THE Apostolical History: CONTAINING The Acts, Labors, Travels, Sermons,
Discourses, Miracles, Successes, and Sufferings, OF THE HOLY APOSTLES FROM
CHRIST's ASCENSION TO THE Destruction of JERUSALEM by Titus; A brief
DESCRIPTION whereof is here Inserted. ALSO, A Narration of the particular Times
and Occasions upon which the Apostolical Epistles were written; Together with a
Brief ANALYTICAL PARAPHRASE of them. To which is added (for the better
understanding of this History) a MAP of the Apostle PAVL's Travels. Published
for the benefit of such as desire clearly to understand, and rightly to improve
the Holy Scriptures. By SAMVEL CRADOCK, B. D. late Rector of North-Cadbury in
Somersetshire.

Esse Christianum, grande est; non, videri. Hieron. ad Paullinum. Difficile
est, omnes parts implere hominis vere and solid Christiani. Gr. Prudentem
semper admoneo lectorem, ut non superstitiosis acquiescat interpretationibus,
and quae Commatice pro fingentium dicuntur arbitrio; sed consideret priora,
media, and sequentia, and nectat sibi universa quae scripta sunt. Hieron. in 25
Mat. Fruantur alii suo ingenio, mihi illi videntur optimi concionatores, qui
sunt optimi Scripturae interpretes. Streso. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, and
are to be sold by Edward Brewster, at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXII.

To his highly honored Friends, Richard Hambden Rowland Hunt Henry Ashhurst
Philip Foley Esquires. (Sons-in-law to the Right Honorable William Lord
Paget); And to their Pious and Virtuous Ladies.
Right Worthy and much honored,
IF the Dedication of this poor Work unto you, may carry with it any intimation
of the great Respect and Honor I have for you, I desire the world should
understand the ground of it; which is not so much the eminency of your Quality
and outward Condition (though that also deserves its due value and regard) as
your eminent Piety and Virtue, which renders you truly honorable, and attracts
the esteem of all good men. And truly I cannot but look upon it as a great
testimony of the Divine favor to that Noble Family to which you are all so
nearly related, and a great honor to it, That in an Age so corrupt and
depraved as this is, there should be found in it so many Persons more ennobled
by their Virtue than their High Birth; and more great in Goodness and real
Worth, than in Estate. May the Blessing of God Almighty ever rest on You and
your Families, and make you still great Examples of all that is good and
praiseworthy, in the places where you live; that when you shall have finished
your course, and served your Generation here according to the will of God, and
are entered into your everlasting Rest, your Names may be to the succeeding Age
as a Perfume poured forth.

As for what concerns this Work, you may please to understand, That it is the
fruit of some of my hours of leisure and retirement, of which I have had more
of late years than ever I desired or expected. And surely tam otii quam negotii
reddenda est ratio, as he said: We must give account to God of our times of
leisure, as well as of those of public and visible employment. For those
several years last past, wherein I have been confined to privacy, I have
addicted my self to the serious study of the Holy Scriptures, not finding any
way wherein I could better employ my time. For where can we find that profit,
that delight, that comfort in afflictions, which may be reaped from a diligent
perusal and serious meditation on those Sacred and Divinely-inspir'd Writings?
I have often thought with my self, that a short and plain Analytical Paraphrase
and Exposition of them, might be of great use to those who have not leisure to
read larger Comments. And accordingly I have bent my pains to serve them
therein, as I was able. If my poor endeavors may be any ways serviceable to
the Church of God, I shall rejoice. However, as our blessed Savior said in
excuse of Mary when she was blamed for pouring her Box of precious Ointment on
his Head ( Mar. 14.4, etc.), Let her alone, she has done what she could;
intimating, that if she had known how to express her high veneration and
affection to Him in a better manner, she would have willingly done it: So I
hope I may in some measure of sincerity and uprightness say, that I have done
what I could. If I had known how to do any thing better for the service of God
and His Church, in the Circumstances wherein I have of late years been cast, I
hope I should have readily done it. But seeing I did not, I have (humbly
imploring the Divine Assistance) adventured on this.

It Is well known, that there is nothing in this world more pleasing and
cheering to the eyes, than Light; insomuch that one elegantly calls it The
smile of Nature. And in like manner, to the Mind and Understanding of man,
there is nothing more pleasing and delightful than a clear discovery of Truth.
But of all Truths, there are none can be so acceptable, so delightful and
ravishing, as those glorious Truths revealed by God in his holy Word, which
tend so much to the bettering of man here, and to the bringing of him to
eternal happiness hereafter. And truly I am very confident, would Persons of
Quality and Education more diligently read and study the Holy Scriptures, they
would find such incomparable delight, sweetness, and comfort in them, that
Play-books and Romances, and such corrupting and effeminating Trash (which
consume the precious hours of too many of our Gentry) would seem vile and
contemptible in their eyes. But I need not say these things to you, who know
how better to employ your time, and have learned to prefer Manna before Onions
and Garlic.

All that I shall further trouble you with, is only to acquaint you, That se^
(...) venturing this poor thing of mine into a World so full of Censure and
Prejudice, I find my self inclined to put up some such Petition unto God for
it, as that excellent person, Mr. Herbert put up for his Divine Poems:

Turn their eyes hither who will make again:
Theirs, who will hurt themselves or me, refrain.
And thus (honored Friends) wishing very heartily unto You, and all yours, all
manner of prosperity, I remain,

Your very humble and affectionate Servant, SA. CRADOCK.
Gesings in Wickam-brook Suffolk, October. 1. 1672.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAving lately published the entire History of our Blessed Lord and Savior,
from his Birth to his glorious Ascension to Heaven; it will not be, I hope,
unacceptable to thee, if I here present thee with the History of the Church
immediately succeeding; and give thee a Narrative of the Acts, Labors,
Travels, Sermons, Discourses, Miracles, Successes, and Sufferings of the Holy
Apostles, as they are recorded by the Evangelist Luke in that Divine Book of
his, called the Acts of the Apostles.

And that my Design in this undertaking may the more clearly be discerned, be
pleased to understand, that I have digested the whole Work into Seven Chapters.

The FIRST CHAPTER contains the Acts of all the Apostles jointly, from our
Savior's Ascension to Readiness Conversion; and shows what was done by them
before the Feast of Pentecost, at the Feast, and after it. (1.) Before the
Feast; it shows how they continued in joynt-devotion for ten days together at
Jerusalem, in expectation of the great promised effusion of the Spirit; and
during that time, called Matthias by lot to the Apostleship in the room of
Judas [Acts chap. I.] 2. At the Feast; it shows how they received a plentiful
effusion of the Spirit, and spoke diverse Tongues; at which some of the Jews
mocking, Peter preached an excellent Sermon to them, which had such wonderful
success, that by his own and the other Apostles endeavors, about Three
thousand were that day converted to Christ [ Acts Chap. II.]. (3.) After the
Feast; it relates how PETER going up to the Temple with John, he there
miraculously cured a Cripple. The people being filled with amazement and
astonishment at this miracle, Peter informs them, That it was not wrought by
any power of his own, but by the power of Jesus Christ. And from hence he takes
occasion to preach Christ to them (Chap. III.). The Rulers of the Jews being
offended at his Sermon (though a great number of the people were converted
thereby), apprehend him and John, and bring them before the Council, who after
examination dismiss them, yet with a charge not to preach any more in the Name
of Jesus. The Church hereupon betake themselves to prayer, and receive a
present and gracious answer from the Lord. Next it shows, how holy and gracious
the conversation of this Infant Church was, who conversed together with great
concord and charity, the rich selling their goods for the sustentation of the
poorer so^ [ Acts Chap. IV.] (...) ^^^es the fraud and hypocrisy of Ananias
and Sapph^^^ (...) dreadful punishment; as also the many wond^^s (...) wrought
by the Apostles, to the terror of some, and ^^e conversion of others; and their
courageous persisting to preach Christ, notwithstanding they were persecuted,
imprisoned, and beaten for it [ Acts Chap. V.].

In the next place it sets forth how the Apostles appointed Seven Deacons to
take care of the poor, whereof Stephen and Philip were the most eminent, whose
particular acts are ^iated; as namely, Stephen's disputing with some of the
S^nagogue of the Libertines, who (not being able to resist the wisdom and
spirit by which he spoke) drew him before the Council, and and there falsely
accused him [ Acts Chap. VI.]. Stephen in a long and grave Oration defends
himself, and pleads his Cause; but they interrupt him, and fall upon him, and
stone him [ Acts Chap. VII.].

Immediately after Stephen's Martyrdom, a violent Persecution arose, which
scattered the Disciples at Jerusalem. Philip hereupon went and preached Christ
at Samaria, and did many Miracles there, and baptized many; and among the rest,
Simon Magus. The Apostles that were left at Jerusalem, hearing of Philip's good
success at Samaria, send Peter and John thither to confirm those new Disciples,
and to enlarge the Church. These two Apostles coming thither, they by prayer
and imposition of hands conferr the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost on the
true believers there; which Simon Magus seeing he offered the Apostles money to
enable him to confer the like gifts on whomsoever he pleased: for which impiety
Peter sharply reproves him. Lastly, It sets forth how Philip was sent to
instruct and baptize the Eunuch [ Acts Chap. VIII].

The SECOND CHAPTER contains more particularly the History of those two great
Apostles Paul and Peter, though there is inserted also something concerning
Barnabas's journey to Antioch, and the Martyrdom of James.

Now concerning PAVL, these things are here related: (1.) His miraculous
Conversion. (2.) His Vocation to the Apostleship. (3.) His Preaching Christ
first in the Synagogues of Damascus, and then in Arabia for the space of three
years. (4.) His return to Damascus and escaping the hands of the Jews that
there conspired to kill him.

Concerning Peter, these things are recorded: (1.) The Miracles he wrought,
namely, his healing Aeneas of the Palsy at Lydda, and raising Tabitha from the
dead at Joppa [Acts Chap. IX.] (2.) The Doctrine he preached to Cornelius (a
Gentile) and his company, upon a particular vision and command from God;
whereupon the Holy Ghost falls on them, and they are baptized [ Acts Chap.
X.]. This converse and communion of his with the Gentiles, he vindicates to the
Jews, who were scandalized at it, by a narrative of the whole matter. Here also
is inserted a narration, how the Gospel being spread into Phoenice, Cyprus, and
Antioch, by those Disciples who were dispersed upon the forementioned
persecution, Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem to confirm them. Barnabas being
at Antioch, s^^ds for Paul to come to him thither; where they both strenuo^sly
preach Christ, and there the Disciples were first called Ch^ stians [Acts Chap.
XI.]. About this time Herod persecuted the Ch^^^tians at Jerusalem, and killed
James the brother of John. (3.) Here are related the sufferings which Peter
under-went under Herod, who imprisoned him with an intent to put him to death;
but he was delivered by an Angel upon the prayers of the Church. Whereupon the
anger of the King falls heavy upon his Keepers. Herod shortly after goes down
to C^sarea; and in his pride taking to himself the Honor due to God, he is
stri^ken by an Angel, and dies miserably. After which, the Gospel prospers [
Acts Chap. XII.]. This is the last we hear of this great Apostle (excepting his
being present at the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.) till we come to his
Epistles. As for Paul, the remainder of his story falls within the time and
compass of his travels, and those Five remarkable Journeys of his which are
described in the Five ensuing Chapters.

The THIRD CHAPTER contains a Narration of Paul's First Journey from Antioch
with Barnabas, to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, John-Mark being their
Minister: At which time they traveled to Cyprus, Pamphylia, Lycaonia, Pisidia,
and other Provinces of Asia the Less. And therefore this Journey we may call
for distinction-sake, Iter Asiaticum; It is described Acts Chap. XIII, XIV.

The FOURTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Second Journey with Barnabas, and Titus,
and others, from Antioch to that famous Council at Jerusalem, which we may
therefore call Iter Hierosolomitanum. It is described Acts Chap. XV. from ver.
1. to 36.

The FIFTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Third Journey, being accompanied with Silas
and Titus, to visit and confirm the Disciples in those Cities where He and
Barnabas had before preached the Gospel; which done, they were called by a
Vision over into Macedonia, and so passed into Europe, and traveled to
Philippi, Beroea, Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth, and so by Ephesus returned
into Syria and Judea, and then came back again to Antioch. This Journey we may
call Iter Graecum sive Macedonicum. It is described from ver. 36 of Chap. XV,
to ver. 23 of Chap. XVIII.

The SIXTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Fourth Journey, which he began from Antioch
in Syria, from whence he went to Ephesus, according to his promise, and staying
the greatest part o^ his time in that City, we may from thence call it Iter
Ephesinum. From thence he went to visit the Europaean Churches; and at last
from Macedonia, through Asia the Less, and Syria, he returned into Judea, where
by the Jews he was accused, and by the Roman Officers taken into custody. Which
Journey is described from ver. 23 of Chap. XVIII, to Chap. XXVII

The SEVENTH CHAPTER contains Paul's Fifth and Last Journey from C^sarea to
Rome, which we may therefore call Iter Romanum, It is described Acts Chap.
XXVII, and XXVIII.

In these Seven Chapters I have comprised the Divine History of the Acts of the
Apostles. Possibly some may now ask How it can be properly so called, seeing it
chiefly relates the story of Peter and Paul; and of the former but sparingly,
and insists principally upon the Acts of the later, mentioning but little what
the other Apostles did, or what Churches they planted, or what death they died.
For answer to which, this is all that can be said, That it seemed good to the
Spirit of God to have only so much written as he saw conducing to our
edification; and in that we are to acquiesce. Besides, Luke who wrote the Acts
of the Apostles, was a disciple and follower of Paul, and his Companion in most
of his Travels; and therefore no wonder if he designed principally to write his
Story. To all which we may add, That as Paul's Conversion was more miraculous
than the conversion of any other of the Apostles, so the course of his Ministry
was more illustrious. He labored more abundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15.10.
Hierom Catal. script. Ecclesiastic. Tom. 1.
thinks, Luke wrote this History at Rome in the second year of Paul's
imprisonment there, and at the request of the Brethren in that City, and by the
direction of Paul himself; but principally, by the peculiar guidance of the
Holy Ghost. He is thought to have written it in the 62 year of Christ, and the
6th of Nero. We have therefore in this Divine Book set before us, an History of
the rise, growth, state, and practice of the primitive Church, in the purest
Apostolical times; and a declaration of the pure doctrine then delivered, and
of the pure Worship and Church Government and Discipline then practiced. All
which may be a pattern to succeeding Churches in all ages. And agreeably
hereunto I find a learned man expressing himself; I have often thought with my
self Saepe me ceperit ista cogitatio quod i^ud in monte Sinai Mosi exhibitum
divinum schema, non magi^ fuerit veteris tabernaculi aedificandi exemplar, quam
Actorum Apostolicorum volumen, Ecclesiae Novi Testamenti aedificandae and
regendae, omnibus ad hoc vocatis, forma est and Typi^; in quo certe nec vola
nec vestigium est illius Hierarchicae tyrannidis, quam Aula Romana nobis ferro
and flammis satagit obtrudere, nec ulla m^ntio sessionis Petri in Episcopatu
Romano, quae Papisticae fidei unica basis est, etc. Streso in Praefat. ad Act.
Apost.
(says he) that the Divine Scheme given to Moses in Mount Sinai, was not more a
pattern to erect the ancient Tabernacle by, than the History of the Acts of the
Apostles is a form and type according to which all that are thereunto called,
must build and govern the Church under the New Testament, in which certainly
there is not the least appearance of that Hierarchical Tyranny which the Court
of Rome endeavors to force upon us by fire and sword, nor any mention of Peter
's being Bishop of Rome, which is the only Foundation the Popish-Creed is built
upon.

In this Divine Book also we may see how Christ subdued the World to the
obedience of the Gospel, by a few illiterate men against all the malice of
Satan laboring to suppress it, (...) raising slanders and persecutions against
it; and when (...) ^^d not prevail with violence, raising Heretics to corrupt
(...) ^ere we have examples of the prudence, faithfulness, and dil^^^nce of the
Holy Apostles: Here we may see how they lived, what they taught, how they dealt
with the obstinate, how with the ^^irm, and how they acted in the doubtful and
controversal Cases of the Church.

A^ we go ^long in this History, we come to the particular times wherein the
Apostolical Epistles were written; and then we show ^e particular occasions of
writing of them, and by whom, and from what places they were sent; giving a
short Analysis and Pa^aphrase of them, which I hope will give much light to
them, and serve also to illustrate many passages in this Apostolical History.

For the Chronotaxis, or disposition of the things contained in this History,
into the proper times wherein they were acted, there being so great diversity
of opinions among Chronologers Chronologi non magis congruunt quam Horologia.
Strigel.
and Learned men, I have followed what I thought best, leaving others the
liberty of their own judgments.

As for the Apostolical Epistles (which are in number 21), according to the
best conjectures we are able to make, they were written in this order of Time,
according to this ensuing Table.

In the time of Paul's Third Journey The 1 Epistle to the Thessalonians, from
Corinth. See Chap. 5. Sect. 12. 2 Epistle to These. See Chap 5. Sect. 12.


In the time of Paul's Fourth Journey Epistle to Galatians from Ephesus. See
Chap. 6. Sect. 5. 1 Epistle to Corinthians. See Ch 6. Sect. 7. Epistle to
Titus. See Chap. 6. Sect. 8. 2 Epistle to Corinthians. See Chapter 6. Sect. 14. 1
Epist. to Timothy. See Chap. 6. Sect. 15. 1 Epist. to the Romans from Corinth.
See Chapter 6. Sect. 18.


In the time of Paul's Imprisonment at Rome, Epist. of James. See Chap. 7.
Sect. 5. To Philemon. See Chap. 7. Sect. 7. To Philippians. See Chap. 7. Sect.
8. To the Colossians. See Chap. 7. Sect. 9. To the Ephesians. See Chap. 7.
Sect. 10. To the Hebrews. See Chap. 7. Sect. 11. 1 Epist. of Peter. See Chap.
7. Sect. 12. 2 Epist. of Peter. See Chap. 7. Sect. 13. Epist. of Jude. See Chap
7. Sect 14. 2 Epist. to Timothy. See Chap. 7. Sect. 15.


After all these, 1 Epist. of John. See Chap. 7. Sect. 17. 2 Epist of John. See
Chap. 7. Sect. 18. 3 Epist. of John. See Chap 7. Sect. 19.


Thus (Courteous Reader) I have given thee a brief view or prospect of this
whole History; for a better understanding of which, I have added a Map of the
Apostle Paul's Trayels. And lastly* for a close I have added a short
description of the Destruction of Jerusalem, which may be as a Comment not only
to (...) passages in this History, and in the Apostolical Epistles, but in th
Gospels also.

About 23 years after this dismal Destruction, in the 14 year of Domi^ian, John
the Evangelist had the Revelation in the Isle of Patmos. And this is all I
thought fit to advertise thee of by way of Preface. Only I shall add, If thou
desire to reap any benefit by my Paraphrase on the Epistles, I entreat thee
to take thy Bible, and to read the Text along with the Paraphrase. It is not
unknown to any who have ever attentively read over the Apostolical Epistles,
that there are abundance of dark and obscure passages in them; abundance of
(...), things hard to be understood, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3.16. I may
truly say, I have not willingly or knowingly passed over any of them untouched,
but said something (according to my poor Talent) either in the Paraphrase, or
in the Notes, tending to the clearing of them. And so heartily praying and
desiring that from the whole, God may receive glory, and the ingenuous Reader
benefit, I bid thee farewell.

Thine in Christ Jesus, SA: CRADOCK.

I Have seriously perused and read over the Apostolical History, written by Mr.
Samuel Cradock; and I do thankfully acknowledge, that I have received much
comfort and benefit by it, and am fully persuaded, That those persons, whether
Ministers or People to whom God shall give hearts to peruse it as I have done,
will be convinced that it will be very beneficial to the Church of God,
especi^lly to private Families, in helping them to understand the Holy
Scriptures.

Sic testor, Sa: Fairclough, sometimes Rector of Ketton in Suffolk.
Kennet, October. 8. 1672.
Mr. Brewster,
WE have perused, as our occasions would permit, the Book you brought us,
called The Apostolical History, containing an Analytical Paraphrase on the
whole Book of the Acts of the Apostles, and all the Apostolical Epistles, which
are in number Twenty one. And seeing you desire our opinion upon it, we
declare, That we judge it a Work which (with the blessing of God) will be
exceeding useful and beneficial to several sorts of persons: Particularly,

1. To such Ministers as are not furnished with good Libraries.

2. To young Scholars who should be directed in Chronology, and how to reduce
the passages and transactions of the Apostolic Times, to their due and proper
places, and should be guided in a right way and method of studying the holy
Scriptures.

3. To Masters of Families, that they may thereby be enabled to instruct their
Families.

4. To private Christians in the daily reading of the Scriptures, who have not
time or leisure to read larger Comments.

5 It Is a Book sit for Parents to give to their Children that are grown up, to
bring them to a love and delight in the Scriptures, they being made plain, and
facile, and intelligible in this Paraphrase.

6. The Notes in the Margin are very useful for Scholars to give them an
account of the particular interpretations that the Author gives of sundry
difficult places; and yet they are so ordered, that they will not disturb the
unlearned in reading either the Apostolical History, or the Paraphrase on the
Epistles.

7. The Map of Paul's Travels is useful and delightful, not only for the
clearer understanding how that blessed Apostle planted the Gospel up and down
in the world; but it may be useful also for the understanding of several
passages in the History both of the Old and New Testament.

Lastly, The History of the Destruction of Jerusalem, may give much light to
many passages not only in the Apostolical Epistles, but in the Gospels also.

And therefore we commend this Reverend Author's design of helping us to know
the Scriptures, to the blessing of Him who inspired those that wrote them. And
this we do the more hopefully, because it has been the observation of the most
piously considerate, That God has in all Ages made those Labors of his
Servants most eminently acceptable, which have been employed in the profitable
explication of any part of the Scripture; as if He, who has imprinted such a
Majesty upon the Text, delighted also to reflect an honor upon the
Interpreters thereof; and to make men's Works illustrious, by their illustrating
the Word of God, and directing others in the paths that lead to blessedness.

Your loving Friends, WILLIAM JENKIN, sometimes Pastor of Christ's Church
London. RICHARD FAIRCLOVGH, sometimes Rector of Mells in Somersetshire.


The several Apostolical Epistles, as they are placed and paraphrased in this
History, may be found according to this ensuing Direction.
THE First Epistle to the Thessalonians, page 114 The Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, page 122 The Epistle to the Galatians, page 133 The First
Epistle to the Corinthians, page 152 The Epistle to Titus, page 186 The Second
Epistle to the Corinthians, page 195 The First Epistle to Timothy, page 214 The
Epistle to the Romans, page 223 The Epistle of James, page 310 The Epistle to
Philemon, page 322 The Epistle to the Philippians, page 324 The Epistle to the
Colossians, page 333 The Epistle to the Ephesians, page 343 The Epistle to the
Hebrews, page 361 The First Epistle of Peter, page 402 The Second Epistle of
Peter, page 413 The Epistle of Jude page 421 The Second Epistle to Timothy,
page 426 The First Epistle of John, page 435 The Second Epistle of John, page
448 The Third Epistle of John, page 450
ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 35 read two thousand, p. 24 l. 15 dele est, p. 29 l. 22 r. twenty,
p. 41 l. 39 r. them, p. 47 l. 23 r. he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and
like a lamb dumb before the shearer, p. 48 for fourteen r many, p. 55 l. 25 r
His, p. 59 l. 1 r Exterius, p. 73 l. 15 r thereof, p. 74 l. 23 dele and, p. 156
l. 4 r have made further, p. 187 l. 47 r that they may be sound in the faith,
and submit themselves to the doctrine of the Gospel, p. 197 l. 26 r inflicting,
p. 234 l. 51 r wages of sin, p. 235 l. 4 r head, p. 244 l. 17 r are not the
children God, p 249 l. 46 r as well as to the Jews, p. 268 l. 21 r a young man,
p. 288 l. 3 r those rites, p. 299 in the margin r Anno Christo 61, Neronis 5:
p. 309 r Anno Christi 62, p. 325 in note * r. non aliud, p. 335 l. 53 r
extended to them, p. 351 l. 16 r sinless, p. 355 l. 22 r awake thou, p. 373 n.
f r peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum, p. 394 n. b r toga, p. 396 n. h l. 18 r
videri, p. (...) r multa, p. 433 l. 41 r his, p. 449 l. 17 for competent r
complete, l. 25 for (...) ^th.

THE Apostolical History.
CHAP. I. Containing a Narration of the Acts of the Apostles (jointly
considered) from Christ's Ascension to Readiness Conversion. Anno Christi 33
Tiberii 18.

SECT. I.
THE Holy Evangelist Luke having in his former Treatise written the History of
Our Lord and Savior, (wherein he had spoken of all things Non dicit se
scripsisse omnia sed de omnibus: de singulis nimirum tantum, quantum ad
spiritualem aedificationem sufficit: Et haec est sufficientia Scripturae, quam
credimus contra Pontificios. Non credimus omnia in Scripturis esse, sed de
omnibus id, quod ad salutem sufficit.
, that Jesus both did, and taught, so far forth as the Holy Ghost hought fit to
dictate to him, and to enjoin ^im to publish) he now proceeds to write the
History of his Apostles Dicit se de actis Apostolorum nunc scripturum, licet de
aliquibus tantum Apostolis scribit, nec omnia eorum acta. Nihil scribit de
Thoma, Bartholomaeo, Andrea etc. nec de eorum profectionibus in Indiam,
Galliam, Germaniam, neque de eorum morte; nimirum, quia Spiritui sancto visum
non est, plura scribi, quam nobis ad aedificationem opus erat. In iis quae
scripta sunt nos diligenter exerceamus, de caeteris ne simus curiosi. Stres.
. And in the first place, to connect this History with his former, he shows,
That after our Savior was risen from the dead, he continued Forty days on the
earth, and in that space of time appeared often to his chosen Apostles Ministri
sive officiarii Christi sunt hi, ut videre est, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Romans
12.5. Primi sunt Apostoli qui a Christo ipso vocati non poterant errare in
Doctrina, missi in universum orbem ad ecclesias plantandas. Juxta hos, erant 2.
Propherae, qui h^bebant dona praedicendi futura, et interpretandi Scripturas;
et alii extraor^^^^^^, qui habebant dona linguarum, and miraculorum. 3.
Evangelistae, Apostolorum comites, and administri. 4. Docto^es and Pastores,
qui ordinary vocati erant ad explicandam Scripturam and pascendam disciplina
unam aliquam particularem ecclesiam, cui erant praefecti cum his erant. 5.
Rectores 1 Cor. 12.28. itemque Diaconi, Act. 6. Christus tanquam Doctor
supremus, and Academicus in pastoribus formandis fuit occupatus, qui deinde
ecclesias docerent. Quo plus reverentiae habeat quod illis praecipit Christus,
addit, hoc spiritus directione factum. Non quod aliunde regi opu^ habuerit
Filius Dei, qui aeterna est sapientia, sed quia homo quoque erat, ne quis
putaret humano ingenio tradidisse ^postolis, quod tradidit, nominatim ad
divinam authoritatem nos revocat; sicuti toties Dominus ipse nihil se tradere
affirmat nisi quod a Patre accepit. Calv. in loc.
, giving them many sure Evidences, that it was truly He, their Lord and Master;
and by the direction of the Holy Ghost (wherewith his Human Nature was full) he
gave them many Precepts and Commandments, touching the discharge of their
Function and Office; acquainting them with the things appertaining to the
Kingdom of God, viz the Kingdom of his Grace, which is erected, and set up in
the Hearts of men by the preaching of the Gospel. And having now gathered them
together (...)] supple (...) ipsos in unum recolligens qui dispersi fuerant.
vid. Joh. 21.2. est, Attico more, passivum sono, sensu activum, Grot.
, that they might behold his Ascension, he commanded them* that they should not
disperse themselves, not depart from Jerusalem, but stay the^e, and expect the
performance of the Promise made by the Father of a great and plentiful Effusion
of his Spirit upon them [ Joel 2.28.] of which he had often before told them,
as we may see, Luke 24.29. and Joh. 14. and chapter 15. and 16. And though they had
been before baptized by John, who baptized Solent Theologi quatuor species
baptismi recensere 1. Eluminis, seu aquae. 2. Flaminis, seu spiritus, Mat.
3.11. igne baptizabit. 3. Sanguinis seu Martyrij Mat. 20.22. Mar. 10.38. 4.
Luminis seu verbi, Act. 18.25. Quatuor igitur sunt res, quas sacrum baptismatis
nomen solet insignire. 1 Sacramentura regenerationis. 2. Ipsam regenerationem.
3. Martyrium. 4. Doctrinam Evangelii.
with water, but could not confer the Spirit Hoc non ideo dicitur, quod
Johanni^ baptisma fuerit ceremonia vana, vacua, in efficax, quae Spiritum
sanctum non habuerit conjunctum, vid Mar. 1.4. Act. 19.4. Sed dicitur Johannes
sola aqua baptizasse, quia ipse non potuit dare Spiritum sanctum, sed tantum
dedit externum spiritus sacramentum, and sigillum; Christus autem dedit
Spiritum.
with the outward Ordinance, yet now they should be baptized with the Holy
Ghost ten days hence; not but that they had received the Spirit before in some
measure, but now this Spirit should be poured forth in a more large, and
plentiful manner upon them, to confirm them more assuredly in the Doctrine of
the Gospel, to sanctify them more abundantly, to seal to them, and bear
witness with their Spirits, that they were the adopted children of God, Ephesians.
1.13. Romans 8.16. And lastly, to confer those gifts upon them, which were
requisite for the execution of their Office, namely the gifts of Tongues,
Prophecies, and Miracles, that they might divulge and proclaim his Doctrine and
Gospel not only in Judea, and Samaria, but even to the uttermost parts of the
earth. The Apostles hearing him discourse of this extraordinary effusion of the
Spirit, and imagining (as it seems) it would be an introduction to the glorious
temporal kingdom of the Messiah, (which still ran in their minds,) they asked
him, whether he would at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel or no? having
an eye, (as it is probable) to that place, Dan. 7 27. And the kingdom, and
dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. To whom he
replies. That they ought to be contented with the knowledge of such things as
the Father has thought fit to reveal to them: but for other things which he is
pleased to keep secret, they should not pry into them, the knowledge of them
being neither necessary, nor profitable for them. And this might abundantly
satisfy them, that they should shortly be endued with such power, and gifts of
the Holy Ghost, whereby they should be rendered fit to preach the Gospel, and to
testify Ministri de Christo testantur tribus modis. 1. Christum praedicando.
2. Secundum Christum vivendo. 3, Propter Christum patiendo.
to the uttermost parts of the earth (even both to the Jews and Gentiles) that
he was the true Messiah, and Savior of the world. Having thus spoken unto
them, he led them forth to that part of Mount Olivet which is near Bethany Some
think our Savior led his Disciples as far as Bethany, and there having taken
leave of some that were dear to him came back with them to the Mount of Olive^*
which lies between Bethany and Jerusalem, and from thence ascended to heaven.
Lucas dicit cap. 24.50. eduxit eos for as ad Bethaniam usque. h. e. ad eam
Bethaniae partem, quae in monte erat Oliveti in quo monte Christus saepe
preces, and lachrymas ad Patr^m fuderat, ut qui locus submissionis ipsius
testi^ fuerat, idem esset and gloriae.
, and there lifting up his hands, he blessed them, and as he blessed them he
was parted from them, and carried up into heaven, a cloud receiving him out of
their sight. They standing amazed at this wonderful sight, and earnestly
looking after him toward heaven, two Angels An tanta sit Angelorum vis, ut sua
virtute possint efficere corpus vero simile, an vero divina virtute ipsis
corpus aptetur, non disput^bimus. Id certum quod non verum corpu^ ex semine
humano hypostatice sibi unia^^ sed tantum figuram corporis sormatam ex materia
remota geste^t, quale and Christus in praeludium incarnationis saepe assumpsit.
Aliud antem est illud corpus, quod deinde p^r incarnationem induit. Stres.
in white robes appeared to them, and assured them, that he would so come to
judgment, as they had seen him go to heaven, to wit, visibly, and in the same
body with which he ascended; at which time he would appear in the clouds again
with great Majesty and Glory.

Acts 1. v. 1. The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, Chap 1: ver. 1.
(...) ponitur pro (...) constructione Graecis familiarissima, qua sequens casus
a praecedenti regitur. Deinde verba inchoativa, completive sunt intelligenda;
Quae coepit facere, and docere, h. e. quae fecit, and docuit.
of a^l that Jesus began both to do and teach.

v. 2. Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the holy
Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen.

v. 3. To whom also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many
infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things
pertaining to the kingdom of God:

v. 4. And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, says
he, ye have heard of me.

v. 5. For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost, not many days hence.

v. 6. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord,
will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?

v. 7. And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the
seasons, which the Father has put in his own power.

v. 8. But ye shall receive power after that the holy Ghost is come upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

v. 9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up,
and a cloud received him out of their sight.

v. 10. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold,
two men stood by them in white apparel,

v. 11. Which also said, Ye men of Gallilee, Why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come
in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

SECT. II.
THe Apostles having seen our Savior thus gloriously ascend into Heaven
(worshipping, and adoring him in Spirit, as their Lord, and Savior, Luk
24.52.) returned to Jerusalem, and according to his command Tuit have non
simplex obedientia, fed obedientia contra consilium carnis and sanguinis [ Gal.
1.16.] Sciebant Hie rosolymis perpetuas infestationes Judaeorum esse metuendas,
Joh. 20.^9. sed, congregatio habenda erat in una domo centum and viginti
hominum, and carnis consiliis abnegatis, stricte Christi mandato adhaerent.
vid. Mat. 16.24.
contitinued there in joint devotion in an upperroom for ten days, together
with many other men, (whereof some were of the kindred Intelliguntur cognati
Christi, non tantum ex part Josephi, quem aiunt ex priori uxore plure^
habuisse silios, sed etiam ex part Mariae. Uxor e^ im Cleophae, quae Mariae
soror erat tre^ filios, habebat, Jacobum, Josen, Simonem Judam. Mat. 13.55.56.
comp. cum Joh. 19.25. and Mat. 27.56. Enere plures eo tempore, qui in Christum
credebant. Nam 1 Cor. 15. mentio est, de pluribus quam quingentis fratribu^
quibus Christu, apparuit, sed videntur caeteri in Galilaea mansisse, and illi
praecipue Christum secuti, qui erant de Christi sanguine, quibus tamen aliqui
potuerunt accedere, qui Hierosolymis habitab^nt.
of Jesus) and some pious women, who had followed him; among whom was Mary This
is the last mention of Mary the mother of Christ, that we meet with in the
Scripture. Voluit Spiritus sanctus reliquam ejus vitam silentio involvere, ut
futura circa ejus personam fabulosa superstitio nihil praetextus in Scriptura
inveniret.
his mother; their whole number being about Sixscore; and there they expected
the great, and large effusion of the Spirit, which was promised unto them.

Acts. 1. v. 12. v. 12. Iter Sabbati duo millia passuum habuit, eaque
supp^tatio congruit cum l^co Johannis ubi dicit Hierosolymam distare a Bethani^
15 fere stadiis, quae mill, and nonginto^ circiter passus continet. Iter
Sabbati a lege praescriptum non erat: simpliciter enim quietem Dominus in lege
praecipit: sed quia non facile continebantur Judaei, quin Sabbato ad sua
negotia excurrerent, ideo credibile est ad cohibe^dam ejusmodi lasciviam
communi sacerdotum concilio edi^ um fuisse ne ultra duo millia Sabbato
conficere lice^et. Tametsi Hieronymus in responsis ad Algasiam hanc traditionem
a duobus Rabbinis fluxisse commemorat, Atriba Scil. and Simone Heli. Calv. in
loc A Sabbath days journey] ^ is probable that this was the common walk of the
people of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day in pleasant weather for their
meditations when they had done the public duties of the day. Now not only on
the Sabbaths, but also on other holy days it was not lawful to walk above two
hundred cubits, as we have observed out of the haldee Paraphrase, and therefore
the Evangelist may be conceived to use this expression for the measure betwixt
it and the City [A Sabbath days journey] because it was remarkably so, not only
upon obligation but for delight, and the peoples common Sabbath days walk.
Lightf. in loc.
Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from
Jerusalem a sabbath days Journey.

v. 13. And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where
abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas,
Bartholom^w, and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and
Judas the brother of James.

v. 14. ^ 14. (...)] est vox deducta a nomine (...) sen robur, and notat talem
perseverantiam, qu^ quis multo labor, and magna vi seipsum tenet, and
constantem reddit in aliqua occupatione difficili. (...)] vi^. 2 Cor. 1.11.
Precati sunt animis in amore conjunctis and nullo odio divifis, 1 Timothy 2.8.
These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

SECT. III.
DUring this time of their abode together, Peter rose up, and made a motion to
the rest of the disciples there present, that one should be chosen into Judas's
place; who having formerly had the honor to be one of Christ's Apostles had by
his late treachery against his Lord, and Master Mat. 26.47, 48:
(being guide Non est gravius peccatum quam aliis esse (...) peccati: vae
Ministri, vae Parentibus, vae Magistratibus, qui hoc faciunt.
to them that took him, as the Holy Ghost Ergo Spiritus Sanctus est vera
persona, et non qualitas, and ex propria scientia praedicit. Nam futurorum
praedictio Deitatis signum est infallibile, Isa. 44.6, 7. and 41.22, 23. and
quamvis dicitur, Joh. 16.13. ab a^io audire ista futura, quae nobis
praenunciat, tamen hoc non ita intelligendum, quasi opus habeat a Patre aliquid
discere, quid ipse nesciat, sed quod revelationem suam quam dat hominibus,
instituat secandum voluntatem Patris, and Filii, revelans ea, quae Pater, and
Filius volunt revelari. Haec enim est voluntaria oeconomia trium Personarum
inter se.
had long ago predicted by the mouth of the Prophet David, Psalm. 41.9.) fallen
from that dignity; He tells them that this Judas received from the chief
Priests and the Rulers of the Jews a reward for his Treason, yet it did not at
all profit him, but only gave occasion to them, with that money, to purchase
the Porters field See Zech. 11.13.
called from thence Aceldama, to his everlasting infamy. He farther shows, that
this wretched man having through remorse, and anguish of Spirit for that his
heinous fact, hanged himself, See my Harmony of the four Evangelists, chap. 6.
Sect. 15
the rope, or that to which it was fastened breaking, he fell down headlong, and
burst asunder, and his bowels gushed out Simile exemplum habemus in historia
ecclesiastica de Arrio haeretico, qui fecedens ad onus ventris deponendum,
dicitur crepuisse, and omnia viscera effudisse.
, and so he went to his own place In locum suum, and factis suis dignum,
quemque malitia sua meritus est. Sicut in unaquaque Repub. est Carcer, and
locus supplicii erectus in terrorem improborum, ita Deus etiam impiis
praeparavit Infernum, Mat, 25.41.
. These things having thus happened to Judas, he exhorts them to choose another
into his room, showing the necessity of such a choice for the fulfilling those
Scriptures, viz. Psalm. 65.25. and 109.8. In utroque psalmo agit David de
Aulicis Saulis. Sicut enim David in passionibus, and persecutione sua fuit
Typus passionis Christi, ut patet passim ex historia Evangelistarum; ita isti
^ulici Saulis qui Davidem persequebantur fuere typ^istorum Sacerdotum and
aliorum hostium, qui Christum persecuti sunt: Et speciali^er iste Doeg, pastor
pecudum Saulis, qui Davidem prodidit, fuit typus Judae, quem Christus
Apostolum, and Pastorem ovium suarum elegerat, sed qui Christum prodidit. Et
haec est rati^^ quod isti textus, qui alioquin de hostibus Davidis proprie
loquuntur, hic ad Judam accommodantur. Duo autem sunt quae David D^^gi, and
hostibus suis imprecatur, atque duo sunt, quae in hac sua imprecatione de Juda
vat ^matur, nempe quod spoltatus omnibus bonis quae per avaritiam, fraudem, and
furta corraserat, depositus erit ab officio.
; which foretold he should be spoiled of what he had so wretchedly got, and
that his office should be void and conferred on another. And he further
declares unto them what manner of Person was to be chosen namely one of those,
who had followed Jesus from the time that he was baptized by John, and began to
gather disciples (at which time the Baptist gave such a public testimony of
him, that some of his own disciples, and several others began to follow him)
unto the day of his Ascension, that so he might be a more competent and
authentic witness, not only of his Doctrine and Miracles, and the other
actions of his life, but of his Resurrection also Articulus de resurrectione
Christi includit omnes alios articulos fidei de Christo. 1 Cor. 15.13. Si enim
resurrexit, mortuus est, si mortuus est, natus est, etc. Est etiam signum, quod
pro peccatis no^ris exact satisfecit. Deus enim sponsorem nostrum non
exolvisset vincul^^ mortis, nisi lytum sufficiens ab eo accepisset.
.

The Apostles agreeing to this motion, put two men in election viz. Barsabas
and Mathias, and praying unto God to direct the Lot, and to show which of them
he was pleased to choose, and appoint to this office, the Lot fell on Mathias,
and he was accordingly numbered among the Apostles Apostoli non habent
successore^. Apostolat^s enim fuit officium extraordinari^m ad primam
Ecclesiae. ^onstitutionem ^rectum. ^tr^s.
.

Acts 1. v. 15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the Dis^iples,
and said, (The number of names together were about an hundred and twenty.)

v. 16. v. 16. (...)] Pa^ erat, Judae simile quid evenire, quale Achitopheli
evenerat, cujus perfidiam Judas erat imitatus. Sic (...) ^aepi^ sumi diximus ad
Mat. 1.22. Grot.
Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the
holy Ghost by the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, which was guide
to them that took Jesus.

v. 17. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained p^rt of this ministry.

v. 18. v. 18. (...)] i. e. monumentum ^^eleris sui reliquit.
Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity, and falling
headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

v. 19. And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem, insomuch as that
field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of
blood.

v. 20. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolat^
and let no man dwell therein: And his bishopric let another take.

v. 21. Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that
the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

v. 22. Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was
taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his
resurrection.

v. 23. And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was called Justus,
and Matthias.

v. 24. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, which know the heart^ of all
men, show whither of these two thou have chosen.

v. 25. v. 25. Ad locum proprium] i. e. qui ipsi melius conveniebat, quam
Apostolica functio.
That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by
transgression f^ll, that he might go to his own place.

v. 26. And they gave forth their l^ts, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he
was numbered with the eleven ap^stles.

SECT. IV.
THe Apostles, and the forementioned number o^ Disciples having been thus
employed for the first ten days after our Saviors Ascension, and Pentecost
Vocatur Pent^^ost^, quia celebr^tur d^e Quinquagesim^ post pas^ha, L^v. 23.16.
V^^atur etiam f^s^um Septimanarum, Exodus 34.22. quia inter pasch^* and hoc
festum septem septimanae intercedebant: hoc festo praeter ordinaria sacrificia
fiebat sacrificium primitiarum tritici, Exodus 34.22. unde vocatur festum
primitiarum. Number. 28.26. Tria festa magna habebant Hebraei. (1) Paschatis,
cujus secundo die etiam primitiae frugum offerebantur Deo, Lev. 23.10. Sed and
primitiae hordei, quod citius maturescebat quam triticum, Exodus 9.31. Ruth.
2.23. (2) Festum Pentecostes, quo offerebantur primitiae tritici, Deuteronomy. 16.9.
etc. (3) Festum Tabernaculorum post messem, and vindem^am quoque peractam,
Deuteronomy. 16.13. Quae tr^^ festa egregie repraesentant tres gradus nostrae salutis,
quae sunt. 1. Redemptio nostra, quam repraesentat festum paschatis, quo agnus
Dei eaesus. 2. Regeneratio nostra, and sanctificatio per primitias Spiritus
quam repraesentat festum primitiarum. 3. Glorificatio nostra, quam repraesentat
laetissimum festum tabernaculorum, quo in sine anni post peractum laborem in
plenitudine horreorum, and cella^um sub umbra frondium laetitiam exercebant
Israelitae. Pentecoste igitur erat festum inter haec tria medium. Finis hujus
festi erat rememo^atio duorum beneficiorum magnorum, viz. 1 Promulgatae legis
in monte Sinai. 2. Ingressus in terram Canaan, ejusque possessionis, Deuteronomy.
26.1, 2. etc. Offerebantur quidem primitiae in festo paschatis, sed quae non a
singulis Israelitis adferebantur, sed unus manipulus hordei viridis nomine
totius Israelis offerebatur. Pentecostes autem festo singuli Israelitae, saltem
ex singulis civitatibus aliqui deputati, primitias omnium frugum, and fructuum
cum cantu, and tibii^ H^erosolymam mittebant, ac Domino offerebant, quo alludit
Isa. 33.29. Die^ ultimus septem septimanarum erat dies latae legis, ut
colligitur, Exodus 19.1.11. vocaturque ob id festum legis. Eodem die caepit
praedicari ab Apostolis lex nova, complementum veteris.
being now come, as they were with one accord assembled together, suddenly
there came a sound from heaven of a rushing mighty wind (representing the
efficacy of the Spirit of God now descending) and an appearance of cloven fiery
tongues Hae figurae nos docent modum operandi, quo Spiritus sanctus in nobis
utitur. Operatur per modum igni^, and venti. Per modum ignis, quia emollit,
illuminat, accendit, purgat cor. Per modum venti, quia refrigerat, ac reficit
tempore angustiarum per solatium, and initia vitae aeternae, and quia movet per
efficacem suam operationem sicut ventus impellit naves.
lighted upon each of them, and they were now all filled with the Holy Ghost,
and began to speak with strange tongues, such as they never had before learnt
(see Mark 16.17.) and other miraculous powers were conferred upon them.

The fame of this being instantly spread abroad, and there being present at
that time great multitudes of Jews, who had come up from all parts of Judea to
the feast; and also many other Jews The text speaks ver. 9. of Jew^ of all
nations under heaven now dwelling at Jerusalem, and yet it reckons but
fifteen here, which were not all the nations in the world, no not all that were
in the Roman Empire. To say nothing of the Hyperbole's the Scripture frequently
uses, as Cities walled up to heaven, etc. the Languages here spoken of took up
all the nation where it is imaginable any Jews were scattered at this time
through the world. Lightf. in loc.
and Profelytes born in diverse other nations, some whereof probably were
Students there, and others had come up at this time to worship the true God at
Jerusalem; they were all much amazed to hear such unlearned men, as the
Apostles were, speak the languages of their several nations. But some among
them derided the miracle, and imputed it to drunkenness. Hereupon Peter
standing up with the rest of the Apostles in a grave Oration confuted this
calumny, showing the unre^sonableness of it, seeing it was now but the third
hour of the day, or nine a clock in the morning Vid. 1 These. 5.7. Hora tertia
erat tempu precum matutinarie, ad qua ho^ines vel medi^eriter ^^i^ iba t n^si
jejuni. Imo sieb^ ^^stis ^d sextam usqu^ horam jejunatum, ^ocet nos Josephus de
vi^^ sua. Gr^t.
; and then declares unto them, that that which was now done was the completion
of a famous Prophecy uttered by the Prophet, Joel cap. 2. from 28. to the end;
the meaning of which was this, that in the last days, viz. the days of the
Messiah there should be a large, and remarkable effusion of the Spirit of God
upon all flesh; (that is, upon Gentiles as well as Jews) yea, upon all sorts of
persons among them, without distinction, namely, upon old and young, sons and
daughters, bond and free; whereby they should be endued with such an excellent
measure of knowledge touching the mysteries of salvation, and with such an
ability to instruct others, in them, as might well be compared with the
Prophecies *, Per istas prophetationes, visiones, and somnia, intelliguntur
omnis generis dona spiritualia. Ergo effusio Spiritus paritura est abundantiam
notitiae, fidei, sanctitatis, sapientiae, inter omnis generis homines. Sic
impletur abundanter illud Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.33, 34. Joh. 6.45. Heb. 8.11.
Dicuntur haec omnia comparative ad V. T. Non docebunt. i. e. non tantopere opus
habebunt docere, ac s^b V. T. non tanta inculcatione indigebunt, sed leviore
negotio addiscent. Stres. See knowledge and practice. p. 151. Shall see Visions,
etc. that is, shall be enabled through the operation, and revelation of the
Spirit, both to understand and explain the mysteries of the gospel. These
expressions are borrowed from the state and condition of the Old Testament
wherein God used to reveal himself to the Prophets by Dreams, and Visions. See
Numb. 12 6.
Dreams and Visions imparted by God to some of the ancient Prophets; and after
this great effusion of the Spirit there should be many fearful stupendous
sights and prodigies The Sun shall be changed into darkness, and the Moon into
blood. These expressions signify the strange, fearful, and general troubles,
miseries, and desolations which shall befall the Jews before the destruction
of Jerusalem, See Mat. 24 Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether.
, and many great slaughters in Judea, as forerunners and presignifications of
the great and dismal destruction that should come upon Jerusalem, and the
people of the Jews for their crucifying the Lord of Life; and that the only way
to escape in the time of those fears, dangers, and destructions was to repent,
and to own Christ and believe in him, and to call upon the name of the Lord Per
invocationem hic intelligitur totus cultus internus, and externu^, qui a
precatione denominationem habet propterea quod precatio est compendiosum
exercitium omnium motuum Spiritualium quibus Deus colitur. Preces sunt motus
humiliationis contritionis, fidei amoris, and omnium virtutum. Qui nomen Domini
invocaverit, etc. sensus est Quicunque Dominum Jesum agnoverit, receperit, and
coluerit secundum id, quod Scripturae de ipso revelant, and testantur, is
servabitur, Stre^.
in faithful and fervent prayer. From ver. 1. to 22.


Having thus washed off this unjust aspersion of drunkenness by interpreting
and applying this Prophecy, he proceeds on to show them, That Jesus of Nazareth
was the true Messiah promised by all the Prophets. And first he speaks of his
person and life showing that by those many miracles wrought by him in the midst
of them, he was plainly demonstrated (...) h. e testimonio irrefrag^bili and
incontradicibili honoratum; ornatum ejusmodi testimonio de quo nullus dubitandi
locus relictus; tam certo ut nulla certior sit (...). Pricaeus. Est Sermo
imcompletus, and hoc modo complendus Vir ^ Deo demonstr^tus esse aliquid aliud
quam vir nudus. Demonstratus enim a Deo est, esse vir justu^, and sine peccato
[vid. Joh. 8.46.] demonstratus est esse filius Dei, Romans 1.4. and missus a
Patre. Streso.
to be a person sent from God and approved of him; Secondly, he speaks of his
Death, how God having determined and decreed he should be put to death for the
sins of men; and by his fore-knowledg discerning this the fittest expedient to
bring about that great design of saving sinners, he had permitted him to fall
into their power: who having maliciously accused, and condemned him Omnibus
adscribitur, quia omnes (paucis exceptis sidelibus) in mortem Chri^ i
consenserant, Luc. 23.18. Joh. 18.40.
, at last by their vehement importunity prevailed with the Romans to put him to
death, and so had by their wicked hands crucified him, v. 22, 23. Thirdly, he
speaks of his Resurrection how God raised him again, loosing the bands of
death, it being impossible as David had praedicted, that he should be holden of
it. For though those words, Psalm 16.8. etc. in a lower sense had reference to
David's person, yet they were more fully, and ultimately to be fulfilled in the
Son of David, The eternal word of God, The Messiah of the world; and that not
only because David was a Type of him, and did represent his Person, but also
because he was now in his loins, according to the flesh. As these words
therefore refer to David they may be thus Paraphrased; I have set the Lord
always before me, i. e. I have set my thoughts continually on God, as being
ever present with me; and because he is at my right hand ever ready to assist
and support me, I shall not be moved, that is, not swallowed up of my sorrows
nor removed from my constant obedience to his will. And upon this account, my
heart is glad and my tongue rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in hope Hope is
here ascribed to the dead body figuratively.
, that is, When my body shall be laid to rest in the earth, it shall not be
without hope of a joyful Resurrection. For thou will not leave my Soul Thou will not leave my soul in Hell] Soul sometimes is taken properly, sometimes
improperly for the whole person, Act. 27.37 Sometime^ for the dead carcass,
Lev. 19.28. and 21.1. Number. 6.6. and 5.2. in all which place^ the Hebrew word
rendered dead carcass is (...), and so (...) is taken here. Animamque Sepulchro
Condimus, Virgil: The word Sheol here rendered Hell does also signify the Grave
Psa. 55.15. and 141.7. Genesis 42.37. and not for a place of Souls under the
earth. See Dr. Reynolds Praelect. 81. and 82. upon the Apocryphal Books, and
Robert Parker upon Christ's Descent into Hell. (...) is taken for Death, or the
state of the dead, or the invisible place in reference to the Soul, or the
Grave in reference to the body. The Papists would from this place conclude,
that the Soul of Christ immediately upon his Death did locally descend into
Hell the place of the damned. But without any ground. For the words speak
evidently of a deliverance from a paenal condition, whereas the Papists
themselves hold that Christ's Soul was triumphant in Hell. And the Apostle in
this place plainly proves, that David was left in that Hell from whence Christ
was raised so that it is clear he understood the words of Christ's rising from
the Grave: as the second clause does more plainly express, Thou will not suffer
thine holy One to see corruption. The Scope of the Apostle therefore in citing
thi^ place is not to deal about the deliverance of Christ's Soul out of Hell,
but punctually of Christ's resurrection; and the resurrection is properly of the
body, not of the soul. The true meaning and sense therefore of the Article of
Christ's descent into Hell (as the Latins improperly translate (...)) seems to
be this, He went into the place of invisible Souls. For his body remained in
the Grave, and his Soul passed to Paradise. And thus the Articles go on
methodically without any Tautology. That after Christ's death his body was
buried in the Grave, his Soul went to the place o^ blessed Souls, and the third
day both Soul and body were re united in his Resurrection, See Dr. Richardsons
notes on Psalm. 16.
in Hell, that is, my dead body in the grave; nor suffer me utterly to perish
in the Pit of corruption so as never to rise again. Thou will show me the path
of life, that is, how I shall after my resurrection live for ever in thy glory,
Thou will make me full of joy with thy countenance, that is, In thy presence I
shall have fullness of joy forevermore. But these words in their proper and
literal sense could not be spoken of David, because David's body was left in
the grave and was there corrupted [See Act. 13.36.37. compared with 1 King.
2.10.] and therefore they must needs have reference to Christ, who (as David
saw by the Spirit of Prophecy) was to spring from his Loins. (See 2 Samuel 7. and
Psalm. 132.) and so by the same Spirit he saw also that he was soon to rise
again from the dead, as the head of his mystical Body, and by virtue of his
resurrection, his members were to rise also. And that God had assuredly
according to David's Prophecy raised this Jesus from the dead, Peter declares
that he and his fellows could, and did bear their Testimony from v. 24. to 33.
. Fourthly, he then speaks to them of his Ascension, and how after his
resurrection he was exalted to the right hand of God: the consequent of which
was, that having received authority and commission from the Father to prour
forth his holy Spirit in a plentiful manner, [which he had often before spoken
to them of, as in Joh. 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.13, 14.] he had now accordingly
done it, and this strange thing of their speaking diverse tongues, (which was so
much wondered at by them) was an effect thereof. He further shows that David
never ascended, or went bodily to Heaven, and so cannot be said to be exalted
to Gods right hand while his enemies were made his Footstool. And therefore the
person of whom that was praedicted, Psalm 110.1. (and whom David there calls
Lord) could be no other than Christ. For Conclusion, he bids all the house of
Israel know assuredly that God the Father had ordained, and appointed this
Jesus, whom they had crucified, to be the Head, and Savior of his Church, and
had instated him in the true kingly office of the Messiah from v. 33. to 37.
.

A great multitude of the Auditors were so affected with this Discourse, that
being touched with an inward remorse Regeneratio hominis incipit a tali
tertore, per quem cor seu anima hominis it^ compungitur, conteritur,
vulneratur, ut imbuat r vivo and aeri sensu miseriae suae. Probandum est; an
habe is, effecta hujus contritionis, scilicet Cor flexile, quod ve^bo Dei
facile movetur, and ducitur ad bonum. Triplex Spiritus, seu tres gradus donorum
Spiritua ium ^lectis dantur. 1. Spiritus Servitutis, q o anima conteritur,
vulneratur, and sensu miseriae oueratur, ut gratiam anhelet, and d^side et,
Romans 8.15. 2. Spiritus Regen^rationis, quo ex Deo gignimur, and Christo
unigen^to Dei per fidem i^ferimur, ut filii Dei fi^mus, Joh. 3 5 Spiritus
Adoptionis, quo de paterno Dei in nos amore certiores reddimur, quod simus
filii Dei, accendimurque filiali amore in Deum, quo clam ^mus Abba, Pater, Ephesians.
1.14. Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.15.
for their sins, they asked Peter and the rest of the Apostles what they should
do? Peter exhorts them to repent and to own Christ for the true Messiah, and to
believe in him, and to be baptized in his name, and then they should be made
partakers of the holy Ghost; and some of them possibly, of those miraculous
gifts and powers, which they now saw and admired in the Apostles. For upon
their believing in Christ, the promise made by God in the New Covenant of
remission of sins [ Jer. 31.34. Zech. 13.1.] appertained to them, and to their
children Promissiones, quae ad Parents fideles pertinent etiam eorum liberis
debemus applicare, quamdiu facto contrario and propria infidelitate seipsos non
excludunt. Streso.
, and to as many of the Gentiles and their Children, as the Lord should
effectually call to faith in his Son, and therefore they ought to receive
Baptism the Seal thereof. And with many other words he exhorted them to
withdraw, and separate themselves from that untoward generation of the Scribes
and Pharisees [See Mat. 3 and chapter 12. and chapter 16.] who so desperately opposed
Christ, and his Gospel, and by their authority and example strove to keep
people off from embracing the only way of Salvation opened by him. It Is
probable, whilst Peter preached thus to the Jews of Judea and Jerusalem in the
Syriack tongue others of the Apostles spoke at the same time, and to the same
purpose * to several there present of other nations, See Lightfoot in loc. p.
47. 48
and the success of their preaching was that Three thousand were that day
converted to Christianity, and by their hands immediately baptized from 37. to
42.
.

These new converts being now added to the Church, continued and faithfully
persevered in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship (performing all Christian
offices of love one to another) and in the religious exercise of the duties of
Gods Worship, such as receiving the Holy Supper, Prayer and Praising God. And a
great astonishment seized the people to see the wonderful things that were done
by the Apostles. This also is further recorded of these new Converts, that they
had their goods (as to the use of them) in common This community was not of all
their goods, but of that part which every one would voluntarily consecrate for
the public or particular necessities of the Saints (See Act. 5.4.) and was
used only in Jerusalem in those first beginnings of Christianity, and we do not
read it was made a praecedent for other times, and places.

Videtur ipsis jam tum revelata fuisse futura destruction terrae, and urbis
Judaicae, and necessitas exulandi. Usi igitur sunt prudentia; maluerunt bonis
suis ecclesiae consulere, quam omnia perdere. Quod fecerunt, non fecerunt ex
praecepto, sed libere: si inter Christianos nullae privatae possessiones
licitae, sed omnia deberent esse communia, non foret locus praeceptis contra
surtum, non locus praeceptis de eleemosynis. Nam quo fine jubemur de nostris
dare pauperibus, si nihil nostrum est, sed omnia communia. Streso.


in that time of the Churches necessities, and the richer sort sold and parted
with some of their possessions and goods to help and relieve the poorer. And
further their practice was daily to frequent the Temple at the usual hours of
prayer, and privately in particular houses to celebrate the Lords Supper. And
thus conversing together with great simplicity and sincerity, they went on
cheerfully in their Christian course praising and blessing the Lord for all
that he had done for them: and their innocent and harmless conversation
procured them favor with the generality of the people, who had not their
hearts prepossessed with prejudices against Christ, and his Gospel. And thus we
have seen what were the first fruits of the Apostles ministry, whose endeavors
it pleased God so to bless, that there were daily more and more Converts added
to the Church from v. 42. to the end.
.

Act. 2. v. 1. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
one accord in one place.

v. 2. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it filled all the house where they were fitting.

v. 3. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat
upon each of them.

v. 4. And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with
other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.

v. 5. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
nation under heaven.

v. 6. Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were
confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.

v. 7. And they were all amazed, and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold,
are not all these which speak, Galileans?

v. 8. And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?

v. 9. Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia,

v. 10. Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and in the parts of Libya, about
Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes,

v. 11. Cretes, and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the
wonderful works of God.

v. 12 And they were all amazed and were in doubt, saying one to another, What
means this?

v. 13. Others mocking, said, These men are full of new wine.

v. 14 But Peter standing up with the eleven, lift up his voice and said unto
them, Yemen of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto
you, and hearken to my words:

v. 15. For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third
hour of the day.

v. 16. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel,

v. 17. And it shall come to pass in the last days, (says God) I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams:

v. 18. And on my servants, and on my hand-maidens, I will pour out in those
days of my Spirit, and they shall prophecy:

v. 19. And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth
beneath: blood and fire, and vapor of smoke.

v. 20. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before
that great and notable day of the Lord come.

v. 21. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the Name of the
Lord, shall be saved.

v. 22. Ye men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
of God among you, by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the
midst of you, as ye your selves also know:

v. 23 Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledg of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain:

v. 24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it
was not possible that he should be holden of it.

v. 25 For David speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my
face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.

v. 26. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad: moreover also
my flesh shall rest in hope;

v. 27. Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thine holy One to see corruption.

v. 28. Thou have made known to me the ways of life, thou shall make me full of
joy with thy countenance.

v. 29. Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David,
that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is with us unto this day.

v. 30. Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath
to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise
up Christ to sit on his throne:

v. 31. He seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his
soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh did se^ corruption.

v. 32. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.

v. 33. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received
of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye
now see and hear.

v. 34. For David is not ascended into the heavens, but he says himself, The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,

v. 35. Until I make thy foes thy footstool.

v. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has
made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

v. 37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said
unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

v. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in
the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost.

v. 39. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

v. 40. And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save your
selves from this untoward generation.

v. 41. Then they that gladly received his words, were baptized: and the same
day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

v. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

v. 43. And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs (...) done by
the Apostles.

v. 44. And all that believed were together, and had all things common:

v. 45. And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as
every man had need.

v. 46. And they continued daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart.

v. 47. Praising God, and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added
to the Church daily such as should be saved.

Chap. 2. v. 1. Cum complerentur dies Pentecostes] verbum completivum sumitur
inchoative ut etiam Luc. 2.21. Numerus quinquaginta dierum proprie loquendo non
erat completus ineunte primo Pentecostes. Sed currente eo complebatur; erat
enim ipse quinquagesimus. Sensus est, quum tempus quinquaginta dierum, quod
incidebat in diem Pentecostes compleretur, currente adhuc eo, quo completur,
venit Spiritus Sanctus. De Dieu.
v. 3. Seditque supra singulos eorum] scilicet, iste ignis. Poena linguarum
dispersit homines, Genesis 11. Donum Linguarum dispersos in unum populum
recollegit.
v. 5. (...)] Judaei peregrini illie commorantes religionis and studiorum
causa. Judaei vero dicuntur non tam natione quam religione. (...) viri
religiosi] Intelliguntur quidem viri religionem Judaicam sectantes, verum qui
non essent circumcisi. Quicunque enim circumcisionem assumpserant, illi non jam
(...) sed (...) dicebantur.
v. 11. (...)] Dei potentiam, quae Jesu resuscitato apparuit. Id enim
praecipuum argumentum fuit, quo conversus est mundus, vid. cap. 1. 22. 2. 24.
3. 15.
v. 17. Sequitur Lucas in hujus loci, ut and aliorum productione, LXX
interpretes non tamen ad amussim, verbis interdum mutatis, and transpositis,
quod and Moses fecit, Decalogum in Deuteronomium recitans.
v. 19. Sanguinem, and ignem, and vaporem fumi] per Sanguinem intelligo bella,
and caedes; per ignem, and vapores fumosos multa incendia oppidorum, virorum,
and villarum; per obscurationem Solis obscurationem gloriae, and faelicitatis
populi Judaici; per mutationem Lunae in sanguinem grassationem haeresium, and
turbulentorum, ac saepe sanguinolentorum scismatum in Ecclesia. See our Harmony
of the Four Evangelists. page 172.
v. 20. (...)] dies terribilis. Sic truculentus ille Antiochus dictus est (...)
terribilis potius quam Illustris. De Dieu. Omnes dies beneficiis aut poenis
illustres, Dies Domini vocantur, ut been notavit Maimonides Ductore
dubitantium, 2.29. Grot.
v. 21. Pii eripientur communi exilio.
v. 22. Jesum Nazarenum] appellant eum eo nomine, quo vulgo vocatus fuit.
v. 24. Solutis doloribus mortis] Petrus hic respicit ad locum, Psalm. 18.6. ubi
Christus in persona Davidis queritur quod Cheble Sheol i. e. funes sepulchri
and Mokeshe maruth ipsum eumdederint. In Graeco est (...). Lucas igitur in
citando sequitur versionem Graecam tum receptam. At nomen funium his magis
quadrare videtur. Non erat possibile] Scilicet, ut Christus superaretur, seu
vinceretur, a morte; Id enim verbum (...) proprie significat.
v. 25. (...)] de eo sic apud Hebraeos saepe (...) pro (...) usurpatur, ut
Psalm. 91.11. vide Ephesians. 5.32.
v. 27. (...)] i e me Frequens Hebraismus. videre corruptionem] metaphora ab
animato ad exanime (...)] s^ilicet, (...) h. e. (...) in Inferni domo. Fnallage
praepositionis (...) pro (...).
v. 39. (...)] and omnibus qui procul adhuc absunt Idem vult quod (...) Constat
enim praepositionem (...) ejusmodi adverbiis adjunctum saepe vacare, Talia sunt
(...) statim; (...) eras, etc, De Dieu.
v. 40. Deserite hujus improbae gentis mores. Schisma est separatio a bonis seu
a vera ecclesia p^opter rem nullius momenti; sed Separatio est a malis ob
corruptam doctrinam salvificam, and cum non licet manner sine communione mali.
v. 44. (...)] Unum communem scopum habebant, nimirum abnegationem sui ipsorum,
and promotionem regni Christi. They continued in the same confession and
practice of the duties of religion, though possibly they were divided into
several companies and congregations according to their several nations and
languages.
v 46. (...)] Privatim, and sic ^poonitur (...). Non enim in templo, sed per
domos privatorum coenam Domini participabant. Salmasius.
v. 47. Erant gratiosi apud (...) ob bonitatem, modestiam, patientiam, quarum
virtutum ea vis est, ut amorem etiam a disparis vitae hominibus extorqueat.
Particula itaque univers^lis hic re^ringenda est ad eos tantum qui licet a
Doctrina Apostolorum atque Ecclesiae essent alieni; animum tamen gerebant
sincerum, non odio, and malevolentia in Apostolos, eorumque doctrinam,
vitiatum. Apud Sacerdotes enim, and Scribas tantum abest, ut gratiosi
extiterint, ut potius in summo fuerint odio.
SECT. III.
ABout the same time Peter and John went up to the Temple about three a Clock
in the afternoon (being one of the hours of prayer) and there in the name of
Christ they heal Prophetae, V. T. qui Legem magis, quam Evangelium
praedicaverunt plura terribilia, and vindicativa fecerant miracula, quam
beneficia Ignem ex coelo fecerunt descendere, impiorum manus fecerunt
ex^rescere, lepra afflixerunt, tenebris, grandine, ranis, occisione
p^imogenitor^m, inundatione aquarum, etc. puniverunt. Sed in N. T. pauca
habemus miracula vindicativa, sed pleraque omnia benefica. Praesertim de
Christo no^andum, quod quantum vis plurima fecerit miracula, tamen nullum
fecerit terribile, ac vindicativum in vita sua, sed omnia benefica, ut vere de
illo dicatur quod est Act. 10.38. Unum autem miraculum vindicativum. de Christo
legimus verum non in hominibus, sed in ficu exercitum, Mat. 21.18.19.

Cum mancos, caecos, mendicos videmus, ne dicamus sicut discipuli, Joh. 9 2.
sed agnoscamus esse hoc meritum totius natural humanae; and quod nos
praeservati sumus, speciali and impromeritae gratiae esse tribuendum, qu^
obligamur ad specialem gratitudinem.


a cripple lying at the gate of the Temple (called Beautiful) Erat haec in
primo Templi ambitu sive Atrio gentium, quod Herodes caeteris adjecerat: alta
erat cubitorum 30 tota aere Corinthi^co, (quod auro pretiosius fuit) inducta,
vid. Joseph. de bello Jud. lib. 6. c. 6. Quistorpius.
to ask alms, Exemplum hic habemus libertatis divinae in dispensanda gratia.
Hic homo accepit, quod non non quaerebat. Ipse non nisi eleemosynam captabat,
and accepit Spiritualem, and Corporalem sanitatem; sicut Saul quaerens asinas
inuenit regnum. Con^^mat hoc illud Paulimum, Romans 9. Non est currentie neque
volentis. Hic homo petit eleemosynam, quam non accipit; accipit autem quod
melius est.
who had been lame from his birth, and was now about Forty years old (See chapter
4. 22.) The people being amazed at this miracle flocked in great multitudes
about the Apostles in Solomons-Porch, earnestly gazing on them, and wondering at
this strange cure wrought by them; and the man that was cured kept close to
them, having received so great a benefit by them. Peter seeing this, addressed
himself to the people showing them that they were much mistaken, if they
thought that this Miracle was wrought by any power, or virtue, that was in such
mean men, as they were. No, they durst not arrogate so much to themselves. He
assures them it was wrought by no other power, than that of Jesus Christ* whom
they had wickedly crucified (preferring Barabbas a murderer before him): but
God had raised him from the dead, and of his resurrection they his Apostles
were sure, and faithful witnesses. He shows them it was by faith, and relyance
on his power Per virturem, and Potentiam Jesu Christi, qua eum credo mihi
assistere, do tibi, ut surgas, and ambules. Per nomen Jesu intelligitur virtus,
vis, ac potestas Jesu, secundum promissionem, Mar. 16.18.
(which faith was also his gift, and wrought in them by his Spirit) that they
had wrought this cure on this Cripple. He tells them that though they had done
very hainously in thus putting to death the Prince of life, yet he was
persuaded Petius dicit se scire, quod fecerint ignorantes. ^^^eri^ scilicet per
judicium ch^ritatis, vid. Luc. 23.34. 1 Cor. 2.8. Non erant convicti, quod
Ch^istus esset ille ipse Messiah a Deo promissus. Petri Scopus ergo est non
Judaeorum peccatum excusare, sed tantum ^is ostendere, quod non commiserint
illud peccatum, quod non habet spem veniae. Peccare in Spiritum Sanctum non est
facere quod scimus malum esse, sed est ideo aliquod facere, quia scimus malum
esse, vel ideo aliquod persequi, quia scimus bonum esse.
. that most of them did it ignorantly, not being thoroughly convinced (though
they had evidence enough to have convinced them, had they duly attended to it)
that Jesus of Nazareth was the very Messiah; yet however hereby they had
accomplished what was praedicted in the Scriptures concerning the sufferings of
Christ. He exhorts them therefore to repent Contritio non justificat, sed
fides; sed tamen nulla fides justificat, nisi qua^ ex contritione prosiciscitur.
and turn to God, laying hold on his Grace and Mercy offered in Christ, that
their sins might be blotted out, seeing those blessed Peccata delentur ex libro
justitiae divinae per oliterationem, and inductionem sanguinis Christi. Ex
libro nostrae conscientiae, per Spiritum sanctum, Heb. 10.22. cordibus purgatis
a mal^ conscientia Series argumenti haec est. Moses, and omnes Prophetae,
quotquot locuti, hos die^ annunciarunt, and Christo testimonium dederunt,
volueruntque, ut eum audiretis, and vos ad eum converteretis. Vo^autem estis
filii prophetarum, ideoque obligati ad eos audiendos, and filii istius
foederis, quod Deus cum Abrahamo pepigit, and quo totius mundi salutem in hoc
^hristo promisit.
refreshing Gospel Times, which he had long ago promised, were now come, and he
had sent his Son Erasmus, and Beza, ad primum Christi adventum haec referunt:
hunc versum ergo hoc modo reddit Beza, Resipiscite, and conver^te vos, ut
deleantur peccata vestra post quam venerint temporare frigerationis a conspectu
Domini and miserii prius praedicatum vobis Jesum Christum. Glassius etiam dici
(...) poni pro (...) quum sen postquam: (...) usurpatur etiam pro (...) apud
Thucid. and Xen.
into the world, whom the Prophets long ago foretold, and preached of. This
Savior being now ascended he tells them the Heavens must contain (having
received hi^ Humanity) until the accomplishment v. 2^. Until the restitution of
all things] or the accomplishment of all things. The Arabic renders it until
the time in which all things shall he perfected, or finished. (...) does not
only signify a restitution to a former estate, but a fulfilling, or
accomplishing, and the praeposition (...) does not so much stand in the force o
Re again as in opposition to a privative in (...), so Matthew. 17.11. Elias
indeed shall first come (...), and shall restore al^: what to their former
estate? Nay, that the Baptist did not, for he brought them into a quite
different estate to their former: The words therefore may be more fully rendered
thus. Elias truly shall first come, and accomplish all things that are written.
And so must the Son of man do all things that are written of him, as Mark
follows the sense, Mar. 9.12. Lightfoot in loc.

Apud Hesychium, and Phavorinum, (...). Ergo in hoc sensu non ineptum erit
vertere, Act. 3.21. Quem oportet coelum recipere usque ad tempora
consummationis omnium, i. e. ad finem mundi, quando venturus est Judex vivorum,
and mortuorum, Ds. N. Knatchbull.


of all things, which God had spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets
since the world began; such as are, Christ's victory over Satan in the Salvation
of all his people, the Calling of the Jews, and his conquest of the last enemy
Death, etc. He further shows them that Moses had prophesied of this Christ,
under the title of the great Prophet, commanding he should be heard and obeyed
in all things, Deuteronomy. 18.15.18, 19. and that all the Prophets from Samuel as
many as have spoken have also foretold of these days; They therefore should
consider that they were the children of the Prophets, that is, the people to
whom God primarily and chiefly sent the Prophets, and the People to whom the
promise and covenant which God made with Abraham, That in his seed all the
nations of the earth should be blessed (namely, by giving the Messiah to spring
from his loins) did primarily appertain. And this Jesus, being that promised
Messiah God had now sent into the world, whom, being put to death, he had
raised again, and now in the power and ministry of his Gospel had first sent
again to them, to bless them by turning them from their sins by the powerful
operation of his Spirit, and to offer himself unto them as the only Savior,
and Redeemer; and therefore they ought in point of gratitude with all readiness
to receive, and embrace him.

Act. 3. v. 1. Now Peter and John w^nt up together into the temple at the hour
of prayer, being the ninth hour.

v. 2. And a certain man, lame from his mothers womb, was carried, whom they
laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of
them that entered into the temple.

v. 3. Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked an alms.

v. 4. And Peter fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said, Look on us.

v. 5. And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.

v. 6. Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have, give I
thee: In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk.

v. 7. And he took him by the right hand, and lift him up: and immediately his
feet and ancle-bones received strength.

v. 8. And he leaping up, stood and walked, and entered with them into the the
temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God.

v. 9. And all the people saw him walking, and praising God.

v. 10. And they knew that it was he, which sat for alms at the beautiful
gate of the temple; and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that
which had happened unto him.

v. 11. And as the lame man which was healed, held Peter and John, all the
people ran together unto them, in the porch that is called Solomon's, greatly
wondering.

v. 12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel,
why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own
power or holiness we had made this man to walk?

v. 13. The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers
has glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the
presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go.

v. 14. But ye denied the holy One, and the Just, and desired a murderer to be
granted unto you:

v. 15. And killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the dead,
whereof we are witnesses.

v. 16. And his Name, through faith in his Name, has made this man strong,
whom ye see and know: yea, the faith which is by him, has given him this
perfect soundness in the presence of you all.

v. 17. And now brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also
your rulers.

v. 18. But those things which God before had showed by the mouth of all his
prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled.

v. 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

v. 20. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you.

v. 21. Whom the heaven must rec^ive, until the times of restitution of all
things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the
world began.

v. 22. For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all
things, whatsoever he shall say unto you.

v. 23. And it shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that
prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.

v. 24. Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as
many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.

v. 25. Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the Covenant which God made
with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kinreds of
the earth be blessed.

v. 26 Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

v. 1. (...). Circa idem tempus.
v 6. (...) i. e. Imperio, and virtute Christi.
v. 7. Non sine ra^ione textus addit, quod surgere jubens, simul dextram ejus
apprehendens, eum erexit. Sic cum ministri hortant^r and jubent peccatores ut
surgant and ambulent in bonis operibus, jussio illorum conjuncta est cum
potentia Christi, quae efficit quod jubetur. Homo igitur semel regenitus potest
seipsum movere ad bonum, potest obedire Deo and facere quod Deo gratum est.
Quoniam enim vitam habet Spiritualem, vita dat and fert secum vires operandi
and se movendi. Tres tamen cautiones hic probe observandae sunt. 1. Non potest
sine continuatione gratiae and assistentia ejusdem Spiritus. 2. Non potest
perfect. 3. Non potest sine macula. Potest regenitus facere bona opera, sed
non quae sunt in seipsis tam bona, ut Deo ex seipsis placeant.
v. 11. The Porch called Solomons] Not that the Porch built by Solomon was now
standing, for that was burnt and destroyed by the Babylonians as well as the
rest of the Temple; but because this was built in the same place that Solomon's
was.
v. 12. (...)] aut quasi Deus nobis hoc ob nostram pietatem largiretur.
v. 13. Glorificare Jesum, est gloriam ejus ad quam exaltatus erat, mundo, and
hominibus patefacere, ut eum agnoscant. Persona glorificanda tribus titulis
proponitur. 1. Vocatur puer Dei. sicut Act. 3.26. and 4.27. ad exprimendum
tenerum amorem quo Deus illum complectitur (Est filius in sinu suo, Joh. 1.18.)
and ad exprimendum offi^ium Christi: (...) saepe sumitur pro servo, Luc. 12.45.
Isa. 42.1. and 52.13. Sed appellatur servus non ratione inaequalitatis, quae
est in natura, sed ratione liberae submissionis, and obedientiae, qua se passus
est a Patre mitti ad opus ejus expediendum, ad voluntatem ejus faciendam. (...)
cum de Jesu dicitur filium vertunt Ambrosius and Hilarious, ut notat Erasmus
infra, ca. 4.27. 2. (...) quia ipse est sanctitas, and justitia essentialis;
and auctor Sanctitatis, and justitiae quae est in aliis. 3. Princeps vitae
scilicet, qui vitae imperat. Nam per mortem victor mortis factus est, Heb.
2.14. 1 Cor. 15.54.
v. 16. De Apostolorum side hic agitur. q. d. per fidem qua nos nitebamur
potentia and verbo Christi cum diceremus In nomine Jesu surge, and ambula,
impetravimus hoc miraculum. Ad miracula facienda non opus est alia fi^e, quam
quae est communis omnium fidelium, sed tantum alia promissione.
v. 17. Petrus Judaeos appellat fratres. Erant fratres secundum carnem, and
propter externam communionem foederis.
v. 21. Quem oportet, coeli capiant. h. e. receptum contineant. Ex idiotismo
Hebraeorum, quo fit ut ex antec^dente intelligatur consequens, Bez^.
v. 24. Samuel is reckoned the first of the prophets after Moses, 1. Because
prophecy from the Death of Moses to the rising of Samuel was very rare, 1 Samuel
3.1.2. 2. Because he was the first prophet after Moses, that wrote his
prophecy, and 3. Because the Schools of the prophets were first erected by
him, (See 1 Samuel 19.20.) and not that there was no prophet before him. See Dr.
Hammond in loc.
v. 25. Filii dicuntur, qui alicujus doctrina instituti sunt; sic discipuli
prophetarum fili^eorum vocantur 2 Reg. 2. Seu potius quia ad eos primum
spectant prophetarum oracula, and promissiones. Sic dicuntur filii Testamenti.
Qua ratione Mat. 8. vocantur silii regni quibus regnum promissum est.
SECT. IV.
AS the Apostles were thus going on in instructing the People, the Priests, and
Sadduces, and Captain of the Roman Band (that was placed in the Tower Antonia
The Tower Antonia was first built by Hircanus the Armonean but after repaired
by Herod, and in honor of Anthony, named Antonia.
for the guard of the Temple) came upon them, and being greatly enraged (...),
i. e. Ira, and dolor erant accensi. The distaste and dislike of these men
proceeded from several principles and causes. The Captains distaste was for
fear the business should tend to a tumult The Sadduces because they preached
the Resurrection of the dead. The Priests, because the Apostles being private
men went about to teach the people, and because they preached the Resurrection
through Jesus, (...). i. e. either as verified in Jesus, or by the power and
efficacy of Jesus. Sadducaei rigidi admodum in poenis exigendis ut Josephus
docet, qui Pharisaeos ait fuisse in iis rebus leniores. Nimirum qui omnem spem
in hac vita collocatam habebant, severe occurrendum putabant omnibus iis quae
turbare poterant quietem populi, in qua and ipsorum quies continebatur, Grot.
at the Doctrine they preached, they took them and put them in custody Deus
sensim adsuefacit suos ad ferendam crucem, ut crescant cum cruce vires.
that night; yet Peter's Sermon had had so good an operation upon the people,
that with the Three thousand which were before converted chapter 2.41. the number
of believers in Christ was now come to be about Five thousand Prior concio
convertebat 3000. nunc accedunt 5000. aut saltem tot, ut utriusque concionis
effectus conjunctim producat 5000. Quod numerus credentium circiter ad 5 millia
crevisse dicitur non de nova accessione intelligo, sed de tota ecclesia, Calv.
in loc.
The next day the Council being met together (in which were Annas and Caiaphas,
and some others, that were descended of High Priests) the Apostles are now
called in question about the Miracle, they had wrought, and required to give an
account by what power or authority they had done it. Then Peter being filled
with the Holy Ghost, and an extraordinary measure of Courage, told them
plainly, that by the power and authority of Jesus of Nazareth (whom they had
crucified and God had raised from the dead) and by Faith in him, they had
wrought this miraculous cure. This he tells them was the Stone See my Harmony
of the Four Evangelists, chapter 5. p. 144.
spoken of, Psalm. 118.22. and Isa. 28.16. (which could be meant of no other
than the Messiah) who was now rejected and dis-esteemed of them who would be
accounted the builders of the Church of God with sound Doctrine; yet
notwithstanding their rejecting of him he tells them he is certainly the head
of the corner Deus eum constituit in lapidem angularem, i. e. in fundamentum
cui in posterum tota ecclesia superstrueretur.

Duplex est cujuslibet aedificii fundamentum 1. Externum, and natural, viz.
fundus, vel terra apta. 2. Internum, and artificiale, quod ab architectis
ponitur, and est pars aedificii. Sic ecclesia christiana duplex habet
fundamentum. 1. Externum, viz revelationem Dei per prophetas, and Apostolos in
Scripturis sacris; Haec est principium, and fundamentum cui innititur fides
ecclesiae, and propter quod Ecclesia credit quae credit. Non enim testimonium
aliquod humanum, non authoritas Papae and Ecclesiae, neque rationis humanae
scientifica demon^^ratio est illud fundamentum, and principium, propter quod
credimus quae credimus, sed sacra Scriptura, Joh. 5. Illae sunt, quae
testificantur de me. 2. Habet etiam Ecclesia Christiana fundamentum internum
quod est pars aedificii. Sicut enim architecti in ipsa terra ponere solent
lapidem quadratum, vel Petram aliquam in angulis aedificii, quae muros
^ustineat, Ita in aedificio Ecclesiae primo omnium ponitur lapis ille
angulalis, and Petra, quae cum sit ipsa pars aedificii, caeteris aedificii
parts sustinet, atque portat. Hic lapis est Jesus Christus. Ille est cum suis
meritis cui innititur sides nostra, and sicut s des habet duas quasi parts, 1.
Assensum mentis. 2. Fiduciam cordi^. Ita duo habet fundamenta. Scripturae
authoritas est fundamentum assensus: Christi merita, fundamentum fiduciae.
Fides in Christum non est mera imaginatio salutis, sed est fiducialis amplexus
Christi, repositio Cordis in Christum, qua ei adhaeremus cum sensu miseriae
nostrae premimur. Stres. in loc.


, and the principal Stone, or chief part of the whole spiritual building, his
true Church being the Person in whom the strength of the building lies, and by
whom the two walls of the building, viz. Jews and Gentiles are joined together,
and made up into one House and Church; neither is Salvation to be attained by
or through the mediation of any other person whatsoever. From v. 1. to 13.

The Council much marvelled at this boldness, and freedom of speech, wherewith
the Apostles expressed themselves, seeing their education had been such as
could not raise them above mean and ordinary men. But then they were told, or
else some of them remembered, that they were such as had attended upon Jesus in
his life time. However though they were convinced of the truth of the Miracle
wrought by them, yet after they had debated upon the matter among themselves,
they judged it fit strictly to prohibit them to preach any more in the name of
Jesus; which injunction the Apostles would by no means yield obedience unto,
alleging that it was much more right and fit to obey God, than them; and
declared, that they could not choose but proclaim for the benefit of others
those truths concerning Christ of so high importance, which themselves had
certain knowledge of, being eye and ear-witnesses of them. However
notwithstanding this rational Plea, the Council added some further threatenings
to terrify them, and so dismissed them, having nothing to lay to their charge,
but only that for which the people looked on them with admiration and glorified
God for working by them. From 13. to 23.

The Apostles being thus dismissed, went immediately to their own company (that
is the Society of those Hundred and twenty mentioned chapter 1.15.) and acquainted
them with what had happened unto them. The Brethren being much affected
herewith betake themselves, by fervent prayer unto the Lord, acknowledging that
what he had long ago praedicted by his Prophet David The second Psalm which
own not its author in the Title, the Holy Ghost ascribes here to David, and
seems thereby to intimate, that every Psalm that declares not its Author in
the Title is to be ascribed to David, Lightf. in loc.
Psalm. 2.1. concerning the Messiah, was now come to pass. For the Jews had
highly opposed him, the anointed A Patre unctus, ut esset servus, and legatus
Dei* haec unctio consistit 1. In datione potestatis, and authoritatis. 2. In
datione Spiriti Sancti, qui humanam naturam ad hoc faceret aptam. Hac unctione
roboratus est ad perficiendam omnem justitiam, quae a nobis requirebatur.
Unctus est Spiritu Sancto, ut ex ejus plenitudine Ecclesia sumeret, and
hauriret sua dona. Unctio ergo notat commissionem officii and adaptationem ad
illud. Hoc autem officium Christi triplex est. 1. Propheticum consistens in
Doctrina sive mediata, sive immediata, miraculis etiam ad confirmationem
Doctrinae facie^tibus. 2 Sacerdotale, consistens in oblatione Sacrificii, and
Intercessione Huc pertinet benedictio, qua impetratur benedictio populi. 3.
Regium, consistens in rectione ecclesiae per Spiritum suum, and defensione
contra hosts.

Particula Vt latens in constructione Graec^ hic non est nota intentionis, sed
eventus

Voluntas Dei, and interdictum Dei non pugnant. Deus en^m saepe prohibet quod
vult fieri, sed distinctione hic opus est: alia est voluntas eligens, alia
voluntatas approbans. Deus non vult quod prohibet, i. e. non approbat, sed
odit, ac detestatur. Deus tamen vult quod prohibet, i. e. eligit sibi in
medium, quoad bonum aliquem finem perveniat. Quanam autem in re consistit ille
concursus divinae manus cum pec^atis hominum? solet vulgo in sequentibu^
constitui. 1. Deus permittit non Ethice quasi non prohibeat, sed hysice, quia
non impedit, sed sinit homines ire viis suis. Relinquit eos sui^ libidinibus,
nec coercet Satanam. 2. Sustentat creaturam peccantem. 3. Dirigit malitiam
cre^turae in talia objecta, and in tales fines, in quos vult, and eam limitat
ne agat pro mensura malitiae, sed ad mensuram divinae sapientiae. Deus non
praedefinit, and ordinat malas impiorum actiones in quantum malae sunt, verum
ordinat bonum illud quod inde elicit, and quod illi malo adversum est.


of the Lord, and invented false things against him, and the Roman Governors
in Palestine, Herod, and Pontius Pilat had combined against him, and the Jewish
Sanhedrin had joined their malicious Counsels to destroy him, and in opposing
him, had also opposed God the Father who sent him. All this they had done, and
thereby had been instruments to act that which God before determined (h), viz.
that his Son should be put to death for the sins of men. And now God having
raised him again from the dead, and commanded his Apostles to preach him to the
world, these Jews had with great threatenings forbidden them: Whereupon they
humbly beseech the Lord to enable them his Servants, and Ministers to preach
his word with all boldness and courage* and to give them power to work
miraculous cures in the name of Jesus for the confirmation of the Gospel.

Upon this prayer of theirs there came a wind from heaven like to that
mentioned Chap. 2.2. and shook the place where they were assembled, and special
eminent gifts Repleti sunt Spiritu Sancto, i. e. augmentum donorum acceperant
sicut d^e Pentecostes receperant bonum initium. Repleti sunt Spiritu Sancto, ut
scilicet in persecutione loquantur verbum Dei cum fiduci^. Unde Chrysostom.
Reaccensi sunt Spiritu Sancto, and reaccensum in ipsis Charisma. De. Lightfoot
thinks, that upon the Twelve now sell that wonderful gift of conferring the
Holy Spirit.
of the Spirit fell upon them, and especially they were endued with a greater
measure of boldness to preach the Gospel even in the midst of persecution, and
this was such a confirmation to them, that despising the terrors of the Jews,
they with greater confidence published the Gospel of Christ than before. This
also is further to be observed concerning this infant Church, and these
primitive disciples, that they maintained a great union and concord Duplici
medio sibi contra hosts consulunt. 1. Precibus. 2. Stricta inter se unione,
dilectione, and concordia. Et specialiter in hoc consenserunt, ut articulum de
Resurrectione Christi efficaciter urgerent. 1. Ex vaticiniis ^cripturae
demonstrabant verum Messiam debuisse resurgere. 2. Potentia suae doctrinae
suorumque operum miraculosorum, quae in nomine Jesu faciebant, convincebant
homines, Jesum eos roborare, and proinde non mortuum esse, sed vivere.
among themselves both in Doctrine and Opinion, in Heart and Affection, and had
such enlarged bowels toward one another, that no man esteemed what he had his
own when the Churches necessity required it for the help of such among them as
were in want.

The Apostles also with great authority and assurance gave testimony to the
Resurrection of Christ, and their Doctrine found great favor and acceptance
with the People. And those of the disciples, that had possessions sold them
Such was the state of the Church at this time, as was never like to be again.
It was but newly born, it was all in one city, the most of the people far from
their own houses, all in a possibility to be soon scattered by persecution.
Therefore this example cannot be a copy for after times to follow as a command
or to imitate as a perfection, Lightfoot in loc.

Re^quae erat temporariae alicujus necessitatis, and liberi arbitrii, Act. 5.4.
non debet hodie in exemplum trahi, multo minu^ ut necessaria obtrudi. Freid.
lib.


and laid down the money received for them, at the Apostles feet to be
distributed by their advice, and counsel, to every one as they had need. In
which business Barnabas ^arnabas dictus est a (...) filius, and (...) pro quo
contracte (...) consolans ^^^riaco (...) consolatus est. De Dieu.
a Levite gave an eminent example, who having a piece of Land of his own (not
part of the Levites portion, which he might not alienate, but probably
somewhat, which belonged to him in Cyprus where he was born) made sale of it,
and brought the full price of it, and put it wholly in the Apostles power to
dispose of, and to distribute as they saw occasion among those of the Church
that were in want and necessity.

Act. 4. v. 1. And as they sp^ke unto the people, the priests and the captain
of the temple, and the Sadduces came upon them.

v. 2. Being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus
the resurrection from the dead.

v. 3. And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next day: for
it was now even-^ide.

v. 4. Howbeit, many of them which heard the word, believed, and the number of
the men was about five thousand.

v. 5. And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and
scribes,

v. 6. And Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as
many as were of the kindred of the high priest, were gathered together at
Jerusalem.

v. 7. And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power or by
what Name have ye done this?

v. 8. Then Peter filled with the holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the
people, and elders of Israel.

v. 9. If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by
what means he is made whole.

v. 10. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the
Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole.

v. 11. This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is
become the head of the corner.

v. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

v. 13. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that
they were unlearned, and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge
of them, that they had been with Jesus.

v. 14. And beholding the man that was healed standing with them, they could
say nothing against it.

v. 15. But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they
conferred among themselves.

v. 16. Saying, What shall we do to these men? For that indeed a notable
miracle has been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem,
and we cannot deny it.

v. 17. But that it spread no furth^r among the people, let us straightly
threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this Name.

v. 18. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach
in the N^me of Jesus.

v. 19. But Peter and John answered, and said unto them, Whether it be right in
the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

v. 20. For we cannot but speak the things which we have s^^n and ^^^rd.

v. 21. So when they had further threatened them, they let t^^m go, fi^ding
nothing how they might punish them, b^c^use o^ the people, for all men
glorifi^d God for that which was done.

v. 22. For the man was above forty years old, on whom this mi^^cle of healing
was sh^w^d.

v. 23. And b^ing let go, they went to their own comp^ny, and rep^rted all that
the chi^f priests and elders had said unto them.

v. 24. And when they heard that, they li^t up their voice to God with one
accord, and said, Lord, thou art God which have made heaven and earth and the
sea, and all that in them is,

v. 25. Who by the mouth of thy servant David have said, Why did the heathen
rage, and the people imagine vain things?

v. 26. The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together
against the Lord, and against his Christ.

v. 27. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed,
both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel
were gathered together.

v. 28. For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be
done.

v. 29. And now Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants,
that with all boldness they may speak thy word,

v. 30. By stretching forth thine hand to heal: and that signs and wonders may
be done by the N^me of thy holy child Jesus.

v. 31. And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled together, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and they
spoke the word of God with boldness.

v. 32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one
soul: neither said any of them, that ought of the things which he possessed,
was his own, but they had all things common.

v. 33. And with great power gave the Apostles witness of the resurrection of
the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all.

v. 34. Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were
possessors of lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of the things
that were sold,

v. 35. And laid them down at the Apostles feet: and distribution was made unto
every man according as he had need.

v. 36. And Joses, who by the Apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being
interpreted, The son of consolation) a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus,

v. 37. Having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the
Apostles feet.

v. 5. Seniores] idem quod Senatores, and consules urbium. Scribae, qui apud
Jeremiam Juris-consulti, and interpretes legis, qui in medio consessus responsa
dabant de jure. Quidam Scribae erant interpretes legis forensis, and potius
politicae vocationis quam ecclesiasticae.
v. 6. Quotquot erant ex genere Pontificio] h. e. Quorum majores summo
sacerdotio non ita pridem functi fuerant; Quae magna nobi^itas fecerat ut
Synedrio magno ascriberentur, Grot.
v. 9. De beneficientia hominis infirmi] h. e. in eum collata. Genitivus modo
causam efficientem, modo rem, aut personam recipientem notat, ut hic.
v. 11. (...)] in Psalm. 118.22. it is (...), the stone, whom they refused. So
it is also Mat. 21.42. and that according to the Hebrew text. But here the
Apostle heightens the expression, that he may set home their re^using Christ
the nearer to their hearts.
v. 12. Non est aliud nomen] nomen pro ipsa persona, aut re ponitur: sic nom^n
Christi est Christus ipse, quod etiam Ethnicis in usu. Tibullus, nec fidum
foemina nomen. Sic Virgil. 6. Aeneid. Silvius Albanum nomen h. e. Albanus homo.
Nomen aliquando ponitur pro dignitate, and eminentia. ut Phil. 2.9, 10.
v. 13. (...) hic opponitur (...), h. e. peritis, and intelligentibus.

Agnoscebant eos cum Jesu fuisse] Non mirum, cum Senatorum quidam interdum
Jesum suis discipulis comitatum adiissent, and allocuti essent, Mat. 21.23.
Luc. 18.18. Joh. 12.42.


v. 20. Non possumus, quae vidimus, non loqui] h. e. Non debemus silere verbum
potest^tis non raro pro verbo d^biti, and juris accipitur; non possum, i e. non
jure, ligetime, honest, and bona conscientia. Id possum, quod jure p ssum.
SECT. VII.
ANanias and Sapphira They had the formality to sell their lands as others did,
but had not the sincerity to part with the money, as others had: their double
dealing both in word and deed is fearfully punished with sudden death at the
beginning of the Christian Church, as Nadab, and Abihu, and the Sabbath-breaker
were at the beginning of the Jewish, that in future times others might beware
of dissembling with God, Lightfoot. in loc.

Nota in quibus peccaverit Ananias praecipue. 1. Non propter Dei gloriam, and
proximi utilitatem vendidit agrum, sed ut venaretur sibi sanctitatis, and
pietatis laudem. 2. Asseverat quod totum pretium deposuerit, cum tamen partem
ejus maximam sibi reti^uisset. Concurrunt igitur hic Dei contemptus, ambitio,
dissidentia, mendacium, hypocrisis, Freidl.

Quod Ananias voto jam ante totum agrum Deo consecraverit, votoque illo violato
sacrilegus evascrit, ex textu colligi non videtur; sed tantum quod cum per
ambitionem totius pretium don^sse videri voluerit partem ejus suppresserit,
quod hypocriseos erat, and mendacii, De Dieu.

Petrus antehac majestatem, and exaltationem Christi testatus est per miraculum
beneficentiae in homine clando. Nunc eam testatam reddidit per miraculum
severitatis in homine hypocrita. Interpretes vulgo hunc actum comparant cum
facto Pauli, Act. 13 9, 10, 11. and cum facto Eliae, 2 Reg. 1.9, 10.

Peccatum Annaniae erat peccatum nullius necessitatis, quod facillime potuisset
omittere. Non opus habebat quicquam dare, and potuisset totum retinere. Hinc
videmus quod bona vendere, and dare omnia pauperibus, non fu^t res necessitatis
in primitiva Ecclesia, sed libertatis. Carebat tum temporis Ecclesia
protectione Magistratus, and propriis armis Spiritualibus se defendebat, quae
cum ordinary funt invisibilia, tunc visibilia fuerunt ad majorem terrorem
impiorum, tum intra, tum extra Ecclesi^m.


his wife pretending to follow this example fraudently kept back by joint
consent part of the price for which they had sold a possession, and yet
pretended to lay down all the price it was sold for at the Apostles feet. For
which Hypocrisy, and lying to, or in the presence of the Holy Ghost, and
thinking to go undiscovered of that Spirit, which wrought so powerfully in the
Apostles, and to impose upon God himself, as if he saw not what men secretly
did, and presumptuously tempting him, and trying (as it were) whether he would
be so severe to punish it, or no, they are stricken dead, and great fear fell
on all that heard of these things.

Act. 5.1. But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a
possession,

v. 2. And kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and
brought a certain part, and laid it at the Apostles feet.

v. 3. But Peter said, Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the
holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?

v. 4. Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it
not in thine own power? why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God.

v. 5. And Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up the ghost: and
great fear came on all them that heard these things.

v. 6. And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried him out, and buried
him.

v. 7. And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife not
knowing what was done came in.

v. 8. And Peter answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for ^o
much. And she said, Yea for so much.

v. 9. Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of them that have buried thy
husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out.

v. 10. Then fell she down straitway at his feet, and yielded up the ghost: and
the young men came in, and found her dead, and carrying her forth, buried her
by her husband.

v. 11. And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard
these things.

v. 2. (...)] Verbum factum ex (...) seorsim, notat clam, and callide quippiam
surripere, and suffurari.
v. 3. Quare implevit Satanas cor tuum] h. e. Cur occasionem praebuisti
Satanae, ut veneno suo cor tuum impleret, and ad hoc mendacium impelleret?
Quare te ita regi, and impelli passus es a Satana? Implere cor alterius est
audacem eum reddere, implere cor suum audacem fieri. Confer Esth. 7.5. Quis est
hic, qui implevit cor suum (vel quem implevit cor ejus) ad faciendum est? i. e.
qui tam audacis animi sit, ut hoc facere sustineat. Vide etiam, Eccles. 8.11.
Nihil enim metuit cor Spiritibus plenum, De Dieu.

(...)] i. e. in Spiritum Sanctum.

Elipsis praepositionis (...). Hinc elicitur Testimonium ad demonstrandam
Spiritus Sancti Deitatem. v. 4. Non es mentitus hominibus tantum, sed cum
primis Deo. Idem est mentiri Deo, and Spiritui Sancto. Mentiri Deo aut Spiritui
Sancto is dicitur, qui sperat se Apostolos fallere posse Spiritu Sancto
instructo^, Grot.


v. 4. (...), scilicet in tua possessione, (...) ad tuos usus manebat, and
venundatum in tua erat potestate.

(...) scilicet (...)] Quid est quod potuisti, etc.


SECT. VIII.
THE Apostles having thus manifested the power of Christ, and his Justice in
this example of Ananias and Sapphira, they also manifested his graciousness and
mercy in working many miraculous cures in his Name, in healing the diseased,
and delivering the possessed; insomuch, that the people brought forth their
sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the
Shadow Pontificii super hanc umbram Petri aedificant superstitionem suam circa
reliquias Sanctorum. Si sola, inqu unt, umbra Petri tot morbos potuit sanare,
quid non possint reliquiae vestimentorum, vel corporis? Si Pauli sudoriola,
Act. 19. Si Christi fimbria, Mat. 9, fanarunt morbos; Si ossa Elisae mortuos
excitarunt, 2 Reg. 13. Quid non poterunt lignum crucis, sepulchrum Christi,
tunica Christi, lac and crines Mariae, caligae Josephi, etc.? vid. Stres. in
loc. Christus simbriae tactu sanavit morbos; Petrus etiam umbrae contactu: sic
impletum est quod dixerat Christus, Joh. 14.12. Grot.
of Peter passing by, might overshadow some of them. And these acts of mercy
were as necessary for the propagating of the Gospel, and to invite people to
believe in Christ, as those other of severity were for the restraining those
corruptions wherewith Satan would otherwise have infected the Church in its
minority; and to prevent the intrusion of Hypocrites Poena Ananiae, and
Sapphirae non parum valebat terrendis impiis, ne temere prorumperent in eorum
coetum, ubi Deus tam severum vindicem se ostenderat. Calv. in loc.
. The Apostles and Believers had at this present their place of meeting and
assembling to preach the Gospel in Solomon's Porch See chap. 2. ver. 46.
, which was the East-Cloyster of the Mount of the Temple [See 1 King. 6.3.], in
part of which the Sanhedrim used to sit, and yet they are not afraid to come so
nigh unto them. But such of their hearers as were not sincere, durst not join
themselves to them, having seen the severity on Ananias and Sapphira for their
Hypocrisy; yet multitudes of others were added to the Church daily; and the
common people seeing the wonders that were done by them, and their eminent
gifts and endowments, could not but extol and magnify them Erant, (inquit
Chrysostom.) Apostoli sicut Angeli, admirabiles, interriti ad minas, and
pericula, and deliciis superiores, spirantes ignem divinum, gravitate and vultu
venerabiles, affabilitate amabiles, charitate fervidi, oratione coelestes,
moribus divini. Corn. a Lap. in loc.
. From ver. 12, to 17.

Hereupon the High Priest, and those that were with him (most of them of the
Sect of the Sadduces) set themselves very zealously against them; and
apprehending them, put them into the common Gaol; from whence being freed the
night following by an Angel, they are commanded by Him to go again, and preach
boldly in the Temple the Doctrine of Christ, which declares unto men the right
way unto eternal life Vocat Evangelium verbum vitae hujus: non hujus terrenae,
sed q. d. hujus vitae propter cujus spem captivi erant Apostoli.
. The Council meeting next morning, sent to the Prison for them, but find them
not there; for they were preaching in the Temple; from thence they are brought
before them by the Captain and Officers, yet without violence: for they feared
the people would stone them, if they used such persons harshly who had done so
many cures among them. Being now again brought before the Council, they are
here accused of two things. 1. Of Contumacy, in persisting to preach the
Gospel, notwithstanding they were strictly forbidden. 2. Of Sedition, as if
they endeavored to stir up the people to avenge the blood of Jesus upon the
Rulers, persuading them it was by them most unjustly shed. Peter, in the name
of the rest, answers to the first of these, acknowledging they had not obeyed
them in that their Injunction, because they had commanded that which was
contrary to God's Command; and in such a case it was just and reasonable, that
God should be obeyed, and not they. He tells them, That though they had dealt
most injuriously and maliciously with Jesus of Nazareth, and had crucified him;
yet God had raised him again from the dead, and exalted him Ante exaltationem
Christus erat Salvator, quia salutem pro nobis merebatur: post exaltationem est
Salvator, quia salutem in nobis operatur. Christus erat Rex noster in med^a sua
exinanitione, ut de se fatetur, Joh 18.37. Erat enim unctus in Regem sed tamen,
durante exinanitione, non ita evidenter functus est ^fficio Regio, ac post
exaltationem. Sicut David erat Rex ab ipso unctionis momento, 1 Samuel 16.13. Sed
tamen dium exilio passus est, antequam Regium solium ascendit; ita Christus,
etc.
to his ^ight hand in Heaven, and instated him in his Regal Power, that he
might, as a Spiritual Prince, rule and protect his Church; and, as a Savior,
send his Spirit into the Hearts of Sinners, to draw them to Repentance, and
belief in himself Religio piorum in V. T. nulla alia in re fuit posita quam, 1.
In humili confessione propriae indignitatis, and corruptionis, and impotentiae.
2. In confugio fiduciali ad misericordiam Dei, in sacrificio and satisfactione
promissi Mediatoris sundatam. 3. In sincero studio emendationis, and
gratitudinis, ac patientia, ac spe resurrectionis and vitae aeternae: Conversio
ergo generaliter sumpta dividitur in tres parts, viz. contritionem fidem, and
emendationem.
that so they might receive remission of sins, and all the blessed consequents
thereof. He declares, that they his Apostles did bear their testimony to the
truth of these things; and so did the Holy Ghost See Joh. 15.26. and 16.13, 14.
, who descending upon them, and others also (who believed in Christ, and
yielded obedience to him), endowed them with extraordinary gifts Spiritus
Sanctus duplici modo de Christo testatur. 1. Inartificialiter per modum testis;
cum ita operatur in animos fidelium, ut eis persuadeat de veritate verbi
divini, and verbum illud, quod ipse revelavit, esse veritatem. Spiritus Sanctus
non tantum est Auctor verbi, sed Testis verbi. Verum hoc testimonium est
internum, quo non p^ssunt uti fideles ad convincendos alios, and quod non
potuissent allegare Apostoli ad convincendos hos judices. 2. Artificialiter,
per modum argumenti, cum scilicet iis qui Christo obediunt, largitur tam
mirabilia dona, ex quibus tanquam certissimo argumento possunt omnes homines
concludere, Christum non esse nunc mortuum, sed vivum, and exaltatum. Hoc
testimonium hoc loco allegant Apostoli ad convincendos hos judices.
, and enabled them to do miraculous cures: And if their testimony were false,
certainly it would never have been so confirmed. From Ver. 12, to 30.

These words so enraged Haec concio Petri eadem est quantum ad substantiam eum
ista, Act. 2. tamen long alius effectus illius ac hujus. Illam a^diente, (...)
compung: bantur, hanc audient^s (...) dissecabantur.
the Council, and cut them to the heart, that they presently entered into
consultation of putting the Apostles to death; but were diverted from that
wicked intendment, by the advice of Gamaliel, a learned and grave Senator, and
of much repute among them; who told them, that if this work were of men, it
would come to naught; as he proves by two instances, one of Theudas Fuerunt
duae Theuda; alter prior, de quo hic Lucas; alter posterior, de quo Josephus
scribit, lib. 20. c. 2. Is de quo hic agitur exstitit paulo ante finem Herodis,
ut notat Casaub. Exerc. 17 Ostendens ita sensisse and O^igenem, Non est mirum,
diversis temporibus plures extitisse factiosos homines ejusdem nominis. Grot.
, who gave himself out to be some excellent person sent of God for the
delivering of the Jews; and the other, of Judas of Galilee Dictus fuit
Gaulonites cujus meminit Josephus, lib. 18. c. 1. lib. 20. c. 5 Hic cum
Cyrenius Praeses Syriae mitteretur ad censendum populum, seditionem concitavit,
docens non alium esse Dominum quam Deum agnoscendum; censum nihil aliud esse
quam manifestam servitutis professionem; and libero Judaeorum populo indignum.
Faciebat autem ista Judas ministerio Sadociae Pharisaei, quem sibi adjunxerat.
, who in the time of the Tax laid by Augustus raised a Sedition, dissuading the
people from paying it; Both which persons he tells them gathered many followers
after them, but miserably miscarried in their enterprise. But he further shows
them that if this work were of God, they could not possibly overthrow it,
neither ought they to attempt it, least therein they should show themselves to
be fighters against God.

This advice being so rational, it prevailed with them to desist from their
former intention. Yet notwithstanding sending for the Apostles again into the
Court they appointed them to be scourged Non autem Apostolos intactos
dimittunt: quod tamen aequum fuerat, and congruens iis quae dixerat Gamaliel.
, and strictly charging them not to preach any more in the name of Christ
Potest mundus impius far concionatores, qui praedicent legem, reprehendant
vitia, hortentur ad virtutem. Illos tamen doctoret non possunt far, qui
concionantur in nomine Jesu, and docent, in solo Jesu esse omne id, quod ad
salutem requiritur, in tantum ut nemo possit salvari misi per justitiam
Christi, and per tractionem, and conversionem, Spiritus Sancti.
, dismissed them. But they were so far from being discouraged Persecutio piorum
est comoedia, quae triste habet initium, tristesque processus, sed semper
laetam catastrophen. Martyrium, and amissio vitae corporalis non est exitus and
finis, and catastrophe hujus fabulae, sed coronatio, martyrium sequens. Tum
demum finitur, cum caesus coronatur, and caedens in ignem conjicitur.
by these things, that they went away rejoicing, that they were counted worthy
Magna virtus ipsam contumeliam honori ducere ob bonam causam, Ita in Apostolis,
per elegans (...), combinantur summa dignitas, and indigne propter Christum
tractari.
to suffer shame for his sake. And daily both in the Temple, and in private
houses they ceased not to preach Jesus Christ.

Act. 5. v. 12. And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs, and wonders
wrought among the people (And they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.

v. 13. And of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people
magnified them.

v. 14. And believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men
and women)

v. 15. Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid
them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter passing by, might
overshadow some of them.

v. 16. There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto
Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits:
and they were healed every one,

v. 17. Then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him. (which
is the sect of the Sadduces) and were filled with indignation.

v. 18. And laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison.

v. 19. But the Angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought
them forth, and said,

v. 20. Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this
life.

v. 21. And when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in the
morning, and taught: but the high priest came, and they that were with him, and
called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and
sent to the prison to have them brought.

v. 22. But when the officers came, and found them not in the prison, they
returned, and told,

v. 23. Saying, The prison truly found we shut with all safety, and the keepers
standing without before the doors: but when we had opened, we found no man
within.

v. 24. Now when the high priest, and the captain of the temple, and the chief
priests heard these things, they doubted of them whereunto this would grow.

v. 25. Then came one and told them, saying. Behold, the men whom ye put in
prison, are standing in the temple, and teaching the people.

v. 26. Then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without
violence (For they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned)

v. 27. And when they had brought them, they set them before the council, and
the high priest asked them,

v. 28. Saying, Did not we straightly command you that you should not teach in
this Name? And behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend
to bring this man's blood upon us.

v. 29. Then Peter, and the other Apostles answered, and said, We ought to obey
God rather than men.

v. 30. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a
tree.

v. 31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior,
for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

v. 32. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy
Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him.

v. 33. When they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took counsel to
slay them.

v. 34. Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel a
doctor of law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the
Apostles forth for a little space.

v. 35. And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what ye
intend to do as touching these men.

v. 36. For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody,
to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain,
and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to naught.

v. 37. After this man rose up Judas of Galilee, in the days of the taxing, and
drew away much people after him: he also perished, and all, even as many as
obeyed him, were dispersed.

v. 38. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for
if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught.

v. 39. But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God.

v. 40. And to him they agreed: and when they had called the Apostles, and
beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the Name of Jesus and
let them go.

v. 41. And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.

v. 42. And daily in the temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach
and preach Jesus Christ.

v. 13. (...)] Nemo eorum, qui extra ecclesiam erant, and fidem Christi nondum
amplexi essent auderet se adjungere consortio Apostolorum, ob recentem adhuc ex
prodigioso Ananiae interitu metum; id tamen progressui Evangelii non obfuit.
v. 20. Omnia verba vitae hujus] Vitae nomine intelligit doctrinam, quae ad
vitam aeternam ducit, Joh. 12.50. and 17.3.
v. 34. This Gamaliel was Paul's Tutor, Ast. 22.3. the Son of Simeon, that took
Christ in his Arms, Luc. 2. and the Grandchild of the famous Hillel, Lightf.
v. 19. Ne cum Deo pugnare comperiamini] ante (...): subintelligitur Cavendum
est.
SECT. IX.
THe number of Believers now increasing at Jerusalem, there arose (as it
commonly happens among a multitude) a murmuring of the Hellenists Horum
plerique Hebraica non intelligebant. Quorum fuit and Philo, quanquam Judaeus ex
Judaeis ortus.
(that is such Jews as were dispersed among the Graecians, and were born, or
lived in Heathen Countries, and used the Greek Translation of the Old
Testament, and the Greek Tongue, yet savouring something of the Hebrew Phrases
and manner of speaking) against the Hebrews (who were such Jews as inhabited
Judea, and spoke the Syriack Language) because their Widows Quod viduae
Hellenistarum aut aegrotae, aut infantibus oneratae, minus acciperent quam
viduae in Judaea natae. Id autem accidebat quod (ut videtur) Apostoli ad hanc
distributionem utebantur Judaeis in Judaea natis.
were neglected, and received less, than the Widows of the Hebrews, in the
daily distribution of the Churches moneys. The Apostles desiring to have the
poor well provided for, yet being themselves taken up with dispensing the word,
(the food of the soul,) and so not at leisure to attend that other service; by
their advice, and the suffrages of the Church, there were Seven men of good
report for wisdom and the endowments of the Spirit, chosen out of the Hundred
and Eight, mentioned before, chapter 1. to be Stewards of the Churches stock
Exemplo scilicet eorum qui in synagoga dicebantur (...) Epiphanio (...). Totum
primae Ecclesiae regimen conformatum fuit ad formam Synagogae. Quae been se
habebant nihil opus erat mutari, Grot.
, unto which they were ordained by the imposition of hands Signum mandati
ministerii.
. Among those Stephen, and Philip were the most eminent, whose story is
particularly related. Thus the Gospel went on successfully, and the number of
the Disciples increased daily, yea some of the Priests Casaubonus existimat
vocem (...) hic deesse. Legendum igitur (...), ut sententia sit, Multam populi
turmam credidisse, and aliquos etiam e sacerdotibus. Nam insolens (inquit)
videtur, ut dicatur sacerdotum multa turba doctrinam Christi veram propter hoc
factum esse amplexa.

(...) nihil nonnunquam praeter eos qui, in numero aut turba, designat. Quomodo
(...), Luc. 19 39. (...). Sic (...) omnes praeter elassium principes
dicebantur. Vide Joh. 12.42. Heinsius.


themselves (formerly bitter enemies to Christ) now embraced the faith, and
were joined to the Church.

Act. 6. v. 1. And in those days, when the number of the disciples was
multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews,
because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.

v. 2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and
said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables.

v. 3. Wherefore brethren, look you out among you seven men of honest report,
full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.

v. 4. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry
of the word.

v. 5. And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen a man
full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor,
and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch.

v. 6. Whom they set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them.

v. 7. And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples
multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the priests were
obedient to the faith.

v. 5. Cum Nicolaus dicitur fuisse ab Antiochia proselytus, intellige (...) i.
e. circumcisum, and legi, sua voluntate, subditum. Hic est Nicolaus a quo nomen
traxere Nicolaitae, Apoc. 2.6.15. a Patribus memorati, Iren. lib. 1. c. 27.
Eusebius. hist, l. 3. c. 29. vid. Grot.

This Sect mis-construed the Doctrine of Christian community, to all
licentiousness: but whether it began to be so mis-construed by Nicolas himself,
or some of his followers, as the Sadduces abused the good Doctrine of Sadoc to
a damnable Heresy, it is difficult to determine, Lightf.


SECT. X.
STephen being thus chosen to be one of the first Deacons, and being a man full
of Faith, and power Per (...) intelliguntur Incitationes, and impulsus Spiritus
Sancti ex quibus poterant observare praesentiam, and promptitudinem Spiritus ad
perpetrationem miraculorum. Vide phrasim Scripturae, Jud. 14.6, 19. and 15.14.
1 Samuel 10.10. Cum Spiritus per hos volebat facere miraculum non solebat externo
verbo prom^ssionem edere, sed irruoba^ in eos, i. e. Aliquo motu, and
incitatione aliqua praesentiam, and promptitudinem suam ad miraculum ipsis
insinuabat and sic promissionem miraculi ipsis dabat. Cum homines huic
promissioni credebant, and illius fiducia miraculum edebant, fiebat miraculum.
Cum autem ejusmodi incitationes Spiritus non fiunt, etiamsi adsit fides,
miracula tamen non fiunt. Tales igitur virtutes, i. e. tales impulsus, and
incitationes Spiritus crebras fuisse super Stephanum dicit Evangel^sta, quibus
Stephanus credens and confidens, multa in populo fecit miracula, quibus
doctrinam suam confirmavit, vid. 1 Cor. 12.28. Stres.
to work Miracles, he accordingly does many wonders among the people, and
stoutly defends the cause of Christ against several persons of the Synagogue of
the Libertins Illi qui Stephanum adorti sunt fuerunt homines de Synagogis seu
Scholis, studiosi, scilicet qui in Academia Hierosolymitana, vel instituebant,
vel instituebantur. Erat Hierosolymae Academia constans diversis collegiis and
variarum nationum Judaei hic erexerant collegium aliquod pro sua quaque
juventute. Libertini vocantur filii eorum Judaeorum qui a Pompeio abducti, and
in servitutem venditi, a Tiberio manumissi erant, iisque concessum partem urbis
inhabitare. Judaeus ergo manumissus vocabantur libertus, filius autem liberti
Libertinus, vid. Stres. in loc.

Libertini Romae multi Judaicae religionis. Eorum fuit Cicilius ille in quem
est divinatio Ciceronis. Tocitus Annal. 2. ait, Quatuor millia libertini
generis, superstitione Judaica infecta, missa in Sardiniam. Horum sumptu
structa Hierosolymis haec synagoga, and positi in ea magistri eruditi.


, and of some other Synagogues, that disputed with him, who when they were not
able to resist the wisdom, and spirit, by which he spoke, they falsely accused
him, and bringing him before the Council, set up false witnesses Mixing true
and false things together, as those, who bare witness against Christ. Stephen
might speak of the desolation of the City, and destruction of the Temple, from
Dan. 9.26.27. and Christ's own praediction, Luke 19.43.44. Mat. 23.37. He might
speak that the Ceremonies and Shaddows must vanish, now the Substance is come,
and of the disanulling of the Mosaical rites to give way to a more excellent
spiritual Worship, and yet not speak these things with any abomination of the
Temple or the Service thereof, as they possibly suggested.
against him, who declared they heard him speak blasphemous words against
Moses, and against God, and that he should say that Jesus would destroy the
Temple, and City Vide similem accusationem, Jeremiae, c. 26.9.11.
, and change the Customs, and Rites which Moses had instituted, Unde observamus
quam facile corda hominum externis ceremoniis ad haereant in cultu. Nulla
acrior contentio ecclesiam exercuit, quam quae est de Sacramentis, and externis
ceremoniis. Ratio est, quia homines, ad verum, internum, and spiritualem cultum
minime proclives sunt, tamen ad colendum Deum obligati, in externo ceremoniarum
cultu, qui corporalis est, and animalis, adeoque naturali homini possibilis ac
facilis, acquiescunt, and in eo fiduciam ponunt, Streso in loc.
and commanded from God.

v. 8. And Steven full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among
the people.

v. 9. Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue
of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and
of Asia, disputing with Steven.

v. 10. And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he
spoke.

v. 11. Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous
words against Moses, and against God.

v. 12. And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and
came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the Council:

v. 13. And set up false witnesses, which said, This man cease not to speak
blasphemous words against this holy place and the law.

v. 14. For we have heard him say, That this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy
this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.

SECT. II.
STephen being thus brought before the Council, his face Hoc de nativa facie
non dlcitur, sed potius de praesenti vultu, Calv. Deus coelesti fulgore, and
splendore faciem ejus induit, ut ita testimonium daret esse suum ministrum.
utque hosles terrerentur. Sicut Mosis faciem fecit splendere, Exodus 34.29, 30.
and Christi faciem in transfiguratione, Mat. 17. Probabilior tamen est sensus,
quod animus Stephani incredibili solatio Spiritus fuerit adeo r^pletus, ut
nullos terrores aliquo saciei pallore proderet, sed potius laetitia ipsius in
ipso vultu resulgeret, non secus ac si omni tristitia exemptus inter Angelos
Caeli in plena gloria fuislet constitutus. Sic potest Deus tristitiam ex
hominibus tollere, cum nondum vult homines ex tristitia, vel miseria tollere,
Streso.
appeared full of Majesty, and Splendour, not unlike possibly to that which
Moses's face had, Exodus 34.30. or such as the Angels appeared with, Mat. 28.3.
An argument of a clear conscience, and of the divine assistance, and presence.
Being permitted to speak for himself, he in a long and grave oration applies
himself to answer the charge that was brought against him. And because these
his accusers, and others of the Jews (as it seems) imagined that God was so
delighted and pleased with the Temple, and the Temple-Service, and the
Mosaical, Rites that he intended always to continue and perpetuate them, and
that no other way of Worship could be acceptable to him; therefore by an
historical deduction he shows them that God was worshipped aright before either
Tabernacle or Temple was made, or any of the Mosaical Rites instituted or
ordained, and therefore the true Worship of God was not necessarily, and
inseparably annexed to any of these things. For the proof of this he begins at
Abraham, and shows them how that he living of old at Vr of the Chaldeans in the
midst of Idolaters [ Josh. 24.2, 3.] God was pleased of his free mercy to
manifest himself to him Genesis 12.
about the seventieth year of his age, and effectually to enlighten him by his
grace, and savingly to draw him to own, and worship him the true God: and
commanding him to leave his native Country, and go into a land which he would
show him, he promised to make of him a great nation, and that in him, all the
families of the earth should be blessed. Abraham obeying this command, drew on
his father Terah also with him; and so they came from Vr to Charran, where he
served God till the death of his father, which was about five years after. His
father being dead he was again called by God to leave that Country, and to go
into Canaan, which accordingly he did, and there God promised that to his seed
he would give that land, but they must first endure a long servitude in Egypt.
After he had a good while sojourned in Canaan, when he was Ninety nine years
old Genesis 17.
God made a Covenant with him, and instituted Circumcision as the Seal thereof,
so that from his first Call from Vr, when he was seventy years of age to this
time when he was Ninety nine, he had served God faithfully, yet without
circumcision to this present time. After this, Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac
begat Jacob, and Jacob the Twelve Patriarchs: and the Patriarchs moved with
envy sold Joseph into Egypt, where the Lord was with him, and by his wonderful
providence raised him up to be chief Governor of the country under Pharaoh, so
that in the time of the Famine he sent for his father, and his family, being
Seventy five souls, to come down into Egypt, and nourished them there. Jacob,
after some time spent there, died in Egypt, and so all the rest of his sons
after him, and in testimony of their Faith, and belief of the Promise, that God
had made unto Abraham of giving the land of Canaan to his Seed, they commanded
that their bones Ex omnibus Patribus in Egypto mortuis, solus Josephus Sichemam
transl^tus videtur, and Sichemae sepultus, vid. Heb. 11.12. Ergo hic est
Synecdoche pluralis pro singulari scilicet translati and positi, pro translatus
and positus fuit in Sichem, prout docemur, Josh. 24.32. H^nc opinionem
amplectitur Calvinus, and multis exemplisillustrat Lorinus, nimirum, Mat. 26.8.
murmurabant discipuli, plurale hoc intelligitur de uno singulari Juda
Iscariote, qui folus indignabatur ob profusum unguentum prout exponit Johannes,
cap. 11. and 12. Sic etiam Mat 27.44. Latrones dicuntur obloqunti Christo in
cruce; quod verum non suit nisi de uno Latrone. Josephus Antiq. lib. 2. ca. 4.
post historiam de morte Josephi patriarchae haec subjungit de fratribus. Sed
and obierunt fratres ipsius cum in Egypto faeliciter vixissent: atque eorum
quidem corpora cum post aliquod tempu^ posteri exportassent, Chrebone
sepeliverunt. Quod ex vetustiorum Judaeorum traditione hausit Josephus, quamvis
in eo fallatur quod Chebronem scripsit pro agro Sichemitarum.

Hieronymus testatur Jacobi duodecim filios Sepulchra habuisse prope Sichemam
cum Epistola 27 ad Eustachium, scribit de Paula matre. Transivit Sichem, etc.
atque inde divertens vidit duodecim Patriarcharum sepulchra. Merito igitur
Stephanus de Patriarchis (...) translati sunt Sichemam, id est, p open Sichemam
ut Heb. 9.4. In arca erat urna aurea, and virga Aaronis, i. e. prope arcam. Nam
praecise loquendo, nihil fuit in arca praeter duas legis tabulas, 1 Reg. 8.9.
Bochart^s.


should be carried into the land of Canaan, and buried there.

The Children of Israel now growing, and increasing to a vast multitude in
Egypt, in tract of time, there arose a Pharaoh, that knew not Joseph, who
fearing the number, and strength of the Israelites, exceedingly oppressed them;
and to prevent their increasing, made a barbarous Edict, that their male
children should be killed as soon as they were born, or else drowned in the
river*. In the time of this Edict, Moses was born to Amram and Jochebed his
wife, who being a very lovely child, his Parents hid him three months in their
house; but at last not daring to conceal him any longer, they put him in a
basket of Bulrushes, daubed over with flime and pitch, and laid it in the flags
by the side of the River. Here the Kings Daughter finds him; and moved with
compassion toward the Infant, nourishes him up for her own son, putting him
out to his own Mother to nurse: and caused him to be educated in all the
learning of the Egyptians, so that he proved a person of great abilities above
other men, being very able both to give counsel, and to act any great affair.
When he grew to the age of Forty, it came into his mind to visit his brethren
the Israelites; and among other things that evidenced to him their sad
condition, he saw an Egyptian smiting an Israelite, which so stirred up his
spirit, that he slew the Egyptian who did the wrong, thereby giving the
Israelites the first intimation, that God would deliver them by his hand,
(which it seems God had by instinct, or revelation made known unto himself,)
but they understood it not. The next day seeing two Israelites at variance, he
would have made them friends, and set them at one again. But he, who did the
wrong upbraided him for it, and said, Who made thee a ruler, and a judge over
us? will thou kill me as thou did the Egyptian yesterday? Moses perceiving
hereby, that what he had done to the Egyptian was known, and that the King
hereupon would seek his life, he fled from thence into the land Midian, where
he spent other Forty years of his life, and married Zippora, Jethro's daughter,
and by her had two Sons. The children of Israel continuing still under sore
bondage in Egypt; it pleased the Lord now at length to compassionate them, and
to resolve to deliver them. Wherefore, when Moses had been Forty years in
Midian, as he was keeping his father-in-laws sheep about Horeb, or Sinai, the
Angel of the Lord appeared to him out of a burning Bush, and called him to go
to Pharaoh, requiring him to deliver his people Israel. Moses after he had
showed many signs and wonders in Egypt at last brought them out. And leading
them through the red Sea, he brought them into the wilderness to Mount Sinai,
where God gave them his law, and appointed Moses to make a Tabernacle for his
worship according to the pattern he had showed him in the Mount. So that to
this day for above Four hundred years, he shows them, the Fathers had
worshipped God without any Tabernacle at all.

He further shows them, that though Moses was a person highly to be regarded,
whose memory ought always to be precious to them, having had intimate converse
with God, and having received the law from his mouth, yet they might remember
to their humiliation how their impious Ancestors would not obey him; but
contrary to his mind, during his absence in the Mount, made a golden Calf v.
39. Certum est Judaeos dum Egyptiis serviebant, eorum quoque Diis serviisse. In
quam rem diserte, Josh. c. 24.14. and Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. and 23.3, 8. Ex quibus
videtur sequi, Judaeos ad Egyptiorum exempla se composuisse cum vitulum aureum
in deserto fusum adorarunt. Recte igitur de iisdem Lactantius, lib. 4. c. 10.
Ad prophanos Egyptiorum ritus animos tranitulerunt, and aureum caput Bovis,
qu^m vocant Apim, quod eos signo praecederent, figur^runt. Et Heron. in Oseae
4. Videtur mihi populus Israel in solitudine sibi fecisse caput vituli, quod
coleret, and Jeroboam vitulos aureos frabricatus, ut quod in Egypto didicerant,
(...), qui sub figura boum coluntur, esse Deos, hoc in sua superstitione
servarent. Hi sunt Dii tui, O Israel. Ibi plurale pro singulari usurpatur, quod
saepe fit cum de Deo re^ est, vid. Genesis 35.7. Psalm. 149.2. Eccles. 12.1. vide
etiam, Neh. 9.18. Hic est Deus tuus qui eduxit te ex Egypto, i. e. imago seu
symbolum illius unici Dei, Boch p. 347.
and adored it. They might also call to mind how Moses told them before hand,
of a great Prophet the Lord would raise up in due time, whom they were to hear,
and obey in all things. And this great Prophet, who was no other person than
the Messiah, was now come. Moreover they might consider how that when the
Tabernacle was made by Moses, and all the worship of God appertaining to it
appointed, their rebellious Ancestors notwithstanding, did not long continue
faithful to it, but God for their sins leaving them to themselves, and to
their own hearts lusts, they fell to worship the Host of Heaven See Deuteronomy. 17.3.
2 King. 23 5. 2 King. 17.16. Jer. 19.13.
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, upon which it was that the Lord so highly
expostulates with the people of Israel, Amos 5.25. denying that their Ancestors
offered such sacrifice to him in the wilderness as was pleasing in his sight.
Hoc contigisse videtur, cum populus appulit ad terram Moab. Psalm. 106.28. Numb.
25.2. ^ornicatus est populus cum f^liabus Moab quae vocaverunt eos ad
sacrifieia sua. At illi comederunt, and adoraverunt Deos earum. In his erat
Moloch, qui Deus erat Moabitarum uti and Ammonitarum, a quibus illi acceperant,
and loci and sanguinis propinquitate conjuncti, Glass

Sicut Baal in genere de omnibus Diis dicitur, ita Melech vel Moloch est nomen
Diis omnibus commune. In Amoso extat vox Chiun, quae Saturnum designat. Cum
autem nomen hoc minus forte notum, and sacrorum tantum esset, LXX substituerunt
appellationem ejusdem Dei Saturni magis notam and familiarem, quae in promiscuo
usu esset apud plebem, scilicet Rephae. Salmasius (...) in lingua Egyptiaca
Saturnum significare testatur. Capellus putat intelligi Regem Egypti Remphin
quem existimat eundem esse cum Pharaone cujus tempore vixit Joseph, qui quod
Egyptum servasset. ab Egyptiis intra astra fuerit collocatus, and pro Deo
cultus, and forte etiam a quibusdam Israelitarum Idolatris. Ut id hoc loco
dicatur, Sacrificia illa quae in deserto obtulistis, non mihi, sed idolis
vestris, and Diis fictitiis, quos occulte animo fovebatis, and colebatis,
obtulistis. Tabernaculum quod ibidem humeris bajulastis non meum fuit, sed
Molochi vestri, i. e. Non me in eo Tabernaculo colustis, sed Idolum, quod vos
tacit agitabatis, vid. Freidl. in loc.


And though they made show of serving him by carrying his Tabernacle, and all
things belonging to it, yet they hankred after their Idols, which they not only
bare in their hearts, but also carried about with them representations of them.
For it seems they had gotten the Shrines, or Chaplets, wherein the mages of
Moloch and Saturn were kept and inshrined, and carried them about with them,
and worshipped them. Which Idolatry of their Ancestors not sufficiently
bewailed, and repented of, together with the consequent sins of their children
in succeeding ages, at last provoked God to bring the captivity of Babylon upon
them Amos 5.27. Migrare vos faciam trans Damascum, hic v. 43. id ita effertur,
Transferam vos ultra Babylonem, utrumque est impletum. Neque enim in Syriam
tantum, cujus Metropolis Damascus est, sed etiam trans Babylonem in Persiam,
and Caspiam Israelitae fuere abducti ut ex Ezra 8.17. constat. Minus ergo dixit
Amosus, plus significavit. Assyria, and Media quae ultra Babylonem sunt, multo
magis sunt ultra Damascum.
. But to return to the Tabernacle, (where God used to witness, and evidence his
glorious presence, and where the Ark of the Covenant was, and the Law, and the
Testimonies, evidences of Gods will how he would be served) he shows, their
Fathers indeed carried it with them all along through the wilderness, and at
last brought it into Canaan, where it continued all the days of David, and to
the beginning of Solomon's reign; and then it ended, and gave way to the Temple:
which though David desired to build for the Service of God, yet that honor was
reserved for Solomon his Son, who accordingly built it in a very sumptuous and
magnificent manner. Now when the Temple was built, God himself declared by the
mouth of his Prophet Isaiah, chapter 66.1, 2. That he delighted not to dwell in
Temples made with hands, as if he were included therein, and bound thereto. And
therefore they were not fondly to conceive that after the Temple was built the
worship of God was so tied to that place as he could not be worshipped acceptably
any where else --. As Stephen was thus going on, and (as it is probable) would
have spoken much more fully to the point in hand, the Council it seems
interrupted him, apprehending him to speak in a way of diminution of the
Temple. Therefore breaking off his former discourse, and turning his speech to
them, he sharply reprehends them for several things Cum animae pericliantur,
non lenitate, sed sale, and acore opus est, quod non magis repugnat charitati,
quam cum medicus in extremitate morbi adhibet rodentia. Qui metuit acritudinem
reprehensionis, caveat putredinem malitiae.
. 1. For their rebellion, and resisting the Spirit of God, which spoke to them
by the Apostles and by him. 2. For their imitating their cruel Ancestors, who
killed the old Prophets in killing the Lord of life. 3. For their horrible
violating the holy law of God given them by the glorious ministry and
proclamation of Angels Inter quos erat caput Angelorum, ipse Filius Dei, Stres.
. At these words they were extremely enraged at him, and gnashed on him with
their teeth. But he being full of courage and faith looked up to Heaven, and
had an extraordinary Vision of the glory of God, and of Jesus Christ standing
on his right hand, and accordingly declared unto them what he saw. They hearing
this, without any more ado, in a violent furious manner ran upon him as a
Blasphemer: and though the Romans permitted them not to put any man to death,
yet in a popular rage, they hurried him away out of the City, and there stoned
him. And they that witnessed against him See chapter 6.13.
, (and were therefore by the Law to cast the first stone at him, Deuteronomy. 17.7.)
put off their upper garments to sit themselves for the work, and a young man
called Saul undertook to look to them, who consequently had an hand in stoning
of him. Stephen devoutly commending his Soul into the hands of Christ, and
praying for his murderers, that this sin might not be laid to their charge so
as to obstruct their repentance That this prayer was heard appear by Gods
special mercy to Saul.
, gave up the Ghost.

Act. 6. v. 15. And all that sit in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw
his face as it had been the face of an Angel.

Act. 7 v. 1. Then said the high priest, Are these things so?

v. 2. And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken: The God of glory
appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt
in Charran,

v. 3. And said unto him, * G^t thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred,
and come into the land which I shall show thee.

v. 4. Then came he out of the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and
from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land wherein ye
now dwell.

v. 5. And he gave him none inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his
foot on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to
his seed after him, when as yet he had no child.

v. 6. And God spoke on this wise, that his seed should sojourn in a strange
land, and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat them evil four
hundred years.

v. 7. And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage, will I judge, said God:
And after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.

v. 8. And he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so Abraham begat
Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day: and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob
begat the twelve patriarchs.

v. 9. And the patriarchs moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt: but God was
with him,

v. 10. And delivered him out of all his affliction, and gave him favor and
wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt: and he made him governor over
Egypt, and all his house.

v. 11. Now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and
great affliction, and our fathers found no sustenance.

v. 12. But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent out our
fathers first.

v. 13. And at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren, and
Joseph's kindred was made known to Phraoh.

v. 14. Then sent Joseph, and called his father Jacob to him, and all his
kindred, threescore and fifteen souls.

v. 15. So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers.

v. 16. And were carried over into Sichem, and laid in the s^pulchre that
Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emor the father of Sichem.

v. 17. But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to
Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,

v. 18. Till another King arose, which knew not Joseph.

v. 19. The same dealt subtly with our kindred, and evil-intreated our
fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they might not
live.

v. 20. In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding fair: and nourished up
in his fathers house three months:

v. 21. And when he was cast out, Pharaohs daughter took him up, and nourished
him for her own son.

v. 22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was
mighty in words and in deeds.

v. 23. And when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit
his brethren the children of Israel.

v. 24. And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him
that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian:

v. 25. For he supposed his brethren would have understood, how that God by his
hand would deliver them: but they understood not.

v. 26. And the next day he showed himself unto them as they strove, and would
have set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren, Why do ye wrong one
to another?

v. 27. But he that did his neighbor wrong, thrust him away, saying, Who made
thee a ruler and a judge over us?

v. 28. Will thou kill me as thou did the Egyptian yesterday?

v. 29. Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of
Madian, where he begat two sons.

v. 30. And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the
wilderness of mount Sinai, an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush.

v. 31. When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near to
behold it, the voice of the Lord came unto him,

v. 32. Saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold.

v. 33. Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet: for the
place where thou stand is holy ground.

v. 34. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt,
and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them: And now
come, I will send thee into Egypt.

v. 35. This Moses whom they refused, saying. Who made thee a ruler and a judge?
the same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer, by the hands of the angel
which appeared to him in the bush.

v. 36. He brought them out, after that he had showed wonders and signs in the
land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty years.

v. 37. This is that Moses which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me: him
shall ye hear.

v. 38. This is he that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel,
which spoke to him in the mount Sinai, and with our fathers: who received the
lively Oracles to give unto us.

v. 39. To whom our fathers would not obey but thrust him from them, and in
their hearts turned back again into Egypt,

v. 40. Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: For as for this Moses
which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

v. 41. And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the
idol; and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.

v. 42. Then God turned and gave them up to worship the host of heaven, as it
is written in the book of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered
to me slain beasts, and sacrifices, by the space of forty years in the
wilderness?

v. 43. Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god
Remphan, figures which ye made, to worship them: and I will carry you away
beyond Babylon.

v. 44. Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had
appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion
that he had seen:

v. 45. Which also our fathers that came after, brought in with Jesus into the
possession of the Gentiles, whom God drove out before the face of our fathers,
unto the days of David.

v. 46. Who found savor before God, and desired to find a tabernacle for the
God of Jacob.

v. 27. But Solomon built him an house.

2.48. Howbeit the most High dwells not in temples made with hands, as says
the prophet,

v. 49. H^aven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye
build me, says the Lord? or, what is the place of my rest?

v 50. Has not my hands made all these things?

v. 51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye do always
resist the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.

v. 52. Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And they have
sl^in them which showed before of the coming of the just One, of whom ye have
been now the betrayers and murderers:

v. 53. Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not
kept it.

v. 54. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they
gnashed on him with their teeth.

v. 55. But he being full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven,
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand o^ God,

v. 56. And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing
on the right hand of God.

v. 57. Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran
upon him with one accord.

v. 58. And cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid
down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul.

v. 59. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit.

v. 60. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this
sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.

Chap. 7. v. 2. Videtur Vr fuisse in Mesopotamia. Mesopotamiam Stephanus vocat
non modo eam regionem, quae Euphrate, and Tigride includitur, sed etiam
Babyloniam cujus pars est Chaldaea, Beza. So that Chaldaea was also reckoned to
Mesopotamia.
v. 5. Abraham was forced to buy a place of Burial, though all the land was
given him by promise. Duo mihi Stephanus contribulibus suis in Patriarcha
Abrahamo consideranda proponere videtur, quibus fidem ejus Deus vehementer
exercuit. Primum, quod in terram Canaan and in Judaeam eum transtulerit, neo
tamen ullam possessionem, ne vestigii quidem pedis ei dederit. Alterum, quod
hanc terram ipsi, and semini ejus obtinendam promiserit, quum semen non
haberet, De Dieu.
v. 6. There is a double sum of years mentioned concerning the seed of
Abraham's sojourning, namely Four hundred years, Genesis 15.13. and Four hundred
and thirty Exodus 12.40. Gal 3.17. The Four hundred are to be reckoned from the
birth of Isaac, who was born in the hundredth year of Abraham, and had Jacob
when he was sixty years old. Jacob when he was an hundred and thirty went into
Egypt, from thence to the delivery out of Egypt reckon two hundred and ten
years, and the sum will be four hundred. To which add twenty five years of
Abraham since he came from Haran (for he came from thence in the seventy fifth
year of his age) and five more since he came from Vr of the Chaldees to Haran,
and the sum will be four hundred and thirty. The Septuagint on Exodus 1^.40.
thought fit to express their sense in this Paraphrase. The sojourning of the
children of Israel, which they and their fathers sojourned in the land of Egypt
and Canaan was four hundred and thirty years. So that Stephen must be
understood to say, that the children of Israel were to suffer, and be oppressed
till the end of four hundred years from the birth of Isaac.
v. 14. Joseph accersivit Patrem suum Jacob and omnem cognationem ejus in
anima^us Septuaginta quinque. Scilicet, constantem, conscriptam ex animabus 75.
Multum torsit interprete^ conciliatio hujus loci eum illo, Genesis 46.27. and
Deuteronomy. 10.22. ubi 70 solum animas domus Jacobi, quae intrarunt in Egyptum
commemorat Moses. At difficultatis parum est, si dicamus non esse loca
Parallela. Moses enim catalogum texit in quo una cum Jacobo soli ejus posteri,
and quidem ex sa^mere ejus egressi, exceptis diserte filiorum uxoribus, v. 26.
comprehenduntur: Ob quam causam non ii solum qui cum ipso Egyptum actu sunt
ingressi, sed and Joseph eum duobus filiis Ephraim, and Manasse in
septuagenario numero continentur, etsi jam ante in Egypto essent, quia ex
faemore Jacobi n^ti, and e terr^ Canaan orti, peregrini in Egypto degerent,
adeoque merito haberentur quasi cum Jacobo Egyptum intro iissent: Specialisque
in eo catalogo rationis est, quod Judae duo nepote^ ^x Phares, Hezrem scilicet
and Hamul, etsi post in Egypt^ nati in numerum istum, v. 11. referantur, ut
nempe duorum filiorum Judae Er, and Ouan jam desunctorum locum supple^r^nt. At
in oratione Stephani non genealogia J^cobi instituitur, sed quosnam Josephus e
terra Canaam in Egyptum advocaverit, docetur. Plure^enim quam e faemore Jacobi
ortos accersivit, neque omnes e faemore Jacobi ortos accersivit. Excludendi ibi
sunt primo duo nepotes Judae, deinde ipse Joseph cum duobus siliis: Illos enim,
quippe nondum natos, and se suosque filios, quippe jam in Egyp^o degentes,
accersere non potuit. Separatis itaque istis quinque, deinde, and p^tre Jacobo,
qui seorsim a Stephano commemoratur, restant ex septuagenario Mos^^ numero 64,
nempe undecim fratres, una soror Dina, and 52 fratrum filii; quibus si adjungas
undecim fratrum, undecim uxores, quas necessario Josephus ^na cum maritis
accersivit, quaeque ad (...) pertinebant, habes omnem cognationem ejus in 75
animis. Unde consequitur corruptum esse textum LXX interpretum, qui Genesis 46.27.
pro 70. habent 75. De Dieu. Non tantum (...) fuit, quod scriptores sacri, N. T.
versionem Graecam LXX sequuti sunt, sed ex pura necessitate. Nam aliter
impossible erat, ut allegationes eorum ex Lege, and Prophetis a gentilibus (ut
pote Hebraica non callentibus) examinarentur. Et, si Judaeus in manu habens N.
T. queratur, and cavilletur quod receditur in allegationibus a textu Hebraeo,
in promptu adest, quod respondeatur; Haec ipsa versio, quae citatur, ipsissima
vestra est, quam vos exarastis, edidistis, and mundo proposuistis, ut symbolum,
and tesseram Legis, and religionis vestrae, ut ipsissima Biblia vestra. Dr.
Lightf. in Heb. ad Epist. prima ad Corinth.
v. 16. Quomodo Abraham Emeril a filiis Emor monumentum? Cum hoede Jacobo
dicatur, Genesis 33.19. and Josh. 24.32. Masius multique alii textum putant a
librariis corruptum, and nomen Abrahami irrepsisse, additum a quodam sciolo
descriptore, cum nomen Jacobi a prioribus repetitum recte conveniat cum verbo
emerit. Ludovicus Capellus vult loco Abraham legendum (...), nepos scilicet
Abrahami Jacobus. Rivetus facit nomen Patronymicum Abraham pro Abrahamides and
hujusmodi phraseos varia Salmeron and A Lapide exempla afferunt, tum ex sacris
tum ex profanis literis. Vide plura in Rob. Bailii opere Hist. and Chronolog.
Sunt qui Abrahamum putant ideo pro Jacobo nominari, quia Parents, and filii
idem esse moraliter censentur, atque i^de esse quod 1 Reg. 12.16. Populus
Roboamo insensus, dicit, quae pars nobis in Davide? i. e. in Roboamo Davidis
nepote, and quod 1 Reg. 15.6. Perpetuum bellum intercessisse legitur inter
Roboamum, and Jeroboamum quamdiu hic suit in vivis. Ubi Roboami nomine, qui
pridem obierat, Abias filius intelligitur, qui graviter afflixit Israelitas
usque ad obitum Jeroboami. 2 Paral. 13.17, 18, 19, 20. Sic Christo tribuitur
Davidis nomen, Jer. 30.9. and Ezekiel. 34.23. Bochartus page 435. (...) verti
solet quod emerat Abrahamus cum ex sacra historia constat non Abrahamum, sed
Jacobum eum agrum emisse. At cum articulus non exprimatur tam dativus
subintelligi potest, quam nominativus, ut sensus sit (...), quod emerat
(scilicet Jacob de quo commate praecedente) Abrahamo. Etsi enim Abrahamus diem
suum jam obiisset, ipsi tamen dici potest emptus iste ager, ad designandum
scopum, quem in agri emptione habuit Jacob, qui non suit duntaxat, ut eo pro
sepulchreto uteretur (neminem enim istie Jacobus in humavit, nec ipse ibi
inhumatus est, sed in s^elunea Maepelae, Genesis 49.30. and 23.16.) sed vel
maxim, ut primitiae quaedam essent terrae Canaan cujus totius Haereditatem
Abrahamo Deus, and semini ejus promiserat, quippe cui primo ^acta est
promissio, ut haeres mundi esset, Romans 4.13. Atque ibi simul causa latet cur
non tantum Josephus sed (quod hic a St. Stephano discimus) reliqui etiam
Patriarchae a Posteris haereditatem terrae promissae jam capientibus, Sichemum
sint translati, atque in ejus agro sepulti, nempe quia ager iste emptus erat
Abrahamo tanquam pignus haereditatis totius terrae, Abrahamo promissae. De
Dicu. Genesis 33.19. Jacob emisse legitur partem agri siliorum Hemor (...) centum
agnis. Fortasse pro ag^is, nummi intelligendi sunt agni effigy signati, quales
cudisse legitur Servius Rex Romanorum: Fortasse argenti vel pecuniae nomine eo
loco censeri possit quicquid illa aetate praestabat pecuniae vices. Bochart.
lib. 1. cap. 2. de ammalib.
v. 26. (...)] Conatui datur nomen effectus.

3 25. (...)] ductu Angeli. Sensus est Deum, quum Mosen mitteret principem, and
redemptorem and Mosis, and redemptionis per eum praestandae regimen universum
commisisse manibus hujus Angeli. Unde liquido constat Angelum istum, qui Exodus
3. apparuit Mosi in rubo, quique ibi aliquoties Jehova, ac Deus patrum
nuncupatur, ac qui istie Mosen mittit, ac instruit, non fuisse creatum Angelum,
sed ipsum filium Dei, per cujus manum Stephanus ait Deum, nempe Patrem, misisse
Mosen; qui Angelus vocatur quia in hac action, ut and in tota populi
liberatione subserviit Patri. Est ille Angelus faciei ejus de quo Isa 63.9.
Angelus faderis quem Mosi in deserto comitem fuisse eumque in Monte Sinai esse
allocutum, Stephanus infra testatur, v 38. Vere ergo princeps faederis qui
populo Israelis tanquam suo, legem tulit in monte Sinai, qui se principem
exercitus Domini merito vocavit, Josh. 5.14. Ideoque non Angelus modo faedetis,
sed and ipse Dominus jure vocatur, Mal. 3.1. Hic Angelus eduxit populum ex
Aegypto, Numb. 20.16. and duxit per desertum, Exodus 23.20, and 33.2. quem
Christum fuisse testatur Apostolus, 1 Cor. 10.9. De Dieu.


v. 38. (...)] Respicitur locus, Deuteronomy. 32.47. ubi lex dicitur esse vitae, i. e.
causa vitae faelicis, quae eximie vita Hebraeis. Hic (...) pro (...).
v 41. Fecere juvencum, ad imitationem Aegyptiorum, apud quos Apidis cultus
valde est vetus, vid. Tacit. Hist. 5 and Herodotum lib. 2.
v. 43. (...) est (...) 2 Reg 5.18. Sic Saturnum vocabant Syri, colebantque non
in forma Regis, sed in forma Stellae, in Hebraeo est (...) Ciiun quod eandem
Saturni stellam significat, sed Arabibus. Gro^ Vos porta^tis Saturnum, stellam
Dei vestri, idem est ac si dixisset Vos portastis stellam Dei vestri Saturni;
figuras quas fecistis, nempe Tabernaculum Molochi, scilicet imaginem Caeli, in
qu^ Sol, sive Moloch magnus ille astrorum Rex, tanquam in Tabernaculo
continetur, and Saturni stellam, De Dieu. Praecipua Egyptiorum inter quos
versati erant Israelitae idolatria erat in veneratione astrorum, and praecipue
planetarum, quorum praecipui erant Sol, and Saturnus, vel Mars, qui Aegyptiace
appellabantur Melech and Remphan, vel Rephan, ut observant docti; Simulacra
quaedam horum astrorum solebant Sacerdotes includere certis tentoriolis, vel
Tabernaculis, and cistis, eaque circumgestare humeris, populo acclamante,
cantante, tripudiante. Hoc imitati sunt Israelitae in deserto, Exodus 32.4.5, 6.
Etsi enim ibi non legimus nisi vitulum factum, altar aedificatum, lusum, and
potum esse, tamen ex interpretatione Amosi, and Stephani clarum est, fuisse ibi
quoque quandam circumgestationem idoli tabernaculo inclusi qualis olim fuit
inter Ethnicos, Streso.
v. 48. Sensit Origenes, Deum, cum Templum sibi fieri permisit a Solomone, pari
id fecisse proposito, quo and altar, and victimas indulsit, nempe ut se populi
genio aptaret, ac eos ritus sibi vindicaret, quos alioqui populus falsis Diis
erat impensurus. Templum Christianis est corpus purum, altar animus Sanctus,
Simulachra vero omnis generis, virtutes. Vocabant ergo Christiani suorum
conventuum loca modo Ecclesias (...), modo Basilicas, and eodem sensu Domos
Dei: Templi autem appellatione, destinato abstinebant. Grot.
v 51. Incircumcisi cord, and auribus] i. e. Cor habentes plenum vitiosis
affectibus, Lev. 26.41. Jer. 9.26. and quibus pruriunt aures ad ea audienda,
quae vitiis favent, Jer. 6.10. Intellectus stupiditas, voluntatis pertinacia,
and indomiti affectus, praeputium sunt, and membrum quod deponendum est, Col.
3.5. and 2.11. Non hic Judaeis exprobratur naturalis corruption, sed corruption
attracta, qua se ipsos magis, magisque induraverant, exc^ecaverant, and
praeputium roboraverant per contemptum Evangelii.
v. 5^ (...) pro inter. Inter medios exercitus Angelorum. Ostendit quam
magnifice data sit Lex inter multas Angelorum turmas. Respicitur locus Deuteronomy.
33.2. Grot. Accepistis legem ad ordinationes Angelorum, i e. ordinantibus
Angelis vel secundum, and juxta ordinationes Angelorum: huic loco parallela
sunt, Gal. 3.19. Heb. 11.2. (...) respondet (...) Hebr. Filius Dei, qui quamvis
in se Deus, hic tamen (...) tanquam Angelus Dei, Caeterorumque Angelorum
praefectus consideratus, e medio Angelorum, qui eum undique stipabant, legem in
monte Mosi dedit, De Dieu.

Deus Pater legem per filium dedit. Filius usus est ministerio Angelorum.
Angeli, nomine filii Dei Mosi legem tradiderunt, eique quid docere Israelitas
debeat, praeceperunt Moses (...) ad ordinationes seu secundum, vel juxta
mandata Angelorum Israelitis legem dedit, seu secundum distributiones
Angelorum, quibus legem disposuerunt, vel distribuerunt in december praecepta, and
december praecepta in duas tabulas, totamque adeo legem in Moralem, Ceremonialem,
Forensem. Distinguenda quoque circa legis promulgationem sunt haec tria. 1.
Promulgatio legis per vocem, quae facta est, Exodus 19. in monte Sinai. 2.
Scriptio legis in tabulis, quae facta est post hanc pomulgationem, Exodus 31,
and 34. 3. Scriptio legis in libro quae Mosi injungitur, Exodus 34.27. ut lex ex
isto libro populo quotidie praelegeretur, dum tabulae lapideae autographae
manebant in arca faederis. In sola promulgatione usus est Angelorum ministerio,
non in scriptione.


v. 57. Irruerunt concorditer in eum] quasi ex judicio zeli quod stante repub.
usurpare solebant, sed tantum in eos, qui Judaeis auctores essent ad falsos
cultus. Ad quod connivere solebant Sacerdotes, vid. Josephus lib. 15 c. 8.
etiam cum sub Romany essent. Peccabant autem isti homines hic dupliciter. 1.
In legem, quae etiam libera repub. judicium illud populare exerceri noluit nisi
in auctores idolatriae, qualis non erat Stephanus. 2. In Romanos, qui ipsis
ademerant jus omne capitalium suppliciorum.
58. Testium erat, primos jacere lapides, ac sic semet, si quid falsi subesset
sontes facere caedis, populum vero, qui ipsorum auctoritatem sequebatur,
absolvere.
59. Domine Jesu, recipe spiritum meum] Hinc discamus immortalitatem animae.
Est haec inter primas veritates, quod anima humana sit immortalis, vid. Eccl.
12.7. Mat. 10.28. Luc. 12.4. 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.21, 22. 2 Pet. 1.14.
v. 60. (...). Ne statuas illis hoc peccatum, and hoc Domini exemplo Luc.
23.34. Peccata velut ante Deum stant, vindictam petentia. Emman. Saa.
SECT. XII.
STephen becoming thus the Protomartyr, and first, that under the Gospel sealed
the Doctrine of Christ with his blood, he was carried to his burial by devout
men, who made great Lamentation See Genesis 50.10. Deuteronomy. 34.8. 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25.
over him. But the spite and cruelty of the Jews was not quenched by the blood
of Stephen, but rather inflamed. For immediately after this, they raised a
great persecution against the whole Church at Jerusalem, wherein Saul (the
young man before mentioned) was very active. This man's Parents were both Jews,
so that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews; he was of the Tribe of Benjamin born
He had a double Name, Saul as he was an Hebrew by birth; and Paul as he was a
Roman, being born at Tarsus, a free City of the Romans: His Education was in
the Schools of Tarsus; which as Strabo reports, lib. 14. was then famous for
the study of Philosophy, and the Liberal Sciences. Here he attained the Greek
Language and Learning, and grew expert in their Philosophy and Poems, his skill
wherein he shows, in alleging Epimenides, Aratus, Menander. From thence he
was sent to Jerusalem for the study of Divinity and of the Jewish Law. In his
youth, he learned the handicraft Trade of making Tents.
at Tarsus This City had among other privileges obtained of the Roman Emperor
Augustus the freedom of the City of Rome, because that in his wars against
Brutus and Cassius they held with him, and had suffered much, See Act. 21.39.
in Cilicia; by Sect a Pharisee, and the Son of a Pharisee Act. 23.6.
, and studied at that time (as it seems) at Jerusalem, and frequented the
School of Gamaliel a famous Doctor among the Pharisees. He was a very strict
observer of the Law of Moses, and of the Traditions delivered to the Fathers,
but a bitter, and fierce enemy against the Doctrine of Christ, and all those
that owned him, and professed to believe in him. This man having received
Commission from the Chief Priests impowring him to do this wretched work, made
miserable havoc of the Church: for entering into Houses, he haled thence both
men and women, that believed in Christ, and bound them, and put them in Prison,
and often caused to be beaten and scourged in the Synagogues; and used all
scourged in the Synagogues; and used all rigid means to make them deny Christ,
and blaspheme him (as it seems) he himself did [1 Timothy 1.13.]: And such as were
constant to the faith, he forced to fly to heathen Cities, and then pursued
them thither also.

Act. 8. v. 1. And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there
was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem, and they
were all scattered abroad thorowout the Regions of Judea, and Samaria, except
the Apostles.

v. 2. And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation
over him.

v. 3. As for Saul, he made havoc of the church, entering into every house, and
hailing men and women, committed them to Prison.

Phil. 3. v. 5. Circumcised the eighth day, of the flock of Israel, of the
tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the law, a Pharisee.

v. 6. Concerning zeal, persecuting the church: touching the righteousness
which is in the law, blameless.

Act. 22. v. 3. I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in
Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught
according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous
toward God, as ye all are this day.

v. 4. And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into
prisons both men and women.

v. 19. And I said, Lord, they know I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue
them that believed on thee,

v. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing
by and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

Act. 26. v. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth:

v. 10. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints did I shut
up in prison; having received authority from the chief priests, and when they
were put to death, I gave my voice against them.

v. 11. And I punished them often in every synagogue, and compelled them to
blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto
strange cities.

Gal. 1. v. 13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews
religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it:

v. 14. And profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in mine own
nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.

v. 23. But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the faith, which once he destroyed.

Act. 9. v. 13. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man,
how much evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem:

v. 21. But all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that
destroyed them which called on this Name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that
intent that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?

SECT. XIII.
THis persecution dispersed in a manner the whole body of the Church, and
scattered both the Members and Teachers thereof, (excepting the Apostles In
gravi persecutione neque omnes fugere, neque omnes debent, inquit Augustinus.
Quando autem fugere fugere liceat, quando non liceat, generalibus regulis
difiniri non potest, sed prud^^^^ cujusque permittendum est, ut sec^^dum
circumstantias ita agat ne con^entiam laedat.
) into diverse Countries, which tended greatly to the advantage of the Gospel.
For the Apostles (who had an extraordinary Function, and therefore were bound
to show more than ordinary courage) remaining at Jerusalem, and sticking to
their work there, till they should be more manifestly called by God from
thence; the rest of the Disciples (of which there were now some thousands, as
appears Act. 2.41. and chapter 4.4.) were scattered some into the Regions of Judea
and Samaria, who spread the Gospel wheresoever they came; some went to
Damascus, among whom was Ananias a devout and religious person, Act. 9.10. and
22.12. Others, it is like, went to Rome, and among them Andronicus and Junia,
who were of note among the Apostles, and kinsmen of the Persecutor Saul, and
had embraced the faith before him, as himself testifies, Romans 16.7. Others
traveled as far as Phoenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the Gospel to
the Jews only [ Act. 11.19.] namely to those Jews, that were dispersed among
the Gentiles, as may be gathered from Jam. 1.1. and 1 Pet. 1.1. Among them that
went to Samaria, Philip was one, (the second in order after Stephen among the
seven Deacons). He coming into that City, preached Christ so effectually, that
the people with one accord gave heed to the Doctrine he delivered, and seeing
the Miracles Miracula solent comparari cum campanis, quibus homines convocantur
ad verbum audiendum.
wrought by him, they were persuaded to embrace the Gospel. For out of many
that were possessed, he cast unclean Spirits who at their coming out, made loud
acknowledgments of the irresistableness of the power by which he acted. And
others, that were taken with Palsies, or were lame he cured. Before this time,
there had been in the City, one Simon a Magician, who had by Sorcery, and the
help of the Devil done some strange things among them, which so affected the
ignorant people, that they cried him up as a person in whom the great power of
God did wonderfully manifest its self. But they now seeing far greater Miracles
done by Philip, they were converted to Christianity, and many among them, both
men and women believing, were baptized by him in the name of Christ. And among
others Simon Magus himself was convinced, and believed Non puto fidem Simonis
fuisse meram simulationem, sed fidem historicam, qua vere convictus credidit
Jesum Christum (in cujus nomine Philippus praedicabat, and miracula faciebat)
esse Deum, and se, ac Diabolo (cujus vi ipse suas edebat praestigias) majorem:
Sicut Magi Aegyptiaci comparantes sua miracula cum miraculis Mosis, credebant,
and fatebantur per Mosen operari digitum Dei, Exodus 8.19. Stres.
, and was also baptized.

Act. 8. v. 1. And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there
was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem, and they
were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea, and Samaria, except
the Apostles.

v. 4. Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching
the word.

v. 5. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto
them.

v. 6. And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip
spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.

v. 7. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were
possessed with them: and many taken with Palsies, and that were lame, were
healed.

v. 8. And there was great joy in that city.

v. 9. But there was a certain man, called Simon, which before time in the same
city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself
was some great one.

v. 10. To whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest, saying, This
man is the great power of God.

v. 11. And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched
them with forceries.

v. 12. But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and
women.

v. 13. Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he
continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were
done.

v. 8. Magnum gaudium factum est in illa civitate non tantum ob tot sanatos
obsessos, paralyticos, and claudos, sed praecipue ob manifestatam aeternae
salutis viam.
v. 10. (...). Metalepsis pro (...).
v. 12. (...)] de regno illo, quod hic inchoatur, and consummabitur post
resurrectionem.
v. 13. Simon qui totam urbem fallaciis suis infatuaverat, Dei veritatem simul
cum aliis recipit. Quamquam non tam sua unius, quam totius gentis causa
illuminatus fuit in Evangelii notitiam, ut scandalum tolleretur, quod imperitos
morari poterat. Voluit enim Dominus hunc, quem pro semideo habebant Samaritae
in triumpho ducere: quod fit dum excussa inani jactantia veris miraculis
gloriam dare cogitur. Fides autem Simonis erat temporaria cujus meminit
Christus, Mar. 4. Sentit veram esse Evangelii doctrinam, and conscientiae suae
sensu ad eam recipiendam cogitur, sed deest fundamentum, h. e. sui abnegatio.

Et Baptizatus est] Hoc Simonis exemplo clare patet non conferri, omnibus
indifferenter in baptismo gratiam, quae illic figuratur. Nos sciamus offerri
nobis a Domino per sacramenta quicquid sonant annexae promissiones, and non
frustra, and inaniter offerri, modo side ad Christum directi ab ipso petamus
quicquid Sacramenta promittunt.

Adhaerebat Philippo] Quod cum Philippus admisit, in eo apparet, quam difficile
sit hypocritas discernere. Sic Demas temporarius Pauli comes, postea factus est
perfidus desertor. Cum igitur interdum improbi, and fraudulenti homines se
nobis adjungunt, and se nobis astute insinuant, sedulo cavenda est facilitas
quoslibet sine delectu admittendi, quae saepe ignominiam aspergit Evangelio
atque eo prudentius attendere nos decet quando magnos viros deceptos fuisse
audimus, Calv. in loc.


SECT. XIIII.
THe Apostles which remained at Jerusalem hearing of the success of Philip's
preaching at Samaria thought fit to send Peter Hoc observatu dignum est, quod
Petrus mittitur, and deputatur a caeteris Apostolis. Ubi igitur primatus Petri,
cui Papa superstruit suum?
and John, to confirm the new Converts there in the Faith, and to settle all
convenient order among them. They accordingly coming thither, by their
preaching and exhortation confirmed them in the Doctrine of the Gospel. These
believing Samaritans had received the grace of the Spirit, whereby they were
enabled to believe in Christ; but the miraculous gifts of the Spirit were not
as yet fallen upon any of them; whereupon the Apostles by their earnest prayer
unto God obtained this mercy for them, and accordingly by the imposition Frat
Apostolica praerogativa per impositionem manuum Ecclesiis impetrare charismata
Spiritus Sancti ad aedificationem Ecclesiae necessaria. Hi Samaritani habuerunt
quidem antea Spiritum regenerationis, sed non Spiritum Prophetiae, seu dona
illa, quae quibusdam in Ecclesia data erant ad Ecclesiam aedificandam, de
quibus agitur 1 Cor. 12.28. Et quum datus esset hic Spiritus, exercebat se per
visibilia effecta, e. g. per eloquutionem variarum linguarum per patrationem
miraculorum, etc. Stres. Lucas hic non de communi Spiritus gratia loquitur, qua
nos sibi Deus in filios regenerat, sed de singularibus illis donis, quibus
Dominus, initio Evangelii, quosdam esse praeditos voluit ad ornandum Christi
regnum. Hic autem illorum erat usus, ut quisque pro facultatis suae modo
Ecclesiae prodesset, Calv.

The imposition of the Apostles hands mentioned here and elsewhere, was not
upon all that believed, and were baptized, but on some certain persons, whom
they were directed by the Holy Ghost to lay hands upon, not for their
confirmation in grace, but as those God intended to employ in the propagating
of his Gospel, See Lightf. in loc.


of their hands upon certain persons among them, whom they were directed by the
Holy Ghost to lay their hands upon (as those God had appointed to be preachers,
and ministers of the Gospel, and whom by these their gifts he would enable to
understand the language and sense of the Scripture, and to be instructors of
the people) those miraculous powers were conferred on them. Simon Magus seeing
this, and being touched with a secret Ambition to get this power of conferring
these miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost upon whomsoever he pleased, (which
would have made him famous and renowned in the world) he offered the Apostles a
sum of (c) money to enable him to do it. Peter inflamed with an holy
indignation at this wretched motion, said unto him, Thy money perish with thee.
Assure thy self, No share, or portion of so glorious a privilege as this is,
belongs unto thee. From this deed of Simons, it is called Simony to seek to buy
spiritual gifts or offices, with money or gifts.
For I perceive thou art not upright before God, but thy hypocrisy and
ambition, by which thy heart is as it were bound and fettered, is as odious to
him as the bitterness of Gall can be to any man's taste. Repent therefore, and
humble thy self unfeignedly before the Lord for this wicked project of thine,
and earnestly seek his pardon, which if thou will do sincerely it is not
impossible but thou may obtain it. Simon at this besought them that they
would pray for him, that God would pardon this wickedness of his, and not
inflict on him such punishments as they seemed to intimate, were like to fall
upon him.

When these two Apostles had finished their ministry in those parts they
returned to Jerusalem preaching, and disseminating the Gospel, in the Villages
of Samaria as they passed along.

Act. 8. v. 14. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that
Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John.

v. 15. Who when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive
the holy Ghost.

v. 16. (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus)

v. 17. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost.

v. 18. And when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the
holy Ghost was given, he offerred them money,

v. 19. Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may
receive the holy Ghost.

v. 20. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have
thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money.

v. 21. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God.

v. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

v. 23. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond
of iniquity.

v. 24. Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of
these things, which ye have spoken, come upon me.

v. 25. And they, when they had testified and preached the word of the Lord,
returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many villages of the
Samaritans.

v. 16. In nomen Jesu] i. e. in hunc finem, ut testarentur se credere in
Dominum Jesum, nec non in Deum Patrem and Spiritum Sanctum, qui simul hic
intelligendi sunt per Synecdochen membri, Mat. 28.19.
v. 17. Manus imposuerunt illis] Fuit haec ceremonia antiquitus usitata cum
alicu aliquod bonum apprecarentur, and alicui benedicerent, Genesis 48.14. Non
quod in Ceremonia aliqua vis esset, sed quod esset visibile signum cordialis,
ac sincerae comprecationis, vel benedictionis.
v. 20. q. d. Apostolus, Malim te, and pecuniam tuam perire, quam me
acceptation^ illius pollui, vid. 2 Reg. 5.16, 17. Pecunia tua tecum maneat in
exitium, i. e. tibi maneat, and tibi cedat in exitium, Pisc.
v. 21. Non est tibi pars neque sors (...) pro re. Romans 9.28. Hinc interpretor
in hac re, nempe in dono Spiritus Sancti. Tu potestatem tribui cupis etiam
aliis donandi Spiritum Sanctum? Absit. Nam ne ipse quidem portionem ullam habes
in hac re, De Dieu. Secundum aliquos, (...) hic significat beneficia per
sermonem Evangelii promissa.
v. 22. (...)] interna cogitatio, consilium, and machinatio cordis.

Si forte remittatur] Apostolus non docet dubitanter precari, sed vehementer
precari, and Simonem eo magis ad poenitendi studium inflammat.


v 23 (...). Vocatur (...) amaritudo tanta quanta est sellis, vel veneni. De
fell amaritudinis, vid. Deuteronomy. 29.18. ubi similis phrasis, and Heb. 12.15. De
nexu injustitiae, Isa. 58.6. 2 Timothy 2.26. Hisce verbis describit malitiam
Simonis, scilicet, hypocrisin, and ambitionem, qua animus ejus veluti devinctus
erat, quaque Deum gravissime offendebat, ut amaritudo sellis offendit hominis
gustum, Pisc.
v. 24. Sensit se talem esse intus, qualem Apostoli dixerant. Itaque cum ipsos
judicet Deo charos, eorum deprecatione uti vult, ut Jobi deprecationi, qui eum
laeserant. Grot.
SECT. XV.
FRom Samaria, Philip is warned of an Angel Ministerium verbi dignissimum est
officium, cum Angelorum interventu ad id vocentur homines. Speciali mandato
Angeli, and speciali instinctu Spiritus Sancti, v. 29. mittitur Philippus ad
Aethiopem. Sic Petrus speciali visione and instinctu mittitur ad Cornelium,
Act. 10. Sic Paulus, and Barnabas speciali mandato mittuntur ad Macedones, Act.
16
in a Vision, that he should go to Gaza, but he must not travel the ordinary
road; but the other way which was through the desert, and lay through the
mountains. In this way he meets with a great man an Eunuch, Treasurer of
Candace Queen of the Aethiopians Aethiopia est regio inter Arabiam, and
Aegyptum, sub zona torrida.
returning in his Chariot from Jerusalem where (being as it seems a proselyte)
he had been to worship Fuit vir pius, sed opus habuit majori illuminatione, and
speciali receptione Messiae exhibiti.
at the feast of Pentecost. Philip by the instinct, and motion of the Spirit
joining himself to his Chariot, finds him well employed Qui cupit Deum habere
comitem itineris, in divinis sit occupatus.
namely reading the Fifty third Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, and being
courteously invited by him to come up into his Chariot En signum animi discendi
cupidi, and de salute solliciti.
and to interpret that Scripture to him, (which he acknowledges he did not well
understand) Philip accordingly expresses himself ready to serve him therein.
The words (...) proprie comprehensio, i. e. pars sermonis, qua continetur
certum pronunciatum, certa ve pronunciata.
the Eunuch was reading are the seventh and eighth verses of that Chapter. He
was led as a sheep Christus non tantum passus est, sed patienter passus est.
, so opened he not his mouth. The next clause in the Hebrew Text was this. He
was taken from prison, and from judgment Isa. 53. v. 8. In Hebraeo est (...) a
coarctatione and a judicio tollitur: in LXX (...). In ipsius depressione
judicium ejus sublatum est. Judicium aliquando pro jure sumitur, Job 34.5. vid.
Lightf. in loc. Aliqui haec verba sic exponunt, De angustia, and judicio
sublatus est, hoc est, a passionis. vinculis, and morte solutus est, and
liberatus per Patrem suum, cum a mortuis resurgeret: and in depressione ejus,
i. e. cruce and morte, judicium ejus, h. e. jus, seu causa ejus asserta est a
Deo, vid. Freidl. in loc.
, that is, hurried from thence to execution; but the Septuagint (which Luke
follows, and possibly the Eunuch at this time read) has enlarged the sense, by
change of the phrase, reading it thus, In his depression, or humiliation, his
judgment was taken away, that is, his right was taken away, and no right at all
done him, and Who can sufficiently declare the wickedness of that generation,
which dealt so unjustly with him, as to take and cut him off from the land of
the living, who was so innocent a person. Philip shows him that the Prophet in
this place speaks not of any other person but the Messiah, who was now come
into the world, and had done and suffered all that was prophesied of him. And
having largely instructed him in the Doctrine of Christ, and (as it is probable)
concerning Baptism also, the Eunuch desired to be baptized, professing his
Faith in Christ. Thereupon Philip immediately baptized him, which when he had
done, he was strait-way transported, and carried out See 1 King. 18.12. and 2
King. 2.16.
of his sight by the Spirit Insigne exemplum quod ministri mittantur a Spiritu
Sancto, quippe qui Philippum non tantum inspiratione sua ad Eunuchum perduxit,
sed and deindo transportavit in alium locum ubi concionari debebat.
of the Lord (which might be an evidence to him, that he was sent to him of
God, and was no mercenary person, seeing he staid not to receive any reward)
and found himself set down at Azotus or Ashdod, one of the five Cities of the
Philistines [See Josh. 15.47.] The Eunuch went on his way rejoicing at this
wonderful mercy of God in revealing Christ to him, in whom he believed for the
remission of his sins; But Philip passing through the Country, whither the
Spirit had carried him, he preached the Gospel in all the Cities and Towns
thereof, through which he went, till he came to Caesarea Stratonis ^here it
seems he stayed a great while. For fourteen years after t^^ ^ul coming with the
collections of Asia, and Achaia to carry t^ (...) o Jerusalem he found Philip
there with his whole Family, (...) lodged with him, See Act. 21.8.

Act. 8. v. 26. And the angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying, Arise, and
go toward the South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto Gaza,
which is desert.

v. 27. And he arose, and went: and behold, a man of Ethiopia, an ^unuch of
great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who h^d the charge of
all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship;

v. 28. Was returning, and sitting in his chariot, read Esaias the prophet.

v. 29. Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join thy self to this
chariot.

v. 30. And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet Esaias,
and said, Understandest thou what thou read?

v. 31. And he said, How can I except some man should guide me? And he desired
Philip, that he would come up, and sit with him.

v. 32. The place of the Scripture which he read, was this: He was led as a
sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he
not his mouth:

33. In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away; and who shall declare his
generation? For his life is taken from the earth.

v. 34 And the Eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, Of whom speaks
the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?

v. 35. Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and
preached unto him Jesus.

v. 36. And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the
Eunuch said, See, here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized?

v. 37. And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may.
And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

38. And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into
the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.

v. 39. And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way
rejoicing.

v. 40. But Philip was found at Azotus: and passing through, he preached in all
the cities, till he came to Cesarea.

v. 27. Candaces nomen commune Reginarum Aethiopiae fuisse, a Plinio traditum
est, lib. 6. cap. 29.
v. 40. (...), ut supra, v. 23.
CHAP. II. Anno Christi 35. Tiberii 30.
Containing the Acts of the Apostles, from Readiness Conversion to his First
Journey with Barnabas.
SECT. I.
SAul Saulus erat ex tribu Benjamin, in qua tribu ^^c nomen videtur ^isse
usitat^m, quod primus Rex Is^aelis hoc nomen h^beus, ex eadem tribu erat. Notat
nomen aliquem, quem Parents precibus a Deo impetrarunt.
having for some time made havoc of the Church, and still breathing out
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of Christ, went at length to
the Sanhedrim the supreme Council at Jerusalem, wherein the Priests made a
great part, and were the most active men, (which C^uncil had the Cognizance,
and supreme Judgment of all matters appertaining to the Jewish Religion and
that in the Synagogues, which were without See 2 Chronicles. ^9 8 9.10.
the land of Judaea, as well as those within) and obtained of them letters of
Commission to the Synagogues of Damascus This was the chief City of Syria
situate on one side of Mount Libanus, about five or six days journey from
Jerusalem, a H^a^he^ City but wh re many of the dispersed Jews dwelt, and had
Synagogues. Hi ^udaei etsi extra Judaeam h^bitabant, tamen communionem suam
colebant cum Templo and Synedrio Hierosol mitano. Itaq^e a summo fa^erdote,
^ynedrii praeside, literas pet^it ^aulus ad Synagoga^ Damascena, ut harum
opera, and intercessione a Damascenorum Rege impetraret liberta^em inquitendi
si qui essent Damasci Christiani, eosque vinciendi, and Hierosolym m perducendi
Romani Synedrio permittebant jus prehensionis, and verberum; non tantum in
Judaeos Palestinae, verum etiam extra Palaestinam, ubi erant Synagogae, quae
sponte su^ jurisdictionem Synedrii in rebus ad religionem spectantibus
agnoscebant. Grot.
, that if he found any there that p^ofest Christ, he should bring them bound to
Jerusalem, that they might be punished. And journeying toward Damascus to
prosecute this cruel design, when he came nigh to the City, at midday, a Light
from Heaven above the brightness of the Sun, shone round about him Hinc
discendum quod gratia conversionis non datur secundum praevisa merita, aut
praevisas bonas dispositiones.
, and those that journyed with him. When they were all fallen prostrate on the
earth, he heard a voice speaking to him Exemplum rarae clementiae, quae est in
Christo, qui hunc suum persecutorem ex coelo dignatur instituere, eique se
manifestare. Multum erat quod incredulitati Thomae ita succurrit, ut ei latera
sua, and cicatrices estenderet, sed hic infidelitati Saulis ita occurrit, ut se
ex coelo ipsi conspiciendum exhibeat and propria voce seipsum ei praedicet.
in the Hebrew tongue, Saul* Saul, why persecutest thou me? Saul trembling, and
full of fear, said, Lord, Who art thou? The Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest; It Is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Saul said, Lord
what will thou have me to do? Jesus answered, Arise go into the City, and there
it shall be told thee what thou must do. The m^n, that journeyed with Saul
rising up from the earth were greatly amazed, and stood speechless, having seen
indeed a great Light, and heard a sound of words Comites Pauli viderunt lucem,
and audiverunt vocem, sed non intellexerunt articulatum sensum, qui cum illa
voce pe^mixtus erat, and a solo Saulo audiebatur, vi^. Joh. 12.28.29.

Erant prostrati, and tamen dicuntur stetisse muti. Prostrati surrexerunt
quidem, attamen manserunt in loco attoniti. Comites percelluntur, ut Judaeis
testarentur vocem ex coelo factam ad Saulum.


, but neither saw Christ who spoke, (as Saul did) nor understood distinctly any
thing he spoke. Saul also being risen up, there were Seals Squamae oculis ejus
inductae ipsum effecerant caecum, ut per corporalem caecitatem, caecitatem
mentis disceret. Hactenus non fuerat caecus, i. e. non agnoverat caecitatem
suam in rebus fidei, sed visus sibi fuerat sapientissimus, Gal. 1.14. vid. Joh.
9.39.41.
come over his eyes, so that when he op^^ed them, he could see nothing; Christ
teaching him by this bodily blindness the blindness of his soul in spiritual
things, which he was before insensible of. Being led therefore by the hand into
Damascus he was there three days without sight, and did neither eat, nor drink
See Mat. 15.32. and Mark 8.2.
, (men being better able in those hot Countri^s to endure long fasting, than in
our colder Climate) and probably he spent a great part of that time in prayer,
and humbling his Soul before the Lord for his former sins, and particularly his
violent persecution of the Church of Christ. And in this time, (as some learned
Vid. Ludov. Capell. historiam Apost. page 8.
men think) he had that ecstasy, and was rapt up into the third Heaven, where
he saw, and heard, what was not lawful for him to utter, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. For
from his Conversion to the writing of that Epistle, fourteen years intercurr'd.

Now there was at this time a certain Disciple at Damascus, named Ananias See
Sect. 13. of chapter 1.
to whom the Lord spoke in a Vision Ananiam all^cutus est per repraesentationem
aliquam internam; qualis fieri solet in somniis, vel in ex^^sibus.
, that he should go into the street that is called Straight and inquire in the
house of Judas for Saul, telling him that he was then in prayer, and had it
revealed to him he should receive his sight. Ananias is startled at this
command, being afraid to go to him, because of his former violent persecution
of the Saints, and his present commission and authority from the chief Priests
to pursue that bloody design; but Christ tells him, he was a chosen Vessel, one
whom he had chosen to conveigh the Divine Treasure of his Gospel, not only to
the Jews but the Gentiles also, even to the greatest and highest among them,
and that he should do and suffer great things for his Name sake. Ananias
hereupon went to him, and laying his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord
Jesus who appeared unto thee in the way as thou came hither, has sent me to
thee, that thou should receive thy sight Non est putandum Ananiam non plura
dixisse Paulo, quam quae hic narrantur. Nam non tantum ad sanandum, sed etiam
ad docendum Paulum fuit missus. Et quod Act. 26.16, 17, 18. Christus scribitur
dixisse Paulo, id forsan non immediate ex caelo sed per hunc Ananiam dixit.
Plurima igitur Ananias dixit Paulo quibus ipsum tum de Christianismo, tum de
Apostolatu ejus late, instituit.
; and be filled, and endued with those admirable gifts of the holy Ghost, which
may enable thee in the discharge of that divine Office to which thou art
called, and confirm thee in the faith and belief of Jesus. Arise therefore, and
be baptized for a Sign and Seal Sacramenti vis non est alia, quam obsignatio
promissionum Evangelii, and medium roborandi fidem.
that thy sins are washed away in the blood of Christ* and by such an open
owning and professing of him, declare thy self to be his true Disciple, Ananias
having thus spoken, straitway there fell from Saul's eyes as it were Scales, and
he received his sight, and was baptized, and when he had received meat he was
strengthened. And then he continued with the Disciples there certain days.

Act. 9. v. 1. And Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest,

v. 2. And desired of him letters to Damascus, to the synagogues, that if he
found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them
bound unto Jerusalem.

v. 3. And as he journeyed, he came near to Damascus, and suddenly there shined
round about him a light from heaven.

v. 4. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?

v. 5. And he said, Who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest: It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

v. 6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be
told thee what thou must do.

v. 7. And the men which journeyed with him, stood speechless, hearing a voice,
but seeing no man.

v. 8. And Saul arose from the earth, and when his eyes were opened, he saw no
man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus,

v. 9. And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.

v. 10. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias, and to him
said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord.

v. 11. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is
called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas, for one called Saul of
Tarsus: for behold, he prays,

v. 12. And has seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting
his hand on him, that he might receive his sight.

v. 13. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much
evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem:

v. 14. And here he has authority from the chief priests, to bind all that
call on thy Name.

v. 15. But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto
me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel.

v. 16. For I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Names sake.

v. 17. And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house, and putting his
hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord, (even Jesus that appeared unto thee
in the way as thou came) has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight,
and be filled with the holy Ghost.

v. 18. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he
received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.

v. 19. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul
certain days with the Disciples, which were at Damascus.

v. 5. Adversus stimulos calcitrare. Eodem adagio and Euripides and Pindarus,
and Menander apud Stobaeum utuntur. A bobus deducta metaphora, qui cum (...),
aut stimulis recalcitrant, seipsos laedunt.
v. 7. Viri comites vocem quidem audiverunt, sed neminem viderunt. At Saulus
vidit aliquem, quem comites non videbant. Videtur ipsum gloriosum corpus Domini
Jesu vidisse, sicut Stephanus Act. 7. and sicut alias, Act. 22.18. and 23.11.
and 2 Cor. 12.2. Dicit enim ipsemet express, quod Christum viderit post
resurrectionem, 1 Cor. 15.8. 1 Cor. 9.1. That Christ at this time was seen of
Paul appears v. 27. and chapter 22.14. but whether this was done by a Vision of the
Spirit only, as it happened ch 22.18. or with the eyes of his body before he
was blinded, is not made known unto us Certain it is, God could as well
strengthen the sight of Paul, that he might see Christ in Heaven opened, as he
did the sight of Stephen, Act. 7.56.
v. 9. Poenitentiam sic ostendens saevitiae in Ecclesiam exercitae. Hoc est
quod Hebraei dicunt (...).
v. 15. (...), est, praedicatione Evangelii Christum ejusque beneficia mundo
c^mmendare; sed quod de Regibus dicitur quomodo imp^etum? Nusquam legitur quod
Regibus Evangelium praedicaverit, nisi soli Agrippae, Act. 26, quem tam^n
lucratu^ non est: sed non tantum hic intelliguntur Reges, sed Magnates, qu^rum
multis Evangelium praedicavit, tandem etiam fortassis ipsi Imperatori, Act.
27.24. Et deinde vir^u ministerii Paulini non est restringenda ad tempus vitae
ipsius. Cando^^ enim, quam vivus accendit, etiam post mortem ejus multis
illuxit, parvis, and magnis, eosque ad ^idem Christi adduxit.
Act 22. V. 5. As also the high priest does bear me witness, and all the estate
of the elders: from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to
D^m^scus to bring them which were there, bound unto Jerusalem, for to be
punished.

v. 6. And it came to pass, that as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto
D^m^scus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about
me.

v. 7. And I f^ll unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul,
S^ul, why p^rs^cu^est thou m^?

v. 8. And I ^nswered, Who art thou, Lord? and he said unto me, I am Jesus of
N^zar^th whom thou p^rs^cutest.

v. 9. And they that were with the law indeed the light, and were afraid; but
they he^rd not the voice of him that spak^ to me.

v. 10. And I said, Wh^t shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise,
and g^ into D^^^s^us, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are
appointed for th^^ to do.

v. 11. And when I co^ld not see for the glory of that light, being led by the
hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus:

v. 12. And one An^ni^s, a devout man according to the law, having a good
r^port of all the J^ws which dwelt there,

v. 13. Cam^ unto me, and stood, and sa^d unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy
sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him.

v. 14. And he said, The God of our fathers has chosen thee, that thou
should know h^s will, and see that just One, and should hear the voice of
his mouth

v. 15. For thou shall be his witness unto all men of what thou have seen and
h^ard.

v. 16. And now, why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, calling on the name of the Lord.

Act. 26. v. 12. Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission
from the chi^f pri^sts,

v. 13. At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the
brightness of the sun, shining round about me, and them which journeyed with me.

v. 14. And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto
me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, S^ul, why persecutest thou me? It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

v. 15. And I said, Who art thou Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest.

v. 16. But arise, and stand up upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee
for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witn^ss, both of these things
which thou have seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee.

v. 17. Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I now
send thee,

v. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me.

SECT. II. An. Christi 36, 37. Tiberii 21, 22.

THe Lord now reveals to Saul what he would have him do; and among other
things, he was taught that he should not confer with flesh and blood, nor
debate the matter, either with himself or others, (who might cause him to
question the reality of his Call, or discourage him from yielding obedience to
it, by representing dangers to him); nor go to Jerusalem to those that were
Apostles before him (to consult with them and be instructed by them, or to
obtain a permission or commission from them to discharge his Office, he being
so extraordinarily, and immediately called, and instructed by Christ himself)
but that he should go for some time into Arabia, and the places near Damascus.
Being now therefore well instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, he begins
straitway to preach Christ in the Synagogues of the Jews Semper enim Apostoli
primum Judaeos affati sunt, ut aut eos converterent, aut omnem eis excusationem
adimerent.
in that City, and to declare to them, and convince them by plain
demonstrations, that he is the true Messiah, and the Son of God; the
praedictions of the Prophets, concerning the Messiah being exactly fulfilled in
his person. They that heard him were amazed at this thing, knowing what he had
done at Jerusalem, and with what intent he came up to Damascus. When he had for
some time preached Christ here, he went into Arabia, where for the space of
about three years he preached the Gospel, and then returning to Damascus again,
and strenuously preaching the Doctrine of Christ in that City, the Jews being
enraged at him consulted to kill him, and being encouraged by the Governors
under Aretas King of Arabia, (who kept the City with a Garrison) they watched
the gates day and night, that they might take him, and put him to death; but he
being let down by the Disciples in a Basket See 1 Samuel 19.12.
over the Wall in the night, escaped their hands.

Gal. 1. v. 11. But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was
preached of me, is not after man.

v. 12. For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

v. 13. For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews religion,
how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it:

v. 14. And profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in mine own
nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.

v. 15. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and
called me by his grace,

v. 16. Hoc v^lt Apostolus, Se non homines consuluisse ^uid sibi esset
faciendum, sed solo Spiritus divini motu and instinctu actum, and ab ipso
Christo in raptu triduano post conversionem suam edoctum, statim praedicasse
Christum. Neque hoc est alicuju^ arrogantiae, sed justae defensionis contra
criminationes aliorum, quasi non esset plenus Apostolus, utpote qui ipsum
Christum, ut reliqui, non habuisset magistrum, Freidl.
v. 16. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen,
immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood.

v. 17. Neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me,
but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus.

Act. 9. v. 20. And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he
is the Son of God.

v. 21. But all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that
destroyed them which called on this Name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that
intent that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?

v. 22. (...)] Verbum (...) significat, efficere condescensionem ut sic dicam,
i. e. argumentis propositis efficere ut aliquis tecum in eandem sententiam
descendat. (...) scilicet (...) i. e. assentiri eos cogens quod hic Jesus sit
Christus, Pisc.
v. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which
dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ.

v. 23. And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill
him.

v. 24. But their laying await was known of Saul, and they watched the gat^s
day and night to kill him.

v. 25. Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a
bask^^.

Act. 26. v. 19. Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the
heavenly vision.

v. 20. But showed first unto them of Damascus, and Jerusalem, and thorowout
all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and
turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.

2 Cor. 11. v. 32. In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king, kept the
city with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me:

An. Christi 38. Tiberii 23. In which year he dies, and Caius Caligula succeeds.
v. 33. And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped
his hands.

SECT. III.
SAVL escaping in this manner at Damascus, he goes from thence to Jerusalem, to
visit Peter He desired to go see Peter, and to have some acquaintance with him;
not for any homage to his Primacy (as the Papists plead) for he makes no
distinction between him, and James, and John, in point of dignity, Gal. 2.9.
nay is so f^r from homaging him, that he rebukes him, and reproves him, Gal.
2.11. But he desired to be acquainted ^th Peter, because he understood he was
the Minister of the Circumcision, as he himself was to be of the
Uncircumcision, Gal 2.8. and because there had been some kind of Parallel
betwixt them in their recovery; the one having denied, and forsworn Christ, and
the other having violently persecuted h^^ in his members.
, and the other Apostles, in the fourth year after his Conversion; but essaying
to join himself to the Disciples there, they were all afraid of him, not
believing him to be a true Disciple, and sincere Convert, till Barnabas
Possibly there had been some acquaintance in former times betwix^ Paul, and
Barnabas, they being bot^ Grecizing Jews; the one of Cypras, the ^ther of
Cilicia; and both prob^b^ brought up and educated at Jerusale^ see Act. chapter 4.
v. 36^
bringing him to Peter, and James the Kinsman of Christ (for of the rest of the
Apostles he saw none, they being as it seems at this time gone abroad to
propagate the Gospel) declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way,
who had spoken to him from heaven, and that he had boldly preached in the name
of Christ at Damascus with the hazard of his life, and so he was set right in
their opinion, and conversed familiarly with them. Whilst he is here, he
preaches Christ undauntedly, and disputes with the Hellenists See Sect. 9. of
Chap. 1.
, (or Jews that cohabiting among the Greek Nations, used the Greek Tongue, and
the Septuagints Translation of the Old Testament) proving to them that Jesus
was the true Messiah, who were so enraged at him, that they went about to kill
him. But being in the Temple in prayer, he fell into a trance, wherein he saw
Christ, who bad him make haste out of Jerusalem, for there they would not
receive his Testimony. Against this, he humbly argued with the Lord, alleging,
That his former zeal against Christ, and his Doctrine having been so
remarkable, and notorious among the Jews in this place, it might be an argument
to them, that so strange a change as this was not wrought in him but upon great
and sufficient grounds and reasons, and so he might in all likelihood be a more
fit instrument to propagate the Gospel here, by how much the more he had
opposed it formerly. But this did not prevail for staying at Jerusalem, but
Christ commands him to depart from thence, telling him, he would send him to
preach to the Gentiles. Saul hereupon readily obeys, and forthwith departs from
thence having stayed there only Fifteen days; several brethren that dwelt at
Jerusalem accompanying him as far as Caesarea, from whence he sailed to Tarsus
his own City, the Metropolis of Cilicia; and from thence was shortly after
fetched by Barnabas unto Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria; being all this while
not so much as known by face to the Churches of Judeae, which had embraced the
Faith; only they had heard of his preaching the Doctrine of Christ, which
before he had persecuted, and they glorified God for his Grace so powerfully
manifested in him.

Act. 9. v. 26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself
to the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was
a disciple.

v. 27. But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the Apostles, and declared
unto them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him,
and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the Name of Jesus.

v. 28. And he was with them coming in, and going out at Jerusalem.

v. 29. And he spoke boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against
the Grecians: but they went about to slay him.

v. 30. Which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to Cesarea, and
sent him forth to Tarsus.

Gal. 1. v. 18. Then after three years I went to Jerusalem to see Peter, and
abode with him fifteen days.

v. 19. But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords brother.

v. 20. Juramentum adhibet, ut Romans 1.9 2 Cor. 1.23. Causa autem gravis erat,
ut crederetur Apostolus a Christo factus non ab aliis Apostolis substitutus.
v. 20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God I lie not.

v. 21. Afterward I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia,

v. 22. And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judea, which were in
Christ.

v. 23. But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the faith, which once he destroyed.

v. 24. And they glorified God in me.

Act. 22. v. 17. And it came to pass, that when I was come again to Jerusalem,
even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance,

v. 18. And saw him saying unto me, Make haste and get thee quickly out of
Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me,

v. 19. And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every
synagogue them that believed on thee.

v. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing
by and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

v. 21. And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the
Gentiles.

An. Christi 39. Caii Caligula 1.
SECT. IV.
NOw after Saul's miraculous Conversion, the Churches which were planted by
Philip, and others (who fled from Jerusalem upon the persecution raised by him,
Act. 8.1.) through all Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, had much rest and peace,
and were greatly edifyed, and built up in Knowledge, Faith and Love, the Graces
and Comforts of the Spirit daily increasing in them, and the number of
believers was daily augmented. In this time Peter went forth to visit the
Churches newly planted in those parts, and to confirm them in the Faith. Who
coming at last, to the Saints which dwelt at Lydda, he there in the Name, and
by the Power of Christ heals Aeneas, who lay sick of the Palsy, and had kept
his bed Eight years. Upon this Miracle the inhabitants of Lydda and Saron
generally received the Faith, seeing this man to be so strangely, suddenly, and
perfectly cured. From thence he goes to Joppa, where he finds a very good woman
full of good works (whose name in Syriac was Tabitha, but in Greek Dorcas,
signifying a Roe) newly dead Non mortua est Dorcas, ut miseriam fuam finiret,
and in gloriae possessionem transferretur, sed ut esset objectum in quo
Christus suam gloriam manifestaret, and suorum Apostolorum auctoritatem ac
vocationem confirmaret, plane ut Joh. 11.4.
whom they had washed Mos lavandi, and pollinciendi cadavera mortuorum non est
ceremonia Judaica divinitus instituta, sed est consuetudo tum Judaeorum tum
Gentilium sapientiorum, orta ex naturali instinctu and spe futurae
resurrectionis. Sic Enmus Tarquin^i corpus bona faemina lavit and unxit. Huc
accommod^ndum illud Pauli, 1 Cor 15.29. q. d. si non est animis nostris
naturaliter inscriptum, futurum aliquam resurrectionem mortuorum, quid est quod
plerique homines tantum curae, and lotionis adhibent super cadaveribus
mortuorum? Stres.
, and laid out according to the mannner of the Ancients, who as some think did
thereby intend to signify their hope of a Resurrection. Peter being brought up
into the Chamber where she lay, the poor Widows, which had been clothed by
her liberality came weeping to him, and showed him the evidence Textilia manuum
ejus monumenta. Videmus hinc quae sint optimae Sanctorum reliquiae, quibus post
mortem possunt manner in memoria hominum, scil. benefacta in pauperes.
of her Charity, the Coats and Garments which she made, or caused to be made
for them. Upon this Peter putting them all forth kneeled down, and prayed, and
then raised her to life Habemus in Scriptura octo ad minimum exempla eorum qui
vere mortui in vitam redierunt, viz. filium viduae Sareptanae, 1 Reg. 17.19
filium sunamitidis, 2 Reg. 4.32. Virum in Sepulchro Elizae vivificatum, 2 Reg.
13.21. Filiolam Jairi, Mar. 5.22. Filium viduae Naimiticae, Luc. 7.11. Lazarum,
fratrem Mariae and Marthae, Joh. 11.33. Ipsum Dominum Jesum Christum, Mat. 28.
Tabitham hauc, Act. 9. Praeter illam innumeratam turbam sanctorum quae cum
Christo resurrexit, and in urbe sancta visa est, Mat. 27.52.53. Haec exempla
probant resurrectionem mortuorum, quam speramus, and quae toties in Scriptura
promissa est, non esse impossibilem sed certo futuram.
again See Mat. 9.25. Mar. 5.41.
. And by these miracles very many in those Quarters were brought to believe in
Jesus.

Act. 9. v. 31. Then had the churches rest thorowout all Judea, and Galilee,
and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied.

v. 32. And it came to pass, as Peter passed thorowout all quarters, he came
down also to the Saints which dwelt at Lydda.

v. 33. And there he found a certain man named Aeneas, which had kept his bed
eight years, and was sick of the palsy.

v. 34. And Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes thee whole: arise,
and make thy bed. And he arose immediately.

v. 35. And all that dwelt at Lydda, and Saron, saw him, and turned to the Lord.

v. 36. Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by
interpretation is called Dorcas: This woman was full of good works, and
alms-deeds which she did.

v. 37. And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick and died: whom
when they had washed, they laid her in an upper Chamber.

v. 38. And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard
that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would
not delay to come to them.

v. 39. Then Peter arose and went with them: when he was come, they brought him
into the upper chamber. And all the widows stood by him weeping, and showing
the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them.

v. 40. But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed, and turning
him to the body, said, Tabitha, Arise. And she opened her eyes, and when she
saw Peter, she sat up.

v. 41. And he gave her his hand, and lift her up: and when he had called the
saints and widows, presented her alive.

v. 42. And it was known thorowout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.

v. 43. And it came to pass, that he tarried many days in Joppa, with one Simon
a tanner.

An. Ch^^sti 40. C. Caligulae 2.
SECT. V.
DUring Peter's stay at Joppa, Cornelius a Roman H^^tenus descripsit
Evangelista praecipua acta Apostolorum inter Hierosolymitanos, Judaeos and
Samaritanos; Nunc incipit describere acta eorum int^r gente^ and hoc capite
conversionem ^^imi Ethnici describit in quo Apostoli didic^runt in posterum
etiam Ethnicis E^^^^^lium praedicare. Conversi ante^ fuerant Samaritani,
conversus quoque Eunuchus Aethiops, sed hi potius inter Proselyto^ and
circumcisos adeoque inter Judaeos numerandi, cum per prof^ssionem Religionis
Judaicae, Ecclesiae fuerint insiti. Cornelius autem est prim^^ incircumcisus,
cui annunciatum est Evang^lium. In eo ergo ordinaria genti^m vocatio incaepit.
There were two things sh^l mainly differenced the Jews f m other people,
Cir^^^cision, and Singularity of Di^t, or Pro^ibition of c^rtain meats. But the
more proper difference was the ^^tter. For (...) the ^ale ^ ^d of A^r^ham was
c^^cu^cised and (...) in re^^rd of that ceremon, there was no difference
b^twixt an (...) and a Jew. But ^bs^^ining (...) such and such meats, w ^a
(...) mono, a singu^^^ity, (...) an Isr^^^ (...). And (...) any m^ats (...)
l^^erty of conversing with any (...) and their the enlarging (...) one in the
enlarging the other. T^^ H^^then w^^^ (...) off at the confusion of ^^el, and
had lain so long in Darkne^, Sin, Superstition and Idol^try, and all the world
(Israel only excepted) were strangers to God. Peter the Minister o^ the
Circumcision was appointed the instrument of bringing in the Gentiles. Some
think Christ intended this, when in Mat. 16.19. he gave him the k^ys of the
Kingdom of heaven, and th^reby put into his hands a peculiar privilege to open
the door of Faith and the Gospel to the Gentiles, and gives him withal, power
to bind and loose the use of Moses's Law among the Heathens when he brought the
Gospel among them; some of it being to fall and some to stand, according as the
Spirit should d^rect him; and accordingly it should be ratified in Heaven, See
Lightf. in loc.
, and Captain of a Band of Italian Soldiers, who with others kept Garrison for
the Romans at Caesarea Caesarea was the City where the Roman Governor or Pro
Consul resided, see Act. 23.23. and 24.6. and that partly for the bravery o^
the City, but chiefly for the commodiousness o^ the Haven.
(being a very pious and religious Cornelius non erat extus Judaeus aut
Proselytus. Judaicam religionem public nondum profitebatur, sed tamen sacram
Scripturam, inter Judaeos conversans, legerat, and ex illa very Dei cognitionem
aliquam hauserat, miseriam suam agnoverat, gratiae and salutis cupidus erat
factus, forte etiam generalem aliquam cognitionem venturi Messiae imbiberat.
Habet regeneratio suos gradus. Primus gradus est contritio and emollitio
cordis, qua quis adigitur ad sensum peccati and miseriae; quo sensu gravatus
sitit and esurit liberationem. Secundus gradus est, agnitio Christi, qua quis
de sufficientia Christi ad liberandum convictus, seipsum abnegat and ad
Christum confugit, eique viva fiducia cordis inseritur, and cum filiali fiducia
liberationis in ipsum recumbit, and filialis in Deum amor in c^rde ejus
accenditur cujus ductu and impulsu servit Deo ingenua obedientia and nova vita.
Primus gradus vocari solet spiritus servitutis and est proprie effectus legis:
posterior spiritus adoptionis and est proprie effectum Evangelii. Fieri potest
in Cornelius habuerit primum gradum regenerationis, scil. ut fuerit contritus
cord and onustus sensu miseriae, sitiensque gratiam, eamque quaerens; sed non
novit veram viam inveniendi and verum medium quaerendi, sed sine dubio eam
quaesivit per propria opera and honestam vitam; quae tamen opera Deus propter
veram contritionem cordis non aspernatus, sed se iis moveri passus est ad
dandos majores regenerationis gradus ad salutem necessarios. Non enim est
contra sanam Theologiam, quod primitiae gratiae regenerantis been usurpatae,
sint causae impetrantes gratiam majorem. Habenti enim dabitur ut abundantius
habeat, Mat. 13.12. Moralibus virtutibus, quibus homo seipsum ab aliis per
liberum arbitrium natural nonnihil discernit, nullis promissionibus alligata
est gratia regenerationis salvisica: sed initiis gratiae regenerantis been
usurpatis est alligata, Joh. 7.17. Et praecipue contritum cor habet magnas
promissiones, Psalm. 51.19. Isa. 57.15. Stres.
person, and one that worshipped the true God, with all his Family, and was
very charitable to the poor, though only a Proselyte of the Gate There were two
sorts of Proselytes. 1. Proselytus foederis or justitiae, who submitted himself
to Circumcision and to the whole Mosaical Paedagogy. 2. Proselytus portae, a
Proselyte or Stranger within their Gates, Deuteronomy. 14.21. such were suffered to
live among them though not circumcised, neither did they conform to the
Mosaical rites and Ordinances, only were obliged to observe the seven precepts
of Noah of which see Godw. Jewish Antiq. page 10.
(as they called them), and uncircumcised) had in that City, as he was Fasting
and Praying, about three of the Clock in the afternoon Though Corneliu^ was not
proselyted to the Jewish Church, yet he followed their manner and form of
Worship. This was the hour of their Evening Sacrifice.
a Vision of an holy Angel, (not in an ecstasy or rapture of Spirit, or in a
dream, but waking, ocularly and sensibly) who appearing Angeli frequenter
solebant fieri visib^le^ assimiendo formam hominis and humano^ ^dentes motus,
quod and ipse filius D^^m V. T. saepinscule fecit in praeludium s^^
Incarnationis.
to him, told him, that his prayers and alms Pr^^^tionem subvehi alis duabu^,
aiunt veteres, jejunio and misericordiae operibus.
had found acceptance with God. And the Lord designing to manifest his Grace
now in a more especial manner unto him, commanded him to send to Joppa, to
inquire for one Simon Peter, who should come unto him and further instruct him
Major erat legatio Apostolica, quam Angelica. Angelus Apostolum monstrat;
Apostolus Christum: tantum honorem t^stibus suis habuit Christus.

Cur non ipse Angelus edocet quid Cornelio faciendum sed ad Petrum remittit?
Quia non Angeli sunt instrumenta regenerationis and sanctificationis sed
ministri Evangelii. Sic Deus Saulum remittit ad Ananiam, Act. 8.26. Quo exemplo
non immerito monentur Magistratus Politici, ne spiritualem administrationem
regni Christi ad se rapiant; fed eam relinquant iis qui a Deo ad hoc vocati
sunt.


concerning the Mind and Will of God toward him. Cornelius immediately yields
obedience hereunto, and accordingly sends two of his Domestic Servants, and a
devout Soldier that constantly attended him, to Peter who was now at Joppa.
Peter about the time that Cornelius his messengers drew near the City, knowing
nothing of their coming, went up of his own accord, about noon to the
Battlements of the house as a place of privacy to pray in; and being there he
became very hungry and desired to eat: but whilst they made ready, he fell into
a trance, such as in which men were wont to receive Visions from Heaven. And in
a Vision of his Spirit God revealed himself to his people of old, 1. By Dreams
and Visions in the night when they were asleep. 2. By Apparitions when they
were awake. 3. By Voice from Heaven. 4. By Urim. 5. By inspiration. 6. By
Rapture^ and Ecstasy.
(without the help of his outward Senses) he saw a great sheet Per hoc Vas
commodissime intelligitur totus mundus cum quatuor suis plagis. Ecclesia N. T.
colligitur ex toto mundo, and ex omnibus quatuor mundi angulis. Huic visioni
adjungitur vox scilicet imaginaria quae Petro dixit macta and comede: macta, h.
e. para Domino in sacrificium gratum.
, full of all sorts of living creatures, clean and unclean, let down unto him
from Heaven, and a voice spoke to him, that he should eat freely and
indifferently of any of them: which he doubting to do, the Voice spoke again to
him, saying, What God has cleansed call not thou common. By which Vision he is
taught that he should not despise the Gentiles nor account them unclean, but
converse with them and preach freely unto them as well as to the Jews; and
hereby also was intimated that God had taken away those interdicts and
prohibitions concerning some meats, and consequently those differences and
separations between Jews and Gentiles Discrimen inter Judaeos and Gentes per
discrimen ciborum adumbratum erat.
signified by them, and therefore he was not to make a distinction where God
now made none. Whilst Peter thought on these things, Cornelius's messengers
were come to the house where he was, and asking for Peter delivered their
M^ss^ge unto him: The Apostle the next d^^ very readily went along with them,
(b^ing encouraged thereto by an inward rev^la^ion or affla^ion of the Spirit
Videi Spiritus Sanctus internas cogitationes ac dubitationes Petri super hac
visione easque prohibet and declarat se esse eum qui miserit eos viros. Qui
loquitur and prohibet ac jubet, persona est. Qui cogitationes cordis videt,
Deus est. Qui ministros Evangelii vocat, imo qui Angelos mittit ad aliquid
expediendum, divinam authoritatem habet. Atque haee omnia de se dicit Spiritus
Sanctus. Est igitur Deus verus.
) and some other believing Jews also accompanied him to Caesarea. When he was
come thither, Cornelius being stricken with an extraordinary reverence at the
presence of so great a S^rvant of God, and exceeding the bounds of mere civil
respect, fell down at his feet and worshipped him. But Peter would by no means
receive that honor from him, but told him that he was an ordinary man, such an
one as himself; though thus employed at present in Gods message unto him. Then
entering into the house he found many of Cornelius's Kinsmen and Friends there
met together; to whom addressing himself, he spoke after this manner, Ye all
know that its counted unlawful Illicitum non lege Mosis sed decreto sapientum
quod pari loco cum lege habebatur. Ubi enim interdictum homini Judaeo sese
commiscere cum alienigenis? Expressum praeceptum de hac re non legimus nisi
illud particulare de non contrahendo cum incircumcisis matrimonio nec faciendis
cum illis foederibus, praesertim cum illis septem gentibus Anathemati devotis
Deuteronomy. 7. a 1 ad 7. Etsi autem lex sola conjugia and politica foedera cum
Ethnicis interdicit, tamen constitutionibus humanis, ac consuetudinibus
paternis illa lex fuit ampliata, ut etiam a conviviis and convictu and privato
congressu Ethnicorum abstinuerint; unde etiam gentes omnes contempserunt
tanquam canes. Non igitur tam divinae institutionis, quam humanae consuetudinis
erat, abstinere a congresso politico cum Ethnicis.
for us Jews to converse familiarly with you Gentiles, but God has now by a
Vision from Heaven, and the inspiration of his Spirit, showed me that I should
not make any difference between Jews and Gentiles. For I perceive Legerat hoc
antea Petrus in Prophetiis V. T. de futura vocatione Gentium; audiverat ex ore
Christi mandatum dantis de docendis omnibus gentibus, sed rem non
comprehenderat, non intellexerat, convictus non erat donec non solum per
visionem ex coelo esset instructus, sed etiam propriis oculis videret hunc
incircumcisum Cornelium a Deo donatum initiis verae conversionis. Nulla fere
est veritas quam non audiunt homines saepe propositam declaratam, demonstratam
and tamen centessima t^ndem concione, vix intelligunt, comprebendunt, credunt.
Videmus etiam regenitos posse graves errare errores in re religionis.
that the Partition wall is now broken down, and that national Prerogatives or
personal excellencies find no acceptance with God, but any man of any Nation
whatsoever, if he fear God and work righteousness, is accepted with him. Hear
ye therefore the Doctrine (...). Hebraismus pro (...), hoc illud verbum, i. e.
hoc patet and manifestum est ex ilio verbo, quod Deus misit Israeli. Haec est
descriptio Evangelii prout missum est ^^^^^^itis in V. T. per Prophetas.
which God appointed his Prophets of old to publish to the Children of Israel,
to wit, that of reconciliation and peace between God and man by Christ Jesus,
(who is Lord of all). Which Doctrine, was first published in Galilee, presently
after John Baptist began to preach and baptize, which you cannot but have heard
of, and how God endued the humane nature of Christ with the fullness of the
graces of his Holy Spirit and with power to work Miracles, and anointed and
consecrated his whole person to the the office of the Mediator, which he
accordingly executed with much tenderness and compassion, going about doing
good, curing diseases and casting out Devils, for God was with him in the
fullness of the Deity, as he was his eternal Son [ Col. 2.9.] and in power,
grace, and favor, as he was man and Mediator [Joh. 8.29. and 16.32.] And
though the Jews put him to death and crucified him, yet God raised him up the
third day and manifested him openly, not to all the Jews, but to his Apostles
and Disciples that attended on him, who were chosen for this end that they
might testify what Divine Doctrine he preached and what Miracles he wrought,
and might be witnesses particularly of his resurrection, having had the honor
to eat and drink with him and to see him eat and drink after he rose from the
dead. To these he gave command that they should preach his Gospel to the world,
and should testify that he is appointed of God, to be Judge of all men, even of
all that shall dye before, or shall be found alive at his Coming. And he
further shows them, That this Jesus is he whom all the Prophets foretold as the
sole Author of Reconciliation with God, and Remission of sins through faith in
him.

Whilst Peter was thus preaching to Cornelius's family and those other persons
there present, they were by the powerful work of the Spirit of God converted to
Christ, and the holy Ghost by his wonderful Graces and Gifts, viz. of
Illumination, Regeneration and the gift of Tongues descended on them all, of
his own accord, without any laying on of hands by Peter, to the great wonder
and astonishment of the believing Jews, that had accompanied the Apostle
thither, who thought this Promise, of sending down the holy Ghost, belonged
only to the House of Israel. Then Peter seeing what was done, and how these
Gentiles had been baptized with the holy Ghost, concluded that they ought to be
baptized with Water, and receive the external sign or seal of incorporation
into Christ's Body, the Church; therefore commanding all things to be made
ready, either He baptized them himself, or gave order that some of those who
accompanied him (who probably were Ministers and Teachers), should do it. This
done, they desired him to stay some days with them, that they might be further
instructed confirmed and comforted by his Ministry.

Act. 10. v. 1. There was a certain man in Cesarea, called Cornelius, a
centurion of the band, called the Italian band,

v. 2. A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave
much alms to the people, and prayed to God always.

v. 3. He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day, an angel
of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius.

v. 4. And when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord?
And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial
before God.

v. 5. And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is
Peter.

v. 6. He lodges with one Simon a tanner whose house is by the seaside; he
shall tell thee what thou ought to do.

v. 7. And when the angel which spoke unto Cornelius, was departed, he called
two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them that waited on him
continually.

v. 8. And when he had declared all these things unto them, he sent them to
Joppa.

v. 9. On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the
city, Peter went up upon the house to pray, about the sixth hour.

v. 10. And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made
ready, he fell into a trance,

v. 11: And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it
had been a great sheet, knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth:

v. 12. Wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air.

v. 13. And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter: kill and eat.

v. 14. But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is
common or unclean.

v. 15. And the voice spoke unto him again the second time, What God has
cleansed that call not thou common.

v. 16. This was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into heaven.

v. 17. Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had seen,
should mean: behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius, had made enquiry
for Simons house, and stood before the gate,

v. 18. And called, and asked whether Simon which was surnamed Peter, were
lodged there.

v. 19. While Peter thought on the vision, the spirit said unto him, Behold,
three men seek thee.

v. 20. Arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing:
for I have sent them.

v. 21. Then Peter went down to the men, which were sent unto him from
Cornelius, and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore
ye are come?

v. 22. And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that
fears God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned
from God by an holy angel, to send for thee into his house, and to hear words
of thee.

v. 23. Then called he them in, and lodged them: And on the morrow Peter went
away with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him.

v. 24. And the morrow after they entered into Cesarea: and Cornelius waited for
them, and had called together his kinsmen and near friends.

v. 25. And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his
feet, and worshipped him.

v. 26. But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my self also am a man.

v. 27. And as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were come
together.

v. 28. And he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a
man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation: but God
has showed me, that I should not call any man common or unclean.

v. 29. Therefore came I unto you without gainsaying, as soon as I was sent
for. I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me?

v. 30. And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was falling until this hour, and at
the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and behold a man stood before me in bright
clothing,

v. 31. And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in
remembrance in the sight of God.

v. 32. Send therefore to Joppa, and call hither Simon, whose surname is Peter:
he is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner, by the seaside, who when he
comes, shall speak unto thee.

v. 33. Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and thou have well done, that
thou art come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God.

v. 34. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God
is no respecter of persons.

v. 35. But in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him.

v. 36. The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace by
Jesus Christ, (he is Lord of all).

v. 37. That word (I say) you know which was published thorowout all Judea, and
began from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached:

v. 38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with power,
who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil:
for God was with him.

v. 39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of
the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree:

v. 40. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly.

v. 41. Not to all the people, but unto witnesses, chosen before of God, even
to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.

v. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it
is he which was ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead.

v. 45. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

v. 44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them
which heard the word.

v. 45. And they of the circumcision which believed, were astonished, as many
as came with Peter; because that on the Gentiles also was powered out the gift
of the holy Ghost.

v. 46. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered
Peter,

v. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we?

v. 48. And he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. Then
prayed they him to tarry certain days.

V. 2. (...)] Incircumcisus sed qui idololatria relicta uni Deo se dederat, and
quae pietati consentanea judicabat, sequebatur
v. 10. (...)] H^c loco significat constitutionem hominis extra se rapti.
Cecidit super eum exstasis, id est. in exstasim incidit: nam proprie loquendo
non (...) in nos sed nos in (...) incidimus.
v. 11. Videb^tur linteum illud a coelo pendere ut significaretur libertas
coelitus indulta. (...)] quorum multa immunda, Lev. 1.27.
v. 15. (...)] id est, noli tu pro polluto habere. Do not thou pollute, that
is, Do not thou call or count polluted, that which God has made lawful. It Is
the use of the Scripture, very frequently to speak as in an effective or active
sense, and to intend only a declarative; and in the very same sense is the
binding and loosing to be understood, Mat. 16.19. and 18.18. for teaching what
is bound, and what loose; what lawful, and what unlawful, Lightf.

There was a distinction of clean and unclean beasts before the Flood, as
appears Genesis 7.8. But this was in reference to sacrifice only, and not in
reference to diet. After the Flood God gave Noah liberty to eat any thing that
was wholesome for d^et; and in this liberty the world continued till the Law
given at Sinai, save only that the Israelites did not eat the sinew that
shrank, which was the first distinguisher that ever began to enclose Israel for
a peculiar from other people, Genesis 32.

Pecudes immundae a mensis semotae non modo ante legem sed and ante diluvium,
Genesis 7.2. Ea tamen distinctio tandem sublata est ut umbra rerum futurarum,
quarum corpus erat in Christo, Col. 2.17. Ex mundis sanguinem attingere nefas,
Genesis 9.4. tum quia in sanguine est anima, i. e. vita pecudis, tum quia Deus
sanguinem destinaverat ad expiationem faciendam in altari pro animabus nostris,
Lev. 17.11. Quod cum mere sit ceremoniale, nihil quicquam causae fuit cur
Apostoli gentibus sanguinem ad tempus prohiberent, Act. 15.20. quam spes
Judaeos infirmos hac ratione lucrifaciendi, qui ab esu sanguinis tantopere
abhorrebant, ut eos omnes populos gladio destruendos scrib^nt qui rennunt huic
mandato se subjicere. Ideo hoc observatum quamdiu visum est Judaeo in hisce
ritibus educatos, posse ad Christum allici. At post de illorum conversi^ne
desperari jam coeptum, etiam hoc interdictum ut partem legis ceremonialis
abrog^vit Apostolus, 1 Cor. 10.25. and alibi non raro. Itaque Augustini aevo si
qui putarent ab esu sangu^nis ea lege se prohiberi, a caeteris irridebantur, ut
docet contra Faustum, lib. 32. c. 13. Bochartus.


v. 20. Ego misi eos] Activum pro duplici activo, i. e. Feci ut mitterentur.
v 22. Alter ille Gen u^i^ huic non d^ssimilis, Luc. 7.5.
v. 30. Hora nona or^b^m ^ imi^atus in hoc Judaeos.
v. 36. (...)^ sub^^^ (...). Audite igitur sermonem illum quem misit, i. e.
promulgacit si^us Israel ann^ncians pacem per Jesum Christum, hic est omnium
Dominus, vel^quie^ ^mnium Dominu.
v. 37. B^pti^mus J^h^nnis^ se sumitur pro doctrina Johannis. Sicut sit, Mat.
21.25. Ast. 18.25. and 19.3.4. Doctrina Johannis erat, Messiam olim expectatum
jam venisse in Mundum and propediem esse revelandum. Tempus igitur esse ut
unusquisque per veram poenitentiam se paret ad filium Dei vera side
receipiendum, Mat. 3.2. Si hunc rejiciant, adesse terribilem illum diem
reprobandi totius populi, Mal 4.1.
v. 39 Dicuntur Judaei Christum suspendisse a ligno quia praetextu seditionis
contra C^sarem Pilato persuaserunt ut Romano more eum crucisigeret, cl^m^ntes,
crucisige, crucisige. Factum hoc secundam consilium Domini qui in Veteri
Tes^amento praefiguraverat hunc modum mortis Christi.
v. 41. Christus edisse memoratur, Luc. 24.34. ut verum se hominem etiam a
resurrectione demonstraret. Edit non quia opus habuit, sed quia ^oluit.
Christus etsi glorificatus tamen nondum voluit uti sua ple^ a glor a sed
accommodavit se hominibus and cum illis ut homo conversatus est. Edit, cum non
indigeret, Inde colligo eum etiam b^bisse: utrumque enim est hominis ut vivat:
exprimere autem id, necesse non fuit, quia potus passim sub cib^
comprehenditur. Invitat Christus a resurrectione discipulos suos ad prandium,
Joh. 21.12. (...), inquit (...). Ipse panem distrib^^t ae pisces. Verisimile ne
est pransos discipulos sine potu? quod si and ipsum servatorem pransum cum
illis dicamus, cum alimento potum recte conjungimus, De Dieu.
v. 43. In fide nostra sunt duo distincti actus qui requirunt duplex
fundamentum: In fide requiritur, 1. Certitudo intellectus ut de veritate ejus
quod credimus simus certi and in dabii. Hujus certitudinis fundamentum est
testimonium Apostolorum. 2. Fiducia cordis, qua cor oneratum and onere peccati
fessum, anhelans acquiescit and se sustentat. Hujus fundamentum est Christus.
In Christum collocatur haec siducia, and nunquam in Apostolos.
v. 44. This was a second confirmation that the Gentiles were to be taken in.
For when G^ ^^^ured out the holy Ghost upon the Uncircumcision, as well as upon
the Circumc^^^ it was evidence sufficient that now God had made no difference
betwixt them.
v. (...) ^st fruit of the gift of tongues was that they that had it were
enabled to spe^k and (...) Originals of the Scripture, Lightf.
v. 48. Apostoli ad baptizandos homines etiam aliorum utebantur opera.
SECT. VI.
THe Apostles and Brethren that were in Judea, namely Those that had been
converted out of Judaism to Christ hearing of this, when Peter came shortly
after to Jerusalem, began to quarrel with him, that he had conversed with
Uncircumcised persons, and eaten with them. But when he had declared unto them
the whole matter (which he confirmed by the Testimony of those six persons that
accompanied him to Caesarea), they were satisfied, and glorified God, who also
has given unto the Gentiles repentance unto life, graciously changing their
hearts, and drawing them to believe in Christ.

Act. 11. v. 1. And the Apostles, and brethren that were in Judea, heard that
the Gentiles had also received the word of God.

v. 2. And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the
circumcision contended with him,

v. 3. Saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them.

v. 4. But Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by
order unto them, saying,

v. 5. I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, a
certain vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by
four corners, and it came even to me.

v. 6. Upon the which when I had fastn^d mine eyes, I considered, and saw
four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and
fowls of the air.

v. 7. And I heard a voice saying unto me, Arise Peter, slay and eat.

v. 8. But I said, Not so, Lord, for nothing common or unclean has at any time
entered into my mouth.

v. 9. But the voice answered me again from heaven, What God has cleansed,
that call not thou common.

v. 10. And this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into heaven.

v. 11. And behold, immediately there were three men already come unto the
house where I was, sent from Cesarea unto me.

v. 12. And the spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. Moreover these
six brethren accompanied me; and we entered into the man's house:

v. 13. And he showed us how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and
said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose surname is Peter:

v. 14. Who shall tell thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be
saved.

v. 15. And as I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the
beginning.

v. 16. Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed
baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost.

v. 17. Forasmuch then as God give them the like gift as he did unto us, who
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ: what was I that I could withstand God?

v. 18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.

SECT. VII. Anno Christ. Calig. 41 3 42 4 43 5 44 and 45 Claudii 1 2 3



A Door being thus opened for the promulgation of the Gospel to the Gentiles,
some Disciples born in Cyprus and Cyrene, who after the martyrdom of Stephen
were dispersed and went about publishing the Gospel, but hitherto to the Jews
only; now understanding (as it seems) what had passed between Peter and
Cornelius and the liberty granted unto them, began to preach Christ to the
Greeks He seems not to mean here the Hellenists or Jews who used the Greek
tongue in their Synagogues, as ch 6.1, (for of them he spoke, v. 19.) but the
Grecians which were Gentiles.
at Antioch in Syria, who were Gentiles. And God prospered their endeavors
exceedingly and brought in many Converts Describitur hic prima Ecclesia ex
gentibus collecta, saltem ex Judaei^, simul and Gentibus. Caesareae una aliqua
familia Gentilis ad fidem fuerat conversa, sed Antiochiae colligitur integra
and magna Ecclesia, Stres. in loc.
to them daily. The Apostles that remained at Jerusalem hearing of it, sent
Barnabas to confirm those Disciples there in the Faith, (See Sect. 13. of chapter
1.) who coming and seeing with what good success, the Gospel had been preached
among them was exceeding glad and exhorted them steadfastly to hold fast to
Christ. For he was a very pious person, a man of excellent gifts and graces,
and by his means also many others were won to the Faith of Christ. And having
great a desire that the Gospel might still be more and more propagated, he went
to Tarsus to seek out Saul, (knowing as it is probable, that he was designed for
minister to the Uncircumcision) that they might join together in the work of
Christ. And having found him he brought him with him to Antioch, where for a
whole year they instructed the Church in that City, and taught much people. And
the Disciples ( viz. such as had received the Faith of Christ, being formerly
called by the Jews, Nazarites or Galilaeans; but among themselves, Disciples,
Believers, Saints, Brethren, and those of the Church), did now first in this
place obtain the name of Christians.

Act. 11. v. 19. Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that
arose about Stephen, traveled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch,
preaching the word to none, but unto the Jews only.

v. 20. And some of them were men of Cyprus, and Cyrene, which when they were
come to Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus.

v. 21. And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed,
and turned unto the Lord.

v. 22. Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church, which
was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as
Antioch.

v. 23. Who when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted
them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.

v. 24. For he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and of faith, and
much people was added unto the Lord.

v. 25. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul.

v. 26. And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to
pass that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and taught
much people, and the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.

v. 19. (...)] Propter Stephanum. Drusius verti posse ait, post Stephanum,
scil. l^pid^tum. Erasm. and Beza, Ob Stephanum.
v. 20. (...)] Certo legendum (...), quomodo habet ille in Anglia. M. S. and
ita legit Syrus. Grot.
v. 26. (...)] Ubi seeds fuit regni istius quod Magog Ezechieli, septentrionale
Danieli: and eversum erat ante adventum Christi, secundum oracula.
SECT. VIII.
ABout this time certain persons who had the gift of Prophecy, and foretelling
future things; came from Jerusalem to Antioch; one of whom (by name The same
person, Act. 21.10. foretold Paul's bonds.
Agabus) by revelation from the Spirit of God, foretold that there would
shortly be a great famine Famis hujus meminerunt Suetonius in Claudio, cap. 18.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2.
over all Judea, and several other parts of the world, The Septuagint often
tender the Land (when it signifies the Land of Judea) by (...) the world. See
Dr. Hammond.
which accordingly came to pass in the reign of the Emperor Claudius; The
Christians therefore of Antioch, resolved to send relief to their Brethren the
Christians in Judea, in this time of dearth Eusebius in Chron. and Orosius l.
7. c. 6. affirmant, Helenam Adiabenorum Reginam (quam ad Christum conversam
essem scribit Orosius) Judaeis in hac fame, magna munificentia succurrisse.
; and having gathered it, sent it to the Elders Seniores vocantur penes quos
erat Ecclesiae regimen, in quibus primum gradum tenebant Apostoli. Sic mensis
praefuerunt Diaconi, ut Presbyteris tamen subessent, nec quicquam nisi ex eorum
authoritate agerent, Calvin. Haec prima est Presbyterorum in Ecclesia mentio.
Vocantur Patres Synagogarum. Totum autem regimen Ecclesiarum Christi,
conformatum fuit ad Synagogarum Exemplar. Grot.
of those Churches Agnoscebant enim eos quasi Patres suos utpote primos
fideles: tum quia fideles in Judaea spoliati bonis a Judaeis, majori indigentia
laborabant: tum quia ipsi sponte se bonis abdicarant, posuerantque eorum pretia
ad pedes Apostolorum, c. 4. 34. quare prae caeteris merebantur juvari. A Lapide.
by the hands of Barnabas and Saul; who having performed this their charge,
returned again to Antioch taking with them John whose surname was Mark, Nephew
to See Col. 4.10.
Barnabas.

Act. 11. v. 27. And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch.

v. 28. And there stood up one of them, named Agabus, and signified by the
Spirit, that there should be great dearth thorowout all the world: which came
to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar.

v. 29 Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to
send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea.

v. 30. Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul.

Act. 12. v. 25. And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, when they had
fulfilled their ministry, and took with them John, whose surname was Mark.

SECT. IX.
LVke having thus related what was done at Antioch he returns now to Judea, and
shows how about the same time King Herod Agrippa Quatuor sunt Herodes in sacra
Scriptura noti. 1. Ascalonita sub quo Christus natus est, Infanticida, alias
Herodes magnus. 2. Antipas, filius ejus, Tetrarcha Galilaeae, qui Johannem
Baptistam occidit, Math. 14. Mar. 6. and Christum ludificatus est, Luc. 23.11.
3. Herodes Agrippa, Aristobuli filius, and Herodis M. nepos. Hic Romae cum
esset, Caio erat familiaris nondum Caesari, optabatque Tiberio Caesari celerem
mortem, ut Caius cito ad Imperium veniret; quo nomine a Tiberio in Carcerem
conjiciebatur. Caius autem Imperator factus, eum carcere liberatum fecit Regem
Judaeae. 4. Agrippa Junior, prioris Agrippae filius de quo Act. 25.13. qui
tamen in Scriptura non Herodes, sed simpliciter Agrippa appellatur.
(Son of Aristobulus and Granson of Herod the great) having obtained a Herodes
Magnus Rex Judaeae per Annos XXXVII. Hoc regnante Joann. Baptista and Christus
nati, Luc. 1. Mat. 11. hic Magorum adventu and abitu territus occidit Infantes.
Ibid.
Filii, Tetrarchae. Nepotes ex Aristobulo jussa^ Patris strangulato. Archelaus
^rarcha Ju^rum per ^os 7 aut 8. ^ hoc Chri^ rediit ab ^io, Mat. 2. D Philippus
Tetrarcha Ituraeae and Trachonitidis regionis, Luke 3.1. maritus Herodiadis,
Matthew. 14.3. e Herodes Antipas Tetrarcha Galilae ae, Luc. 3.1. raptor
Herodiadis, Mat. 14.4. interfector Baptisiae, ibidem, vulpes insidias struit
vitae Christi. Luc 13.31. illusor Christi, Luc. 23.11. Hujus procurator Chuza,
Luc. 8.3. Cum hoc educatus Manahen Act. 13.1. Conspirat cum Pilato adversus
discipulos Christi, Act. 4.27. Herodes Rex Chalcidis, qui regnum a Claudio
Imper. intercessione fratris Agrippae obtinuit, Josephus. z Agrippa Major
universum regnum avi obtinuit. Imperat annos 7. Inte^ ficit Jacobum: in vincula
conjicit Petrum, ab angelo percutitur, Act. 12. ubi etiam Herodes vocatur in
hujus praetorio, Caesareae, custoditur Paulus, Act. 23.35. Herodias primum
Philippi deinde p^r consensum fratris ejus ^ntipae uxor. Matthew. 14. Josephus.
Bernice, Act. 13.14. Haec primum Herodi chalcidis regi, patruo, deinde Polemoni
Ciciliae Regi nupta, a quo discedens caepit Regem Agrippam sectari, non sine
manifesta incesti suspicione. e. Agrippa Minor regnat annos 56. ^oram hoc, and
Bernice sorore, causam dicit Paulus. Act. 26. Drusilla. Haec primum Emesenorum
Regi, circumcisionem admittenti, deinde promissis persuasa, abjecta religione
patria, Felici, procuratori nupsit, Act. 24.24. Joseph. l. 20. 5. great part of
his Grandfathers Dominions of Claudius the Emperor, came into Judea, to take
upon him his Government, about the latter end of the first, or beginning of the
second year of Claudius; and being willing to gratify the Jews, (who he saw
desperately hated the Christians), he began to vex and persecute certain of the
Church at Jerusalem; and in that persecution he slew James Catalogus
Apostolorum duos habet Jacobos. Prior est Jacobus frater Johannis, filius
Zebedaei, in ordine Apostolorum tertius; a Theol^gis vocatur Jacobus Major, and
a Marco 3.17. Boanerges. Alter est Jacobus frater Domini. Gal. 1.19. filius
Alphaei, in ordine Apostolorum nonus, Mat. 10. Ab alii^ vocatur Jacobus minor
ex Marc. 15.40. and est is, qui Hierosolymitanae Synodi Praeses fuit, Act. 15.
cujus mentio, v. 17. hujus capitis; habeturque pro auctore Epistolae, qua^
Jacobi vocatur.
Brother of John, and Son of Zebedee with the Sword Ita c^ntigit ei calix iste
de quo Christus erat loquntus, Mat 20.23. Jacobus primus omnium Apostolorum
mortem obiit.

Gladio decollare, supplicium fuit inter Judaeos non usitatum* quod legimus;
sed a Romany acceptum, sicut and Johannes Baptista gladio decollatus est.


, who was called Boanerges (Mark 3.16.) because he was a zealous and thundering
Preacher against the Vices of the Times. And perceiving that the Jews were well
pleased therewith, He proceeded further and apprehended Peter also, the
Passover of the Jews being then at hand. And having imprisoned him, he set
sixteen Tot militibus Petrum custodiri curavit, quia veritus est, ne miraculose
evaderet, sicut fecerat antea, Act. 5.19. See Sect. 7. of 1. Chap.
Soldiers to guard him, four at a time, and to take their turns in the four
watches of the night, meaning after the Feast of the Passover was over to
bring him forth to the Jews, and probably (if they desired it) to put him to
death also.

Peter being thus cast into prison, fervent and importunate prayers were made
by the Church to God in his behalf. He continues there till the very night God
many times suffers his Children to come to the Pits-brink, and then delivers
them, that they may be more sensible of his mercy, and have the more evident
matter of praising his name.
before Herod intended to bring him out to the people; at which time sleeping
between two Soldiers to whom he was bound with two Chains, and the Soldiers
keeping watch before the door, an Angel came to him, and the light with which
he appeared shone in the prison, who raising him up and causing his Chains to
fall off from his hands, He commands him to make himself ready to go out
immediately with him; which accordingly he does, but as yet was not assured
that this was really done, but in this transport, apprehended he had been in a
dream or trance. And the prison, as it seems, being in the Suburbs, after they
were out of prison, they past through two watches, or wards which stood every
night without the gates of the City, and at last came to the Irongate, which
leads into the City, which opened to them of its own accord, and when they had
passed together through one street, the Angel left him, and departed. Peter now
perceiving that it it was no vision, but a real deliverance, said within
himself, Now I see clearly that God has sent his holy Angel and has delivered
me from the hands of Herod and from the malice of the Jews. And when he had
considered what course was fittest for him to take, he resolved to go to the
house of Mary, Mark's mother, where many Christians were met together at this
very time of the night to seek the Lord in prayer for him: And as he knocked at
the door, a Damosel came to ask Who was there? and knowing Peter's voice, she
stayed not to open the door for gladness, but ran in and told them Peter was
there. They at first thought she spoke idly, but she persisting in it, they
then said, It is his So the word Angel does sometimes signify no more than a
Messenger, Luke 7 24.27.
Angel; that is, some Messenger come from him, who mentioning his name, the
Maid by mistake, concludes it to be Peter himself; or else possibly by his
Angel they might mean that some holy Angel Angelum ejus nominant qui divinitus
illi appositus sit custos, and salutis minister. Quo sensu Christus dicit
Angelos parvulorum semper videre faciem Patris, Matthew. 18.10. Quod antem vulgo
hinc eliciunt singul^s hominibus attribui singulos Angelos qui eorum curam
gerant, nimis infirmum est. Nam Scriptura testatur magno interdum populo unum
Angelum dari, and uni tantum homini, ingentem exercitum, Genesis 32. Nam Elizaei
ministro aperti sunt oculi, ut multos currus igneos in aere cerneret, qui ad
tuendam Prophetae salutem ordinati erant, 2 Reg. 6.17. apud Danielem vero non
nisi unus Persarum Angelu^, and unus Graecorum nominatur, Dan. 10 5.13.20. Nec
Scriptura suum cuique certum and peculiarem Angelum promittit* sed potius quod
Angelis suis mandaverit Deus, ut singulos fideles custodiant, Psalm. 91.11. Item
ut castrametentur in circuitu piorum. Psalm. 34.8. Ergo figmentum quod passim
invaluit, de binis cujusque geniis, profanum est. Nobis sufficiat quod pro
Ecclesiae salute tota coelestis militia excubat: atque ita pro temporis
necessitate, nunc unus Angelus, nunc plures suo praesidio nos protegunt. Certe
inaestimabilis haec est Dei bonitas, quod Angelos qui radii sunt divini
fulgoris, ministros nostros esse pronunciat. Calv. in loc.
, had assumed his shape and voice, and stood at the gate in his resemblance.
But whilst they thus debated the matter, Peter continued knocking, and when
they had opened the door, they were amazed to find that it was indeed Peter
himself. Then he related to them how miraculously the Lord had delivered him,
and giving order, that James the less (the Son of Alpheus, called the brother,
that is, the kinsman of the Lord, Gal. 1.19.) and the rest of the Brethren in
that City should be certifi'd of the manner of his deliverance; he withdrew
himself to some more secure place, (probably to Antioch) not being willing to
put himself into the same danger again, out of which God had so wonderfully
delivered him, [See Mat. 10.23.]

In the morning there was a great stir among the Soldiers, what was become of
Peter. And Herod not finding him, strictly examined the Watch, and being
frustrated of his intention against the Apostle, he vents his rage against the
Soldiers, and commanded they should be carried away (...) significat abduci,
hoc est, rapi ad supplicium, vel duci in vincula.
either to prison or to execution, and to be punished as malefactors.

Act. 12.1. Now about that time, Herod the king stretched forth his hands, to
vex certain of the church.

v. 2. And h^ killed James the brother of John with the sword.

v. 3. And because he saw it pleas^d the Jews, he proceeded further to take
Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread)

v. 4. And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him
to four quarternions of soldiers to keep him, intending after Easter to bring
him forth to the people.

v. 5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing
of the church unto God for him.

v. 6. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was
sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers before
the door kept the prison.

v. 7. And behold, the ^ngel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in
the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up
quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.

v. 8. And the angel said unto him, Gird thy self, and bind on thy sandals, And
so he did. And he says unto him, Cast thy garments about thee, and follow me.

v. 9. And he went out, and followed him, and wist not that it was true which
was done by the angel: but thought he saw a vision.

v. 10. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the
iron gate that leads into the city, which opened to them of his own accord,
and they went out, and passed on through one street, and forthwith the angel
departed from him.

v. 11. And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety,
that the Lord has sent his angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of
Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.

v. 12. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the
mother of John, whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together,
praying.

v. 13. And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken,
named Rhoda.

v. 14. And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for gladness,
but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate.

v. 15. And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed that
it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel.

v. 16. But Peter continued knocking; and when they had opened the door, and
saw him, they were astonished.

v. 17. But he beckning unto them with the hand to hold their peace, declared
unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison: and he said, Go show
these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into
another place.

v. 18. Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers,
what was become of Peter.

v. 19. And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he examined the
keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death.

v. 11. (...)] Ubi ad se redierat, stupore excusso.
SECT. X.
HErod shortly atfer goes from Jerusalem to Caesarea and abode there: And being
highly displeased with the Tyrians and Sidonians he intended to make war (...)
had an intention to make war. Sic Hammondus.
upon them. They being sensible, that their own narrow circuit of Land was not
sufficient to maintain them, and that they depended on Galilee and Judea, (now
under Herod's jurisdiction) for a great part of their provisions, they judged it
their wisest course to seek peace with him. Having therefore gratified Blastus
his Chamberlain, and got him to be their Friend, they sent their Commissioners
to request the King that he would be graciously pleased to be reconciled to
them. Herod being a proud Prince and pufft up with his prosperity, on a solemn,
day appointed (as it is like) for the audience of these Tyrian and Sidonian
Commissioners, being clad in a Royal Robe all glistering with Silver (whereon
the Sun shone, and so made it more glorious and illustrious, as Josephus
reports, lib. 19. Antiq. chapter 7.), and sitting upon his Throne, made a speech
unto them to show his magnificence and eloquence, and possibly extolled his own
clemency, that having a just cause to chastize them with his arms, yet he was
graciously inclined to spare them. At this the people gave a shout and with
impious flattery, cried out, It is the voice of a God and not of a man. Herod
priding himself in this acclamation and assuming this divine honor to himself,
immediately the In morbis immittendis saepe Angelorum ministerio Deus utitur,
Exodus 12.29. 2 Samuel 24.16.
Angel of the Lord smote him with a loathsome disease, so that he was eaten up
either of lice or worms, and dyed miserably. And this Tyrant and Persecutor of
the Church being thus removed, the Gospel prospered exceedingly, and was
preached up and down with great success.

-- And he went down from Judea to Cesarea, and there abode.

v. 20. And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon: but they
came with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the kings chamberlain
their friend, desired peace, because their country was nourished by the kings
country.

v. 21. And upon a set day Herod arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne
and made an oration unto them.

v. 22. And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not
of a man.

v. 23. And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not
God the glory, and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

v. 24. But the word of God grew, and multiplied.

CHAP. III. Anno Christ. Claud. 46 4 47 5 48 6 49 7 50 8 51 9


Relating Readiness first journey from Antioch with Barnabas, to preach the Gospel
to the Gentiles, John Mark being their Minister, which for distinctions sake we
call, Iter Asiaticum. Iter Asiaticum.

SECT. I.
BArnabas and Saul having carried the Alms sent from the Disciples in Antioch
to their Brethren in Judaea in the time of the dearth (as we have seen Sect. 8.
of Chap. 2.), returned to the Church at Antioch again; in which there were at
that time several Prophets Prophetae dicuntur qui praediti erant dono
interpretandi Scripturas Propheticas ex revelatione Spiritsis Sancti; and
nonnulli eorum etiam praediti erant dono praedicendi futura, quae scire
Ecclesiae intererat, qualis erat Agabus, Doctores sunt qui in Scholis sive
Ecclesia, doctrinam sacram tradunt and alios erudiunt, qui Ephesians. 4.11. a
Pastoribus distinguuntur.
and Teachers, and among others one very eminent, viz. Manaen, who was a person
of that high rank and quality, that he had been brought up with Herod Antipas,
and yet contemning the world, had embraced the Gospel, and thought it no
disparagement to him to be a Teacher there. Thus God manifests the freedom of
his Grace, in effectually calling some of all sorts and ranks of men to a
participation of the benefits offerr'd in and by his Son.

Barnabas and Saul had not been long in that City, before the holy Ghost on a
day when the Church fasting and praying, by some instinct or revelation to one
or more of the Prophets and Teachers there, commanded that these two, viz.
Barnabas and Saul should be separated Cum non dixerit Spiritus Sanctus
segregate Domino, sed mibi, ostendit unam esse potestatem and virtutem.
from the service of that Church (where there were for the present Teachers
enough) and sent to preach the Gospel in other parts. The Church hereupon with
prayer and fasting commended them to God, and by imposition of hands Fuit haec
ceremonia antiquitus usitata cum alicui aliquid bonum apprecarentur, and alicui
benedicerent. Genesis 48.14. non quod in ceremonia aliqua vis esset, sed quod
esset visibile signum cordialis ac sincerae comprecationis vel benedictionis,
Stres.

This is the first ordination of Elders since the Gospel, that was used out of
the Land of Israel. No better reason I suppose can be given of this present
action, than that the Lord did hereby set down a platform of ordaining
Ministers in the Church of the Gentiles for future times, Lightf.


set them apart to this particular employment. Thus having received their
Commission from the holy Ghost, they set forth for the work to which they were
designed Non opus habebant vocatione and missione ut possent paaedicare
ligetime Evangelium; erant enim antea vocati and missi, and diu jam functi
erant ministerio: sed opus habebant speciali vocatione and missione ad
praedicandum Gentibus, Stres.
, taking John Mark along with them, to be assistant to them, and a
fellow laborer in the work of the Lord, and to be by them sent to any part of
their charge, whither they themselves could not go. Having begun their journey,
they first came to Seleucia a port in Syria and from thence sailed to Cyprus
Haec olim Macaria dicta ob beatam rerum omnium corporalium abundantiam, sed
nunc demum beata facta per communicationem Evangelii. In hac Insula erat
inclytum illud Templum Paphiae Veneris de quo multa Tacitus lib. 2. hist. In
hanc tamen corruptissimam and impurissimam insulam Deus omnium primo Evangelium
suum misit, and Ecclesias ibi plantavit. Est enim Cyprica Ecclesia prima ex
transmarinis. Non est ergo currentis sed miserentis Dei, Rom 9.
, Barnabas's own Country [ Act. 4.36.], and at Salamis one of the Cities of
that Island, they first began to preach the Gospel in the Synagogues of the
Jews. For though these two holy men were sent to the Gentiles, yet were they so
far from forbearing to preach to the Jews, that they constantly began with them
first in all places where they came. And traveling over that Island as far as
Paphos, they there found a false Prophet a magical Jew [See Act. 19.13. and
Mat. 24.24.], called Bar-jesus (...) Filius salutis, qui salutis sanitatisque
adferendae artem prositetur.
, and surnamed Elymas or Magus, who opposed them, and particularly endeavored
to hinder and divert Sergius Paulus (who governed that Island for the Romans)
from hearing them and from embracing the faith. Saul seeing the wickedness and
malice of this man and having a great incitation of the Spirit of God upon him,
looked earnestly on him, and spoke to him to this purpose, O thou vile
sorcerer, who like the Devil by whom thou workest, show thy self and an
enemy to the truth and to all goodness; will thou not cease to lay false
imputations on the gospel, and the way of salvation to hinder and discourage
men from embracing of it? It is most just that thou that shuttest the eyes of
thy mind so perversely against the light of the Gospel, should lose thy
outward sight; and therefore by the immediate power of God it shall be taken
from thee for some time; and immediately Elymas was struck blind and was not
able to go without leading. The Governor seeing this miracle, and hearing the
Doctrine of the Gospel opened and explained, and perceiving it accompanied with
so much power, was converted to the Faith. And from this time forward Saul was
always called Paul Hoc loco imprimis coepit esse Gentium Apostolus, itaque
etiam sortitur nomen Gentibus usitatum.
, which name possibly was first given him by the household of Sergius Paulus. So
that though he was called Saul, so long as he conversed among the Jews, Syrians
and Arabians, yet afterward, when he was by Gods special Call principally sent
to the Gentiles, viz. to the Greeks and Romans, he then had the name of Paul
given unto him, that being a name more agreeable unto them. From Paphos, Paul
and his company went to Perga in Pamphilia, a Country in Asia the less, at
which place John Mark Reditum hujus Johannis Marci ad officium quod deseruerat,
ejusque cum Paulo reconciliationem, vid. 2 Timothy 4.11. Phil. 2.4.
(possibly being weary of those travels or having and earnest desire to visit
his mother and friends) left them (which Paul took very ill) and returned to
Jerusalem, where he stayed till Paul and Barnabas came thither again: in whose
place (it seems) Paul took Titus, for he was with him, when after he had
finished this peregrination, he went up to the Council at Jerusalem.

Act. 13.1. Now there we in the church that was at Antioch, certain prophets
and teachers: as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of
Cyrene, and Manaen which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.

v. 2. As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, Separate
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them.

v. 3. And when they had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they
sent them away.

v. 4. So they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia, and
from thence they sailed unto Cyprus.

v. 5. And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the
Synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John to their Minister.

v. 6. And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain
sorcerer, a false prophet a Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus.

v. 7. Which was with the deputy of the country Sergius Paulus, a prudent man:
who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.

v. 8. But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood
them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.

v. 9. Then Saul (who also is called Paul) filled with the holy Ghost, set his
eyes on him,

v. 10. And said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the
devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord?

v. 11. And now behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be
blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a
mist and a darkness, and he went about, seeking some to lead him by the hand.

v. 12. Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished
at the doctrine of the Lord.

v. 13. Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in
Pamphilia: and John departing from them, returned to Jerusalem.

v. 2. (...), i. e. (...). Vocare hic est destinare: praeteritum passivum
usurpatur in significatione activa.
v. 11. (...)] adversum te. Manus enim Dei dicitur super eum esse, quem
protegit, at contra vel adversus illum quem punit. vid. Psalm. 80.17. and 1 Samuel
12.15.
SECT. II.
PAul and Barnabas from Perga go to Antioch in Pisidia (a Country of the lesser
Asia) and entering into one of the Synagogues of the Jews on the Sabbath day,
after the reading of some portions or sections in the Law and Prophets More
recepto ab Esdrae temporibus, ut prater particulas de lege (quod vetus erat)
etiam de prophetis particula aliqua Sabbatis singulis legeretur. Grot.
(as their manner was every Sabbath, See v. 17. and chapter 15.21.) they are
invited by the Rulers Synagogae habebant suos praefectos, qui erant quasi
consistorium Ecclesiasticum, qui lectiones and adhortationes peragebant
disciplinam exercebant and ordinem curabant, Stres. See Harmony of the four
Evangelists, Sect. 10. of Chap. 3.
of the Synagogue to give a word of instruction It was the custom of the Jewish
Doctors to expound and apply some part of Scripture to the instruction of the
people. Hamm.
unto them if they were prepared so to do. Hereupon Paul standing up, and
bespeaking all both Jews and Proselytes to give audience, in a most excellent
Sermon he sets forth the mercies of God to the Children of Israel, in
choosing them at first for his own peculiar people and exalting them thereby
above all the Nations of the World, and delivering them by his Almighty power
from the bondage of Egypt, exercising longsuffering, and forbearance toward
them, notwithstanding their provocations Forty years in the wilderness, and
driving out the seven nations out of the Land of Canaan, and giving it to them
for a possession. And after his providence had been thus over them for about
the space of Four hundred and fifty years; He gave them Judges and spirited
them for their places, and raised up some particular eminent persons to rule
over them, and to fight their battles: which way of Government lasted to the
time of Samuel, who being a Prophet, ruled them in Gods name, and stood for
some years. After this, they desired a King, and God gave them Saul, whose
reign, (reckoning in also the preceding government of Samuel), continued for
the space of Forty years Samuel and Saul governed between them both about Forty
years; the years of the government of either of them are not distinctly and
particularly expressed. It Is probable that Samuel might govern before Saul was
set up about Thirty years and consequently that Saul did not reign above Ten
years at the most. See Allens Chron. p. 109.

Saul non regnavit annos quadraginta sed includuntur in hoc numero anni
Samueli^* quibus ille ante and cum Saulo regnavit vel potius judicavit.


; and after him, he gave them David a man after his own heart and ready to
perform (...)] Omne id quod ipsum jubebo praestare. Non enim hoc de ipsa lege
intelligendum est, sed de peculiaribus mandatis ad Davidis vocationem and
regimen populi spectantibus.

David was a man after Gods mind in the main of his life, though not in every
particular action, the denomination being from the greater part.


what he enjoined him in governing the people. Of this man's seed he shows, God
according to his promise [ Isa. 11.1.] had raised up to Israel, Jesus a
Savior. To whom John Baptist bare witness, preaching the Doctrine of
Repentance and pressing contrition, humiliation, and brokenness of heart for
sin, that so there might be stirred up in the people a hunger, and thirst, and
earnest desire after Christ, who was then ready to appear, and to enter on his
prophetic office. He showed that John did not only exhort to repentance in his
Sermons, but by administering the ordinance of Baptism he obliged them to it,
and to an humble acknowledgment and confession of their sinfulness and
impurity, which washing with water might suggest unto them. And as John went on
fulfulling his ministry, he was so far from arrogating to himself the Title of
the Messiah, that he avowed himself only for his forerunner, declaring, that
shortly the Messiah would come in person and preach among them, which
accordingly he did. Now this Gospel and Word of Salvation, which Christ brought
into the World (he shows) is sent, and is to be proclaimed and made known unto
them. He acknowledges the Sanhedrim, and people that then dwelt at Jerusalem,
did not indeed understand him to be the Messiah as they might have done, had
they considered the Predictions of the Prophets, contained in those Sections
and Portions of Scripture which every Sabbath Day are read in their Synagogues;
but instead thereof, they adjudged him to death, and in so doing, fulfilled
those very prophesies they understood not. And though they found not in him any
cause of death, yet they desired Pilate, that he might be slain. But after he
was crucified and buried, he shows them, that God raised him from the dead, and
for Forty days he continued upon the earth, and was several times seen by his
disciples and diverse others who from the beginning attended on him, who do now
with great assurance testify these things unto all the Jews. He further shows,
that now God had actually fulfilled his promises made unto their fathers, in
that he had sent his son into the world to be incarnate, and to accomplish the
work of our redemption, whom he had raised from the dead, after he had been
crucified according to the promises and predictions that are recorded of him in
sundry places of Scripture, as particularly in Psalm. 2.7. where Christ is said
in the day of his resurrection, to be begotten Deus Pater, ter dicitur Christum
filium genuisse, and ter vitam ei dedisse. 1. Ab aeterno ex se generando,
deinde ex semine Davidis excitando, and denique ex mortuis resuscitando.

Verba haec non sunt ita accipienda quasi tum demum post resurrectionem suam
Christus coepit esse filius Dei, and ab eo gigni, sed quia tum Deus
potentissime per resurrectionem declaravit Christum esse filium suum. In
scriptura enim res tum dicuntur fieri vel nasci, cum manifestantur and se
produnt: confer Prove. 17.17. Amicus nascitur in die malo, h. e. tum sese
prodit, cum premit nos angustia. C^me^on.


of the Father, because he was then most eminently declared to be the Son of
God [ Romans 1.4.] And in Isa. 55.3, God not only promises to raise him from the
dead, but to secure him from ever dying any more, saying, I will give you the
sure mercies of David, that is, perform unto you the gracious promises made to
David. Now it was promised to David, that of his seed should arise the Messiah,
who should have an everlasting Kingdom, and who should not see corruption, as
it is Psalm. 16.11. If therefore God should suffer his Son to return again to the
place of corruption, viz. the grave, how could he make good the promises he had
made to D^vid. For these words cannot be applied personally to David; for David
after he had served his generation, dyed and never rose again* but his body
putrified in the earth. But Jesus in whom this prophecy is completely
fulfilled, was raised again from the dead, and saw no corruption* nor was his
body putrified in he earth. This therefore he shows is the Gospel that they
preached unto them, namely, that this Jesus is the true Messiah, by whose
merits and intercession, remission of sins is to be obtained and whosoever
believes in him shall certainly be freed from the wrath of God, and the
punishments attending sin in another world; from which the law of Moses could
not of it self, by all its ceremonies, washings, and sacrifices, purge or
cleanse, or free, any person whatsoever. For the Law of Moses had only a
shadow of the good things which were to be performed by Christ. Upon the whole
matter therefore he exhorts them that they should take heed lest by their
obstinate resisting and rejecting this way of Salvation, now preached to them,
they should bring a remarkable astonishing destruction upon themselves, such as
God threatened to bring upon the Jews of old from the Caldaeans [Hab. 1.5.]
where he speaks to them to this purpose, Behold ye despisers, and be amazed,
and cover or hide Apud Suidam (...), est (...), facere ut non appareat. Sic
Plutarch. de Pyth. orac. (...); non vult abscondere aut tegere veritatem, (...)
disparete, nempe ut illi qui prae pudore se for as proripiunt, Beza.

Sequitur Apostolus hoc loco versionem (...) LXX, qui (...) baggoim, i. e. in
Gentibus. Hab. 1.5. (ut videtur) legebant (...), quia vertunt (...). errore
orto ex affinitate litterarum and. Non est autem quod turbetur quisquam quod
errorem hunc non emendaverit Evangelista noster. Etsi enim in verbis, in re
tamen ipsa nullus est error. Nam contemptores arguuntur Judaei, quum Gentes
magistros aspicere jubentur. Sensus itaque recte constat, imo mentem Prophetae,
quasi per commentarium explicat. De Dieu.


your selves, for I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe if
any man declare it unto you. And as the Caldaeans demolished their first Temple
and ruined their City, for their impenitent going on in their sins, against all
the messages sent them from God by the Prophets; so he advises these present
Jews to take heed, lest by despising Christ and his Gospel, they bring upon
themselves a like destruction.

The Apostle having ended his Sermon, as they went out of the Synagogue, the
Proselytes (who were of Gentile parentage, but had embraced the Jewish
religion, and though uncircumcised, frequented their religious assemblies)
desired to hear more of this subject the next Sabbath. And some pious persons
of the Jews, together with these religious Proselytes, followed the Apostles to
their Lodging, who exhorted them to continue steadfast in the doctrine of the
Gospel. And the next Sabbath day came almost the whole City to hear the Gospel
preached by them. But the chief men of the Jews, seeing how the people thronged
to hear the Apostles, were horribly enraged at it, and contradicted, and
cavilled at the doctrine they preached, and reviled and calumniated their
persons. However, this nothing discouraged Paul and Barnabas; but putting off
all fear, they openly declared, that they had performed their charge from
Christ of preaching the Gospel first to the Jews; but seeing they behaved
themselves so obstinately and perversely, and by their contempt thereof showed
and declared themselves unworthy of so great a blessing, they were now by Gods
appointment to leave them, and to preach to the Gentiles. For this was the
direction of God, that the Gospel being first preached to the Jews, and
rejected by them, it should then be preached to all other people of the world.
And this is the sum of that old prophecy, Isa. 49.6. I have set thee to be a
light to the Gentiles, to give the people that sat in darkness knowledge of the
way to eternal life. When the Gentiles heard this good news, and understood
their own interest in it, they rejoiced exceedingly, and magnified, and highly
approved the Gospel and word of the Lord, and as many as were chosen of God,
and by the conviction of his Spirit, prepared and disposed to seek after
eternal life, believed. And the Gospel was preached over the whole Country. But
the Jews being enraged hereat, stirred up and exasperated some of the female
proselytes of honorable quality (who were led with a blind zeal against the
Gospel, which they understood not, and accordingly, as it seems, stirred up
their husbands against it), and other chief persons in the City against the
Apostles, and drove them out of their Coasts; who shaking off the dust of their
feet against them (as our Savior had commanded, Mat. 10.14.), departed and
went to Iconium, a City of Lycaonia, in the lesser Asia. Yet the Disciples in
this City, and the parts adjacent, were nothing discouraged with the Jews
Blasphemies, calumnies, and oppositions, but were filled with spiritual Joy
that they had embraced the Gospel, and went on courageously in their profession
of it.

Act. 13. v. 14. But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in
Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down.

v. 15. And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the
synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of
exhortation for the people, say on.

v. 16. Then Paul stood up, and beckning with his hand, said, Men of Israel,
and ye that fear God, give audience.

v. 17. The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the
people, when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm
brought he them out of it.

v. 18. And about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in the
wilderness.

v. 19. And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he
divided their land to them by lot.

v. 20. And after that he gave unto them judges, about the space of four
hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet.

v. 21. And afterward they desired a King, and God gave unto them Saul the son
of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years.

v. 22. And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their
king, to whom also he gave testimony, and said, I have found David the Son of
Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will.

v. 23. Of this man's seed has God, according to his promise, raised unto
Israel a Savior, Jesus:

v. 24. When John had first preached before his coming, the baptism of
repentance to all the people of Israel.

v. 25. And as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I
am not h^. But behold, there comes one after me, whose shoos of his feet I am
not worthy to loose.

v. 26. Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among
you fears God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.

v. 27. For they that dwelt at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew
him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets, which are read every sabbath day,
they have fulfilled them in condemning him.

v. 28. And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate
that he should be slain.

v. 29. And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him
down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulcher.

v. 30. But God raised him from the dead:

v. 31. And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee
to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.

v. 32. And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was
made unto the fathers,

v. 33. God has fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he has
raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm: Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee.

v. 34. And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to
return to corruption; he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of
David.

v. 35. Wherefore he says also in another psalm, Thou shall not suffer thine
holy One to see corruption.

v. 36. For David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God,
fell on sleep and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption.

v. 37 But he whom God raised again saw no corruption.

v. 38. But know ^ unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this m^
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins.

v. 39. And by him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which
you (...) not be justified by the law of Moses.

v. 40 Beware therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the
prophets;

v. 41. Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for I work a work in in
your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you.

v. 42 And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue, the Gentiles besought
that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath.

v. 43. Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious
proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who speaking to them, persuaded them to
continue in the grace of God.

v. 44. And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear
the word of God.

v. 45. But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and
spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting, and
blaspheming.

v. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the
word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles.

v. 47. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a
light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation unto the ends of
the earth.

v. 48. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the
word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed.

v. 49. And the word of the Lord was published thorowout all the region.

v. 50. But the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable women, and the chief
men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled
them out of their coasts.

v. 51. But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto
Iconium.

v. 52. And the disciples were filled with joy, and with the holy Ghost.

V. 14. (...), pro (...) enim in plurali, significatione singulari dicere, in
more est Evangelistis, ex usu LXX Interpretum. Ut Exodus 20.10. and sic passim.
De Dieu.
v. 19. Septem Gentes] Sex nominantur Exodus 3.8. Cananaei, Hitthaei, Amoraei*
Perizaei, Hevaei; sed addendi his Girgazeni ex Neh. 9.8. quos in Africam ivisse
^i^^^ Hebraei. Est ubi una ex septem omittitur, vel quia minima, vel quia minus
potens.
v. 20. (...), scil. (...) and post-hac circiter 450 annis, scil. facta, dedit
judices, usque ad Samuelem prophetam. Numerus positus respicit antecedentia in
Sermon Pauli, cujus initium est electio patrum, v. 17. terminus, distributio
terrae Canaan, v. 19. Electio caepit eo tempore, quo Deus Ismaelem separans,
Isaacum semen promissionis posuit, and in illo cum posteritate ejus faedus
pepigit, Genesis 17.6, 7, 19, 21. Ab illo igitur anno (fuit autem unus ante natum
Isaacum, cap. 17.1. cap. 21.5.) ad tempus usque distributionis terrae Canaan
per Joshuam ducem and Judicem plenariae, decurrerunt anni 450, minus uno; quod
ad iodicandum (...) particula additur. Haec simplicissima videtur conciliatio
Chronologica, ut ad corruptionem in textu statuendam non opus sit consugere.
Vid. Junium in Paral. l. 1, par. 95. Classius.

Omnino assentior iis, qui hic annos, quibus rexerunt Judices, supputari nolunt
(sic enim annos hosce 450 cum 480 qui ab exitu ex Aegypto ad Templi Salomonici
initium effluxisse dicuntur 1 Reg. 6.5. conciliare imp^ssibile videtur) sed qui
a nato Isaaco u^que ad ^udices flux^re, quasi scriptum sit, (...); ut non
quamdiu rexerint Judices, sed ^uando eos Deus dederit, indicetur: nempe post ea
quae v. 17, 18, 19. natrata fuerunt, quae 450 circiter annis gesta fuere,
convenit conmputus Nam a nato Isaaco ad natum Jacobum sunt 60 anni, inde ad
introitum in Aegyptum 130 inde ad exitum 210. inde ad introitum in terram
Canaan 40. inde ad distributionem ter^ae, anni 7. qui simul faciunt 447 annos,
id est, circiter 450 desunt enim solummodo tres. Recte autem ad nati Isaaci
tempus refertur illud, ver. 17. Elegit Deus patres nostros; tum enim Deus qui
jam Abrahamum elegerat ex omnibus terrae populis, ex omnibus Abrahami liberis
elegit Isaacum, in cujus familia foedus consisteret, dicens, In Jsaaco
vocabitur semen tuum. De Dieu.


v. 21. Samuel munere suo prophetico functu^ est partim ante Saulis regnum,
partim dum consiliis Saulum rexit simul annis XL nam quatuor tantum ante mortem
Saulis mensibu ^^editur Hebraeis mortuus Samuel. Sauli tribuit Paulus annos
quadraginta, nempe adjuncto tempore Gubernationis Samuelis, cujus Regimen fuit
a majori Regis dignitate velut absorptum. Osiander.
v. 22. Qui exequetur omnes voluntates meas] nerape in regendo populo idem est
quod dicitur, Psalm. 78 72.
v. 29. Posuerunt eum in monumento] i. e. qui eum de cruce detulerunt, Josephus
Arimathensis and comites ejus, Mat. 27.58, 59.
v. 34. Non amplius reversurum (...) in corruptionem] At Christus nunquam in
ulla corruptione fuit, Psalm. 16.10. ubi (...) pro (...), videre pro pati
experiri, and experiri de mortuo non nisi improprie dicitur: est ergo duplex
(...). At quomodo dici potest Dominus eo reverti, quo nunquam devenit? Sciendum
ergo est Lucam Graecos veteris T. interpretes secutum, (...) convertere id quod
Hebraeis dicitur (...) i. e. sepulchrum. Beza.

(...)] Ad verbum, Sancta Davidis fidelia (...) vetusta interpretatione
sanctus, i. e. (...)(...)(...) sancta David cum potius denotet benignitates
David, i. e. Davidi factas aut promissas, (...) i. e. (...) firma robusta.
Drusius.

Ex Helenistarum usu (...), and (...), at quomodo ex daebo vobis sancta David
fidelia colligit Apostolus resurrectionem Christi and vitam ejus nulli amplius
corruptioni obnoxiam? Quum (...) sint benignae Dei promissiones Davidi factae.
Davidi autem promissum esset, ut ex semine ejus oriretur Messiah, qui tanquam
sanctus Dei non videret corruptionem recte collig^t Apostolus non potu^sse Deum
sancta Davidis fidelia dare quin and sancto suo, Davidi promisso,
incorruptibilem per resurrectionem vitam largiretur. De Dieu.


v 40. Quod dictum est in Prophetis] i. e. in uno Prophetarum, nempe Hab. 1.5.
In Prophetis i. e. volumine prophetarum minorum Synecdoche integri, q. d.
videte ne idem vobis eveniat quod olim parentibus vestris, urbe and Templo
exciso, ipsis deportatis ob contemptum beneficiorum Dei.
v. 42, (...)] pro (...). Vu^gatus et Erasmus recte interpretati sunt sequente
Sabb^to, ut idem sit quod, v. 44. (...), quo tota civitas dicitur convenisse ad
audiendum verbum, nempe quia postulationi Gentium Paulus annuerat. (...).
Capell.
v. 43. (...)] Ita per metonym. vocatur doctrina Evangelica quae summo Dei
beneficio nobis contigit. Sic Heb. 12.15. 1 Pet. 5.12.
v. 46. Indignos vos ipsos judicatis vita aeterna] Beza (...) vertit
decernitis, h. e. hoc vestro facto, quasi sententia in vos ipsos lata,
statuitis and decernitis: Ostenderunt non minus clare quam judex qui sententiam
pronunciat. Solent actionibus nomina tribui aliarum actionum, quarum pares sunt
affectus. Grot.
v. 48. Glorisicabant sermonem Domini] i. e. Gloriose ac magnifice de sermonem
sive verbo Dei loquebantur.

(...)] Ordinati ad vitam, h. e. quotquot erant cupidi salutis, and bona mente
praediti. Non tamen contendo illam ipsam cordis praeparationem aut
promptitudinem, Naturae esse, cum haud dubie etiam illa ipsa quasi prima
apertio cordis, aut studium cognoscendae veritatis sit merum donum, ac
beneficium ingens Dei, Ex immensa ejus gratia proficiscens, and trahens corda
Auditorum ad Filium. Credo idem in hac sententia dici quod in parabola de
semine in varium solum cadente, cum in alio plane nullum fructum ferat, ac nec
radices quidem agat, in alio aliquem mediocrem, denique in alio etiam uberem.
Flac. Illyr.

(...) manifest opponuntur iis qui se ea vita indignos judicaverant, i. e.
ostenderant. Parant se vitae aeternae, qui si ejus spes detur gravissima ob id
velint facere ac pati. Tales sunt (...) ut Lucas loquitur, cap. 9. 62. and
facile credunt Evangelio, Joh. 7.17. Cum haec dicimus non excludimus
praevenientem gratiam. Facere enim homines dicuntur id quod faciunt per Dei
gratiam excitati: sicut se dicuntur convertere, est enim quaedam gratia ante
fidem, quae Patris tractio vocatur. Grot.


SECT. III.
AT Iconium they continue long and preach Non fuerunt Paulus and Barnabas ex
duodecim illis Apostolis qui Christo servierunt tempore carnis, sed tamen post
ascensionem Christi Paulus fuit immediate ex caelo ad Apostolatum vocatus, Act.
9. Et nunc uterque per Spiritum Sanctum missus ad Gentes, Act. 13.1.2.
powerfully and with good success, the Lord giving testimony to the Gospel
(which is the word of his Grace), and working many Miracles by their hands;
insomuch that great store both of the Jews and of the Greeks that were
Proselytes (and frequented the Synagogues of the Jews) received the Faith. But
here some refractary unbelieving Jews exasperated the minds of the Gentiles
against the Apostles, and all others who had received the Faith of Christ by
their Ministry. So there grew a division Aliud est, schisma facere in mundo,
aliud in Ecclesia. Mundum scindere non potest verti vitio ministris Evangelii.
Quoniam enim non possunt totum mundum convertere, necesse est mundum scindere,
and aliquos a mundo separare, quod dum faciunt, mundus istos separatos odit, ac
oppugnat, and qui oppugnantur se defendunt, and sic necessario mundus
scinditur. Sed Ecclesiam scindere and schismata in ea concitare peccatum est.
Quod faciunt illi, qui populum fundamentales salutis doctrinas retinentem,
novis quaestionibus turbant, 1 Timothy 1.4. vel propter exiguas quaestiones
salutem non magnopere concernentes, tumultuose committunt, ut se invicem
oderint.
in the City, some taking part with the persecuting Jews, and some with the
Apostles. At last the rage of the unbelieving Gentiles and Jews proceeded so
far, that they were bent to use the Apostles despitefully and stone them; which
they having notice of, slipped away to Lystra, according to our Saviors command,
Mat. 10.23. See Act. 8.1. Act. 9.25.

At Lystra they preach the Gospel, and Paul cures a Cripple See Act. 3.2, 3.
Ille sanatus sine fide, hic per fidem.
(that had been so from his infancy) by a word of his mouth, perceiving that he
had a Faith wrought in (...), that he should be healed of this his malady,
which was discovered to the Apostle, either by divine revelation, or some
external signs Ex externis signis cordis commoti, lacrymis, suspiriis,
complicatione manuum, vultu laeto, etc. praecipue per spiritum propheticum, seu
per revelationem singularem illius spiritus a quo ipse excitabatur ad fidem
illam, qua hoc miraculum impetravit. Sic Petrus noverat Simonem Magum Act. 8
21. and Ananiam Act. 3.3 quod fidem, and sinceritatem non haberent. Stres. in
loc.
thereof. The Lystrians are so affected with this miracle, that they cried out,
The Gods This opinion seems to have sprung from some Apparitions of the
Angels made to the Forefathers; which the Heathens changed in to Fables, as
that of Lycaon, etc.
are come down to us in the shape of men. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter,
(which the Heathen held for their highest God); and Paul, Mercurius; whom they
held for the Interpreter and Messenger of the Gods, because Paul here appeared
the chief speaker. And the Priest of Jupiter (whose Temple, Altar, or Statue
stood, as it seems, without the City) came presently to the gates of the House
where the Apostles lodged, and brought Oxen trimmed and adorned with Garlands
of Flowers (according to their Heathenish rites) verily purposing to offer
sacrifice unto them. Which when the Apostles understood, they rent their
Clothes in detestation and abhorrence of such vile Idolatry, and told the
people, they were mere men of like passions with themselves, and in the same
condition of mortality; and preached to them to turn from Idols (which are no
Gods, whatever they accounted them, but mere vanities and nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4.)
to the living God, who created Heaven and Earth, and all the Creatures therein;
who in times past, in a just judgment, left the Gentiles to their own blind
Worships and Idolatries, and yet whilst he did so, left not off to evidence
himself sufficiently to them, to be the true God, in the works of his wisdom,
power, and providence, and by that great goodness of his, in giving them rain
and fruitful seasons, and the like; which are acts of his particular Power and
Bounty [ Romans 1.19.]; thereby filling their hearts with gladness, from the
abundance with which he crowned the years, and by these means inviting and
drawing them off from their impieties and idolatries. All which discourse of
the Apostles could yet hardly restrain them from sacrificing to them. Not long
after this, some unbelieving Jews from Antioch of Pisidia and Iconium, who had
driven the Apostles out of their own Cities (as we have seen before) came
hither, and by fair words gained the inconstant multitude, who even now would
have sacrificed to the Apostles, to be on their side and to join with them
against them: So that being desperately enraged, in a furious tumultuary
manner, they threw stones Malum quod multis viris sanctis contigit. Mosi fere
Exodus 17.4. and Numb. 14.10. Davidi 1 Samuel 30.6. Zachariae 2 Chronicles. 24.21.
Christo Joh. 8.58. and 10.31. Stephano Act. 7.58, 59. Multis fidelibus Heb.
11.37.
at Paul as a Blasphemer [ Lev. 24.16. Deuteronomy. 13.10.] and thinking they had
killed him, dragged him as a dead man out of the gates of the City [See 2 Cor.
11.25.]. But as the Disciples came about him, thinking, as it seems, solemnly
to interr him, if he were dead, or to administer help to him if there were any
life yet remaining in him; by the wonderful power of God he revived again, and
rose up in the midst of them, and returned into that injurious City to refresh
himself, and the next day he went with Barnabas to Derbe.

Act. 14.1. And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into
the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke, that a great multitude both of the
Jews, and also of the Greeks believed.

v. 2. But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds
evil-affected against the brethren.

v. 3. Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave
testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done
by their hands.

v. 4. But the multitude of the ci^y was divided: and part held with the Jews,
and part with the Apostles.

v. 5. And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and also of the
Jews, with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them.

v. 6. They were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra, and Derbe, cities of
Lycaonia, and unto the region that lies round about:

v. 7. And there they preached the gospel.

v. 8. And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a
cripple from his mothers womb, who never had walked.

v. 9. The same heard Paul speak: who steadfastly beholding him, and perceiving
that he had faith to be healed,

v. 10. Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and
walked.

v. 11. And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lift up their voices,
saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeness
of men.

v. 12. And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercurius, because he was
the chief speaker.

v. 13. Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen,
and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people.

v. 14. Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul heard of, they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out,

v. 15. And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like
passions with you, and preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities
unto the living God, which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things
that are therein.

v. 16. Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.

v. 17. Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good,
and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness.

v. 18. And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had
not done sacrifice unto them.

v. 19. And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who
persuaded the people, and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city,
supposing he had been dead.

v. 20. Howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up and came
into the city, and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.

v. 1. Judaeorum simul and Graecorum] Quicunque Judaismum non profitebantur,
Judaeis (...) dicebantur; and totus mundus ab his dividebatur in (...) and
(...). Idem ergo in libris sacris (...). Salmas.
v. 3. Libere loquentes in Domino] i. e. In nomine Domini, vel propter Dominum.

(...)] scil. Evangelio, quia ex summa Dei benignitate is nuncius processit.


v. 9. (...)] nempe a malo suo. vide Math. 9.28.
v. 11. Lycaonica lingua non fuit specie distincta a Graeca, sed ejus saltem
dialectus. Lingua Lycaonica, lingua Cappadocum.

Dii assimilati hominibus descenderunt ad nos] Jupiter apud Ovidium, primo
Metamorph. Et Deus humana lustro sub imagine terras.


v. 13. Sacerdos Jovis stantis] i. e. cujus simulachrum stabat ante urbem. More
Gentium, Jovis simulacro Jovis nomen dedit. Grot.

Tauros vittatos] Minutius in Octavio. Victimae ad supplicium saginantur,
hostiae ad poenam coronantur.

Tauros and Coronas] i. e. Tauros coronatos seu vittatos, qui mos erat priscus
Gentilitiorum sacrificiorum. Virgil. Victor velatumque auro vittisque juvencum.


v. 16. Sivit omnes Gentes suis ipsarum viis incedere] Hoc comparate, dictum ut
sequentia ostendunt. Nec legem illis dedit nec Prophetas, quibus pravos cultus
compesceret.
SECT. IV.
AT Derbe they preach the Gospel, and instruct many; Among others that there
gave their Names to Christ, Timothy was one, with his holy Mother Eunice, and
Grandmother Lois, who had taken great care of his education and had instructed
him in the Scriptures from his infancy. He was well acquainted with the
sufferings of his spiritual Father Paul at Antioch of Pisidia, Iconium, and
Lystra, as Paul afterward intimates, 2 Timothy 3.10, 11. The Apostles went no
further than this City at this time, but returned the very way they came,
traveling back again to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch of Pisidia, confirming in
the Faith, as they went along, those whom they had before converted to Christ
[See Act. 15.32, 41. and 18.23.], and exhorting them to persevere, and to make
account that they must meet with many tribulations in the way to the Kingdom of
Heaven. And in all the Churches they constituted (a) Elders (...). Sic
differunt (...) and (...).

(...) ad Electionem pertinet, and de Ecclesia seu populo dicitur, qui solebat
extensione manuum leges vel magistratus sciscere, and approbare. Sic 2 Cor.
8.19.

(...) est actio Presbyterorum qui aliis ad Presbyterium electis ac vocatis
solebant imponere manus; ut precationibus, votis, and congratulationibus suis,
illis impetrarent confirmationem donorum, quibus ad functionem redderentur apti.

Tribuitur (...) Apostolis quia ipsi hujus (...) a populo factae auctores and
ductores fuerunt. Illi enim populum convocarunt, aliquos idoneos viros ipsis
praestituerunt, jusseruntque ut Ecclesia extensione manuum approbationem suam
declararet. Apostoli ergo ordinarios Presbyteros elegerunt cum approbatione
Ecclesiae.


by fasting and prayer to teach and guide them. And having commended them to
the care of Christ, on whom they believed, they took their leaves of them.

Per Presbyteros intelliguntur omnes qui ad aliquam Leiturgiam seu functionem
publicam in Ecclesia vocatur; sive sint Doctores and Pastores qui verbum, and
Sacramenta administrant; sive Rectores qui in disciplinae administratione
Pastoribus auxilio sunt 1 Timothy 5.17. sive denique ipsi Diaconi qui Elcemosynas
administrant: omnes inquam illi officiarii Ecclesiastici, qui Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
diversis enumerantur nominibus, hic uno generali nomine vocantur Presbyteri.
Stres. in loc.
Then traveling over Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia, and having preached the
word at Perga, they went down unto Attalia, and thence sailed to Antioch in
Syria, (from whence they set out two years before, when they were by the
prayers of that Church commended to the Grace and Assistance of the Spirit of
God, to be carried on in this great work of converting the Gentiles. And being
come thither, and calling the Church in that City together, they declared what
God had done by them, and how he had co-operated with them in their Ministry,
and how he had opened a door of Faith to the Gentiles, so that great numbers of
them came in, and believed in Christ.

Act. 14. v. 21. And when they had preached the Gospel to that city, and had
taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch.

v. 22. Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom
of God.

v. 23. And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed
with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.

v. 24. And after they had passed thorowout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.

v. 25. And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into
Attalia.

v. 26. And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to
the grace of God, for the work which they fulfilled.

v. 27. And when they were come, and had gathered the church together, they
rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of
faith unto the Gentiles.

v. 28. And there they abode long time with the disciples.

v. 23. Zonaras in Apostolorum Canonem prolixe^ and eleganter docet Chirotoniam
ab initio designasse suffragia, postea antiquitatis primis rltibus pro
consecratione usurpatum. ^uistorpius.
(...) nihil aliud declarat quam constituere, creare, ordinare designare, sive
id fiat per suffragium unum, sive per plura, sive absque suffragiis omnino.
Boifius. (...).
(...) constituentes, non vero ordinantes sensu hodierno Ecclesiastico. Non
enim vel argumento vel testimonio adhuc vincor ut credam (...) per se tunc
temporis vel a multis post diebus significasse vel (...) vel (...), vel
ordinationem, vel consecrationem. vide 2 Cor. 8.19. Ibi frater iste (cujus laus
fuit in Evangelio) dicitur (...) constitutus ab Ecclesiis socius
peregrinationis Pauli. Ubi vix eredo quenquam velle asserere eum ordinatum
fuisse ab Ecclesiis, sensu Ordinationis hodierno Ecclesiastico. Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. lib. 6. c. 29. (...). Omnibus enim fratribus, electionis gratia, in
Ecclesia congregatis. Clariss. Knatchbullus. Hesychius (...), constituere,
decernere* ^ligere.

(...) erunt duorum generum; vel enim docendi munere in Ecclesia fungebantur,
and alio nomine Pastores seu Episcopi dicuntur; vel Pastoribus, and verbi
Ministris adjuncti, morum censuram agere, and disciplinam tueri solebant, 1 Timothy 5. Utrosque eligere necesse erat cum Apostoli non diu in uno subsisterent
loco, ne per absentiam ipsorum Ecclesia idoneis privaretur ministris. Freidl.


v. 27. (...)] cum ipsis 2 Cor. 6.1. Vocantur Dei (...). vide etiam, 1 Cor. 3.9.
CHAP. IV. Relating Paul's second Journey or Peragration with Barnabas and
others, Anno Christi Claudii 52. 10.


from Antioch to that famous Council at Jerusalem, which we call, Iter
Hierosolymitanum. Iter Hierosolymitanum.

SECT. 1.
PAul and Barnabas stayed now with the Disciples at Antioch a great while.
After which, as it seems, Paul propagated the Gospel as far as Illyricum, (a
Country lying on the Adriatic Sea, bordering on Macedonia, now called
Slavonia) preaching such things to them, concerning Christ, as they never heard
before; as he himself testifies, Romans 15.19, 20, 21. Through mighty signs by
the power of the spirit of God, so that from Jerusalem, and round about
Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ: yea so have I striven to
preach, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's
foundation. But as it is written [Isa. 52.15.] To whom he was not spoken of,
they shall see, and they that have not heard, shall understand.

During this time, it is probable, he suffered some of those things, which in
his second Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 11. v. 24, 25. he makes mention of,
to wit, that he had five times received forty stripes save one from the Jews
[See Deuteronomy. 25.3.] and thrice been beaten with wands, probably, by the Lictors
or Roman officers at the command of the Gentiles; and had thrice suffered
shipwreck, in one of which it seems, he was a day and a night floating in the
Sea, and yet by the wonderful power and providence of God, was preserved and
delivered out of that extreme danger.

SECT. II.
ABout this time, it seems, certain Jews of the Sect of the Pharisees, who had
embraced the Gospel, came down from Judea to Antioch, and taught, that the
Gentiles, converted to Christianity, ought to be circumcised, and keep the Law
of Moses, if they would be saved; disturbing and disquieting the Consciences of
many of the Brethren in Syria and Cilicia, by this their perverse Doctrine Hinc
patet neminem jure offendi posse, si videat in Ecclesia hypocritas, falsos
Doctores, schismata. Sic enim fuit inde ab Apostolis, and sic oportet esse 1
Cor. 11.19. Mat. 18.7. Haereses non inveniuntur extra Ecclesiam, sed in
Ecclesia. Non igitur propter Haereses Ecclesia deserenda; si modo sine
communione mali licet in ea manner.
. Against these Paul and Barnabas stilly oppose themselves, and not without
great reason. For many of the Jews were yet zealous for the observance of the
Ceremonial Law, as appears Act. 21.20. And they were not only hard to be
brought off themselves from those Rites wherein they had ever been trained up,
but they would have imposed them upon the believing Gentiles also. This bred
great disturbance at present, and in time an Apostasy of very many from the
Gospel. Paul and Barnabas therefore (who had chiefly to deal in the
ministration to the Gentiles) are now sent from Antioch to consult the Apostles
at Jerusalem about this case. This is the journey that is spoken of, Gal. 2.1.
Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took
Titus with me: and I went up by revelation, etc. Not but that he was sent by
the Church, but the Church was directed by a special revelation from God,
(either first signified to them, or else to Paul immediately, and by him made
known to them) to take this course for the settling this Question.

Paul and Barnabas being brought on their way and accompanied by some of the
Brethren of Antioch (that it might appear they went not of their own accord,
but as sent by that Church), they declared, as they passed along, to the
Brethren, every where, for their comfort and confirmation, what great things
God had done by their ministry, in the conversion of the Gentiles. When they
came to Jerusalem (being kindly received by the Apostles, and Elders, and the
Church there), They began to open their Message, acquainting them what success
God had given to their preaching among the Gentiles, and how wonderfully his
Spirit had co-operated with them; Yet so it was, that some Judaizing Christians
of the Sect of the Pharisees coming to Antioch had taught, that such Gentiles
who embraced the faith, ought to receive Circumcision, and were obliged to the
observation of the Ceremonial Law. So that faith in Christ was not judged
sufficient (by these men) to justification, but according to them,
Circumcision, and an observation of the Ceremonial Law must be joined with it.
These things they intimate had bred a difference among them: They were
therefore come thither from the Church at Antioch to consult the Apostles in
this case; and to desire their determination therein. Hereupon the Apostles and
Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, met in Council to consider of this matter v.
6. (...)] By a common Hebraism, word is put for the business spoken of.
. After there had been much disputation and reasoning pro and con; at length
Peter stood up, and declared his judg^^^^ in this case, showing them, that a
good while ago, God made choice of him among all the Apostles first, To preach
the Gospel to the Gentiles, as particularly to Cornelius and his Family [ Act.
10. See Sect. 5. of Chap. 2.] And God who alone knows all hearts, and can alone
judge of the purity of them, bare witness to those Gentiles, that they were
accepted of him, though they were not Circumcised; a clear evidence of which
was his giving them the Gifts of his Holy Spirit, both ordinary and
extraordinary [Act. 10.44.] as he had done before to the Apostles themselves.
Neither made he any difference between the Jews and them, as to the Gifts and
Benefits which are common to those who believe in Christ; but instead of the
external purifications of the Law of Moses, he has purified the hearts both of
believing Circumcised Jews, and believing Uncircumcised Gentiles, by faith in
his Son, whose blood cleanses from all Guilt, and whose Spirit sanctifies and
purifies the Heart and Conscience from dead works. He demands therefore why
they did press that which was so contrary to the Will of God, and refused to
believe that, which was so plainly testified to be his Will, namely, that the
believing Gentiles were pure, though uncircumcised, so that the Jews might
freely converse with them. He further shows, this was a provoking of God, To
impose upon the believing Gentiles the yoke Deus proprie non potest dici Legis
jugum collo nostro imponere, sicut hi Judaizantes, quia non eo fine legem
mandat quo hi Judaizantes eam volebant mandari, scil. ut medium cujus
observatione justificemur and salvemur; sed tantum eo fine ut legis onere
pressi, desideremus eum, qui nos a lege liberet. Sicut durum onus servitutis
collo Israelitarum in Aegypto imposuit, ut pressi desiderarent liberationem ex
Aegypto.
of the Mosaical Law, [See Gal. 5.3.] which never belonged to them, and which
the Jews themselves were never able to bear, nor so to perform as to be
justified thereby. But as our Fathers (says he) were not saved by the works of
the Law [ Gal. 3.11. Romans 3.20.] but by the Grace and Favor of God merited by
the righteousness and sufferings of the Messiah, in whom they believed [ Heb.
11. Romans 3.25. Romans 10.8.]; so do we expect to be saved by the same Grace, and
no otherwise.

Peter having ended his Speech, Paul and Barnabas declared what Wonders and
Miracles God had enabled them to do, in the converting of the Gentiles, which
was another argument from Heaven, that God was well-pleased with their
Ministration to the Gentiles, and that the Gentiles were accepted by him,
though uncircumcised, seeing they had received the Gifts of the Spirit, as well
as they of the Circumcision.

Next after them, James the Son of Alphaeus [See of him Act. 12.17. and Sect.
9. of Chap. 2.] began to speak, saying, Simon Ebraeum nomen est (...) quod
Graecis litteris scribitur (...). Graecum vero nomen est (...). Lucas hic
Ebraicam pronunciationem sequutus est, quia Ebraeum Ebraeis ininducit loquentem:
Peter has sufficiently demonstrated, that it pleased God sometime since, to
look down in mercy upon the Uncircumcised Gentiles, and out of them to take a
people to himself, to bear his Name, to acknowledge and worship him for their
only God. And this is agreeable to what was foretold by the Prophet Amos chapter
9:11, 12. where God declares, that in the latter days, viz. the days of the
Gospel, he will raise up and restore the house or tabernacle Re aedificabo
Tabernaculorum David, i. e. Ecclesiam in qua habitat, and regnat Christus,
filius Davidis: cujus olim typus suit tribus Judae cum Benjamin, in qua
tabernaculum and sedem quasi Rex, and moderator fixit David. Hoc tabernaculum
cecidit in Judaeis incredulis qui Christum recipere noluerunt; suscitatum est
in Apostolis and aliis credentibus e Judaea; sed plane restauratum ex Gentibus
quae loco Judaeorum huic Tabernaculo and Domni Dei ex toto orb, quasi vivi
lapides, inaedificata^ sunt. Hieron. in Amos. 9.11

James here speaks the same sense with the Prophet Amos, in words somewhat
varying from him, that there should be other nations besides the Jews, which
should be called the Lords, and seek after the Lord.


of David, (though at present it was low, by the falling off of the Ten Tribes,
and other breaches that were made upon it) and change it into a spiritual and
everlasting Kingdom under the Messiah (of whom David was a Type), which shall
comprehend and take in, all the chosen Gentiles; yea, even some of their
greatest enemies (typified by Edom) shall be brought under the obedience of
Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, and operation of the Holy Ghost; so that
this Kingdom in this sense, shall be in a more flourishing estate, than in the
days of old, [See Ephesians. 3.5, 6. and Ephesians. 2.12, 13, etc.] And this though it
were not brought to pass actually, till these latter days, was yet foreseen and
predetermined by God long ago, and accordingly foretold by that Prophet.
Therefore thus I judge (says he), and this is my opinion in this matter that we
ought not to impose Circumcision upon the converted Gentiles, nor lay Yokes and
Burdens on them, which Christ has freed them from. Yet that the Jews, who are
so zealous to have these Yokes imposed, might have less offense, and the
Gentiles no burden neither; he proposes this temper, viz. That the believing
Gentiles for avoiding of scandal to the weak Jews, be required to observe these
Four things. First, To refrain from eating things offered to Idols, because it
is a kind of participation in that Idolatry, [See 1 Cor. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. and
1 Cor. 8.10.] Secondly, From fornication Juxta illud Comici, non est flagitium
Adolescentem scortari. Per (...) simplex scortatio intelligitur quae apud
Gentes pro peccato non habebatur, praesertim, si quis faeminis ad hoc venalibus
uteretur. Ita Brentius Homil. 68. in Acta.
, which though against the Moral Law, yet the Gentiles, (it seems) for the most
part held to be no sin, or at least no great sin, being practiced out of
marriage [See 1 Cor. 6.13, 14, 15.]. Thirdly, From things strangled, that is,
from eating of Beasts which dyed without letting blood, which was an
abomination to the Jews [Gen. 9.4. Lev. 17.14.]. Fourthly, From blood Usus
sanguinis non est peccatum, pugnans contra legem naturae, and Decalogi, sed
tantum contra legem ceremonialem quae Christianos non obligat. Deus enim
discrimen ciborum sustulit, Act. 10.15. Romans 14.14, 17. 1 Cor. 8.8 and cap.
10.25, 27. Col. 2 16. 1 Timothy 4.3. Tit. 1.15. Non est igitur ab Apostolis
interdictus esus sanguinis, nisi quatenus est scandalum fratris infirmi. Ubi
igitur non offendit, ibi non est illicitus. Stres.
, namely, separated from the Beast, whether congealed, or not congealed; which
God had (as some think) forbidden, to affright men from all cruelty and
bloodshedding, [See Lev. 3. 17.] And besides, blood being, among the Jews,
destinated to sacrifices, and to represent the blood of the Messiah that makes
atonement for sin [ Lev. 17.11.], the common use of it was very odious to the
Jews. These Four things he advises, that the converted Gentiles be required to
forbear, that they might not give offense to the Jews, who could not but have a
great abhorrence for them, they hearing Moses's writings read in their
Synagogues every sabbath day, wherein they are so strictly forbidden. Therefore
he thought it fit for the present, That the Gentiles should in a charitable
compliance so far condescend to the Jews q. d. Auctoritas Mosis adhuc nimis
magna est apud conversos Jud^o^. Nondum desueverunt a Patriis institutis, and
libertatem suam quam in Christo habent, nondum statis intelligunt. Etsi ergo
lex ceremonialis Gentes non obligat, tamen Christiana Charitas re^uirit, ut se
infirmis Judaeis accommode^t quantum possunt, and ab iis ^altem abstineant,
quibus illi maxim ^ffenduntur.
. This proposal of James, the rest of the Council readily agreed unto. And the
matter being thus determined, by the acquiescing of all in the judgment of
James, the Apostles and Elders thought fit (the whole Church thereunto
consenting) to send Judas and Silas, (two of their own number, and men eminent
among them) along with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch* that by the Testimony of
their own Commissioners, and the Letters and Decrees of the Council, the false
Teachers might be silenced, and the believing Gentiles confirmed in the truth,
and assured that the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem held the same Doctrine,
that Paul and Barnabas had before preached; and that these their Commissioners
might also help to compose the minds of those, who by the Adversaries had been
disturbed and disquieted. By these four therefore, they send their Letters and
Decrees to the Churches in Antioch, and also in Syria and Cilicia. (For among
them also, the false Teachers had spread their leaven, which afterward
diffused it self further as may appear by Paul's Epistles to the Romans,
Galatians, and Philippians, etc.). In their Letters, they give them to
understand that they had received advertisement, that some Judaizing Christians
which went from thence, endeavored to subvert them, teaching new doctrines,
which they never commanded them to teach, mingling the Legal Ceremonies, and
the Judaical Observances with the Gospel, and injoining them as necessary to
justification: Wherefore they thought fit, to send two eminent men of their own
number to them to accompany Paul and Barnabas (who were persons with whom they
fully agreed in this matter of difference, and such to whom they could not but
give this Testimony, That in preaching the Gospel, they had behaved themselves
with great sincerity and uprightness, and had run the hazard of their Lives for
the service of Christ). With them therefore they had sent Judas and Silas, that
they might tell the Churches by word of mouth, more largely, what here they had
written but briefly. They further tell them, that they had determined in this
Case as they were guided by the Spirit Hoc discriminis est inter Apostoles, and
nos, quod Apostolorum fides erat fundata super testimonio inferno, quo Spiritus
Sanctus eorum conscientias efficaciter persuadebat, and illuminabat ut ita
crederent, nec ad aliam auctoritatem provocare opus habebant, quam ad illud
testimonium Spiritus quod in cord sentiebant, quamvis m^joris convictionis
causa ^^^am saepe ad Scripturam veteris Testamenti provocabant. Nos autem et si
etiam interna il^^ p^^suasione Spiritus opus habemus, nec sine ea credere
possumus, tamen ad illam non provocamus, tanquam ad fundamentum cui fides
nostra nititur, sed provocamus ad externum illud testimonium, quod Spiritus
Sanctus in Scriptura sacra deposuit. Hic noster Spiritus, cui nititur nostra
fides, 1 John 5, 6. Ideo hoc, vel illud credimus, quia legimus in Scriptura,
quod Spiritui Sancto visum sit, nos ita docere. Streso.
of God, whose Inspiration and Conduct they had followed, and therefore had
decreed, That the believing Gentiles should not be obliged to Circumcision, or
other Judaical observances, but only to those Four necessary things before
mentioned; whereof, though abstaining from fornication, and eating things
offered to Idols, as such* (which was a kind of participation in that Idolatry)
be only simply and absolutely necessary, as being forbidden by the moral Law)
yet the other two are necessary in respect of the present time; and for the
peace, unity, and edification of the present Church, and to avoid giving
scandal to the weak believing Jews: so that there was an accidental and
temporary necessity only of abstaining from them, till the infirm Jews were
better informed, and better understood their liberty in Christ. For afterward*
Paul shows that nothing is unclean that God has made for man's use; as we may
see, 1 Cor. 8.8. and 10.19. 1 Timothy 4.4. Tit. 1.15.

These four persons therefore being dismissed by the Council at Jerusalem, came
with the decretal Epistle to Antioch, and calling the Church together,
presented it to them; which when they had read, they much rejoiced, that their
practice was approved by the Apostles, and received the exhortation given them
in that Epistle with much gladness. Here Judas and Silas (being men of eminent
Gifts in teaching and interpreting the Scriptures) employed themselves in
confirming and building up the Brethren in the Faith. After they had stayed at
Antioch sometime, they were with all kindness dismissed of the Church there, to
go back to Jerusalem; but it seems, for some particular reason, Silas was not
willing to return yet, but chose to stay with Paul and Barnabas, who continued
at Antioch, instructing those who had received the Faith, and so likewise did
many others also.

Act. 15. v. 1. And certain men which came down from Judea, taught the
brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved.

v. 2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation
with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them,
should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders about this question.

v. 3. And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed through Phenice
and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and they caused great
joy unto all the brethren.

v. 4. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the Church,
and of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things that God had done
with them.

v. 5. But there arose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees, which believed,
saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the
law of Moses.

v. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came together for to consider of this matter.

v. 7. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto
them; Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among
us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and
believe.

v. 8. And God which knows the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the
holy Ghost, even as he did unto us,

v. 9. And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by
faith.

v. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the
disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?

v. 11. But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we
shall be saved, even as they.

v. 12. Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and
Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by
them.

v. 13. And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and
brethren, hearken unto me.

v. 14. Simon has declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to
take out of them a people for his Name.

v. 15. And to this agree the words of the prophets, as it is written.

v. 16. After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David,
which is fallen down, and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set
it up:

v. 17. That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles
upon whom my Name is called, says the Lord, who does all these things:

v. 18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.

v. 19. Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them which from among the
Gentiles are turned to God.

v. 20. But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions of of
idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood.

v. 21. For Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being
read in the synagogues every sabbath day.

v. 22. Then pleased it the Apostles, and elders, with the whole church, to
send chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas:
namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren,

v. 23. And wrote letters by them after this manner, The Apostles, and Elders,
and brethren, send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in
Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia.

v. 24. Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us, have
troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised,
and keep the law, to whom we gave no such commandment:

v. 25. It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen
men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas, and Paul.

v. 26. Men that have hazarded their lives for the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

v. 27. We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the
same things by mouth.

v. 28. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden then these necessary things:

v. 29. That ye obstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from
things strangled, and from fornication; from which if ye keep your selves, ye
shall do well. Fare ye well.

v. 30. So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they had
gathered the multitude together, they delivered the Epistle.

v. 31. Which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.

v. 32. And Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the
brethren with many words, and confirmed them.

v. 33. And after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in peace
from the brethren unto the Apostles.

v. 34. Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still.

v. 35. Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the
word of the Lord, with many others also.

Gal. 2. v. 1. Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with
Barnabas, and took Titus with me also.

v. 2. And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that Gospel,
which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of
reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain.

v. 3. But neither Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
circumcised:

v. 4. And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in
privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might
bring us into bondage.

v. 5. To whom we gave place by subjection no not for an hour, that the truth
of the Gospel might continue with you.

v. 6. But of these, who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it
makes no matter to me, God accepts no man's person) for they who seemed to be
somewhat, in conference added nothing to me.

v. 7. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision
was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the uncircumcision was unto Peter,

v. 8. (For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles)

v. 9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived
the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands
of fellowship, that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the
circumcision.

v. 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I also
was forward to do.

SECT. III.
PEter (as it seems) about this time came from Jerusalem to Antioch, and for a
while using his Gospel-liberty did eat, and familiarly converse with the
believing Gentiles; but certain Brethren of the Jews, that were Friends Causa
hujus perniciosae dissimulationis indicatur, nempe, eum timuisse Jacobi
familiares. Fl^^. Illyr.
of James, and very tenacious of the Ceremonial Law, coming thither from
Jerusalem; He for fear of offending these men, or incurring their ill will,
withdrew himself from the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful to have any
fellowship with uncircumcised persons; the lawfulness of which converse, he
very well knew, and therefore feigned, and dissembled in this matter. And some
other Jewish Converts of the Church of Antioch followed this Example, insomuch
that Barnabas also was carried away with their cowardice and dissembling. Paul
not brooking this, as contrary to the Gospel liberty, did by virtue of his
Apostolic Office, and with authority, rebuke Peter, and openly and freely
opposed himself against him in this matter, expostulating with him, that he
being a Jew (and so more bound to observe the Ceremonial Law, which was given
to the Jews, and not to the Gentiles), had cast off that Yoke himself, and yet
should go about to enforce it upon the Gentiles. And as far as appears, Peter
did yield to Paul in this debate, as having truth on his side.

Gal. 2. v. 11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed.

v. 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles:
but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing them which
were of the circumcision.

v. 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas
also was carried away with their dissimulation.

v. 14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of
the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, live
after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews: why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews?

SECT. IV.
ABout this time Paul (who desired not only to plant Churches but also to water
them) propounded to Barnabas, that they might go and visit the Churches which
they had planted in several Countries, and see whether they did thrive and grow
in the knowledge of Christ, and obedience to him, and accordingly might exhort,
and confirm them. To this Barnabas readily agreed, only desired that they might
take his Nephew John Mark along with them See Col. 4.10.
. This Paul was by no means willing to, because he had deserted them before at
Pamphylia, and had not accompanied them constantly in their work of preaching
the Gospel to the Gentiles [See Sect. 1. of Chap. 3.]. Barnabas took this very
ill, that such a blot should rest on his Sisters Son. The contention hereupon
grew so sharp between these two holy men, and proceeded to such an exasperation
Culpa fuit penes Barnabam. Paulus quaerebat quod justum erat, Barnabas quod
humanum. Sunt etiam qui notant severitatem hanc Pauli profuisse Marco, qui per
eam monitus, fortior in posterum sit factus, ut talis a Paulo salutetur, Col.
4.10.
(they therein showing themselves to be men of like passions with others) that
Barnabas went away with John Mark to his own Country Cyprus, and Paul chose
Silas to go along with him. Yet God (who uses to bring good out of evil)
turned this to the best; for though they differed about John Mark, yet neither
of them forsook his office or ministry, and though they were separated as to
their persons, yet not as to Faith or Doctrine and being thus parted the one
from the other, the Gospel was published by them in more places.

v. 36. And some days after, Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit
our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see
how they do.

v. 37. And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark.

v. 38. But Paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed from them
from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.

v. 39. And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed
asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus.

v. 40. And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recommended by the brethren
unto the grace of God.

CHAP. V. Containing Paul's Third Journey being accompanied with Silas, Anno
Christi Claudii 53 11 54 12


to visit the Brethren in th^se Cities, where He and Barnabas had before
pre^ched the Gospel. Which we call, for di^^inctions sake, Iter Graecum, sive
Macedonicum, It^r Gr^^^m, sive ^^^^^oni^um.
His Macedonian Journey.
SECT. I.
PA^l being accompanied by Silas, and Titus, and recommended to the blessing of
God, by the prayers of the Church, travels through Syria and Cilicia, to confirm
those Churches which he and Barnabas in their first journey to^^ther had
planted. And as they passed through the Cities they delivered them the Decrees
to observe, which were ordai^ed by the Apostles and Elders, met in the Council
at Jerusalem, whereby those Churches were established in the Faith, and many
more every day converted unto Christ.

Act. 15. v. 40. And Paul chose Silas, and d^parted, being r^commended by the
brethren unto the grace of God.

v. 41. And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches.

Act. 16. v. 4. And as they went through the Cities, they delivered them the
decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders, which were
at J^rusalem.

v. 5. And so were the Churches established in the faith, and increased in
number daily.

SECT. II.
ABout this time, as it is probable: From Tarsus a Haven in Cilicia, Paul sailed
to Crete, and there having for some time preached the Gospel, left Titus to set
in order the things that for want of time were unsettled by him.

Tit. 1. v. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had
appointed thee. SECT. III.
FRom Crete sailing back to Cilicia: At Lystra he sound (among other Disciples)
Timothy born of a Father that was a Greek, though his Mother Eunice was a
believing Jew, 2 Timothy 1.5. This young man had been religiously educated by the
care of his pious Mother and Grandmother, being from a Child trained up in the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures [2 Timothy 3.14, 15.], but was not circumcised in
his infancy, after the custom of the Jews. He was well-reported of by the
brethren at Lystra; and some remarkable prophecies, and predictions had passed
concerning him, what an eminent instrument he should prove in the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.18. Paul intending to take him along with him, as his Companion, and to
employ him in preaching the Gospel, that his ministry might not be ineffectual
among the Jews, (who knew him to be uncircumcised, and the Son of an
uncircumcised Father, and thereupon would not admit him to speak in their
Synagogues) he took and circumcised Paul would not permit Titus to be
circumcised being a Gentile, Gal. 2.3. nor suffer that Yoke to be imposed upon
the Gentiles, which God had never imposed on them. But Timothy being descended
of a Jewish Mother, he circumcised him, to remove scandal from the Jews,

Quod non est necessarium ad salutem, factu vel omissu; aliquando tamen
laciendum, vel omittendum est, cum ita conducit ad aedificationem aliorum, vid.
1 Cor. 9.19, 20. etc. sed cum factio vel omissio talium incipit haberi pro
cultu necessario, and Christianae libertati insidiae struuntur, and aedificatio
Ecclesiae per illa non promovetur sed impeditur, abroganda sunt and non
facienda. Stres. in loc.


him. The Apostle and his Companions desired now to propagate the Gospel into
the other Provinces of Asia, properly so called, (to wit, that part of it which
lay about Ephesus) but when they had passed through Phrygia and Galatia, (where
Paul was most kindly received and welcomed by them, even as if he had been an
Angel from heaven, Gal. 4.14, 15.) they were forbidden by some revelation, or
inward speaking of the holy Ghost to them, for that time For afterward Paul
preached the Gospel there for about two years, See Act. 19.10.
to go any further. For this blessed Spirit prescribed to them, what order and
course they should hold in preaching the Gospel, directing them to go to one
people first, and then to another. Therefore being come to Mysia, they purposed
to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not, intending to hasten them
into Macedonia, to a new work; so that passing by Mysia, they came to Troas,
where Paul had by night a Vision Manifestationes divinae quae fiebant Prophetis
and Apostolis, sive fierent per visiones sive per somnia, sive per instinctus,
etc. semper secum habebant tamen lucem Spiritus Sancti per quam in animis
ipsorum essiciebantur sides, and convictio, quod manifestatio esset a Deo;
sicut Angeli apparentes hominibus semper apparebant cum claritate Domini, ex
qua constabat quod essent Angeli Domini, Luc. 2. v. 9. Ita divinae
compellationes quae fiebant Prophetis and Apostolis semper erant vest^tae
claritate Spiritus Sancti, ex qua and per quam divinitas earum testata
reddebatur. Stres.
from God, and saw a man in a Macedonian habit stand by him, who prayed him to
come over into that country to help them; the like call he had not in all his
travels to any other place. Hereupon he determined to pass from Asia into
Europe, concluding that God had called him to preach the Gospel in Macedonia.
And here Luke seems to have joined himself to Paul, and ever after to have been
his constant Companion. For having spoken in the third person before, he speaks
in the first here.

Act. 16.1. Then came he to Derbe, and Lystra: and behold, a certain disciple
was th^re, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewesse,
and believed; but his father was a Greek:

v. 2. Which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and
Iconium.

v. 3. Him would Paul have to go forth with him, and took, and circumcised him,
because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for they knew all that his
father was a Greek.

v. 6. Now when they had gone thorowout Phrygia, and the region of Galati^, and
were forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia,

v. 7. After they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the
Spirit suffered them not.

v. 8 And they ^^^sing by Mysia, came down to Troas.

v. 9. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: there stood a man of
Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.

v. 10. And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavored to go into
Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the
Gospel unto them.

v. 3. Timotheus non fuit circumcisus, quia, ut Talmudici tradunt, non erat jus
matri silium circumcidere, patre invito; Patris enim potestas praevalebat.
Paulus circumcisionis and usum and omissionem ex temporum and locorum utilitate
metiri noverat, and in his rebus dijudicandis lumine fuit perfusus majore quam
aiii Apostoli. Sperabat, Timothei opera multos ex Judaeis, nondum conversos, ad
Christum posse converti.
v. 9. Vir quidam Macedo stabat] Nocturnum visum fuit per quietem a Deo
immissum, ut in Pauli imaginatione compareret vir habitu Macedonico: vel certe,
ut ait Menochius, Angelus viri Macedonis speciem and vocem assumpsit;
videturque Angelus fuisse Tutelaris Macedoniae, Paulum invitans ut ibi
Evangelium praedicaret. Confer quae sunt apud Danielem, cap. 10. v.
5.12.13.20.21.

Adjuva nos] Angelus curator Macedonum se Macedonibus accenset. Grot.


v. 10. (...)] Argumentum inde trahentes, Nempe ex illo nocturno viso.
Consentientes, pariter hoc statuentes, Deum nos vocasse, etc. De Dieu.

Vt autem visionem viderat, statim studuimus proficisci in Macedoniam] Mutantur
personae, unde liquet Lucam hoc tempore associatum esse Paulo in Troade, quod
Grotius primo observat factum, cap. 20. v. 5. At illud, secundum erat tempus
cum profiscerentur a Philippis Troada; nunc vero profecti sunt a Troade
Philippos. Knatchbull.


SECT. IV.
PAul, and Silas, with Luke, and Timothy now loosing from Troas, came with a
very fair gale to Samothracia, an Island in the Aegean Sea, not far from
Thracia, and thence to Neapolis (a City on the borders of Thracia and
Macedonia), and from thehce they passed to Philippi the chief City of that part
of Macedonia, and a Roman Colony. Here on the Sabbath day, they went out of the
City to a place, where a house of prayer Ubi domus Orationis lege sancita est,
esse, est enim (...) lege sancio. Knatchbull.
was appointed by the Law to be by the River side. In this place, Paul preached
the Gospel to several women there met together, the men it seems refusing to
hear him. And in the time of his preaching, Lydia a stranger, born in Thyatyra
(a City that lay on the borders of Mysia and Lydia), a Proselyte of the Jews,
had her mind enlightened by the Spirit Spiritus aperit cor sed per Verbum.
of God, and her heart graciously inclined to embrace the Gospel, and to
believe in Christ.

Whereupon she her self was forthwith baptized, and desiring to consecrate all
within her Family to Christ, her whole household was baptized also. Then to
testify her gratitude, she courteously entertained Paul and his Companions in
her house.

After this, as they went again toward the place of Prayer, a certain maid
servant that was possessed with a Devil (who speaking from within her, revealed
secret, and future things, and thereby gained much to her Masters) followed
them, crying out, These are the servants of the most high God, who declare unto
us the way of salvation. Paul not brooking that the truth should be thus
rendered suspected by the Testimony of the Father of Lies, commanded the unclean
Spirit, in the Name of Christ, to come out of her, and he came out immediately.
The Masters of the Maid seeing their gain, which came in by her divination, now
at an end, they drew Paul and Silas before the principal Rulers and Commanders
of the Colony there, telling them that these men being Jews, did much disquiet
and disturb the City, teaching a religion contrary to theirs, and to the Roman
Laws, which permitted the practice of no Worship, but what was approved by the
Senate of Rome. The multitude also being by this suggestion enraged against
them, the Rulers commanded them to be stripped, and beaten, and cast into prison;
where they were harshly used by the Jailer, being thrust into the inner prison,
and their feet made fast in the stocks. At midnight as they were praying and
singing Psalms (rejoicing that they suffered for Christ's sake), there was a
great Earthquake, and the prison doors were thrown open, and all the prisoners
bands were loosed. The Jailer awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison
doors open, and apprehending his prisoners had made an escape, was ready to
have laid violent hands on himself, But Paul cried out to him that he should
not harm himself; for they were all there. Then he came trembling in, and fell
at the Apostles feet, as one that would entreat pardon for his hard usage of
them; and bringing them out of the inner prison, he spoke to them to this
purpose. Sirs, I now see and acknowledge that the doctrine taught by you is the
truth of the Eternal God, and he has by this miracle testified to me, that you
are his true and faithful servants. Tell me therefore I beseech you, what I
must do to be saved. They tell him, He must believe v. 3. (...), Phrasis
insignis, quae satis declarat, quod vera fides sit inclinatio, and innixio
cordis in Christum tanquam in fulcrum sustentans. Sicut Adonijah reus mortis
apprehendebat cornua Altaris, 1 Reg. 1.50. Ita cor metu sui reatus contritum,
apprehendit crucifixum Christum ut ejus merito tutumsit.
on the Lord Jesus Christ, which if he, and his Family (b) shall do, they shall
be saved. Then they more largely opened to him and his household the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and he to testify his love and thankfulness to them washed their
stripes, and used the best remedies he could to assuage the pain, Salvaberis tu
and domus tua] Fides patris-familias non salvat familiam direct sed indirecte
quatenus patrem-familias impellit, ut familiam quoque suam in doctrina
Evangelii instituat, vel institui curet, ut credant sicut ipse. Streso.
and heal the wounds and soreness, that remained to them from their scourging:
Then immediately the Jailer and all his household, were baptized unto Christ,
and dedicated unto his service. And further to testify his respect and
kindness to the Apostles, he set meat before them to refresh them, and rejoiced
exceedingly that he and his had obtained so great mercy from God, as to be
brought to believe in Christ. When it was day, the Magistrates (possibly being
terrified with the Earthquake, or considering how injuriously they had used the
Apostles, only for casting out a Devil) sent their Sergeants to release them
(yet privily) out of prison. The Jailer being glad of their release, cheerfully
brought them the news of it. But the Apostles refused Christiana humilitas nos
non obligat ad negligendam famam vel ad admittendam infamiam cum eam legitime
possimus a nobis avertere. Nam post bonam conscientiam non est majus bonum,
quod homo magis tenetur custodire, quam bona fama, vid. Prove. 22.1. Prove.
15.30. Eccles. 7.1. Phil. 4.8. Hoc fine ergo voluit Paulus honorifice educi ne
ad impedimentum Evangelii spargeretur de ipso haec infamia, quod incarceratus
Philippis, formidine malae conscientiae effracto carcere clam aufugisset.
to be thus privily released, alleging that the Rulers had without any legal
trial scourged them, who were not only innocent persons, but free men of Rome,
and had the right and privilege of the Citizens thereof; and so by the Valerian
Law, might not be bound; and by the Sempronian might not be scourged without a
legal Process [See chapter 22.25.]. The Governors understanding this, and knowing
that the punishment was great for any man to injure a Citizen of Rome, they
came themselves, and brought them out, and besought them to depart. And from
the prison they went to the house of Lydia, and having spent some time in
confirming and strengthening the brethren, they departed thence.

Act. 16. v. 11. Therefore loosing from Tarsus, we came with a straight course
to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis:

v. 12. And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of
Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that city abiding certain days.

v. 13. And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where
prayer was wont to be made, and we sat down, and spoke unto the women which
resorted thither.

v. 14. And a certain woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of
Thyatyra, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she
attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.

v. 15. And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying,
If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide
there. And she constrained us.

v. 16. And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed
with a spirit of divination, met us: which brought her masters much gain by
sooth-saying.

v. 17. The same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation.

v. 18. And this did she many days: but Paul being grieved, turned and said to
the spirit, I command thee in the Name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And
he came out the same hour.

v. 19. And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they
caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the marketplace unto the rulers,

v. 20, And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men being Jews, do
exceedingly trouble our city,

v. 21. And teach customs which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to
observe, being Romans.

v. 22. And the multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates
rent off their clothes, and comm^nded to beat them.

v. 23. And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into
prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely.

v. 24. Who having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison,
and made their feet fast in the stocks.

v. 25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises unto God: and
the prisoners heard them.

v. 26. And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of
the prison were shaken, and immediately all the doors were opened, and every
ones bands were loosed.

v. 27. And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the
prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself,
supposing that the prisoners had been fled.

v. 28. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thy self no harm, for we
are all here.

v. 29. Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas.

v. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

v. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thin^ house.

v. 32. And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in
his house.

v. 33. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes,
and was baptized, he and all his straightway.

v. 34. And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them,
and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.

v. 35. And when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, Let
those men go.

v. 36. And the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul: The magistrates
have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in peace.

v. 37. But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being
Romans, and have cast us into prison, and now do they thrust us out privily?
nay verily, but let them come themselves, and fetch us out.

v. 38. And the sergeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they
feared when they heard that they were Romans.

v. 39. And they came, and besought them, and brought them out, and desired
them to depart out of the city.

v. 40. And they went out of the prison, and entered into the house of Lydia;
and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.

v. 13. (...)] Est locus Judaeorum ubi orant. Oratorium sive locus
oratiotionis. Dic ubi consistas in qua te quaero proseucha. Juven. Sat. 3.
v. 16. Puellam quandam habentem spiritum Pythonis] Epitheton Apollinis qui
responsa dabat pretentibus (...), unde Apollo Pythius, qui and Delphicus, a
loco illo celebri dicebatur, cui etiam nomen fuit Pytho, quem Graeci
interpretes aliquoties in Bibliis (...) sunt interpretati, quod ex obsessarum
muliercularum ventre oracula soleret edere, Hebraei (...) vel (...) istud
Daemonium vocare solent, q. d. utres quod mulierum eo daemone correptarum
ventres instar utrium intumescerent.
v. 20. (...)] licet (...) sit ille, qui militibus praeest tamen in municipiis
etiam civiles and urbani magistratus (...) dicebantur.
v. 22. Scindentes vestimenta illorum] Factum hoc ex more Romanorum, qui virgis
caedendos vi spoliabant vestimentis, scindentes quae ultro detrahi non poterant.
v. 27. Stricto gladio erat seipsum interempturus] Metu nimirum gravioris
supplicii. Solebant enim commentarienses, si effugissent vincti, eandem pati
poenam quam vincti passuri erant.
v. 32. Sermonem Domini] i. e. Evangelium de Christo, ejusque beneficiis.
v. 33. Baptizatus est ipse and omnes domestici illius (...) illic] Similia
exempla dati sine mora baptismi habemus supra c. 8. 38. and 10.48. and 16.15.
v. 37. Viros Romanos Synecdochice in plurali dicit. Nam jus civitatis Romanae
solus habebat Paulus. Civem Romanum omnino virgis caedi non licebat per leges
Porcias and Sempronias; quanto minus causa indicta. Novit Paulus ad innocentiae
and causae bonae praesidium etiam legibus uti. Grot.
v. 38. (...)] Ita enim constituerant leges ut in cive Romano laeso ipsa populi
Romani majestas laesa crederetur.
SECT. V.
FRom Philippi (where they had been thus ill used, See 1 These. 2.2.), they came
to Thessalonica the chief City in Macedonia; and here being a Synagogue of the
Jews, (Paul as his manner was) went unto them, and first preached the Gospel to
them, and for three Sabbath days together, plainly showed them, that it was
foretold in the Scriptures, that the Messiah promised to the Jews, must suffer
death and rise again, and that this Jesus whom he preached, is, that long
expected Messiah. Some of the Jews hereupon were persuaded to believe and
embrace the Faith, and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and so
likewise did many of the Greeks that were Proselytes, and many women also of
the better quality. Here Paul instructed them, not only concerning faith in
Christ, but also concerning Antichrist, and when he should be revealed (as
appears from 2 These. 2.2, 3, 4, 5.). And here also he received relief from the
believing Philippians, once and again for the supply of his necessities, as he
testifies, Phil. 4.16. But several of the Jews in this city, continuing in
their unbelief, and being enraged at the Apostles, took to them certain lewd
people of the Town, and assaulted the house of Jason, where they lodged,
intending to drag them out to the people, and possibly to stone them. But
finding them not there, they haled Jason, and some other believers, who, as it
seems, had newly received the Gospel, before the Magistrates vehemently
accusing the Apostles and their followers, as disturbers Non alio modo turbant
orbem quam Medicus suis Pharmacis turbat aegrotum.
of the peace, and enemies to Caesar; whereas they only endeavored to advance
the spiritual kingdom of Christ, without doing any injury to the Roman Empire.
However these (though false) suggestions and criminations much troubled the
people and the Magistrates. But when they had received satisfaction and
security from Jason, and the rest that they would appear when called for, they
dismissed them. However the Brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by
night Disce hinc, Fuga evadere periculum persecutionis, licitum esse. Mat.
10.23.
unto Beraea; whither being come they found there, persons be^ter bred, and of
a more ingenuous temper than those they had met with in Thessalonica, and who
examined whether the Doctrines taught by Paul were agreeable to what the
Scriptures foretold of the Messiah, ^or no: and here their endeavors were
blessed with the Conversion of many of the Jews, and likewise of the Gentiles,
and several of them were persons of the bet^^r sort. But the unbelieving Jews
of Thessalonica hearing of this, follow the Apostles hither also, with their
persecution. Hereupon the Christians of this place (to cause these Persecutors
to give over their pursuit), sent Paul toward the Seaside, as if he meant to
take ship, and to go quite away out of those parts: In the mean time some of
them conducted him to Athens. But Silas and Timothy not being so much known or
malic'd, as Paul was, stayed a little while longer, further to edify the
believers here.

Act. 17. v. 1. Now when they had passed through Amphipolis, and Apollonia, they
came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews.

v. 2. And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the scriptures.

v. 3. Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and ris^n
again from the dead: and that this Jesus whom I preach unto you, is Christ.

v. 4. And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas: and of the
devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.

v 5. But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain
lew^ fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on
an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to
the people.

v. 6: And when they sound them not, they drew Jason, and certain brethren unto
the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down,
are come hither also.

v. 7 Whom Jason has received: and these all do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, saying, T^^t th^re is another King, one Jesus.

v. 8. And they troubled the people, and the rulers of the City, when they
heard these things.

v. 9. And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let
them go.

v. 10. And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto
Berea: who coming thither, went into the synagogue of the Jews,

v. 11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether
those things were so.

v. 12. Therefore many of them believed: also of honorable women, which were
Greeks, and of men not a few.

v. 13. But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was
preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people.

v. 14. And then imm^diately the brethren sent away Paul, to go as it were to
the sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there still.

v. 15. And they that conducted Paul, brought him unto Athens, and receiving a
commandment unto Silas and Timotheus, for to come to him with all speed, they
departed.

v. 1. Amphipolis urbs vicina Philippis. Apollonia mari adsita Corinthiorum and
Corcyraeorum celonia. Thessalonica urbs praeclara Macedoniae ad sinum
Thermaicum, condita a Philippo Amyntae filio, post victoriam de Thessalis, unde
urbi nomen.
v. 3. (...)] intellige (...), ponens ob oculos Christum debuisse pati.
v. 4. (...)] significat plane illos addictos fuisse Paulo and Silae, sicut and
res haereditariae apud Hebraeos. Graeci religiosi erant qui legem quidem Mosis
non susceperant, sed idolatria, and pravis moribus relictis, unum colebant Deum.
v. 5. (...) sunt circumforanei, qui otiosi and ignavi forum frequentabant.
Tacitus vocat sordidam plebem Circo and theatris assuetam.
v. 6. Qui orbis terrarum statum subverterunt: (...), h. e. (...), hoc est, qui
caelum terrae miscuerunt and novis inauditisque dogmatis omnia repleverunt.
Politici qui saepe dogmata vera a falsis, salubria a noxiis non norunt
distinguere, omnia nova suspecta habent.
v. 7. Regem alium dicentes nempe Jesum] Nec populus Romanus olim, nec postea
Caesares permisere in regionibus devictis quenquam regem dici nisi suo
permissu. Nec Pilatus nec Macedones hi intelligebant regnum Christi ejus esse
ingenii, ut Regibus mundi hujus non obstaret, imo and illorum firmaret imperia
multis modis.
v. 9. (...)] Satis accipit cui cavetur, quantum legi aut Judici, aut viro bono
satis est. Grot.
v. 10. Beraea urbs Macedonia non Procul a Pella.
v. 11. h. e. (...) magis ingenui, generosiores: Audiebant patienter,
cogitabant de re, inquirebant; non generis nobilitatem, sed mansuetudinem animi
designat hoc loco (...). Boisius.
v. 15. (...)] qui Paulum constituebant, h. e. qui conabantur Paulum
constituere scil. (...) in tu^o. Verbum actionis pro conatu. Qui deducebant, i.
e. illi qui pro satellitibus and stipatoribus erant in perieuloso itinere.
SECT. VI.
PAul being come to Athens, he sends for Silas and Timothy speedily to come to
him, foreseeing a need of more Laborers in that place Ex tota historia satis
clarum est, quod conatus Pauli in hac civitate reformanda major suerit quam in
aliis civitatibus, sed effectus minor.
. In the mean time, he diligently views and observes their (...) (...) by which
is understood any thing where divine worship is offered, or whereby divine
worship is practiced.
their Temples, Idols and Altars, and takes notice how that City was (...) more
full of Idolatry than any other. At this, his Spirit was much stirred within
him, a holy indignation being kindled in his breast, to see their horrible
Idolatry and Superstition. He therefore sets himself to reform this great evil.
And first, he applies himself to the Jews, and religious proselytes there,
teaching Christ in their Synagogue. Then in the Marketplace, and such places
of public concourse, he took occasion to make known the Doctrine of Christ to
such as he met with there. And some of the Philosophers, of the Sect of the
Epicureans, and Stoics, encountered him and disputed with him; and some of them
derided and slighted him, calling him Babbler: Others said, he was a publisher
and setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached Jesus, and the
resurrection. Hereupon they brought him to Areopagus, the place of Judicature
in Athens, and examined him more strictly, what new religion it was he taught;
the temper of that people being very inquisitive after new things.

Paul being brought before the Judges in Areopagus spoke to them, to this
purpose, Ye men of Athens, I look upon you, as those which are generally given
to the worship of more Athenienses adeo superstitiosi erant ut putarent sibi
colendum quicquid uspiam terrarum pro Deo coleretur and quia timebant ne omnium
populorum Dii sibi non essent cogniti, etiam incognitis altaria erigebant.
gods or Demons than other cities are. For as I passed up and down in your
City, beholding your Altars and Images, I found an Altar with this Inscription,
TO THE UNKNOWN GOD: Whom ye profess to worship, and yet know not, him do I
preach unto you, namely, The invisible God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth,
who cannot be contained in any Shrine, or Temple of man's framing. Nor can any
Image made by man's hands be a proper instrument to represent him; Neither does
he need any of the Sacrifices, or Gifts that are offered to him by men, seeing
he gives to all their very life, and all that they have. And of one man and
woman, viz. Adam and Eve, has he made the whole race of mankind, and has
ordained their time, and place, when, and where, they shall dwell on the face
of the earth: And the end of all this is, That they might seek after Him, that
created them, and worship him sincerely. And though they were lest through
their fall, and degeneracy from Him, as in the dark yet is this invisible God
palpably to be discerned, and his glorious wisdom, power and goodness
(manifest^d in his works of Creation and Providence), distinctly, and clearly
to be known, if men would but seek and grope after him. And indeed we need not
go out of our selves to find him, for he is very near every one of us. For our
life, motion, and subsistence is wholly by him, and by his power, according to
that which Aratus (a Poet of your own who has written of the course of the
Heavens) once delivered, saying, We are also his offspring, that is, we are
descended from God by Creation. God therefore being our Creator, can in no
reason be supposed to be the work of our hands, as an Image of Gold, or Silver,
or Stone is: And how irrational is it for man, the Image of God, to adore an
Image, or work made by his own hands, which falls so short of representing the
infinite, and invisible God, that it cannot represent the Spirit and Soul, the
Reason and Understanding of man. And though God in his infinite patience has
long born with the world, thus lying in ignorance, and going on in such
prodigious conceits, yet now he causes his Gospel to be preached to all
Nations, and thereby calls and invites them to repentance, and to forsake their
Idols and sinful ways, which they ought seriously and speedily to do, because
he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in righteousness by his
Son Jesus Christ, of which he has given assurance by raising him from the
dead. [ vid. Act. 10.42.]

When Paul had mentioned the resurrection of the dead, some of those learned
men (probably those of the Sect of the Epicureans who denied all ^uture life)
fell a scoffing; but some others of them desired to hear him again concerning
those matters. So for the present he left them, having performed his part in
sowing the good seed of the Gospel among them. And though we read not of any
great success Paul's ministry had in this famous University, yet it pleased God
to incline the hearts of some in this place to believe, and embrace his
Doctrine, and to adhere to him. Among whom were Dionysius (one of the
Areopagites, or Senators and Judges in Areopagus), and a woman called Damaris
with some others.

Act. 17. v. 16. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was
stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.

v. 17. Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the
devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him.

v. 18. Then certain Philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoics,
encountered him: and some said, What will this babl^r say? Other some, He
seems to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them
Jesus, and the resurrection.

v. 19. And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know,
what this new doctrine, whereof thou speak, is?

v. 20. For thou bring certain strange things to our ears: we would know
therefore what these things mean.

v. 21. (For all the Athenians and strangers which were there, spent their time
in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing).

v. 22. Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars-hill, and said, Ye men of Athens,
I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.

v. 23. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with
this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you.

v. 24. God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord
of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands.

v. 25. Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all things.

v. 26. And has made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the
face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation.

v. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and
find him, though he be not far from every one of us.

v. 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being, as certain also of
your own Poets have said, For we are also his offspring.

v. 29. for as much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think
that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art, and
man's device.

v. 30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all
men every where to repent:

v. 31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.

v. 32. And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and
others said, We will hear thee again of this matter.

v. 33. So Paul departed from among them.

v. 34. Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was
Dionysius, the Arcopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

v. 16. (...)] h. e. Civitatem idolis refertam. Athenae urbs fauorum referta.
Cicero. Zenophon in Atheniensium repub. inquit festa duplo plura agitant quam
alii. Sic Geographis dicuntur loci (...), multis arboribus referti. Syrus
vertit civitatem plenam idolis.
v. 16. Epicurei a Stoicis in doctrina valde discrepant. Illi enim pro summo
bono voluptatem habebant, Deum and providentiam nec non animorum imortalitatem
negabant. Hi vero summum bonum in virtute collocabant, (...) asserebant,
affectus e natura tollebant, absolutum and irrevocabile fatum, Deo ipsi leges
praescribens, introducebant.

(...): non a (...) dico sed a (...) colligo. Metaphora ab aviculis sumpta,
quae sata in agris depascuntur, and semina legendo, i. e. colligendo, victum
sibi quaerunt, ut columbae, semina per arvum sparsa. Inde apud Atticos ad
homines istos translata fuit ista vox, qui circa mercatus and fora versantur,
ut quae ex saceis defluunt colligunt, atque inde vivant; eoque viles, and
contempti homines describuntur, qui foro perreptantes dicta aliorum captant,
and quae ex ore cujusque velut grana e sacco, excidunt, colligans ut habeant
quod fabulentur, and garriant. Syrus, quid vult hic collector verborum? Quid
vult vilissimus iste homuncio dicere? Sic Boisius.

Novorum Deorum nuncius esse videtur] Non rarum id, publico scito extranea
Numina admittere, and ma^e audiebant quod faciles essent in admittendis sacris
peregrinis. Hic igitur perperam interpretantes verba ejus, tam Anastasin quam
Jesum Daemonium seu seu Numen adorandum esse, eum indicare voluisse, sunt
opinati, quod and Chrysostomus ibi annotat. Seldenus.


v. 19. In Areopagum] Erat Areopagus, test Stephano, vicus Athenis a Templo
Martis sic dictus. In templo Martis Judices, dicti Areopagitae, judicabant. De
Dieu.

Areopagus erat locus judicandi, and Areopagitae ipsi Judices quos Solon
instituit.

Duxerunt eum ad Are^p^gum, non ad Judicium, sed quod ibi multi esse solerent
homine, eruditi, senatores, oratores, and alii vid. infra 34 Grot


v 21. Peregrint qui ibi ad tempus diversabantur, facile imbibebant civium
vitia. (...) hic est quod Plinius lib. 1. ep. 13. Vocat in stationibus sedere,
tempusque audiend^s f^bu^is conterere. and ep. 22. g^mnasia, particus, and
tonstrinas sectari long^sque fabulat onibu^ suum aliorumque otium delectare.
Pricaeus.

Hanc levitatem sui civibus saepe ex probrat Demosthenes, ut in Oratione illa,
qua respondet Epistolae Philippi


v. 2^. (...)] i. e. (...) inquit Chrysostomus. Beza, Conspicio vos quasi
religiosiores vulgo, superst^tiosiores. Boisiu sic. Quacunque eo (inquit
Paulus) con picio quaedam quae quam sitis vos O Atheniense c^ltu^ divino
dediti, clarum and testatum ^aciant. Nam pe^transiens, etc (...). A Worshipper
of Demons, or dead Hero's. See Mr. Mede's Apostasy of the la^^ times.
v 23. (...) Philoni (...) ^^nt ea per quae Dii coluntur, Unde culturas hic non
ma^e vertit Latinus. Grot. (...) proprie est id ipsum quod colitur, quae quidem
apud Athenienses erant s^m (...) M^lim t men numina vestra reddere. Sic Paulus
2 These. 2.4. (...). De Dieu

(...)] Laertius Or^ginem hujus rei narr^ns, dicit ab Epimenide monitos
Athenienses, pestilenti^ Athenis oborta, ut s^cra facerent (...), i. e. ei Deo
ad quem ea re p^rtineret, and qui po^est t^m habuit pestilent ae averiu^
c^ndae, quisquis i^ tandem foret. uod ^utem verus Deus Judaeorum Ath niensibu
ignotas erat, videtur inde pro^enisse qu^d Judaei (...) Dei nomen non
offerebant vulgo, ne Ge^tium ludibrio exponeretur, v^l etiam in Populo Dei
vilesceret. Nec poterant Gentes ex cul u Judaico, (qui ab Deorum Gentilium
cultu plurimam distabat) certi quid co^igere. Lucanus.

-- and delita sacris
Incerti Judaea Dei --
Cognitus ergo erat verus Deus aliquo modo Atheniensibus, scil. confusa aliqu^
notitia, ignotus distinct, and actu: Ignorantes coluerunt istud numen quod
Paulus iis annunciavit, and quadam con^u^a notitia invocarunt tanquam naturae
opificem, and si non ante, s^ltem Hadriani Caesaris temporibus (qui a nato
Christo CXX annis claruit) Deo suppl carunt Gentilium sapientiores ut te^is est
Arrianus* n^ bilis ejus temporis script^r Dissert. Epictet^ l. 2. c. 7. ubi
inquit (...), Deum invocantes precamur eum, Domine miserere nostri, quae est
Ecclesia Ch^^^^^nae precatio.


26. Ex uno sanguine] i. e. Ex semine unius Adami, ut eo, quoque modo nos omnes
quodam naturali^ cogn^tionis vinculo coll^gare.
v. 27 Vt quarerent Dominum, si sort palpando eum invenirent] Ostendit aliquam
rei difficultatem. Nam palpare aut caecorum est, aut noctu incedentium. Sic
Deus in creaturis invenitur, q^ando post diligentem inquisitionem and
serutationem actu contrectatur, and aeternita^, omniscientia, omnipotentia, and
boni^as ejus quasi tanguntur.

Non long abest ab un^quoque nostrum] nempe vi poten^iae suae 8en ep 41 Prope
est a te Deus tecum est, inius est Nihil Deo clusum est. Interest animis
nostris and cogitationibus med^s intervenit. Jovis omnia pletia. Virgilius.


v. 28. In ipso vivimus, mov^mur and sumus] In ipso id est per ipsum, ipsius
beneficio. (...), Animo scil. quod de Jove dixerat Aratus in Phaenom: id vero
Deo ^ptat Paulus. Claruit Aratus tempore Ptolemaei Phil^delphi. In aureis
Pythagorae carminibu^ simile extat hemisticum. (...), sensus est, Hominem
naturae suae praestantia Deum quodammodo refer, quod Scriptura dicit ad
imaginem Dei esse con^litum.
29 Non debemus existimare auro, argento, lapidi.

(...)] i. e. (...) arie and ingeniu hominis sculptis. Ad veroum scripturae
artis and cogitationis hominum, and sic reddidit Vet Interp.

Nemo persuadere i^ quit sibi debet Deum esse auro similem argento vel lapidi,
quem ars aut humana cogitatio formavit Heinsius. Per (...) non modo sculptile
opus, sed etiam pictum and omnia ea intelliguntur, quae homines colendo aut
repraesentando numini solent commin sci. Beza.


v. 30. (...) i. e. Cum ^eluti connivendo praeteriisset.
v. 31. (...)] Hoc est, ce^to and side digno argumento probans Christum fore
Judicem, quum eum ^ mortuis suscitaverit. Deus Jesum resuscitando e mortuis
maximum doctrinae ejus testim^nium praebui^ In ea autem doctrina and hoc erat,
se fore Judicem humani generis. Math. 25 31. Joh 9.28.29.
v. 32. Aliqui sannis cum excipiebant] Nempe Epicurei. ^lii vero, audiemus te
ru^sus de hac re] Nempe Stoici qui hominis mortui restitutionem non putabant
impossibilem, ut ostendimu^ ad lib. 2. de V. R. Christianae. Grot.
34. Dionysius Areopagites] Unus ex illo nobilissimo Senatu, qui and in
republica multum habebat authoritatis and de caedibus and vulneribus judicabat.
Graeci vocant (...). Valerius Maximus sanctissimum Concilium. Multum
proculdubio profuit Evangelio, viri tam gravis, and publico testimonio probati,
conversio.
SECT. VII.
SIlas and Timothy being now come to Paul from Beroea, He sends Timothy to the
Thessalonians to confirm them in the Faith. For he bare a great love to them,
and had a great desire to have gone to them himself, but was hindered, 1 These.
2.18. and chapter 3. 1, 2. Which journey Timothy performing and returning again to
him, e're he left Athens [1 These. 3.6, 7.] and bringing him good tidings of
their perseverance in the faith and growth in grace, he sends him (together
with Silas) again into Macedonia further to confirm the Churches there [ Act.
18.5.] ordering them to come to him to Corinth, whither he was now going.

SECT. VIII.
PAul now leaving Athens comes to Corinth Hujus urbis subactio sub obedientiam
Evangelii ab ipso Paulo, habetur pro nobilissima part sui Apostolatus, super
qua maxim triumphat vocans illam Ecclesiam Sigillum sui Apostolatus, 1 Cor.
9.1, 2.

Luxus and libidines Corinthiorum in proverbium abierunt. Unde, Paulus nullibi
quam in Epistolis ad Corinthios contra scortationem magis invehitur, 1 Cor. 5.
and 6. 2 Cor. 12.21.


, where he found Aquila a Jew of the Province of Pontus in Asia and Priscilla
his wife, who were come lately from Italy, because Claudius Quae Claudio causa
fuerit hujus exilii, non certo constat. Aliqui putant quod propter fervidas
disputat^ones de Messia sen Christo quae erant inter Judaeos Christianos, and
non-Christianos, fuerint ejecti a Claudio, aliquid mali a Christi regno sibi
metuente.
had by his decree banished all Jews from Rome. He being there in a strange
place, and out of moneys, betakes himself to work with his own hands for his
subsistence. It seems he had learned the trade of tent-making before he set
himself to his studies, it being the Custom of the Jews to learn some trade The
Jews have a saying among them, What is commanded a Father toward his Son? To
circumcise him, to redeem him, [Num. 18.15.] to teach him the Law, to teach him
a Trade, and to take him a Wife. R Judah says, He that teaches not his Son a
Trade, does as if he taught him to be a Thief.
, yea, though they were to be Students. He had indeed power and warrant to
challenge maintenance for his preaching, as he intimates many times in his
Epistles. But there was not yet any Church at Corinth to maintain him; and
besides the Corinthians being ordinarily very covetous Avaritia apud ipsos
max^me graslata est, quae unica videtur fuisse causa ob quam Paulus necessar^um
putavit Corinthiis, (...), 1 Cor. 9.13. 2 Cor. 11.7, 8, etc. and 12.13.14.

Venerant etiam ad hanc Eccl^si^m Pseudo Apostoli illi, qui in Synodo
Hierosolymitana condemnati, per invidiam ubique obsisteb ut Paulicon^tibus, and
hoc sine se passim ^ssereb^nt ad gratis docendum.


, and greedy of gain, he would not take any thing of them, lest it should have
hindered the success of his ministry. He therefore being of the same trade with
Aquila and Priscilla, he took up his lodging with them, and wrought at their
trade. On the Sabbath Days he went into the Synagogue of the Jews, and reasoned
and discoursed with them concerning the Messiah promised to the Fathers, and
endeavored to persuade both Jews and Proselytes to embrace his Doctrine. But
when Silas and Timothy were come to him, and had brought him tidings of the
great proficiency and growth of the Macedonian Churches, he was then pressed in
Spirit, and grew more earnest, to bring on the Jews of Corinth to embrace the
Gospel, and accordingly testified to them that Jesus was the Christ, the true
Messiah whom they had so long expected. But they vehemently opposed him and
railed at him and his Doctrine most contumeliously. Whereupon he shook his
Garments, and told them plainly, Their blood was upon their own heads (See 2 Samuel 1.16.) and that they were guilty of their own destruction [See Act. 13.46,
51.]. And seeing they were so obstinate, he would now leave them, and with
Silas and Timothy go preach to the Gentiles. And so going out of the Synagogue,
he went into the house of one Jusius, (by birth a Gentile, but a Jewish
Proselyte) whose house, it is probable, he chose as a fit place to preach the
Gospel in, to such as would be willing to heat him And his endeavors here were
not without success. For Crispus the chief Ruler The Rulers of the Synagogue
were as Ecclesiastical Counselors set over the Synagogues to keep and govern
them in good order. See Act. 13.15. See Sect. 2. of ch 3. Note (b).
of the Synagogue, and his household were brought to believe, with several
others, among whom were Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, whom He baptized,
1 Cor. 1.14, 16. But notwithstanding this good success, the Apostle (as it it
seems) was now through human frailty possessed with some fear and apprehension
of danger to his person from the Jews, and therefore had thoughts of going
thence, and leaving the City. But whilst he was agitating these things in his
mind, it pleased God to speak to him in a Vision by night, that he should fear
nothing, for He would be present with him to secure him from all harm, and bad
him go on confidently to preach the Gospel there, for he had much people in
that City, whom he intended effectually to call by his ministry. Hereupon he
continued there a year and half, preaching the Gospel; and as we may gather
from 2 Cor. 12.12. he wrought many miracles for Confirmation of his Doctrine,
and converted many.

Act. 18. v. 1. After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to
Corinth,

v. 2. And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from
Italy, with his wife Priscilla (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to
depart from Rome) and came unto them.

v. 3. And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought
(for by their occupation they were tent-makers).

v. 4. And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews
and the Greeks.

v. 5. And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed
in spirit, and testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ.

v. 6. And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment,
and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads, I am clean: from
henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.

v. 7. And he departed thence, and entered into a certain man's house, named
Justus, one that worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the synagogue,

v. 8. And Crispus the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord, with
all his house: and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized.

v. 9. Then spoke the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but
speak, and hold not thy peace:

v. 10. For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee, to hurt thee: for I
have much people in this city.

v. 11. And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God
among them.

v. 2. Eo quod edixisset Claudius (...) ut excederent omnes Judaei Roma].
Meminit hujus edicti Suetonius in Claudio. Exierunt igitur Roma cum Judaeis
ipsi Christiani, quia illi ad seculi morem generali Judaorum nomine erant
contenti.
v. 5. (...)] tenebatur animo testificari Judaeis Jesum esse ipsum Christum,
Had an earnest mind, or was earnestly minded. (...) pro (...). Participium pro
infinitivo ponitur verbis animi affectionem significantibus. Knatchhull.

Testificabatur Paulus Judaeis Jesum esse Christum sed absque successu. Atque
ideo (...), h. e. in dolor crat summo, and intimis angebatur sensibus, quod
opera sua nusquam inutilius poneretur quam apud fratres suos, and cognatos
secundum carnem. Boisius.


v. 6. (...) ves;timemta, h. e. vestem exteriorem nimirura togam oblongam.
Pluralis pro singulari.

Sanguis vester super caput vestrum]. q. d. Si quid vobis mali evenerit,
scitote id vestra culpa evenisse.

(...)] Steti in specula and clamavi, vid. Ezekiel. 33.4.


v. 13. (...)] Nempe (...). Populus multus] Populus hic dicuntur ii qui facile
Christi populus fieri poterant ut oves, Joh. 10.16.
SECT. IX.
DUring his abode here, in his own name and in the names of Silas and Timothy
he writes his First Epistle to the Thessalonians.

In which Epistle there are these two principal parts.

First, He endeavors to confirm them in the Faith of Christ, and to assure
them of his sincere affection to them, and encourages them to constancy in the
profession of the Gospel, notwithstanding the many afflictions they met with,
on that account, Chap. 1.2, 3. Secondly, He instructs and exhorts them to
holiness of life and conversation, inserting a consolatory discourse touching
the resurrection of the dead, Chap. 4, 5.
The First Epistle ^n the Thessalonians.
IN the First part, (After his Apostolical Salutation to the Church of the
Thessalonians, which by the Grace of God, and Gospel of Christ preached unto
them, had been converted to the Faith, and which was established in the Faith
and belief of God the Father In Deo Pa^^e and Dom^^o nostro J^^^ Chr^sto i. e.
Q^^e c^lit Deum and Jesum, vel quae perseverat in fide in Deum, and in
Christum. ^a^ab^us.
and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent), he declares,

1. H w th o^f^l he was to God for their sincere conversion, and how he daily
m^d^ m^ntio^ f them in his prayers, humbly bes^eching the Lord they might
p^rse^^re. And how j^yfully and continually he remembered that good work of
their s^ith, by which they so c^uragiously embraced the Gospel of Christ, that
exc^^lent ch^rity which they had t^stified by their care, and pains, and
industry for the go^d ^f the Saints, that patience and constancy which their
hope in C^ri^^ ^^d w^^ught in them; all which graces, as they had manifested
(by their ^ff^^) ^^^re men* so h^ doubted not, but they endeavored to approve
their h^^^ts to G^d Acer stim^lus ad b ^^ ^gendum est memoria praesentis Dei.
in the exercise of them (as became good Children to their (...) F^th^r), in
whose sight those graces are highly pleasing, v. 2, 3.

2ly. He pr^f^ss^s his firm b^li^f ^f their Election, which was manifested to
him by many cl^^r signs th^re^f 1. His ministry among them had been accompani^^
with ^xtra^dinary and miracul^us gifts, and the powerful operation, and ^ff
cacy of the H ly Ghost in their heartt, so that they were fully assured and
persu^^d of the truth of the Gospel which he had preached unto them. And they
th^ms^lves might rem^mber what manner of entrance, he, and his fellow laborers
in the G^sp^l had among them, in so much, that they not only embraced the
Doctrine ^f Christ, but firm^y adhered to it, though attended with persecution,
and that with demonstration of such a Talia dona non largitur D us nisi cum
vult salvari audientes. secundum consilium been placiti sui in Christo. Quare
ex docentium donis re^te colligitur Dei c^nsilium de Ele^tione Audito^um

Nihil magis admirabile, quia nihil magis naturae contrarium, quam in
tribulatione gaudere, sed Spiri us per tribulationes bona coelestia and divina
promitters efficite ut homo, haec bona sibi proponen^ in tribulatione gaude^t.


joy, which none but the H^ly Ghost could produce in them; by which things they
rendered themselves in a sort like unto the Lord Christ, and like unto his
servants the Apostles who suff^red for the truth, and preached the Gospel with
joy in the midst of afflictions. 2. Their exemplariness to the
neighbour-Churches in Macedonia and Achai^. For the G^spel which he had
preached am^ng them, was, by means of their trafiquing Multi ex Thess^lonica
Mercatore^ per Graeciam omnem negotiabantur.
people carried not only into the neighbour-Countreys, but into th^se that are
far distant, so that their conversion to God, and faith in Christ was so
famous, and spread into so many pl^c^s of the world that 'twould be superfluous
for him to say any thing more of it, the thing ne^ding no other testimony than
it self. And further he shows, that the faithful far and wide tell the history
of the Thessalonians conversion, and declare how the Apostles entrance among
them was strangely and singularly blessed to the turning of them from dead
idols to serve the true and everliving God, and to believe in his Son Jesus
Christ, whom the Father has raised from the dead, and to expect his second
coming, (namely, to judgment), at which time he will reward their faith and
patience; having by the merit of his death and passion delivered all that
believe in him, f^^m the wrath to come. From v. 4. to the end.

3dly. He sets before them the sincerity and uprightness of his ministry among
Philippi for preaching Christ [Act. 16.], yet, (trusting in the assistance of
God), he boldly published the Gospel unto them, though he met with much
contention and opposition from the still-necked Jews, and ignorant Gentiles. In
the preaching of which, he had no design to seduce or corrupt any, by
instilling any false doctrine into them, or to encourage them in any impure
courses of life, (as the manner of false Teachers is); nor to procure to
himself esteem, or any worldly advantage thereby. But as God was graciously
pleased to choose him to be an Apostle, and to approve him and think him meet
for so great a trust; so he had endeavored to approve his heart to God in the
discharge of it, not accommodating his doctrine to the pleasing of men's
humors, but preaching such things as are agreeable to the will ^f God, whose
eye pierces into the heart, and discovers the secretest intentio^^ thereof. He
sh^ws he never used to flatter them or soothe them in their sins, (...)
themselves could t^stifie, nor carried any covetous d^sign under a Cloak of
piety, as God kn^w, to whom he could appeal. Neither was he ambitious of vain
glory and esteem among men, as false-Teachers are wont to be. And whereas he
might have exercised severity, and authority (...)] Cum possemus in onere seu
molestia esse, i. e. Onerosi, ^ molesti. Infra phrasis. Et praecedens and
sequens sententia videatur postulare ut haec verba de authorit^te Apostolica
vel potius de illius usu intelligamus. Pisc.
among them as an Apostle of Christ, yet he had not done it, but had used such
mildness and tenderness toward them as a nurse does to a little child whom she
feeds and cherishes. He was so affectionately desirous of their eternal welfare
that he was not only willing to impart the Gospel to them, but to have laid
down his very life for them if it had been necessary for the procuring their
salvation. And as an evidence of his cordial affection to them and earnest
desire of their good, they might remember that he had wrought with his own
hands, not only in the daytime but sometimes part of the night, to get
something to maintain him See Act. 18.3. 1 Cor. 4.12.
, that he might not be chargeable to them. He appeals to them, who saw his
outward actions, and to God who saw his heart, how holily, justly, and
unbl^meably he had behaved himself among them. They could not but be sensible,
that he had carried himself toward them as a Father toward his Children,
exhorting them to do their duty, and comforting and encouraging them in the
performance of it, and testifying unto them all that they ought to walk worthy
of God, that is, as becomes those that know God and profess his name, who had
called them by his grace to a participation of his kingdom and celestial glory.
From v. 1. to 13.

4ly. He mentions (with great thankfulness to God) some other evidences of the
divine favor toward these Thessalonians; As first, their receiving the Gospel
(...)] Sermonem auditus Dei, scil. per quem ipse Deus auditur, and intelligitur.
not as the word of man, but as the word of God, which testified it self to be
divine, by its efficacious operation in the hearts of believers. 2. They showed
themselves like to the Christian Churches in Judea in patient suffering
persecution from their own friends, kinsfolks, and fellow-citizens, as they did
from the unbelieving Jews; whom he d^scribes as the most perverse enemies of
the Gospel of any other, setting out their wickedness in several particulars,
declaring how, They killed Christ, and before him, their own Prophets that were
sent unto them [Math. 23.31, 37.], and now they persecuted the Apostles; they
showed themselves adversaries to God in persecuting his servants; they were
enemies to mankind by endeavoring to obstruct the Gospel which brings
salvation to men. They forbad the Apostle to preach to the Gentiles; and so
daily more and more filled up the measure of their sins, in so much, that the
wrath of God seems come upon them to the uttermost in their judicial
obduration. From v. 13. to 17.

5. He labors to assure them that he had a great love and affection to them,
though he did not as yet come to them (as they might expect) to strengthen and
comfort them in their afflictions. He tells them, he was not absent from them
in heart and affection, though in body; and the more he was hindered from coming
to them, the more earnestly he desired to see them. He designed to come to them
once and again, but Satan still cast in impediments in his way. He tells them,
he had great reason highly to value them, for he accounts them among the
chi^fest Churches converted to the faith by his ministry, and so he hopes they
will be found, when Christ shall come to judge the world, and will be his crown
and Sunt hic tria Enunciata Metonymica. 1. Vos estis mea spes, id est, ii ex
quibus spero me adepturum laudem apud Deum. 2. Vos estis meum gaudium, id est,
ii qui gaudium mihi afferunt. 2. Vos estis mea corona, i. e. ii propter quos
coronabor a Christo laud fidelitatis, and praemio beatitatis quum dicet, Euge
bone serve fidelis fuisti, etc. Intra in gaudium Domini tui. Pisc.
joy at that day. From v. 17. to the end.

6. He goes on to give them further assurance of his love to them, and to
establish them in the faith of Christ. 1. He tells them that being no longer
able to bear the vehement desire he had of hearing how things went with them,
he had sent Timothy unto them, and was content to deprive himself of the
company of a person very dear to him, and to stay at Athens alone, that they by
him might be comforted and confirmed in the faith; and that n^ne of them might
be troubled at the afflictions which the profession of the gospel exposed them
unto, as if some strange thing had happened to them. For they themselves could
not be ignorant that this is the condition unto which all true believers are
called, God having ordained that they should first partake of the sufferings of
Christ, before they partake of his glory: and they had been hereof before
advertised by him, when he was with them (that they might prepare for
sufferings) and it has accordingly so come to pass; so that now they know it
by experience. Having therefore so great solicitude in his mind for them, he
could not any longer forbear the sending of Timothy to them, to know the state
of their faith, and to know whether they continued constant in it, or whether
the Devil and the world bringing persecutions upon them on that account had not
caused them to warp under those trials, and so rendered all his labors among
them fruitless. But when Timothy returned and brought him the welcome news of
the firmness and constancy of their faith, and of the continuance of their
charity, and of their kind remembrance of him, and great desire to see him,
this, he tells them, was matter of exceeding great joy unto him; and the
testimony he heard of their faith, did more comfort him, than all the
afflictions which he suffered did deject him. For now we live Vivere sic
sumitur in illo dicto, mici dum vivimus vivamus.
(says he), that is, are lively, cheerful, and courageous, if ye stand fast in
your faith in Christ. He tells them he knows not how to be sufficiently
thankful to God for their perseverance, and for giving him occasion to rejoice
so sincerely before him for their proficiency. He further acquaints them that
he daily prayed unto the Lord that he might see their faces again, and might be
instrumental more perfectly to instruct them, and to increase the measure of
their faith by opening to them more fully the mysteries of the gospel. He
accordingly prays for a prosperous journey to them, and that the Lord would
grant that they may increase, and abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men, as he did toward them. And lastly that their hearts may be
established in holiness, unblameable before God (who is our rec^nciled Father
in Christ) and that continuing so, they at the coming of Christ with all his
Saints and Angels to judgment may not be ashamed Apostolus S^^ritu plen^s
conglomerat hic multa quae affectus suggerebat, nec de verbis est sollicitus,
sed verba nonnulla ubticet and ^ubaudit. A Lap.
. From v. 1. to the end.

He comes now to the second part of his Epistle which contains exhortations,
and Resurrection of the dead, and last judgment being by the way taken in.

In the First place, he tells them, He exhorts and entreats them in the name of
the Lord Jesus, that as they had received of him how they ought to walk, and
please God, so they would labor daily to excel and advance therein. They might
remember what Commandments he had given them from Christ. Particularly, 1. That
they should preserve themselves in Chastity, and purity from the sins ^f the
flesh. For this was the will of God that they should be holy both in soul and
body, and that they should abstain from fornication, and continually keep their
bodies as vessels consecrated to the Lord, and not defile them; whereby they
would distinguish themselves from the Gentiles, who know not God, but live in
impure lusts. 2. That they should not defraud any man; for God will avenge such
kind of injuries as he had before assured, and warned them. And they should
remember, that the end of Gods calling them to the Grace of Christ, is, that
they should not defile themselves with any kind of sin (...) hic generaliter
sumitur ut supra, v. 2, 3. and tam late patet quam quod ei opponitur, (...).
. And he that rejects these wholesome exhortations, he shows is guilty of
rejecting the divine authority ^f God, by the inspiration of whose holy Spirit,
he had given them th^se precepts. 3. Touching brotherly-love, and how it is to
be exercised, he tells them, he need not write much; for he found they were
eminently taught, and inclined by the Spirit of God to the exercise of that
grace, and that they manifested it not only at home but toward the Brethren
round about in Macedonia. And he desires they may daily more, and more increase
and excel therein. 4. He exhorts them to use their best endeavors (...)]
significat Eniti, i. e. Magno conatu quicquam agere, translate a more hominum
ambitiosorum qui summo studio, and animi Contentione nituntur ad honores Estius.
to live quietly, and to follow their own business [See 2 These. 3.12.], and to
work with their own hands (as he had commanded them when he was with them),
that by employing themselves in honest labor, they may both preserve their
reputation among the Gentiles (who will think ill of Christianity if it make
men idle Mos est Paulo peculiariter ea vitia tangere quae quoque in loco
vigebant maxim.
, and that they may earn so much by their labor as may supply all their wants
and necessities that they may have no need of help or relief from others. From
v. 1. to 13.

2. He advises them not to mourn immoderately He forbids not all sorrow for the
dead, which Christ himself showed for Lazarus, Joh. 11.35. The Church for
Stephen, Act. 8 2. And Paul for Epaphroditus when he was extremely sick, Phil.
2.27. But he speaks against Heathenish and immoderate sorrow. For though many
of the Gentiles believed the immortality of the soul, yet they never were able
to comprehend the resurrection of the body, and the re-uniting it to the soul.
See Act. 17.32.
for their deceased Christian friends as Heathens do, that have no hope of a
resurrection. He tells them he would not have them carry themselves as if they
were ignorant of the happy state of those that dye in the faith of Christ. For
as they believe, that Christ is risen from the dead, so they ought also to
believe that those who have dyed in the faith of Christ, God will bring forth,
and cause to appear with him, in the day wherein he shall judge the world,
having first raised their bodies from the graves, and united them with their
souls. And he tells them by revelation from the Lord, that the change of the
faithful Paul by an ordinary (...) reckons himself, and his Associates among
the survivers at Christ's Coming, not as thinking that himself and those then
living should be found of Christ in the body at that time, but knowing that all
the Righteous make one body in Christ, and reckoning himself one of that
number, He says We that remain, that is, those of the faithful that shall
survive to Christ's Coming. See Dr. Slater in loc.
that are alive at his Coming shall not prevent the resurrection of those that
are dead in Christ. For when Christ shall appear in that his great glory, and
shall by the voice or trump of the Archangel raise the dead, then the dead in
Christ shall rise before the living be changed. And the faithful that are then
alive being suddenly changed from mortality to an immortal glorious condition,
shall be caught up together with the Saints that are raised from the dead, to
meet the Lord in the air, and there being acquitted and absolved by the
sentence of the Judge, shall enter into the kingdom prepared for them, and so
shall remain for ever with the Lord in endl^ss bl^ss. As for the wicked he says
nothing of them, s^^ing h^ had ^^w^rd of Comfort for them. But as for the other
he bids them comfort one anoth^r with these words, that is, draw matter of
consolation to themselves against the l^ss of their d^ce^s^d friends from the
consideration of the resurrection, and the future ^^^y. From v. 13. to the end.

3dly. He tells them that if any among them did curi^^sly inquire into the
precise time of Chri^ts c^ming to judgment, it was to no purpos^ for him to
write any thing about it, seeing it was not revealed That there should be a
second coming of Christ, viz. to judgment, and that this coming should be
sudden and at a time when least expected, was revealed when Paul wrote this
Epistle. But that it should not be till the departing from the faith, the
revealing o^ Antichrist, and his destruction by the b^eath of the Lords mouth
[2 These 2 3.], it seems was an after-revelation; for the Lord did not at once
reveal all his secrets to his servants, but by parcels, Dr. Slater in loc.
. Hows^^v^r this they could not be ignorant of, (having so often h^ard it from
himself and his associat^s) that Christ will come sudd^nly, and unexpectedly,
as a thief in the night, and will surprise secure impenitent sinners unawares.
But believers need not fear that day because they sleep not in the darkness of
sin and ignorance; The last day c^nnot as a thief in the night surprise them,
because they are children of the light, and of the day, living and walking in
the light of Gospel Truth, and in holin^ss ^f conversation. From v. 1. to 6.

4ly. Having thus spoken of the manner of Christ's coming to judgment. He takes
occasion from thence to exhort them to watchfulness and sobriety, that they may
not f^ar b^ing surprised by that day. Let us not therefore (says he) live in
carnal s^curity as infidels do, but be vigilant and sober; for they that sl^ep
s^curely, or give themselves to drunkenness usually do it in the nig^t and
darkn^ss, but such a course as this, would ill become us who are Christians,
and the children of the day, and live in the light of the knowledge ^f Christ;
we ought to be s^ber, and watchful remembering our life is a spiritual warfare,
and therefore we ought always be upon our guard, having on a breast plate
composed of faith and charity to defend us against the assaults of Satan, and
on our head the hope of salvation for an Helmet. And this should further
^ncourage us in the doing of our duty, because God has not appointed us to be
vessels of his wrath, but has c^lled us to the obtaining of salvation in and
through his Son, who dyed for us, that whether we wake Sicut dormi^e dicuntur
qui mortem obi^re, ita vigilare qui ad cum mortis somnum non pervenerunt.
or sleep, that is, live or dye, we should live with him, namely, a spiritual
life here, and hereafter an eternal life of glory. From the wh^le he exhorts
them to comf^rt and build up one another in faith and holin^ss. From v. 6. to
12.

5ly. He comes n^^ to direct the people how to carry themselves t^wards their
Pastors and spiritu^^ Guides, who labor among them, and faithful^y admonish
and couns^l them (as their need requires) and are over them in the Lord, by
virtue of his c mmission and authority in the things appertaining to their
souls. He injoyns them to give them due respect (...), Hic significat debita
reveren^^ prosequi.
, thankfully to acknowledge their pains, and highly to esteem and love them on
that account; and that they should live in peace and concord among themselves,
and especially with their Pastors. V. 12.13.

6ly. He directs the Ministers how to carry themselves toward the People,
nam^ly, that they should admonish th^se that are unruly, and w^lk dis^rderly,
that they should comfort the feeble-minded, and such as are dejected under
their afflictions, that they should bear with the weak and infirm in the says,
that they should be patient toward all. V. 14.

7ly. He gives now general directions to all. 1. That they abstain from all
private revenge, not rendering evil for evil, but ever following that which is
good both among themselves, and t^wards th^se that are without. 2. To rejoice
evermore in the sense of Gods love to them in Christ, upon which account, they
should be of good courage, and well content, even in the midst of all
tribulations. 3ly. To pray without ceasing, that is, upon every occasion, in
all their nec^ssities, and in every business, as the matter required, yet not
so as never to intermit; but so, as not to give quite over, but to return to it
again. 4ly. In every thing to give thanks, in adversity, as well as prosperity.
For so gracious is the will of God in Christ toward them, that they have
reason so to do. 5ly. To take heed of quenching Lux Salutaris agnitionis Dei
per Spiritum Sanctum accensa extinguitur per neglectum verbi divini, and
precationis devotae, per securitatem, impietatem and ingratitudinem. Glass.
the gifts and graces of the Spirit in themselves, but to labor to stir them
up by prayer, and the due exercise of them. 6ly. That they contemn not, nor
neglect those holy, public exercises Prophetia hoc loco est verbi divini
interpretatio.
wherein the Ministers of the Gosp^l do interpret the Scriptures by the
singular revelation of the Spirit, and speak unto men to edification,
exhortation and comfort [See 1 Cor. 14.3.]. 7ly. To prove all doctrines and
opinions, and to examine them by the rule of the word, and analogy of faith,
and to hold fast that which is good rejecting that which is otherwise. 8ly.
That they abstain from all sorts of evil, and the very appearance of it. From
v. 15. to 23.

Lastly, He concludes his Epistle solemnly praying for them, that God who is
the author of all true peace and comfort, would please to sanctify them in
every part, namely, that their Spirit [that is their intellectual part, their
understanding and will], and their Soul, [that is, their affections and
appetite], and their body, and outward man, may be kept immaculate, so that if
it should so happen, that they should live to the Coming of Christ to judgment
See Notes to 1 Timothy 6.14. and to the 6. v. of chapter 1. to the Philip.
, he may find them in this excellent condition at his Coming. He declares his
confidence that he who has called them to a participation of his grace, will
carry on his own good work in them v. 24. (...). Sic complutensis legit. Deus
est fidelis and vitam caelestem sicut vos sperare jussit ita and praestabit:
(...) dicitur quod reipsa imoletur. ut Romans 4.16. Grot.
; and having begun to sanctify them, will continue to do it; for he is
faithful, and his gifts and calling are without repentance. See 1 Cor. 1.8.
Phil. 1.6. And so desiring their prayers for him, and injoyning them to salute
one another, with the kiss of peace and charity (as believers were wont to do
in those times, according to the custom of those countries). He strictly
charges them that this Epistle be read to the whole church, to all the holy
Brethren Hence the Papists are to be reproved who prohibit Lay People from
reading the Holy Scriptures.
, and so shuts up all with his Apostolical benediction. From v. 23. to the end.

SECT. X.
PAul thus going on courageously with his Ministry, the Jews were so horribly
enraged at him, that they banded against him, and brought him before the
Tribunal of Gallio the Proconsul of that Province, accusing him that he taught
another way of worshipping God, than what the Law of the Jews prescribed, and
according to which the Romans had permitted them to live. But Gallio told them,
if it were a matter that appertained to the civil government, it was but reason
he should hear them, and do them justice; but seeing the Question betwixt them,
was concerning things appertaining to their Religion, he would be no judge in
such matters. The Jews, as it seems, were not satisfied with this answer, but
pressed him again with vehement and somewhat uncivil importunity, that he would
take some course with Paul; Gallio being offended at this their carriage, by
his Officers drove them out of the Court. But they continuing yet to be
troublesome and importunate, some of the Natives of Corinth, fell upon Sosthenes
(one of the Rulers of the Jewish Consistory, who probably was their Captain and
Leader in this complaint against Paul) and beat him in the place; the
Pro-consul taking no notice of it, or reproving it.

Act. 18. v. 12. And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made
insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat,

v, 13. Saying, This fellow persuades men to worship God contrary to the law.

v. 14. And when Paul was now about to open his mouth, Gallio said unto the
Jews, If it were a matter of wrong, or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would
that I should bear with you.

v. 15. But if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to
it: for I will be no judge of such matters.

v. 16. And he drove them from the judgment seat.

v. 17. Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes the chief ruler of the synagogue,
and beat him before the judgment seat: and Gallio cared for none of those
things.

v. 12. Gallio] Erat hic frater magni Senecae, dictus cum Junior esset,
Novatus, sed adoptatus postea a Junio Gallione.
v. 13. Contra legem]. Haec accusatio inde obtentum sumebat quod Apostoli qui
Judaei erant, incircumcisos ad suum coetum admittebant.
v. 14. Secundum rationem vos ferrem]. i. e. Rationi consentaneum esset ut vos
ferrem, and paterer quantum velletis dicere, fuisset hoc mei officii.
v. 17. Sosthenem praefectum Synagogae]. Nempe Synagogae alterius ab ea cui
praeerat Crispus. Nam in magnis urbibus plures erant Synagogae, and singulis
sui Archi. synagogi.
SECT. XI.
ABout this time, as it seems, a certain Egyptian came into the Province of
Judaea, who termed himself a Prophet, and gathered together Four thousand men,
and brought them from the wilderness to the mount of Olives, and there told
them, that by his command, they should see the walls of Jerusalem fall down, by
which they might enter into the City.

But the insurrection of this Egyptian and his Accomplices coming to Faelix the
Roman Governors ears, he brake in upon them with his Roman Horse and Foot, and
killing Four hundred, he took Two hundred Prisoners, and dispersed the rest;
but their Prophet and Leader escaping, it was not known what became of him.
Joseph. l. 2. c. 12.

Of this man Lysias the Captain spoke, when he said to Act. 21.38.
Paul, Art not thou that Egyptian, who before these days, made an uproar, and
leddest out into the wilderness four hundred men, that were murderers.

SECT. XII.
PAul tarried a good while at Corinth after he had been brought before Gallio,
and had came off so well. During which time it is probable, he wrote his Second
Epistle to the Thessalonians. For having in his former expressed his longing
desires to visit them [1 These. 3.10, 11.] and finding by the intervention of
other affairs, and perhaps of dangers, that he was still hindered, he hastened
to send this Second Epistle to supply the want of his presence.

^he Second Epi^^ to the Thessa^^ians.
In which Epistle there are these parts.

1st. AFter his inscription and salutation (which are the same with that in
Thessalonians, against those pers^cutions and afflictions, which he understood
they were exposed to, for the profession of Christ and his Gospel.

The Arguments he uses, in order hereunto, are these; 1. He shows the Condition
of their Church was very happy, because their faith did daily grow and
increase; and love Fides and dilectio duae res maximae in quibus est (...)
Christianismi. vide Ephesians. 4.15.
did so much abound among them. 2. Their faith and patience was so eminent that
he gloried in them, and set them forth as a pattern to other Churches. 3. The
afflictions they so unjustly suffered from their unreasonable Persecutors, were
a manifest demonstration, that there will be a day of Judgment, wherein God
will give to every one according to their works. And He in his infinite wisdom
sees it good to suffer them his servants, here to be sorely afflicted that they
may be meet v. 5. Loquitur hic non de merito, sed de dignatione gratuita. Quis
enim meritus est Vocari? Paraeus. Digni, dignatione Dei, non dignitate nostra.
and fitly qualified according to His order and constitution (who has
appointed that they should suffer with Christ, before they be glorified with
him), to enjoy the kingdom of Heaven, for the obtaining of which they suffered
such hard things. And at the great day, He will manifest his righteous judgment
in punishing their oppressors and persecutors, and will give them (together
with the Apostles, and other Martyrs of Christ), rest and refreshment from all
their troubles and miseries. And this they may assuredly expect when Christ
shall visibly come from heaven royally attended with all his glorious Angels,
and shall in a terrible manner execute vengeance on all that regarded not to
know God, nor to worship and serve him as they ought, and obstinately refused
to entertain and obey the Gospel of his Son. These shall be punished with
everlasting perdition, when they shall appear before Christ the Judge, and shall
see his glorious power A facie Domini and a gloria virtutis ejus] i. e. Cum
conspexerint faciem Domini and gloriam roboris, and potestatis ejus. Vatablus.
. And in that day wherein he shall thus punish his adversaries, he shall be
highly glorified in the glory, which he shall impart to his Saints; the measure
of which shall be so great, that it shall fill them with wonder and admiration,
they finding their expectation so much exceeded. And this he tells them, he
spoke for their comfort, because his testimony (that is, the Evangelical
doctrine he had preached) had found belief and entertainment among them. He
further tells them, that he daily prayed for them, that the Lord would
vouchsafe to make them meet for that glory, to the participation of which he
had so graciously called them (see Ephesians. 4.4.); and that he would accomplish all
things which according to his good pleasure and bounty he had determined to do
for them; and that he would powerfully complete the grace of faith, which be
himself had wrought in them; that the name of Christ may be glorified by them
here, and they be glorified by him in that happy day, and all according to the
riches of his free grace and mercy manifested in his Son. From 1. to the end.

2d. He rectifies a mistake which he understood they were in, concerning the
day of Judgment, as if it were now at hand, and would happen presently in that
age. He beseeches and obtests them, that as touching (...) hic positum est pro
(...) ut 2 Cor. 8.23.
Christ's second coming, and the Saints gathering together from all quarters of
the world, at that time, to meet him, [of which he had spoken in his former
Epistle, Chap. 4. v. 15, 16, 17.] they would not be soon shaken and driven from
what (...) Hic expono sententiam. Ne facile dimoveamini ab illa sententia quam
me docente imbibistis. Grot.
he had taught them by any seducers whatsoever, who either by some pretended
revelation from the spirit, or some speech of the Apostle (which they pretended
they had heard, or from some passages in his former Epistle (which they
mis-understood), endeavored to persuade them, that the day of judgment was at
hand. He tells them there are several things which must pr^cede Christ's second
coming, which he will acquaint them with, that they may not be deceived. 1. A
great and general Apostasy from the faith [see 1 Timothy 4.1.]. 2. The revelation
of the great Ebiou and Cerinthus and other Heretics who denied the Deity of
Chrsst, the Apostle calls Antichrists. 1 John 2.18. as forerunners of the
great Antichrist.
and chief Antichrist, whom he characterizeth after this manner, calling him
the man of sin, the son of perdition, one who opposes and exalts himself
above Christ, (who is very God), in all his offices, Regal, Sacerdotal, and
Prophetical, yea exalts himself above every thing that is worshipped, that
is, above magistrates [who in Scripture are called Gods, Psalm. 82.6.], and are
(...) August, or illustrious. Yea, who exalts himself above all that is
called God; one way or other [that is, above all powers whatsoever], arrogating
such things to himself, as only belong unto God, and thereby endeavoring (as
it were) to d^clare that he is God. He sits and rules in the Temple of God,
that is, among the people that bear the name of Christ, the visible external
Christian Church, (the society that profess themselves the Temple of God), he
tells them, he fits and rules, and exalts himself, as if he were God,
uncontroulably, antiquating, or dispensing even with the laws of God himself.
All which things they might remember he had acquainted them with before. He
comes therefore now to show them what it was that withheld, and hindered, and
stayed his revealing and manifesting of himself for the present, so that he
could not publicly appear as yet, nor should before that time and season,
which the divine providence had appointed. That which hindered (as it seems) was
the entireness of the Roman Empire, which (probably) he had hinted to them
before, but mentions not here (possibly) that he might not provoke the present
Roman power against the Christians, who promised themselves that their Empire
should never have an end. And if any should enquire whether Antichrist was not
yet in the world, he answers, the mystery of iniquity was even now working,
that is, there was something now working in the world, that was a type and
figure of that which should show it self more plainly in the great Antichrist,
viz. the spirit of contention for rule and priority See Dr. Moris learned piece
called the mystery of iniquity.
. This bore some similitude with the spirit of the great Antichrist, who should
appear in his season. But this Antichristian heat of ambition must play at
lesser game, till the (...) the Roman Emperor be removed, who possessed Rome,
which was to be the Seat of Antichrist; which Seat being once void, Antichrist
would enter, and discover himself, and advance himself above all laws, both
divine and humane He is therefore called here (...).
. So that this man of Sin (...) does not intimate one individual man, but the
series of shavelings that were to succeed in one Seat. As Heb. 9.7, 25. (...),
The high Priest denotes the whole series or succession of Priests. And (...)
signifies not one Pastor, but the series of faithful ministers.
is to be understood of one that is to appear after the breaking of the Roman
Empire in pieces If any ask Tertullian who this (...) is, that hinders the
revealing of Antichrist, he tells him, Quis nisi Romanus status? cujus in december
Reges abscessio dispersa, Anticichristum super inducet, and tunc revelabitu^
iniquus.
. The Apostle further shows, that Jesus Christ our Savior shall destroy this
Antichrist by the sword of his mouth, that is, by the preaching of his Gospel,
and the power of his spirit concurring therewith, and by the brightness of his
coming, that is, by clear and convictive reasons and arguments divulged by
such, as shall speak by the spirit of Christ. He further declares that the
coming of this Antichrist, his raising, and first advancement to his kingdom,
will be with such kind of working, as Satan is wont to use to seduce men,
namely, with the power of signs, and wonders, and diabolical illusions, which
Satan will produce to confirm the dominion, and false doctrine of Antichrist;
and which are beyond humane, but not Angelical power; and with all unjust and
fraudulent dealing and deceit, with all arts and tricks of cosenage, that the
Devil himself can invent, which will take place and prevail in such whom God
(because they received not the truth in the love of it, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness) will judicially give over to strong delusions, to their
perdition and damnation. From v. 1. to 13.

3dly. Having uttered this sad prophecy; lest the Thessalonians should be
startled at it, he tells them they need not fear seduction by this
Antichristian spirit, because God had chosen them to salvation through
sanctification of his spirit, and belief of the truth, having effectually
called them by the Gospel, which he had preached unto them, that they might
obtain the glory purchased by Christ. Wherefore he exhorts them to constancy in
the faith, and to maintain the traditions, instructions, and doctrines
delivered to them by him, and which they had received either by his preaching
or writing.

Lastly, he earnestly prays for them, that Jesus Christ our Lord, and God our
gracious father in him, (who has given all true believers solid grounds of
perpetual comfort, and good hope of eternal life through his free grace v. 16.
(...)] pro (...) vel (...) Hebraismus. Pisc.
), would comfort their hearts in all their afflictions, and strengthen them
unto every good word and work v. 17. (...)] pro (...).
, that is, that they might so speak and so act as may be most pleasing, and
acceptable in his sight. From v. 13. to the end.

4ly. In the close of his Epistle, he exhorts them to pray earnestly, that the
Gospel may have a free course and be glorified by the conversion of the
unconverted, and by the edification and further improvement of those that are
effectually called, as it was among them; and that himself and other preachers
of it might be delivered from unreasonable and absurd men, who perversely
opposed it. And of that sort of men, he tells them, there be too too many in
the world, among whom the Gospel will not be entertained, nor meet with faith
Ad fidem vocantur omnes quibus annunciatur Evangelium. Sed qui in vitiis sibi
placeut, non credent nobis inquit Lactantius etiamsi solemn manibus gestemus.
and obedience. However as to them, he declares his confidence, that God who
has effectually called them, and who is constant and faithful in promoting his
own work, will establish them in faith and holiness, and will defend them
against the evils, dangers, and temptations of Satan and his instruments; and
that which further encouraged him to hope it, was their ready obedience to his
injunctions. He prays that the Lord would by his Spirit direct and incline
their hearts to express that ardent love to himself In Charitatem Dei, i. e. in
Charitatem suam. Emphatice nomen cognatum pro reciproco.
, which they of duty owe him, and to an imitation of the patience of Christ v.
5. (...).
. From v. 1. to 6.

5ly. He prescribes the practice of Church Discipline, toward such as walk
disorderly among them, and not according to the rule and doctrine by him
delivered. He forbids them all familiar converse with such that they may be
ashamed, and (reflecting upon their evil courses) may repent and reform. By the
disorderly, he means, such as lived idly, and were busy-bodies (...) sciscitor,
(...) Curiosus. vid. 1 Timothy 5.13. (...) Curiose agentes, i. e. Cura rerum
alienarum districti.
in other men's matters; which kind of course, he shows, was very contrary to
his practice among them, who did not eat any man's bread gratis, but wrought
with his own hands Mos hic Paulo ubique, 1 Cor. 4.12. Act. 20.34. 1 These. 2.9.
in the day time, and sometimes part of the night, at his trade of Tent-making
[see Act. 18.3.], that he might not be chargeable to any of them, though he had
power to have challenged maintenance for his preaching the Gospel among them,
as other Apostles did [see 1 Cor. 9.3, etc.]. But he had departed from his
right, and had done that to which he was not bound, to incite them by his own
example to labor, each one in his Calling very diligently. For this he
enjoined them, when he was with them, that if any lived idly, and would not
work, [having health, strength, and opportunity for it], they should not eat,
namely be relieved by the Charity of the Church, who are only to take care of
those that are indigent and necessitous. He therefore exhorts the disorderly,
and commands them in the name of Christ to reform, and to live peaceably upon
the fruit of their own labor. As for those of them that were free from these
misdemeanors, he exhorts them to go on constantly in their duty, and not to be
weary of doing that which is good. And if any disorderly persons among them
would not obey these admonitions, given in this Epistle, he injoyns, that they
should be noted as persons not fit to be conversed familiarly with, that so
(entering into a consideration of their evil ways) they may be brought to
repentance. Yet he tells them, they must dispense this severity with wisdom,
not reckoning these offenders as enemies Vide Lev. 10.17.

Haec enim excommunicatio non est instar veneni quod hosti datur ad exitium,
sed medicina quae fratri datur ad salutem. Quod autem objicitur, Math. 18.
Excommunicatum habendum esse instat Ethnici, illud non repugnat huic
sententiae, quoniam illud a Christo non absolute dicitur, sed tantum ratione
Communionis sacrae; a qua arcetur, ne sua contagione reliquos inficiat. Gomarus.


, (as of whose repentance and reformation they despaired), but as long as they
made profession of the Christian Religion, they should consider them as lapsed
brethren, and accordingly exhort and admonish them as those they desired and
endeavored to reduce and reform. From v. 6. to 16.

He shuts up the Epistle praying for them, that God, who is the author of
peace, would give them peace, at all times and in all places (f), v. 16 (...).
Vetus interterpres legit, (...). Quae lectio videtur genuina, Piscatori,
Grotio, and Bezae.
and every manner of way, namely with himself and with one another.

The Conclusion of the Epistle (wherein he salutes them), he wrote with his own
hand, that they might discern it from any counterfeit, that might be carried
about in his name. Verse. 17.18.

SECT. XIII.
THE Apostle having continued a year and half at Corinth, and fairly planted a
Church there (though it were miserably degenerated soon after) he now
determines to sail to Ephesus; Aquila and Priscilla resolving to accompany him:
And having taken his leave of the Brethren there; at Cenchrea a Haven on the
East side of that City, he shaved his head Quod Cenchreis dicitur aut Aquila
aut Paulus crinem totondisse quia votum habebat, de sacro voto id non potest
intelligi, quia deponendus erat capillus votivus Hierosolymis and supponendus
ollis pacisicorum. Civil istud votum fuisse videtur quod sumpserat vel Paulus
vel Aquila qualia multa, faciebant ^udaei Non ante capillum tondebo quam ad
illum locum pervenero. Quae vota erant peregrinantium. Ita Paulus votum fecit
tondendi Capilli ubi Cenchreas pervenisset. Salmas.
. The reason of which, probably was this: He had (it seems) before taken upon
him, for some time, the Vow of the Nazarites, whereby he was obliged to abstain
from wine, and shearing his head, and touching of the dead. But having now
accomplished his Vow, he shore his head, and returned to the common way of
living, according as was prescribed, Numb. 6.18, 19, 20. The reason of this Vow
we may gather from 1 Cor. 9.20. namely, in things indifferent he was willing to
comply with the weak Jews; to show, that he was no contemner of the Law: And
for the same reason he caused Timothy to be circumcised; and for the same
reason, purified himself in the Temple at Jerusalem, Act. 21.23, 24.

The Apostle being now come to Ephesus, he taught in the Synagogue of the Jews;
but thought not fit (though desired) to stay long there then, being prompted
(as it seems) by some secret instinct of the Spirit, now to go up to the
approaching Feast at Jerusalem; not that he now took himself obliged to observe
the Feasts, or antiquated Ceremonies of the Law, (see Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16.
Romans 14.5.) but he was willing to go to this Feast, that he might in that great
solemnity and concourse of people, have more advantage to spread the Gospel
among the Jews. Leaving therefore Aquila and Priscilla at Ephesus, he sailed
thence to Caesarea, and thence went up to Jerusalem; where it seems he stayed
not long, finding possibly not such success of his endeavors as he expected
and hoped for. Whereupon he hastened from thence and went down to Antioch in
Syria, where he stayed for some time.

Act. 18. v. 18. And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then
took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him
Priscilla and Aquila: having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow.

v. 19. And he came to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself entered into
the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.

v. 20. When they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consented not:

v. 21. But bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast
that comes, in J^rusalem; but I will return again unto you, if God will: and
he sailed from Ephesus.

v. 22. And when he had landed at Cesarea, and gone up, and saluted the Church,
he went down to Antioch.

CHAP. VI. Anno Christi Claudii 55 13 56 14


Containing Paul's Fourth Journey, which he began from Antioch in Syria; which
we call Iter Ephesinum, His Ephesine Journey. Iter Ephesinum.

SECT. I.
PAul having spent some time at Antioch, he departed thence; and went thorough
Galatia, and Phrygia, and traveling from place to place, as he went along, he
visited and confirmed the Disciples in those parts. When he came among the
Galatians, he was received by them with all imaginable joy and gladness, they
being not only not offended at the tribulation which was outwardly brought upon
him, but they gladly and kindly received him as if he had been an Angel of God,
nay even as the Lord Jesus himself, Gal. 4.14. Among other things which he now
injoyneth them, he appoints that they should make collections, and set apart
their Charity for the poor every Lords day, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.

Act. 18. v. 22. And when he had landed at Cesarea, and gone up, and saluted
the Church, he went down to Antioch.

v. 23. And after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went over all
the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.

SECT. II.
IN the mean time, whilst the Apostle is thus confirming the Churches formerly
planted in Galatia and Phrygia (see Chap. 16.6.), a certain man born of Jewish
Parents at Alexandria in Egypt by nam^ Apollos, being a judicious, learned and
eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, and something instructed in the way
of the Lord, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel (though as yet but
imperfectly), came to Ephesus, and being of great zeal and fervency o^ spirit,
he taught boldly in the Jewish Synagogues, the Doctrine of the Gospel according
to his knowledge: for he knew only so much of it, as John Baptist had taught his
Disciples, and confirmed and sealed with Baptism, by which the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost were not imparted, as they were to many by the Baptism
of the Apostles Act. 8.15, 16, 17. And possibly he had been in Judaea in John
Baptists time, and so either was baptized by him, or else by some of his
Disciples, who were now dispersed abroad. Aquila and Priscilla hearing him
preach, and perceiving that he wanted something of that knowledge, that they had
attained to, they took him home to them, and in private conference informed him
more fully and clearly concerning Christ and the Gospel; showing him what
Christ had done and suffered to save sinners, and what was required of those
that shall be saved by him. Apollos being thus more full^ instructed in the
Doctrine of the Gospel desires to travel into Achaia (viz. to Corinth, the
chief City thereof), that he might preach the Gospel there. The Brethren
therefore at Ephesus, encouraging him in this design, and accompanying him with
their Letters Testimonial to the Brethren at Corinth; when he was come thither,
he watered what Paul had before planted [1 Cor. 3.6.]; and much confirmed the
Disciples in that place; and mightily convinced the Jews (who were his great
opposers), that Jesus was the true and only Messiah promised to the Fathers.

Act. 18. v. 24. And a certain Jew, named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an
eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus.

v. 25. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent in
the spirit, he spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only
the b^pti^m of John.

v. 26. And he b^gan to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and
Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of
G d more perfectly.

v. 27. And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote,
exhorting the di^cipl^s to receive him: who when he was come, helped them much
which had believed through grace.

v. 28. For he mightily convinc^d the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the
scriptures, that Jesus was Christ.

v. 24 (...)] Vir eloquens, vel, vir prudens and sapiens.
v. 25. Initiatus vta Domini] prima elementa Christianismi acceperat, and
docebat diligenter ea quae sunt Domini pro modo cognitionis quam acceperat.

Sciens tantum Baptisma Johannis] h. e. Doctrinam ejus; nem^e scivit, Exhibitum
esse Messiam, and aliquo modo ejus officium and beneficia; sed ignoravit quod
Jesus sit Messiah, quodque sit crucifixus pro genere humano, resuscitatus, and
glorificatus, and alia non pauca huc pertinentia.

Per baptisma Johannis intelligenda est Doctrina de Christo quam Johannes
tradiderat, and baptismate obsignuverat discipulis sais. Synecdoche Metonymica.
Piscator.


SECT. III.
Whilst Apollos was thus employed at Corinth, Paul having visited the
Churches in Phrygia and Galatia, came to Ephesus Ephesus erat Metropolis
Ioniae, clara conditoribus Amazonibus, gra^i diluvio quod p^ssa est, templo D^n
e ejusque incen^io, viris doctis, and artificibus inde ortis, art magic^ ibi
usitat^; epistol^ Pau^i ad era scripta, n e non diuturni Johannis Evangeli^ta
in hac urbe resilentia; epistol^que ad ca^ scripta, Apoc. 2.1.
, (according to his promise made to them, chap. 18. v. 21.), and there he found
Twelve Disciples, no further instructed in Christianity than the Doctrine by
John; having received Baptism from him, or some of his Disciples scattered
abroad, as was the case of Apollos before mentioned. Paul asks them whether
they had received the Holy Ghost? They answer, they had not so much as heard
whether there were any Holy Ghost; that is, that there were now any miraculous
Gifts imparted by the Holy Ghost. In which words, they seem to speak after the
common Tenet of the Jewish Nation, which was, That after the death of Ezra,
Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi the Holy Ghost departed from Israel; and they
profess they never heard of his being a new given, with his miraculous Gifts.
He asks them then, Unto what were ye baptized? they say, unto John's baptism;
that is, into the Doctrine which John taught, and sealed by Baptism; which
being published to them, and by them owned and professed, they were baptized;
by which Baptism, the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost were not given or
imparted to any. To this Paul replies, that the ministry of John was not to
gather Disciples to himself; but he exhorted his hearers to repent and believe
in him that was shortly to appear and manifest himself, viz. in Christ Jesus,
and to expect remission of sins only by Him. Which they, to wit John's hearers,
understanding and consenting unto, they were baptized by him in the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

Paul having thus instructed them concerning the true tendency of John's
Baptism, and how it pointed to Christ, he laid his hands on them, and the
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost were immediately conferred on them. And they
spoke diverse Tongues, which before they understood not, and were endued with
the Gift of prophesying, that is, of declaring things to come and interpreting
the writings of the Prophets, that they might be fit Teachers of others.

Act. 19.1. And it came to pass, that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having
passed through the upper coasts, came to Ephesus, and finding certain disciples,

v. 2. He said unto them, Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed?
And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy
Ghost.

v. 3. And he said unto them; Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said,
Unto John's baptism.

v. 4. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance,
saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after
him, that is, on Christ Jesus.

v. 5. When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

v. 6. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them,
and they sp^ke with tongues, and prophesied.

v. 7. And all the men were about twelve.

v. ^ Number Spiritum Sanctum accepistis?] i. e. Dona illa eximia Spiritus Sancti
ex quibus colligeretur vos ad sanctum ministerium divinitus vocari, scilicet
donum linguatum and Prophetiae. Nam etsi ista dona omnibus credentibus and
baptizatis tunc temporis non erant communia, nec necessaria, tamen cum hi
discipuli Johannis destinabantur ad docendum in Ecclesia and haud dub^e zelo
ferverunt, (ut Apollo, itidem Johannis discipulus, cap. 18.24.), requirebantur
in illis hujus modi dona, in quibus pateret, ipsos divinitus ad sacrum
ministerium vocatos esse.
v. 5 Breviter indicat Paulus discrimen baptismi Johannis a praesenti baptismo;
quod Johannes quidem baptizavit in venturum Messiam ac populum jussit in eum
credere; ipsi vero bapt^zabant in exhibitum, passum, and glorificatum; simulque
eos proculdubio de tota sacra ^rtade, and mysterio Christi, plane instituebant.

Audientes vero] i. e. qui ex populo hanc Johannis concionem audierunt sideque
acceperunt, ii baptizati sunt ab illo, scil. Johanne. Sic Streso and Glassius.


SECT. IV.
THE Apostle after this private instruction of these Twelve Disciples, having a
long time to stay at Ephesus, for the first three months he preached the Gospel
in the Synagogue of the Jews, laboring to convince them; but when instead of
being convinced, he saw them remain obdurate and refractory, and not only not
to embrace the Gospel, but to oppose it, and speak contumeliously of it, and
vehemently to contend with him for preaching of it (which as some conceive he
calls, his fighting with beasts See note on 1 Cor. 15.32.
at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. v. 32.), he left them, and separated the Christians of
that place from them, whom with others that came to hear him he daily
instructed in a certain place, called the Verus cultus N T. non quaerit
differentiam locorum s^^ in omni loco vult exerreri. ^^ulus non re^ormidat
Schola Philosophica Evangelium docere. Vide Ioh. 4.20.21. 1 Timothy 2.8.
School of Tyrannus; and this he did for the space of two years: so that the
sweet savor, and report of the Gospel was spread abroad through all Asia,
properly so called (namely, which lies about Ephesus), both among Jews and
Gentiles [1 Cor. 16.9.]. And it pleased the Lord greatly to confirm the
Doctrine of the Gospel here preached by the Apostle, by enabling him to work
many Miracles ^iracula, Ecclesiae non sunt semp^r necessaria, adeo ut illa
Ecclesia quae d^num miraculorum non habet, ca^^^ si no Characte^^^tico unde
agnosc^tur esse vera (...). Nam 1. Nulla est promissio. ^la enim quae est, Mat.
16.1^. 1 Cor. ^^.28. non est perpetua, sed (...) 2. Miracula exige (...)
d^^^matur Joh. 4.48. 1 Cor. 1.^2. 3. Vetamur miraculis fidere fine Scriptura
aut quae fiunt ad consi ^andum doctrinam Scripturae cont^ari^m, Deuteronomy. 13. 4.
Miracula ultimorum temporum declarantur esse signa Antichristi. 2 These. 2.9.10.
in this place. For he did not only cure those that came to him, but by his
touching linen clothes and sending them to those that were sick, or possessed
with Devils, they were thereupon immediately cured. Some Jewish exorcists
Exor^ismus significat vehementem obtestationem qua in nomine Domini aliquem
obligamus ut hoc vel illud faciat vel dicat, vid. Numb. 5.19. 1 Reg. 22.16,
Math. 26.63. 1 These 5.27.

In veteri Testamento nihil legitur de Exorcistis sicut neque de obsessis, sed
circa Christi tempora Diaboli inter Judaeos licentiose and evidenter
grassabantur, and corpora hominum variis mod^^ ^^ffligebant, quod eo fine
potissimum a Deo concessum est, ut gloria Christi tanto magis fieret per p^cua.
Christus igitur, potestate sua divina usus, plurima daemonia ejecit, and
Apostolis quoque suis have po^estatem concessit. Luc. 10.17, 18, 19. Verum quod
Christus and Apostoli secerunt, vere ex potestate divina cui cedere Diaboli
cogebantur, id quidam Judaei ex (...) Christi and Apostolorum fecerunt
praestigio^e, quibus Satan cedebat non coactus, sed volens, ut eos in
superstitione confirmaret and quoties obdurandis in malitia hominibus consultum
esse videret. Tales fu^runt hi, and tales quoque videntur fuisse illi Judaeorum
filii de quibus Christus, Mat. 12.27. qui nomine Christi hypocritice utebantur,
sicut illi de quibus, Mar. 9.38.


, the Sons of One of the 24 Heads of the Families of Priests, See 1 Chronicles.
24.4. 2 Chronicles. 36.14. Math. 2.4.
Sceva, who went about pretending to cure diseases, and cast out Devils; seeing
what great miracles Paul wrought in the Name of Jesus, they likewise attempted
to cast out a Devil out of a man possessed, by using the same name, though in
Jesus they believed not. But the Devil would not obey them Diabolus hic fit
concionator^ Propheta, Angelus lucis, graviterque reprehendit exorcistas qui
tamen instinctu Diaboli omnia sua agebant, idque non alio fine quam ut Pauli
authoritatem and integritatem suspectam redderet.
, as not having any authority from Jesus as Paul had, though they used his
Name: Nay, he was so far from obeying them, that he made the man that was
possessed, fall violently on them, and tear off their Clothes and wound them;
so that they were forced to run away. Which thing being once noised abroad,
fear fell both upon Jews and Gentiles, and many were hereby brought to believe
in Christ. And several that were thus wrought upon, came to the Apostles, and
acquainted them with the actions and courses of their former lives, and desired
advice and counsel from him. And many that had practiced magic and sorcery,
and such like wicked Arts, brought out, and publicly burnt their conjuring
Books, though they were of very high value and price in that City, so much
given to Magic; and if estimated by what they might have been there sold for,
the price would amount to about a Thousand five hundred pounds of our money. So
mightily the Gospel prevailed upon the Apostles preaching.

Act. 19. v. 8. And he went into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for the space
of three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of
God.

v. 9. But when diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that
way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples,
disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.

v. 10. And this continued by the space of two years, so that all they which
dwelt in Asia, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

v. 11. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul,

v. 12. So that from his body were brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs, or
aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of
them.

v. 13. Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call
over them which had evil spirits, the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure
you by Jesus, whom Paul preaches.

v. 14. And there were seven sons of one Sceva a Jew, and chief of the priests,
which did so.

v. 15. And the evil spirit answered, and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know,
but who are ye?

v. 16. And the man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt on them, and overcame
them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked,
and wounded.

v. 17. And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus,
and fear fell on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

v. 18. And many that believed, came, and confessed, and showed their d^^^s.

v. 19. Many also of them which used curious arts, brought their books
together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them,
and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.

v. 20. So mightily grew the word of God, and prevailed.

v. 9. In Schola Tyranni] Sophistae sive declamatoris cui nomen Tyrannus, vel
aedificium publicum a quodam ejus nominis magnate erectum, ut populus ac
juventu^ in s^ientiiis and artibus liberalibus ibi exercitaretur.
v. 12. Et discederent ab iis morbi] Ita praestitum quod dixerat Christus, Joh.
5^.12. and Act. 5.15.
v. 19. (...)] Curiosa, i. e. magica. Ephesus ante alias civitates his pravis
stud^^ dedita erat. (...) Beza per denarios vertit; sic etiam vulgatus, Arabs
per drachmas quae tantundem fere valebant atque denarii.
SECT. V.
Whilst the Apostle is thus employed, he understands, that since his departure
from the Galatians, some corrupt and false teachers coming from Judaea, had
crept in among them, who professing Christ in outward show, taught, that the
observation of the Mosaical institutions ought to be joined with Faith in
Christ as necessary to Salvation: These false Teachers had infected most, if
not all the Churches in that region with their erroneous Doctrine, And they, it
seems, pretended to be sent thither by those three eminent Apostles Peter,
James, and John, and that they taught nothing but what was agreeable to their
minds. These Apostles they highly magnified, as having seen Christ in the
flesh, but vilified Paul, not allowing him the name or right of an Apostle, nor
granting that he was ever called by Christ, or owned for an Apostle by the
other Apostles. Hereupon Paul thought it necessary to write an Epistle to the
Galatians; wherein his scope is to convince them of their errors, to reduce
them to the right way again, and to instruct them in the duties of a holy life.

In which Epistle there are these three parts, The Epistle to the Galatians.


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
IN the Preface he declares, he was a true Apostle, not called or
commissi^nated Jesus Christ, after he was raised from the dead, and had
ascended into Heaven: And his calling was so much the more excellent, because
Christ, who called him, was then invested with greater and more excellent
glory, than when he was upon the Earth. And he was called also by the will of
God the Father See 1 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1.
, who raised Jesus Christ his Son from the dead, and gave all power unto him
for the governing of his Church.

And that he might make this his admonition and address to the Churches of
Galatia more effectual, he joins all the rest of the faithful Brethren that
were with him in it, wishing unto them in his own and their names abundance of
grace and peace from God the Father (the Fountain of all blessings), and from
Jesus Christ the Mediator (who is the Conduit pipe by whom they are conveyed);
which Jesus, he shows, gave himself unto death for the expiation of our sins,
and to redeem us and recover us out of that sinful and miserable state wherein
the world lies, according to the gracious appointment of God the Father, who is
worthy to receive all honor and glory from us, for so inestimable a benefit
through all eternity. From Verse 1. to 6.

He now c^mes to the Body of his Epistle, wherein we may observe these
particulars.

1. He sharply reprehends these Galatians, that they had so soon forsaken God
who ha^ ^ad^d them t^ a participation of the grace of Christ [to save them by
his ^race (...) the w^rks of the Law] and had embraced a new strange Doctrine
(...) Gospel f^^gn^d by men. He tells them, that there was no other Gospel than
that true Gospel of Christ which he had preached among them. Only there were
some seducers, who had crept in among them, who disturbed their peace, and
quite perverted and changed the Doctrine he had preached to them, mingling the
righteousness of works with the righteousness of faith, and maintaining, that
justification is not by faith only, but also by the observation of the Mosaical
rites, and the works of the Law. He tells them, that he had taught the Gospel
of Christ so sincerely and so certainly, that whosoever should teach them
another Gospel not agreeing thereto, whether he were Angel or Man, they ought ^
hold him as a person deserving to be abhorred has of God and all good m^n. And
that he might show them, he spoke it not from any perturbation of mind, but
deliberately, he repeats it again, to fasten it the more upon their minds. From
Verse 6. to 10.

2. He endeavors to convince them of their great error in forsaking the Gospel
preached unto them by him, and undervaluing his Apostleship, showing them. 1.
The integrity he had used in his Ministry. For he did not persuade that men but
that God should be heard and obeyed, that so their says might be founded on
divine authority, and not ^n humane, nor did he aim at pleasing men but Christ
Jesus. For should he now study to please men, as he did in times past, when he
was a Pharisee (when to please the high Priest and Jews he persecuted the
Church), he could not be a faithful servant of Christ, but might justly be
reckoned the servant of those whom he endeavored to please. 2. He sets before
them the divinity of his Doctrine, which he assures them was not given him, or
taught him by man, nor did he receive it at the second hand, only by tradition;
but it was immediately revealed to him by Jesus Christ. And that they might the
more readily be persuaded hereof, he tells them, that they cannot but have
heard of his former enmity and h^stility against the Gospel and Church of
Christ before his conversion See Act. 26.27.
, and how he had attained to a great measure of knowledge in that religion which
he then p^s ssed; and had ability to defend it beyond many of those that were
equal in a^^ with him; and how he was as strict a maintainer of the Jewish
cust^m^s, and of the unwritten traditions of the Fathers (which they superadded
to the Law), as an^ man what ever.

Now they could (...), ^n imagine, that so great a change could be wrought in
him by any ^^dinary m^ans, but must needs be from God, who (acc^rding to the
rich^s and (...) ^s his ^^ace), having determined even from his infancy to set
him ^^art f^r his (...) service, in his due time actually and effectually
called him, and illumi^^^^d his mind with th saving knowledge of his Son,
appointed Act 9.15.
that he should ^r^^ch him and make him known to the Gentiles. He shows, that
being thus miraculously called and commissionated to preach the Gospel, he
immediately set about it, not consulting with any man living whether he were
rightly in^tructed in the Gospel, or whither he had power sufficient to preach
it. Neither went he up to J^rusalem to consult Peter, or James, or any of the
twelve, that were instated in that ^ff^^ bef^^^ him, but went presently from
Damascus into Arabia, and there preached the G^sp^l for three years, and so
returned to Damascus again. After th^^ h^ w^nt up to Jerusalem to see and visit
Peter See Sect. 3. of Chap. 2.
, but he ab^d^ with him only (...) days, and besides him, he saw no other of
the Apostles there, save only (...), Christ ^insman, the rest (probably) being
gone out to preach the Gospel abroad. N was t^ the truth of what he here
delivered, (it being a matter of great import (...) and ^ which the success of
his Ministry much depended, that these things sh^ul^ (...) ^^lieved concerning
him), he solemnly calls God to witn^ss, confirming it by a^^^th. After this (he
tells them) he preached in Syria and Cilicia, with the approbation of the
Apostles and Churches of Judea, that received and, (...) the Christian faith,
who knew him not so much as by f^ce, (so far was he (...) being in^tructed by
them), but hearing of him, and being certified of his wand^^ful conversion, and
how he was turned from being ^ p^rsecutor to be a preacher of the Gospel, they
glorified God for his grace s^ extraordinarily manifested toward him. From
Ver. 10. to the end.

3. He farther sh^ws them, that fourteen years after, being m^ved by an
extraordinary ins^^^, and command from God, he went up to Jerusalem again with
Barnab^s and Titus, and there did particularly (...)
acquaint them st^eminent of the Apostles with the Doctrine which he had
pr^ached among the Gentiles, that by their consenting unto it, as the fame
which they themselves did preach, his bypast and future labors might have the
more success; which otherwise (as it seems) were in danger to be hindered and
fru^trated by the Calumnies of his adversaries, who affirmed, that the Apostles
at Jerusalem did not approve of the Doctrine which he preached. Therefore as a
testimony of their agreement with him, (he tells them) the other Ap^stles did
clearly j^in with him, in the point controverted between him and his
adversaries, judging Circumcision t^ be a thing not necessary to salvation,
else they would have required Titus (who came with him, and was born of Gentile
Parents) to be circumcised, which ^^t they did not. And the reason why they did
it not, he shows, was, because s^m^ (...) brethren that (...) great urgers ^f
the necessity of Circumcision, and the other Levitical ordin^nc^s (and were
brought in to be members of the Church of Jerusalem by fr^ud, and h^ reason of
their large pretenses t^ piety), had secretly convey^d thems^l^^s that m^^ting
which he had with the other Apostles, and that pur^^s^ly to see^t^h th^^ he
would, before them, stand to, and defend that liberty and freedom (...) the
Ceremonial Law, which he had preached among the Gentiles, as a part of Chri^^^
purchase. If he had ^^d ne it, they would have triumph^d ver him as (...) it
had ^^eanted before the Ap^stl s, what he had before others affirm^^, and so
would have endeavored, to bring back the Christian Gentiles and the whole
Church to the bondage of the Ceremonial Law. And hence it was, that neither he
nor the other Apostles would yield to the importunate desire of these false
Brethren, no not for an hour, (that is, so far as to use Circumcision, that one
time), and that because this had been to subject the Apostles and the truth to
their adversaries, and so the purity of the Gospel Doctrine would not have been
maintained among the Churches of Christ, and particularly not among the
Galatians. And as a further evidence, that his calling and office were from
God, he shows them, that at that meeting which he had with those Apostles, who
were looked upon as the chief^st, viz. Peter, James, and John, and which his
adversaries boasted of as his Superiors, when they had heard his Doctrine, they
corrected nothing in it, nor added any thing to the knowledge he had before. And
for their personal privilege s, viz. that they had seen Christ in the flesh,
and were Apostles before him even when he was a Persecutor, etc. these things
he took no notice of, because G^d regards no man for external things, by which
they are outwardly valu^^ or esteemed among men; and can make use of the
meanest as well as the most excellent instruments in his service. But on the
other side, when those same Apostles who were deservedly reputed pillars of the
Church (as being under God great upholders of it by their gifts, diligence,
and fidelity) had by certain evidences found, that the Apostolic office to
preach to the uncircumcised Gentiles was committed to him, as the Apostolic
office to preach to the Jews was committed to Peter, and that the like
assistance, blessing, and success did accompany the labors of the one as well
as of the other; these three Apostles (perceiving the grace and gifts, both
ordinary and extraordinary which were bestowed upon him, fitting him for the
Apostolic office), they did, without much more ad^, acknowledge him and
Barnabas for their Colleagues or fellow-Apostles, giving them the right hand, in
testimony thereof. And as a token of their mutual agreement in dividing their
Charge, they consented that Paul and Barnabas should go to the Gentiles, and
that they three would go to the Jews Which Paction is nothing contrary to what
is held forth, Act. 15.7. For Peter speaks not there, that his ordinary
Charge was to preach to the Gentiles, but only of that act of his mentioned
Act. 10. whereby he was at one time employed to preach to them.
. And as a further testimony of their agreement, these three Apostles did
earnestly recommend to Paul and Barnabas the collecting of some charitable
contribution among the Churches ^f the G^ntiles 1 Cor. 16.1.
, for the supply of the p^or Christian Jews Romans 15.25.
, which they very readily agre^d to, and diligently performed, as we may see, 2
Cor. chapter 8. and chapter 9. L^^t y, to evidence yet further the divine authority of
his office unt^ them, and that he was not inferior to the other Apostles, he
tells them, that as an Apostle ^f Christ, and by virtue of his Apostolic
office, he did with authority (...), and boldly and freely oppose himself to
Peter, one of the chief Apostles, when in his practice at Antioch, he declined
from the Doctrine taught by himself, concerning the abrogation of the
Ceremonial Law. For whereas before s^m^ J^ws (that w^r friends ^f James) Causa
hujus perniciosae dissimulationis indicatur, nempe eum timuisse Jacobi
familiares. Hac Ill^r.
came from Jerusalem, Peter did h^ld fellowship with the Christian Gentiles,
and did eat freely with them (which h^ di^ agreeably t^ the Doctrine of
Christian Liberty, by which all differences ^f m^^ts and nations were removed
under the Gospel, as Peter himself was instruct^d by Vision, Act. 10.15.), but
when th^se Jews were come, he separated himself from the Gentiles, as if it had
been unlawful for him to eat with them, and this thorough fear of offending
those f^re mentioned Jews (who were tenacious of the Ceremonial Law); by which
bad example of his, some of the other Christian J^ws, that were at Antioch,
were drawn aside, yea and Barnabas also was drawn into the same dissimulation,
carrying it so, as if fellowship with the Christian Gentiles had been unlawful,
whereas both himself and Peter very well knew the contrary. Now when Paul saw
that they walk^d not uprightly according to the true Doctrine of the Gospel, he
publicly expostulated with Peter, and demanded of him, why he (being a Jew)
had cast off the Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, and us^d hss Christian Liberty,
(living after the manner of the Christian Gentiles when he saw occasion) and
yet inf^rced this yoke on the Gentiles, endeavoring thereby to induce them to
think that it was n^cessary now for them under the G^spel, to ^bserve the
C^rem^^ial law whereas it was never given unto them, nor they ever obliged to
observe it, no not before the coming of Christ. Upon the whole matter, for
ought that appears to the contrary, Peter did herein yield to Paul as having
truth on his side. From Ver. 1. to the 15.

4. He comes now to assert and confirm the Gospel-doctrine of Justification by
Faith in Christ, (which he had before preached to them), against the corrupt
Doctrine of his adversaries, who urged the strict observation of the Ceremonial
Law as necessary thereunto, by virtue of a Divine Precept standing yet in
force, as may be gathered from the Ap stles reasoning. Chap. 3.19.25. and Chap.
4.3, 4, 5.

And that he may strike at the root of this most dangerous error, he excludes
all works in general, not only those of the Ceremonial Law, but of the moral
also, yea all works of our own whatsoever, from having any influence upon our
Justification. This he proves, 1. Because they that were Jews by birth, and so
faederally the holy people of God, (and not such profane idolatrous sinners as
the Gentiles were, who were ignorant of the Law of God, and strangers from the
Covenant of God), found it necessary to renounce the works of the Law in point
of Justification, and to seek righteousness only through Faith in Christ;
therefore much more ought they Galatians, and other Gentiles so to do, and
especially seeing the Spirit of God affirms, Psalm. 143.2. That no man,
whether Jew or Gentile shall be justified, to wit, by the works of the Law This
Clause is here supplied by the Apostle without adding to the sense. The like
addition of words for explication without wronging the sense is frequently used
in the N. T. where Scriptures are cited out of the Old T. as Math. 4.10.
compared with Deuteronomy. 6.13. Heb. 10.5. compared with Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8.
. It Is therefore by the Faith of Jesus, or by Faith receiving and resting on
Jesus Christ, and that most perfect righteousness of his, that we are
justified. But here he prevents an Objection which he foresaw some of the
adversaries of this Doctrine would be apt to make. They will say, that if we
seek to be justified by Faith in Christ alone, and not by the works of the Law,
then people may live as they list, and freely indulge themselves in sin. He
answers, That though it should so happen, that some who profess to seek
Justification by Faith in Christ alone, should be found notorious sinners See 1
Cor. 12.28.

Faith here and elsewhere ( see Chap. 1.23.) is taken for the Doctrine that is
to be believed.


, yet it would not from thence follow that Christ is the Minister, Author, or
Teacher of sin. That inference, he rejects with abhorrence and detestation. For
he had in delivering this Doctrine of Justification unto them, showed, That the
same Faith, that lays hold on Christ for righteousness, does rest upon him
also, for grace, and strength to subdue corruption, and he had by many seri^us
admonitions strove to b^at down sin among them, therefore if he should now, by
any thing he should preach, enc^urage sin, he should transgr^ss against the
Laws of uprightness, which ought to be found in every faithful Teacher. And
that this Doctrine does not of it self encourage to sin, he proves by his own
example. For (says he) I through the Law am dead to the Law Si modo frustra, q.
d. Non tantum frustra passi estis, sed etiam cum damno and detrimento, nisi ad
bonum mentem redeatis.
that I might live unto God; that is, by the knowledge of the spirituality of
the Law, and the perfection it requires, I have learned, that I am a great
sinner, that I have not power perfectly to perform it, that I am therefore
subject to the Curse of it, and so I cannot be justified by it. I am so far
dead to the Law, as not to put any confidence in my obedience to it, for my
justification De Scriptura loquitur (...). Scriptura hic sumitur per Metonymiam
effecti, pro eo qui eam dedit. Chrysostom.
; yet I am not so dead to it, as to look upon my self as freed from it, as it
is a rule of holy living: But despairing of obtaining Justification and
Salvation by my obedience to it, I am forced to fly to Christ, that from him I
may receive not only Justification, but grace and power to enable me to live
unto God. And as Christ was crucified on the Cross, so by grace derived from
him, I crucify my corruptions, and s^ I live a new and spiritual life, not
having this life from my self, but from Christ, who lives in me by his spirit.
And he being the root and spring of this new life, I derive it from him by
virtue of my union with him; and the band of my union with him, is my faith in
him. And the consideration of his great love in dying for me, is a strong
inducement to me, to endeavor to live holily, that so I may please him. He
further sh^ws that if we should be justified by the law, or works d^ne in
obedience to it, we should frustrate and make v^id the grace of God. For if
Justification be by works, it cann^t be by grace, Romans 11.6. And lastly,
Christ's death had been in vain, if the Justification of a Sinner could have
been obtained by his own works, from ver. 15. to the end.

5. Having sharply reproved these Galatians for their defection from the truth,
justification was by Faith and not by Works. And in order hereunto, he first
appeals to their own experience, and demands of them, whether the gifts and
graces of the Spirit, both ordinary and extraordinary, that were now found in
their Church, were conferred on them till the Gospel was preached among them?
The calling of the Gentiles, and their Justification by Faith, was foretold
about two thousand years before it fell out.
He asks, whether they received them by the works of the Law, [that is, by
hearing the Doctrine of justification by works preached], or by the Hearing of
Faith Tanquam laetum aliquod nuncium praedicavit, pro evangelizavit, h. e. Deus
ei indicavit, quod postea in Scripturas sacras relatum est.
, that is, by hearing the Doctrine of justification by Faith preached. And if
so, Was there any reason, that having by the preaching of the Gospel (which is
a ministry of the Spirit) received such great benefits, and so begun to be a
Christian Church, they should now think it necessary to take in the Law? Would
they now end in the flesh, and return to those external Mosaical carnal Rites,
as if their justification could not be perfected without them? This he shows
would be a point of great folly and absurdity in them. 2. If they should seek
justification by works, or partly by faith, and partly by works, Qui de
fidelium numero sunt.
they would lose all the fruit of their former sufferings for the truth; which
would have been rewarded if they had proved constant to the last; but now they
will be in danger not only of losing their reward, but of incurring further
danger See Notes on Romans 1.17.
, and bringing a heavier condemnation upon themselves f^r their defection. 3.
He resumes and amplifies his first argument, showing, that the Lord had not
only accompanied this Doctrine of justification by faith, with the saving
graces of his Spirit among them, but also with other extraordinary gifts, such
as the working of Miracles, speaking with strange Tongues, curing of Diseases;
which were so many confirmations, that this Doctrine was of God. 4. Having put
a close to that argument brought from their own experience, he adds another,
brought from the example of Abraham, who though he did abound with many virtues
and good works, yet he was not justified by those, but by faith only; which he
proves from Genesis 15.6. where it is affirmed that Abraham believed in the Lord
for the accomplishment of that prime promise of the Covenant made unto him,
that in the Messiah (who was to come of him), he himself and all the nations of
the earth should be blessed, Genesis 12.3. And the multiplication of his Seed was
promised as a means to bring it about. This faith of Abraham's laying hold on
the meritorious obedience of the Mediator, the blessed seed promised; he shows,
was imputed or reckoned to him for Righteousness, or accepted of God for his
justification. And hence he infers, that only they who are of the faith (or
seek after justification by faith), are the true Children of Abraham, who
following his steps, shall succeed him in the inheritance of that great
Blessing, viz. of gratuitous righteousness and justification thereby, which he
by faith obtained, See v. 9. And the Spirit Ex fide sunt qui innituntur merito
Christi pro nobis satisfacientis. Ex operibus L^gis qui impituntur propriis
meritis and probitati and sanctitati propriae.
(who speaks in the Scriptures) knowing this to be the Counsel of God, that the
Gentiles also should be justified by faith, he revealed this promise Ut
promissionem Spiritus acciperemus, i. e. promissum Spiritum. Est autem illa
Spiritus sancti promissio, J^r. 31.33. and 32 40. Ezekiel. 11.19, etc. 36.27. Joel
2.29. Zach. 12.10.
(which is called the preaching of the Gospel) to Abraham Ce^te s^mence done,
c' est Christ c' est a dire. L' Eglise qui constitue son corpse, par la for p^r
loquell^ elle l'embrasse. Amirant fur les Epistres.
, viz. that In his seed, that is, Jesus Christ, (who was to come of him, Genesis
22.18.) all nations should be blessed. So that all that are of faith Act. 7.38.
Heb. 2.2.
, or true believers, whether Gentiles or Jews, do partake by faith of all those
saving blessings, which believing Abraham did partake of; among which, free
justification is the chief. 5. He shows, that they who are of the works of the
Law, that is, who seek to be justified by works done in obedience to the law,
are under the curse of God, and so not justified; the Law pronouncing a curse
upon every one who fulfilleth it not in every particular, Deuteronomy. 27.15, 16, 26.
6. He further adds that no man can be justified by his personal obedience to
the Law, because righteousness and life comes by faith, as he proves from
Hab. 2.4. Ver. 15. Humanitus loquor.
The just shall live by faith. Now the way of justification which the Law
requires, cannot consist with the way of justification by faith (t). For the
Law promises life to him only who performs exactly what it prescribes, and so
has a perfect inherent righteousness in himself, as he proves from Lev. 18.5.
where the voice of the Law is, The man that does them (viz. those things which
the Law requires) shall live in them or attain eternal life by them: But the
voice of the Gospel is, that They that believe in Jesus shall be saved. 7. He
shows not only, That we are justified by Faith, but How Faith does justify,
viz. not for any merit or worth in it self, but as it closes with Jesus Christ,
whereby all the blessings purchased by Him, are made over to us: for Christ
has delivered us from the Curse of the Law, by taking upon him the Curse due
to us, and subjecting himself to death, even the cursed death of the Cross for
our sakes, Deuteronomy. 21.23. And from his death, he shows, a double benefi^ d^d
flow: First to the Gentiles, the blessing of Abraham coming upon them, viz. the
blessing of Church Priviledges, divine ordinances, of reconciliation with God,
adoption, etc. which before the time of Christ's death they were Strangers unto:
The Second to the Jews jointly with the Gentiles, who being by Christ's death
joined in one body, and bec^me one seed of Abraham do by Faith in Christ
receive a plentiful communication of the Spirit (...).
promised in the times of the Gospel. 8. He reasons from humane Genesis 12.3, and
17.4. and 22.17.18.
transactions, viz. From Covenants made among m^n which if solemnly confirmed
by Oath and other usual solemnities cannot without injustice be broken or
disannul^'d, nor any condition destructive to them be afterward superadded. In
like manner he shows, God made a Covenant with Abraham, and his spiritual seed,
wherein he promised spiritual and eternal blessings, to all those that shall
believe in his Son, the promised Messiah. Now Abraham had two seeds *, a
spiritual (represented by Isaac) who seek justification by Faith only; and a
carnal (represented by Ishmael), who seek justification by the works of the
Law. He shows, that the Covenant was not made with Abraham and both these
seeds, but only with one of them, that is, with all true believers, who are the
mystical Body of Christ, and by virtue of their union with him, collectively
called here by his Name. This Covenant he shows, was made and confirmed unto
Christ Mediator non est unius partis sed duarum, earumque dissidentium. Cum
igitur Mese^ Mediatorem ageret inter Deum and populum, hoc ipso testatur, esse
dissidium inter du^^ ista^ parts. Deus autem unus est. Isque semper idem,
semper sibi constans. Dissidium igitur illud non Dei, sed hominis mutationi
deputandum est. Jac. Capollus.
or with respect unto Christ, and to all true believers in him both Jews and
Gentiles (of whom he is the head) four hundred and thirty years before the Law
was given. And therefore if any should say, The way of justification by Faith
in the promise, did h^ld go^d before the Law was given; but when the Law was
given, that way was altered, and justification by works established: this he
shows, cannot be, seeing the Law was given so many years after the Covenant was
confirmed Scripturae tribuitur quod Deo. vid. Romans 11.32. Ver. 21. Fides Jesus
Christi, i. e. in Jesum Christum, Apoc. 14.12.
; and therefore cannot v^cuate or disanull it. If therefore the inheritance of
eternal l^fe (whereof the Land of Canaan was a type and pledge) be to be
obtained by obdience to the Law, it cannot be obtained by Faith, whereby the
grace and blessing promised in Christ is received. For these two cannot stand
together. Now God gave it to Abraham freely, and of pure grace, promising it
unto him on condition of his Faith without any merit on his part. And in like
manner all that desire to approve themselves the true Children of Abraham, must
obtain it, seeing there is but one way of Salvation. From v. 15. to 19.

6ly. He comes now to answer some Objections, which might be made against what
he had said.

Object. 1. If works done in obedience to the Law do not justify, then the Law
upon Mount Sinai seems to be given in vain. For why was the Law given,
enjoining so many moral, judicial, and ceremonial duties, promising life unto
the obedient [Lev. 18.5.], and threatening Gods wrath and curse to the
disobedient [Deut. 27.26.], if the inheritance come not by the Law? In answer
hereunto, the Apostle shows, that one main end why the Law was added to the
Promise was to discover sin [Rom. 3.20.], and restrain from Sin, and to make
men seek out for a remedy, and so to be a Covenant subservient to the Cov^nant
of Grace. And this dispensation (as having more of terror than love in it) was
to continue during the infant-state of the Church, ^ven till Christ should come
in the flesh, to whom the inheritance was promis^d, as being Head of all those
that shall be heirs, and by whom they shall obtain it. And this God showed by
the glorious and dreadful manner of his giving the Law, by the ministry of
Angels, Act. 7.38. Heb. 2.2.
and his appearing then in such terror that there was no access for sinful man
to him, but by a Mediator; and therefore upon the peoples request, Moses was
appointed the Mediator between God and them at that time [Exod. 20.19. Heb.
12.19.]; being therein a type of Christ, the only Mediator of Propitiation. Now
he shows, that there is no need of a Mediator, but when there is a disagreement
or difference between two parties As he is called our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1.
. And God is one party of the two here, who is offended with sinful man, and is
to be atoned. Since therefore the people by reason of their great guiltiness,
and manifold violations of Gods Law were not able to make atonement for
themselves, they might from hence learn how much they needed a Mediator to make
atonement for them.

Object 2. Then it will he said, that the Law is against the Promises of God.
He answers, No. For the Law was not given on Mount Sinai to afford life and
justification by obedience to it (seeing it could not perfectly be kept); but
rather to convince of sin, and condemn for sin, that men, dispairing of any
help in themselves, might speedily betake themselves to Christ for life. So
that the Law is not contrary unto, but subordinate and subservient to the
Promise. For God in the Scriptures Sub elementis mundi, i. e. sub Ceremoniis
quibus Deus veterem mundum Pisc.

Framu^ subjecti ritibus illis qui nobis cum mundo erant communes; qualia sunt,
Templa, Arae, Victimae, liba, (...), and similia, imposita Israelitis in hoc ne
talium amore ad idol^ dilaberentur. Grot.


, (or in the legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, which stood in force
during the time of the Old Testament), has concluded all under sin, that is,
has declared all men by nature, since the Fall, to be under sin, that so
laying aside all confidence in themselves, they may fly by Faith to Christ for
righteousness and salvation, which are the great things promised in the
Covenant of Grace. From v. 19. to 29.

Object. 3. Seeing the Law, or that legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace
was so useful to the ancient Church, and so subservient to the Promise, Why
then did Paul cry down the use of it, especially the practice of the Ceremonial
Law, now? He answers, that, Before Faith came [that is, the Object of Faith,
viz. Christ Jesus (...) Hic ego vertendum puto non quonsam sed qu^d (...),
sensusque sit, Quod autem filii sitis, inde manifestum est quia misit Deus
Spiritum filii fui in corda vest^a. Hac. Illyr.
, or the more clear and full manifestation of the Doctrine of Faith, which was
about the time of Christ's death and ascension], the Law was very useful to the
Jews, because they were by it, as by a military Guard, kept from being mixed
with other Nations in Religion, and were shut up thereby as in a prison under
sin, and the curse due to sin, that so they might be the more prepared, and as
it were necessitated, to embrace the Doctrine of Salvation by Faith in Christ
(which was, during that dispensation, but darkly revealed), when it should be
more clearly discovered; the full revelation whereof they were by this means
kept more intent upon. So that the Law, that is, Moses's Economy, confined
them within the bounds of Faith, that they should not seek for justification by
their own inherent righteousness, or works, or any other way than only by Faith
in the Messiah. Yea the Law was their Schoolmaster in their minority, to
instruct them to repair to Christ for pardon. Thus (he shows) the legal
dispensation of the Covenant of Grace was of good use to the ancient Church;
but denies that the use of it ought to be continued now, when the Doctrine of
Faith is so clearly manifested: Yea on the contrary, (he declares), that it is
now to be abrogated, and the Christian Church freed from the observation of it,
because it was to exercise the office of a School-mast r only over Children in
their minority; but can have no authority over believers now, who in comparison
of them, are to be l^oked upon as grown men. For the Christian Church, viz. all
true believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, and in particular, all the faithful
among the Galatians were now like a Son come to age by reason of their Faith in
Christ (who is now come in the flesh) and therefore are not under the childish
paedagogy of Ceremonies, or the Mosaical outward legal dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace.

Object. 4. But false Teachers might here object, that though it be admitted,
that the Law or Mosaical dispensation given on Mount Sinai was added to the
Promise to be subservient to it; yet Circumcision was given to Abraham with the
Promise, as the i^itiat^ry seal of it, Genesis 17.10. Therefore though the Law or
legal dispensation be abrogated; yet Circumcision was to be kept in the Church,
as that which was given before it, and without which none can be accounted
Abraham's Seed, or Heirs according to the Promise. The Apostle answers, that
Baptism, which signifies and seals our ingrafting into Christ [Rom. 6. 4.5.]
was substituted in the place of Circumcision, and is sufficient for compassing
all those ends for which Circumcision was instituted; because they who are
baptized into Christ do put on Christ, and so are incorporated and made one
body with him; they carry his Name, pr^fess to be his, are esteemed to be in
him as members of his ^ody. And all that have true Faith in Christ are thus
really incorporated into him, and made one body with him, of what Nation or
Condition soever they be. So that Circumcision, which by virtue of its
institution, did serve to keep up a distinction between Jew and Gentile [Exod
12.48.] cannot here be useful, seeing now all distinctions are to be removed,
and Circumcision, being one main part ^f the partition wall betwixt Jew and
Gentile, was not any longer to stand in f^rce. For whatsoever Nation, Rank or
Sex any be of, it is all one in this matter. None are debarred from Christ, n^r
yet the more accepted by him, for any of these things. And all Believers of
what condition soever, are all one body in Christ Jesus; and if they be
Christ's, and by Baptism ingrafted into him, they are true Children of Abraham,
though they be not circumcised, and apparent heirs of the heavenly inheritance,
given unto Abraham by Promise. From v. 23. to the end.

7ly He goes on further to clear the freedom of Christians from the Mosaical
O^conomy by the similitude of an Heir, who while he is a minor, and under-age,
is n^^ at his own liberty or disposal, but in point of subjection, like a
servant under the Guardianship of Tutors or Governors, until the time
appointed by his Father be come out; longer than which, he is not to remain in
the state of subjection. So says he, Gods Church (whereof we are members)
formerly was kept in bondage and subjection under that strict and rigid
administration of the Mosaical Economy, and tied to a number of Ceremonial
observances Idola Dii nuncupative non substantive. Bernard.
and bodily significant rites and figures whereby G^d instructed the former age
of the World, and which were a kind of bondage and slavery to the outward man.
But when the fullness of time was come, which God had appointed for the
finishing this Economy; he sent his Son into the W^rld, who was incarnate, and
subjected himself both to the Precepts and Curse of the Law, that he might
redeem them that truly believe in him from the Curse of it, and the whole
Church in general from that rigor and servitude under which they formerly had
been, as to their outward estate [Eph. 2.15.], and that they might attain to
the adoption of Sons grown up. And as a Testimony of their Adoption, and
^dvancement to the privilege of Sons now grown up, God had sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into their hearts Cogniti estis a Deo, i. e. in gratiam
recepti, and pro filiis habiti; nam verba sensus apud Paulum per usitatum
Hebraismum conn^tant affectum: Ut Cognisco oves, Joh 10. i. e diligo.
clearly testifying this to them, and inabling them (together with other Sons
of God, both among Jews and ^ ^tiles), with a cheerful voice to call God Father
Clamare Metaphoric (...) and fiduciam illum fidelium significat, de qua 1 John
5.14. Heb. 4.16. quod Spiritui sancto tribuitur, quia illius illustratione and
instinctu contingit. Gomar.
. And as to this, they mi^ht consult their own experience. They might therefore
assure themselves they were no more in that servile condition under the Yoke of
Ceremonies, but in a free state, as Sons grown up, and Heirs actually partaking
of their Fathers Goods, ( viz. of his spiritual Graces), and that in a larger
measure than the ancient Church enjoyed before; and all through Christ who has
merited and procured these blessings for us. From v. 1. to 8.

8ly. Having now sufficiently proved by Scripture and Reason the freedom of
Christians from that ancient legal dispensation, and more especially from the
Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, he endeavors further to fasten this truth upon
their minds, both by sharp reproofs, and most affectionate insinuations. And
first, he shows them, that when that legal dispensation was in force, they
(viz. the Galatians who were Gentiles) were ignorant of the true God, and
worshipped dumb Quomodo convertimini (...)] Vocula (...) respicit non rem
eandem sed similem. Galatae reb^s terrenis, and in utilibus servierant, viz.
idolis, jamque denuo se convertere volebant ad servitutem Ceremoniarum
Legalium, quae itidem erant re^ terrenae ac per se neminem servare poterant,
neque, Christo exhibito, quicquam amplius utilitatis habere poterant. Glass.

Re^picit voculi (...) non continuationem actus prioris, sed similis novi
inchoationem. Egena vocat Elementa quia facta erant evanida postquam Corpus
vener^t, unde a Christo ad Ceremonias Mosaicas relabi, nihil aliud erat quam
neglectis summis op^bus mendicitatem fectari.


Idols, and consequently were not born, or brought up under the paedagogy of
the Law as the Jews were, wh^ therefore might pretend some excuse for their
unwillingness to depart from it. But afterward by the preaching of the Gospel
(which God of his free and rich mercy sent unto them, and not for any desert of
theirs), they were brought off from their ignorance; and came to know the true
God: whereas, before they looked not after him, but lay immersed in their
Idolatry: and they were not only brought to know him, but to be known of him
Dies observatis] nimirum consuetudine judaic^, prout erant umbrae futurotum.
, that is, to be acknowledged and owned for his: whereas before their
Conversion, they were not known of God in this sense. And being thus brought
into the Liberty of Sons grown up, he wonders at their folly and ingratitude,
that they would subject themselves to the bondage of the Mosaical Elements or
Ceremonies, which had now no figurative or sacramental signification as
formerly they had (when they were shadows of Christ to come), and therefore
were weak, yea poor and beggarly, not being able to afford any solid
consolation to th^se who observed them. He wonders that they who had been in
bondage formerly unto Idolatry, should desire to be in bondage again (...). Fui
aliquando quales vos nunc estis, existimans pietatem esse Circumcidi, etc.
viz. to those weak and poor Elements, under subjection to which they never had
been before. He instances in some of those Elements unto which they had turned.
He tells them, he understands they observed Hieronymus suspic^tur Apostolum cum
primum Galatas adiret aliqua infirmitate corporali detentum fuisse. N^m tradunt
eum gr^vissimum capitis dolorem faepe perpessum, and hunc esse Satanae ^^ng^lum
qui oppositus ei ^uerat ut eum colaphiz^ t.
(after the manner of the carnal Jews expecting to be justified thereby) their
Sabbaths, New Mons, Anniversary Feasts, as ^f the Passover, Pentecost, and
Tabernacles, and the Year of Release which was the Seventh, and the year of
Jubilee which was the Fiftieth. Which things made him fear he had preached the
Gospel and the Doctrine of free Justification by Faith in Christ in vain among
them. From v. 8. to v. 12.

9ly. He lovingly exhorts them to return to that wholesome Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, without the works of the Law. Brethren I beseech you
(says he), be as I am, for I was as you are Quae igitur tum erat beatitudo
vestra, i. e. Qualis and quanta! Quantus ubique erat rumor vos beatos
praedicantium!
, that is, Take me for your example, who was once as zealous for those Legal
Rites, as any of you are at this present. But now I count them, and all things
else, but dung in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ [Phil. 3.9.].
He tells them, that they had no reason to suspect that what he spoke proceeded
from any ill will toward any of them, or from any particular resentment; for
they had not done him any personal injury. H^ only pl^aded the cause of Christ,
and did not vent any private passion of his own. Nay he was so far from
apprehending any injury from them, that he acknowledges they had shown much
love, and respect to him, when being infirm in body, and much broken with
afflictions, he came first to preach the Gospel unto them; and yet by those
trials Si, sal^a pietate and j^^e naturae, fieri potuit.
wherewith it pleased God to exercise him, they were not tempted to despise his
Person or Doctrine, but received him as if he had been one of the holy Angels
of God, nay as Jesus Christ himself. He asks them, where is that (...), i. e.
me Paulum: non enim legendum (...). Piscat.
blessedness now, which they once thought they enjoyed by his coming am^ng
them! Time was, when they thought themselves so blessed by his presence, that
they could then even almost have plucked out their eyes q. d. Non consideratis
sensum (...) verborum Mosis.
for him, to have done him good. And (says he) am I, who formerly was so
precious to you, become now your enemy, because I declare the truth of God to
you? As for the false Apostles, they indeed pretend great love to you, and zeal
for you; but what (...) their ends therein, but that they may exclude us He had
also seve^al Sons by K^turah, Genesis 25.2. But these two are only ment^^n^d, as
being appointed by God to prefigure the present purpose:
that you may affect them. He tells them, they were once zealously affected
toward him and his Doctrine; and it is good (he shows them) to be constantly
zealous in a good thing, and so he would have them to be, and that as well what
he was absent from them, as when he was present with them. He further tells
them, they were his Children, whom with much pains and travail he had brought
forth to Christ, and had brought them to take on them the Christian profession,
but now they h^d shamefully fallen off from it, so that he was in travail and
pain a second time, till the pure Doctrine of Christ be again established among
them, and till they receive again the right shape of Christians. He tells them,
he much desired to be with them, that being fully acquainted with their state
he might accommodate himself accorddingly to them, either in meekness or
severity: and might change his voice, either by turning his complaints into
praises; or his speech into groans, and his words into tears to bewail their
Apostasy: and by those true significations of his affection, persuade them to
return to their former profession; for now he was somewhat perplexed and p^z^d
how to deal with them. From Ver. 12. to the 21.

10ly. He comes now further to clear the Doctrine of Justification by Faith,
and not by works, from an instance taken from Abraham's Family, where by a
typical Allego^y, this whole matter is represented. The plain import of which
is this, that they who seek Justification by works are in a servile, miserable,
and cursed condition, and at last shall be cast out from the presence of God,
and the Society of the Saints; and they that seek Justification by Faith in
Christ are ^ree Sons of the Family of God, and blessed, and shall at last
certainly attain to an inheritance of life eternal. He exp^stulates therefore
with the Galatians, that they should affect this servile, miserable and cursed
condition. And first, He cites his Adversaries, and all others who (contrary to
G^ds command) did voluntarily again put themselves under the Yoke of the
M^saical Law, and sought to be justified by works, to hear what the Law it self
(or that Collection of the five books of Moses, which is called the Law) does
say, that is, to consider the sense and scope of the Law Causam reddit cur
Agar, illud foedus significavit: Quia, and Mons Sinai ubi sactum est illud
foedus, vocatur Agar (...) (nempe, quia ibi est oppidum Aga^^, unde Agar^ni)
and Gens Agarena. and singuli ad eam pertinentes, subjecti erant Circumcisioni
and Sacrificiis, and dierum discrimini; quanquam, non Lege Mosis, sed ex suis
Legibus, aut moribus Ismaelitarum, qui and Agareni and Saraceni. Grot.

Mon^ Sinai ab Arabibus dicitur Agar. inhabitavit Agar desertum istud, and inde
Arabum natio illa, dicta est Hagarena: scilicet ut Populo, ita and Monti nomen
dedit Hagar.


. Then he propounds the typical History of Abraham's Family, taken from Genesis chapter
16. and 21. the sum whereof is this; namely, That Abraham had two Sons Ver. 4.
Qui per legem justificamini, h. e. justificari conamini.
, to wit, Ishm^el and Isaac, whose condition did differ in two things; 1.
Ishmael was born ^f a Bondwoman or Servant, to wit, H^gar [Gen. 16.1.15.]; and
so he was but as a servant himself, and not the Heir [Gen. 21.10.]: but Isaac
was born of a Freewoman, viz. Sarah [Gen. 21.2, 3.], who had never been a
Servant, but was the Mistress, and therefore Isaac himself was no Servant but a
Freeman, and the Heir to his Father, v. 22. A second difference there was in
the principle of generation and birth: For Ishmael was born after the flesh, or
by the ordinary strength of Nature, his Mother Hagar being a young Woman, and
fit for conception; but Isaac was not conceived or born from any such
principle, Sarah his M^ther being Ninety years old when she conceived him [G^n.
17.17.], and so according to the course of Nature, unfit for concepti^^ [Heb.
11.12.], but he was born by Promise, or by virtue of that promise made t^
A^raham, Gen 17.16. Which Story, the Apostle shows, was an alleg^^y, that is,
besides the literal sense of the words, God intended they should shadow forth
the st^te of his Church in the following particulars; namely, Abraham's two
wives should represent the two Covenants, to wit, the old Covenant, or the old
Administration of the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8.7. (which Covenant was greatly
mistaken by the Jews, and did degenerate into a plain Covenant of works in the
sense of many who did adhere to it); and the n^w Covenant, or the new
Administration of the C^venant of Grace, Heb. 8.8. The first of which C^venants
was prefigured by Hagar the B^ndwoman; and d^scribeth it, 1. From the place
where it was given, viz. upon Mount Sinai, 2. From the lik^ effect produced by
it, as by Hagar, to wit that as H^gar, so this Covenant (especially as it was
g^nerally mistaken for a Covenant of works) did beget Children unto bondage,
that is, they who adhered to it (as so understood) were not thereby freed from
their bondage to Sin, Satan and Gods Wrath (S e Gal. 3.10.), but were of a
servile mercenary disposition, doing what they did in Gods service, not from
love, but slavish fear, and thinking to merit Heaven by their works. See Mar.
10.17.

And having, as it were in a Parenthesis, showed the fitness of the former
resemblance (because M u^t Sinai, where the old Covenant was first given, is
called Fallen from Grace] that is, ye renounce Christ and the Covenant of Grace;
Agar by the Arabians), h^ further describes this Covenant by considering the
condition of those wh^ now did tenaciously adhere to it. And first, he shows
them, that the earthly Jerusalem, or the Jewish Church (not as she was in her
best times, but as she was then in that present age), did answer or bear a kind
of resemblance with that Covenant, because that Church and her Children did
remain in a servile condition, which was the fruit of their adhering to this
Covenant, as it was mistaken, and misunderstood for a Covenant of works. 2ly.
He shows, that the new Covenant, or the new Administration of the Covenant of
Grace was prefigured in Sarah, and that they who adhere to it are called the
Jerusalem that is from above; and all those who are the truly regenerate of the
Christian Church, and make claim to life, according to the tenor of the
Covenant of Grace, are to be reckoned as belonging hereunto. And this Church is
here called Jerusalem, because that City was a Type of the true Church by
reason of its compactness and order, Psalm. 122.3. and beauty, Psalm. 48.2. and
the divine protection that was over it, Isa. 31.5. And is said to be from
above, because her Original is from Heaven [Jam. 1.17, 18.], and the Members
thereof have their Conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. He further shows, the
happy state wherein those are who adhere to this Covenant; nam^ly, in a state
of freedom from sin [Rom. 6.18.], and the Curse of the Law [Rom. 8.1.], and the
Yoke of that ancient legal dispensation [Eph. 2.15.]. 3ly. He shows, who are
the Children of this Covenant [or Members of the true Church adhering to this
Covenant], even all sincere Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles. 4ly. He
confirms the truth of the former mystery, by a quotation out Isa. 54.1. Which
words in their first sense are a Prophecy of the joyful deliverance of the Jews
out of the Babylonish Captivity, and call upon the material City of Sion or
Jerusalem as on a Woman that had been Barren to rejoice, because though all the
time of the Captivity she had been empty of Jews, yet now she should be m^re
populous than ever she was at any time before her Captivity, or than other
Nations were, that had not been led into Captivity. This the Apostle
excellently adapteth to the new Covenant, which when Christ was here on the
Earth had but few Children, few that were brought forth by it, but after his
death, upon the preaching of the Gospel by his Apostles to the Gentiles, it had
very many, so that the Jews in comparison of the Christians were but few.
Lastly, The Apostle applies this Typical History, and partly comforts the truly
faithf^l among the Galatians thereby, and partly instructs them In order to
which, he represents to them these particulars. 1st. As Isaac by virtue of the
Promise, above the power of nature, being born of a Freewoman, was Heir to his
Fathers goods; so all they who seek Salvation, not by the Law, but by Faith in
Ch^^st are supernaturally begotten by the power of Gods Spirit, and by Grace
are the tree Children of God, and such to whom eternal life is promised Nos
silii promissionis] h. e. qui promissionem vera side amplectimur.
, and are Heirs of it, as Isaac was of his Fathers estate. 2ly. He shows them,
that by suffering pe^s^cution by false Brethren (Patrons of Righteousness by
Works), they therein were like to Isaac, whom Ishmael persecuted with bitter
mocking, Gen 21.9. 3ly. As Hagar and Ishmael were cast out of Abraham's House,
(at first by Sarah, Genesis 21.10. and the sentence afterward confirmed by God
himself, v. 12); so they who seek Justification by works (prefigured by Hagar
and Ishma^l) shall be cast out of the Church of God, (the Society of the
Saints, v. 31.) and shall not obtain the inheritance of eternal life: but they
who seek Salvation by Faith in Christ, shall abide therein, and shall be
eternally saved. Lastly, he shows them, that all true faithful Christians are
not Children of the Bondwoman but of the Free; and all that desire to approve
themselves to be such, mu^t take heed of that error of seeking Righteousness by
the works of the Law, but mu^t hold fast the Doctrine of Righteousness by Grace
through Faith in Jesus Christ, if they would not exclude themselves from the
heavenly inheritance. From Ver. 21. to the end.

Having spoken thus much in the vindication of the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith alone, he shuts up the whole disputation with a double exhortation. 1.
That stand fast in their Christian liberty, without subjecting themselves again
to the Mosaical Yoke. Which exhortation he enforces more directly by six
Arguments. 1. Because Christ had purchased this freedom for his Church by his
own blood. 2. The holding Circumcision necessary, and as a part of man's
Righteousness, does cut off the observer of it from all benefit by Christ;
because to maintain Circumcision, is by consequent, to maintain the whole bulk
of the Mosaical rites to be in force, and so in effect to declare, that Christ
is not yet come, seeing all those things were to be done away at his coming
[Heb. 9.10.]. And Christ must either be our whole Righteousness, and our
complete Savior, or not at all [Act. 4 12.]. 3ly. He testifies that they that
engage themselves to observe Circumcision (in the way wherein it was urged by
the false Apostles, Act. 15.1.), d^ hereby engage themselves to perform the
whole Law, viz. Ceremonial and Judicial, (Circumcision being the initiatory
Sacrament engaging the Receiver to the whole Mosaical Paedagogy, Exodus 12.48.),
and the whole moral Law, and that under the penalty of condemnation. For no
less then universal and perfect obedience to the Law in all its precepts, is
required unto Justification by works. 4ly. He shows, that whoever among them
observe the Levitical Ordinances, as they were pressed by the false Apostles,
or sought Ver. 5. Ex fide spem justitiae expectamus] h. e. Vitam aeternam
justis ex fide promissam, Tit. 2.13.
to be justified by observing of them; in so doing, they renounced Christ, and
all benefit by him, and were falen away from the Doctrine Fides operabunda.
of free Grace. For works and Grace are not consistent in the matter of
Justification. 5ly. He declares that he himself and other Jews (who before
their Conversion to the Christian Faith were circumcised), being now savingly
taught and enlightened by the Holy Ghost, did renounce all confidence in their
own works or carnal privileges, and did look to obtain heaven, (here called
their hope Ver. 13. Vos ad libertatem vocati estis; tantum ne libertatem in
occasionem carni, scilicet arripite vel ea abutimini.
, because the object of their hope, Tit. 2.13.) only by virtue of the
Righteousness which is laid hold on by Faith. 6ly. In the state of the Church,
under the Gospel, since Christ was manifested in the Flesh, he shows, that
neither the observing of Circumcision, nor the omitting of it, does of it self
commend a man to God: but that which he now requires, is a true lively Faith So
the word Spirit, when it is opposed to the Flesh is usually taken. See Joh. 3.6.
in his Son, evidencing it self to be such, by the fruits of true love to God
and our Neighbor, which is called the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. Yet
this is not so to be understood, as if the use of the Sacraments of the New
Testament or other pieces of instituted worship were hereby excluded and
declared useless, they being helps of our Faith, with ^ut which, it is
impossible to perform any duty of love to God or our Neighbor, sincerely and
acceptably. From Ver. 1. to 7.

Secondly, He further presses this his exhortation by other arguments, and
that as it were by the By. 1. He commends them for their form^r forwardness in
embracing this now controverted truth, (which he calls a Running well), and he
sees no reason why they should depart from it. 2ly. Lest they should say, they
were fully persuaded in their Consciences, that this way they were brought into
by their new Apostles was the way of God; He tells them, that what persuasion
soever they may have of that kind, it is but a mere delusion, and comes not
from God (who had called them to true Christian Liberty), but from the Devil
and his Instruments. 3ly. Lest they should say, he needed not make so much ado
about this matter, seeing they had not embraced the whole body of the Jewish
worship, but only observed some particular Ceremonies thereof, and as to other
things they practiced as the Christian Faith required: He answers, that a
little Leaven, a little false Doctrine entertained [Mat. 16.12.] may easily in
time corrupt a man's judgment in other points, and a small number of such
seduced persons may easily infect the whole Church [1 Cor. 5.6.]. 4ly. He
expresses his confidence (grounded upon Charity) that through the Lords
gracious assi^tance, they should be reclaimed from this their err^r and brought
to embrace the same truth again, which he had preached to them; and that he
that thus troubled and perverted them (whoever he be) should hear his own
judgment and punishment from God, except he repent. 5ly. He presses his
exhortation by confuting a Calumny, which (as it seems) his adversaries mad use
of, to persuade the people, that he by circumcising Timothy to prevent the
stumbling of the weak Jews [Act. 16.3.] had declared himself to be of the same
judgment with them in the present c^nt^oversie. In answer to this, he gives
them to understand, that he did not ^rge Circumcision to be observed by the
Gentiles at all [Act. 21.25.], nor all^w it to be used by the Jews, in the
sense of his Advers^^^^s, (...) as mi^ht appear t^ them by these two Reasons:
1. If he had preached Cir^^^cisi^n, the Jews would not have persecuted him as
they did. 2. They would not h^^e (...) such ^ffence at his preaching Salvation
through Christ crucified as they did, which is called here the Doctrine of the
Cross, 1 Cor 1.18. For that Doctrine m^st ^^^^nded them, because by it,
Circumcision and the whole frame of the old ^^^al Administration (under which
they were born and educated) was laid asid^ [S^e Act. 21.28.]. 6ly. He wishes
that their prime Seducers, (who troubled their outward and inward peace) were
cut off from Communion with the Church, by the Sword of Excommunication,
because they did burden them with the observation of such things, as were
contrary to Evangelical liberty, to the enjoyment whereof they were called by
God. From Ver. 7. to the middle of the 13th. v.

He c^mes now to the second part of his Exhortation; namely, That they take
heed l^st they abuse their Christian liberty Ver. 17. Nam caro concupiscit
adversus Spiritum, Spiritus autem adversus earnem (haec autem inter se opposita
sunt) ut non quaecungue volueritis, eadem saciatis: ^. e. ideo Spiritus se
carni opponit, ne ea faciatis quae alioquin velletis (nempe si caro sola vos
duceret), vid. Romans 8.13. Grot.
; as if they were freed from all obligation to serve God or man in the duties
particularly required of them. He gives them therefore these two Rules; 1. That
they would not take encouragement from this Doctrine to give license to sin and
corruption within them, to break all b^nds and to fulfill its lusts and
inordinate desires. 2. That they would by love serve one another; that is, That
every one, notwithstanding this Liberty, would from a principle of Love, employ
himself in all the duties of Love for the bringing about the ^a^d of his
Neighbor, and accordingly would either strengthen or enlarge himself in the
use of it, as might be most c^nducing to his Neighbors spiritual ^ood and
edification, and not by an indiscreet use of his Christian Liberty offend his
weak Brethren [R^m. 14.13, 15. 1 Cor. 8.9.]. And this serving one another in
Love, he shows, is the most compendious way to keep the whole Law which is
sum'd up in that one word or Precept, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. For true and regular Love to our Neighbor supp^seth Love to God, and
springs from it, as its Fountain [1 John 5.1.], and is a great evid^nce of it
[1 John 4.21] But he tells them, If there continue bitter strifes and
h^ck-bitings among them, they will in all likelihood, come at last to devour,
and d^^troy one another. And that he may further press his first Rule, to wit,
That t^^y should not use their Liberty for an occasion to the flesh, he exh^rts
them, to walk in the Spirit, that is, to follow the guidance and motions of the
sanctifying Spirit of God, and these benefits would ^ccrue to them hereby. 1.
So the Lusts of the flesh should not rule over them, but they should be
victorious in the contest betwixt the fl sh and the Spirit Si animus noster Dei
Spiritu movetur, actibus id ipsum exprimamus.
, that is, betwixt the corrupt nature, and the renewed part. For the Spirit
will mortify and keep under the flesh; so that though the first motion of
imbred Corruption be not totally supp^ssed, yet they shall not be fulfilled, or
brought into act with deliberation and c^ns^^s For as the evil lustings of the
flesh will strive and struggle against the g^od motions and inclinations which
the Holy Ghost stirs up; so the Spirit or ren^wed part struggleth against
the flesh and the evil motions thereof, lest Nil tam ad misericordiam inclinat,
quam proprii periculi cogitatio.

We must help our Brethren out of their sins by direction; out of their
affliction, by consolation.


the regenerate should do the things which their corrupt nature (that still
dwells in th^^) would ^therwise incline them unto. 2ly. They that are led by
the Spirit and inward principle of grace within, are not under the condemning
power of the Law, though they are under it as a Rule, which their renewed part
complies with. But the Law does manifestly condemn the Works of the Flesh, (of
which he rec^^^^s up a Catalogue of Seventeen, p ssibly too commonly practiced
Ly^^me in th^se Regions and Countries), and those who practice them, he shows,
(^xc^pt they repent) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

3ly If they follow the Spirit, and exercise the graci^us virtues thereof (of
which he reckons up Nine), they will not have the Law against them, to curse or
condemn them. For such virtues and gracious qualities, the Law is so far from
condemning, that it enjoins them, c^mmands them, and encourages in the
practice of them. He further shows, that all they who are Christ's (one as well
as another) have in some good degree (though not equally) crucifi^d the flesh,
with its corrupt affections and lusts. For they fetch virtue from Christ
crucified for that purpose: Christ's death for their sins, strongly obliges them
to it. And they are not only b^und to it but they actually endeavor it,
through the assi^tance of the Spirit of Christ, who dwells in them. In
Conclusion, he shows, that they that are raised up by the power of the Spirit
of God from the death of sin unto ^ new life, ought in their lives and
conversations t^ manif^st it, and to endeavor to walk Christianly and
Spiritually Aliorum vitia and imbecillitates quae vobis oneri esse possint
mansueto animo tolerate, and emendare studete. Huc pertinet proverbium, Amici
vitia noveris, amicum non oderis.
. From the middle of v. 13. to v. 26.

He comes now to d^h^rt these Galatians from some particular sins (which it
seems were too rife among them), and to exhort them to some particular duties,
which they needed to be exhorted unto.

1. He d^h^rts them from Ambition and its evil attendants, Reproach and Envy;
which Evils, possi^ly, their Church at that time was infected with. Ver. 26.

2ly. He exhorts th^se among them, who were spiritual (that is, who had
received strong, Romans 15.8. and perfect, to wit, c^mparatively, Phil. 3.15.),
to endeavor to restore and reclaim those who were overtaken with any sin, and
that with the spirit of meekness, considering their own frailty, and how
easily, under a temptation, they themselves might also fall into the like sin
Those that are dejected under the burden of their sins, they should relieve and
succor by good counsel and advice.
. He shows, this is the end of reprehension, namely, to raise up our Brother
that is fallen, and not proudly to insult over him. He exhorts them therefore,
to bear one another burdens Salsedinem correptionis amor Christi temperet, and
dilectionem proximi sal justitiae condiat.
, that is, to have compassion on their Brothers failings and infirmities, which
lie upon him as a heavy l^ad and Non deteriorum comparatione.
burden) and to use the best means they can to ease and relieve him, and by
discreet reprehensi^n to amend him; and so they shall put in practice that
command of Christ, which He, not only by his Precept but by his Example, so
effectually recommended to his Disciples, Joh. 13.34. and chapter 15.12. (f). And
he that insulteth over others that are overtaken, and thinks himself more
strong, deceives himself, and may possibly be found among the weakest when he
is tempted. He advises them therefore, not to compare themselves with others
that are worse than themselves (which may stir up pride and arrogance in them),
but to compare themselves with those that are better than themselves, that so
they may be humbled. Let ^very one (says he) try their own works by the rule
of Gods W^rd, and not by the Works of others, and so they shall find matt^r of
rejoicing in themselves alone (g), that is, in the testimony of their own
Consciences, and shall not need to borrow matter ^f rejoicing from the faults
and sins of others; for every man shall bear his own burden, that is, give an
account of his Works to God, who will absolve or condemn men, not as they have
done better or worse than others, but as they shall be found in themselves,
absolutely considered. From Ver. 1. to 6.

3ly. He exhorts the people to exercise liberality toward their Teachers and
spiritual Guides, by whom they were taught and instructed. For men shall reap
according to what they have sown, whether it be much or little, good Seed or
bad: and more particularly, as they have employed their temporal goods, either
for pious uses, or for pampering their fl^shly Lusts; so they may expect an
answerable reward or punishment from the Lord. They that spend their Means and
Estates upon the service of their fl^shly Lusts, shall of this abuse of their
goods, reap corruption (that is, eternal perditi^n as it is here opposed to
eternal life): but they that b^st^w their goods to advance the work of the
Spirit in themselves and others, (to further Gods Glory, and Man's Salvation)
shall of the Spirit (that is forasmuch as they have ^mpl^yed their goods ab^ut
spiritual things) be graciously reward^d with eternal life. And in duties of
Charity, he tells them, they should not be discouraged, though they meet not
presently with their reward; for in due time they shall gather the fruit which
God has promised. He closes the exhortation to beneficence, exhorting them
while they have opportunity to do good to all (according to their ability),
^specially to all faithful Christians, and much m^re to their faithful Pastors.
From Ver. 6. to 11.

In Conclusion; for a testim^ny of his sincere affection to them, he tells
them, he had written this whole Epistle with his own hand. It Is true, he wrote
larger Epistles to some Churches, yet he never wrote with his own hand any so
large as this. As for his Adversaries, he shows, they were not acted with
sincere intentions in urging Circumcision upon them, but with hypocrisy, or a
desire only to make a fair outward show of Religion, by observing that fl^shly
and carnal rite, and that they might escape pers^cution from the Jews, (and
from the Civil Powers, who were instigated by them, Act. 18.12, 13); which we,
says he, that preach the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ
crucified are exposed unto. For the fury of those Persecutors was much abated
toward such Christians as did observe the Ceremonial Law of Moses. He further
shows, that these false Apostles, that so vehemently urged Circumcision upon
them, did not themselves, in other points, observe the Law, but dispensed with
it among themselves where they knew there were none like to publish their
doings abroad [Mat. 23.4.]: yet they urged Circumcision upon them, that they
might be able to boast of the multitude of their Proselytes among them; and
that so many received Circumcision in their flesh, at their instigation, and
carried it as a mark of their instructi^n. But as for himself, he shows them,
the matter of his Gloriation was only the Cross of Christ, that is, that he had
preached up the all-sufficient, expiatory, and satisfactory Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross. And for the sake of Christ crucified, all honor, favor, and
respect with men was despised by him, as he for his zeal for Christ was
despised, persecuted and cast off by the World, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. And the reason
why he gloried in the Cross of Christ, and not in any fleshly privileges, was,
because in the Kingdom or Church of Christ neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, without Regeneration and renewing of the Soul by the
Holy Ghost. And to as many as walk according to this Rule (that is, this
pattern of Doctrine which he had taught in this Epistle) concerning Man's
Justification before God, concerning Christian Liberty, and a Christian
Conversation, he heartily wishes peace and mercy, that is, all manner of
spiritual Blessings; they being The particle, and, must in this place be
exegetick of one and the same thing, [as Ephesians. 1.3.]; and not copulative of
diverse.
the true Israel of God. In the close of all, with an Apostolic authority, he
forbids his Adversaries to make him any further work or trouble, either by
gainsaying his Doctrine, or by detracting from his Authority, because he bare
the marks of a Servant most faithful, and m^st devoted to Christ; namely, those
stripes and wounds he had r^c^ived for the name of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.23, etc.
He shuts up his Epistle with his accustomed Seal, wishing that the grace and
favor of Jesus Christ might reside (both as to the effects and sense of it) in
their Spirits and Souls, to enlighten and sanctify them more and more, that
from thence they may draw Consolation both in Life and Death. From Ver. 11. to
the end.

SECT. VI.
THe Apostle during his abode at Ephesus, had a purpose in hi^ mind ^o visit
the Churches in Macedonia and Achaia, and from ^^nce to go up to Jerusalem. But
^ist he intended to go to Corinth, and from thence into Macedonia, and from
Macedonia to ^^turn (...) to Corinth, and so to go to Jerusalem [^ Cor. 15 1^]
to which place he had appointed the God (...) the ^oor ^aints in Judaea to be
sent: and from th^nce (...) ^^^^ght to go to Rome, and so to take a Journey
into Spain* R^m. 15.24. But agitating these things in his mind, he (...)
^^mo^heus and Erastus into Macedonia, he himself staying in Asia for the
pr^sent, where he seems to have preached the G^^p^l to the Cities that were
near Ephesus, by the sp^ce of Nine months; which with the Two years he taught
in the School of Tyrannus, and the Three months he taught in the J^wish
Synago^ues a^ Eph^sus, will m^ke up the space of Three years* that ^e sa^s, he
labored in Asia [Act. ^^.31.]: A great Door b^ing op^ned to him in that place,
though there were many adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.9.

Act. 19. v. 21. After th^se things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit,
when h^ h^^ (...) Ma^^doni^ ^^d A^ha^, to go to Jeru^^lem, s^ying, (...): I
have been there, I must also see Rome.

v. 22. S^ ^e ^ut into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, (...) and
Erastus, but he himself s^ayed in Asia for a season.

SECT. VII.
ABout this time there arose a Schism in the Church of Corinth: some of them,
contentiously preferring their own Teachers (from whom they denominated
themselves) before others; some s^ying, they were of Paul, some of Apollos,
some of Cephas, and some that they owned none for their Teacher but Christ, 1
Cor. 1.11, 12.

Upon this difference, and some others, Apollos with certain other Brethren
came with Letters from the Church there to the Apostle now at Ephesus, to
desire his advice, concerning several weighty matters and Cases of Conscience,
relating to the present state of their Church.

Paul joining Sosthenes with him (that he might be a witness to this his
admonition, and so by two witnesses this his Testimony might be confirmed),
wrote his First Epistle to the Corinthians, and sent it by Stephanus,
Fortunatus, and Achaicus, who, with Apollos, were the Messengers of the
Corinthians; But Apollos refused to return at that time with them [1 Cor.
16.12.]; possibly because he would not countenance a faction, there begun, in
part under his Name.

^he First Epistle to ^e Corinthians.
Which Epistle consists of these Three parts.

1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
IN the Preface we may take notice of the Writers of the Epistle, namely Paul
Duplex Apostolo nomen: Hebraeum Saulus, Romanum Paulus.
, (called by the will and appointment of God to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ),
and Sosthenes See Sect. 10. of Chap. 5. This Sosthenes it seems was now
converted to the Faith; and being a man of note and repute among the
Corinthians, Paul joins him wi^h him in this admonition.
, whom he joins with him, as a witness to this his Admonition, that by two
witnesses his Testimony might be confirmed.

The Epistle is addressed and directed, not only to the Church of Corinth, but
to all the Christians of Achaia See 2. Epist. 1.1.
, to all that are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, to all that are Saints by
effectual Vocation, to all that have the Name of Christ called on them See Dr.
Hammond in loc.

V 5. (...). Donis linguarum, and prophetandi. Haec, commate sequenti, vocat
(...). Testimonium scilicet quo astruitur sesum esse verum Messiam, cum tali^
dona fuerit largitus. Sic Apoc. 19.10. Testimonium Jesu est ^piritus
Prophetiae: Non solum Doctrina quam edit Prophetia, sed ipsum donum
Prophetandi. Sic 1 John cap. 5.8. Spiritus, and aqua, and sanguis, testimonium
de Christo perhibent in terr^. Spiritus, vel donum Prophetiae; aqua, vel
baptismus; and sangui^, vel martyrium: Nam cum ita affl^erent dona
extraordinaria ^piritus, conflue^entqu^ tam infinitae turbae ad baptismum in
nomine Jesu, plurimique pro isto nomi^e s^bierant martyrium, indubitatum
testimonium est, Eum verum esse Messiam. Lightf.


, to all that in any place own him, profess him, and seek to him for help; who
is the Lord of all true Believers every where. To all such he wishes, that
abundance of Grace and Peace may flow from God the Father as the Fountain, and
from Jesus Christ as the Conduit-Pipe.

And in the first place, he declares, How thankful he was to God for the
riches of his Grace bestowed on them through Jesus Christ and the preaching of
his Gospel among them. For they were endowed with all manner of spiritual Gifts
pertaining to the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel; namely, with the
knowledge of the mysteries of the Christian Faith, and the gift of Tongues (d).
So that the divinity of the Gospel (which testifies of Christ), was by these
Gifts strongly attested and confirmed among them. He tells them, they wanted no
spiritual Gifts, which other Christians enjoyed, tending to their edification,
or confirmation, only they should look that they improved them well, assuredly
expecting Christ's second Coming. He was persuaded God would (...) scil. Deus ex
verse 4. ^isc.
confirm them, and cause them to persesevere in Grace, that they may be found
blameless, and unreproveable in the day of Christ's appearing. For having
effectually called them to a participation of the benefits of his Son, he is
faithful and will not forsake them [see Jer. 32.40.], but will carry on his own
work in them. From Ver. 1. to 10.

He comes now to the Body of the Epistle: wherein,

1. He Pathetically exhorts them to Unity; beseeching them, for the sake of
Christ, that they would all agree in the Doctrine of Salvation, and use one
manner of speaking of the same Faith; that there be no Schisms among them; but
that they be compacted, and united as members of the same Body, in the same
belief, judgment, and affections. And this exhortation, he supposes they had
need of, because he had been informed by some of Cloe's See chapter 16.17. I am
glad of the coming of Stephanus, Fortunatus and ^c^aicus; which two latter,
probably, were the Sons of Cloe. Vide Grot. in loc.
Family, that there were Schisms among them: and some Ver. 12. (...)]
Intellige^dum hoc non de omnibus sed de multis.
pretended, that the Doctrine they had received, was peculiarly taught them by
Paul Ego Pauli. Ad originem hujus Schismatis investigandam recurri p^test ad
bipartitionem hujus Ecclesiae in Judaeos conversos, and Gentiles, quae patet ex
eju^ historia, Act 18. Pars gentilitia, forte ^auli nomen efferebat, and
Apollo: Jud^ica, Cephae and Christi. Utraque iterum bipartitur. Quidam de part
Gentilitia, ^aulam aut solum, aut certe prae omnibus aliis sunt reveriti, ut
atrem, Apostolum, primum qui inter eos introduxit Evangelium; utcunque plane,
humili stylo, and non secundum sapientiam ac a^tem hum^nam, praed^cantem.
Quidam autem Apollo ei praetulerunt, ut doctorem profundiorem, elegantiorem,
and magis comptum. Vid. Act. 18.24. Hinc copiosa i^ta dissertatio ^postoli de
ipsissimo hoc concionandi modo, a cap. 1.17. ad cap. 4.6. ubi dicit se, ista,
figura quadam transtulisse ad seipsum and Apollo.
, and so declared themselves to be his Disciples: Others cried up Apollo, as
being instructed by him, after Paul's departure: Others that came from Judea,
and p ssibly had been taught by Peter, cried up Peter: Others professed
themselves only the Disciples of Christ, and would not take any factious Names
of other T^ach^rs upon them, and therein did well. Hereupon be reproves their
divisions, and exhorts them to Unity. And that he might the better persuade
them to it, he demands of them, whether Christ, (though he has diverse
ministers and instruments) has any more than one Church, one Body, and one
Kingdom; and if so, whether one part of the Church should be n^m^d from Christ,
and the other parts from Paul, Peter, Apollos, or other Teachers? He asks,
whether Paul was crucified for them? Or whether they were baptiz d in the Name
of Paul, so as they should denominate themselves from Paul. As for himself, he
was so far from pretending (as some of their vainglorious Teachers did) by
baptizing of many, to bind them unto himself, (that they might acknowledge him
for their head) that he baptized none am^ng them, but Crispus See Act. 18 8.
and Gaius Romans 16.23
, (that he remembered), and the Household of Stephanus. For Christ did not send
him principally to baptize, (which others might do as well), but to preach the
Gospel to those who never heard of it before. And this he was to perform in a
plain and serious way, and not to set himself to attract men to the Faith by
the power and artifices of humane Eloquence; lest the Doctrine of Christ
crucified should be rendered suspected, by such a pompous way of preaching it.
He acknowledges, that the plain preaching of a crucified Savior may seem a
ridiculous thing to impenitent sinners; but unto such who have been brought by
Faith to embrace Christ, and have thereby part in eternal life, it is the
glorious evidence of the power of God in thus bringing about their Salvation.

What therefore the Prophet Esaias threatened against the men of his time [Isa.
29.13, 14]; he applies to all Contemners of the Gospel now, namely, that God
would turn their wisdom into foolishness, who contenting themselves with an
outward formal devotion in their addresses to Him, regarded not inward
sanctification, nor those things wherein the power of godliness consists.

And he further tells them, they might consult their own experience, whether
God in the Calling of the Church, did ordinarily make use of the Philosophers
v. 20. (...) qui docet alios: (...) quivis literatus, ut distinctus a plebe; ac
praecipi e quivi^ Pater traditionum: (...) qui profundius e^^ concionatus atque
interpretatus legem. Qui mystice and alle^orice Scripturam interpretatu^, cu^us
commentataria interrogationibus, and quaestionibus refert^ sunt.

v. 20. In^atuavit] scilicet declarative, h.e. facto suo, stultam esse ostendit
dum agendi media alia pra elegit.


, or the learned Heads of the World, or the Jewish Rabbis, those mystical and
allegorical Interpreters of the Scripture? Nay, whether he did not make their
wisdom to appear stark folly, in comparison of the glorious effects the
preaching of the Gospel produced. And seeing by the glorious wisdom of God,
which shined in his works of Creation and Providence, the Heathen World
(notwithstanding all their Wisdom and Philosophy) were not brought to know God
aright, so as to glorify him; it pleased God, by such preaching as seemed to
them foolishness, to save those who were thereby brought to believe in his Son.
For as the carnal Jews require some sign or prodigy from Heaven to be showed
them, to persuade them of the truth of the Gospel: So the Greeks look for
profound Philosophy in the Gospel, and scorn it because they think they find it
not there. But we, says the Apostle, are nothing discouraged hereby, but go on
in our course, preaching Christ crucified; which Doctrine, is to the Jews (who
looked for a victorious M^ssias, who should rescue them out of the power of
their enemies) a stumbling block; and to the Gentiles (who are gratified with
nothing but Eloquence and Philosophy) mere foolishness. However, unto them that
are effectually called both among Jews and Gentiles this Doctrine is deservedly
acknowledged to be the great evidence of the power of God, and the
manifestation of the wisdom of God above all worldly wisdom. Neither ought this
to seem strange, for the institutions of God (though they may seem weak and
foolish to the World) are more efficacious and powerful then all the wisdom and
power of wordly men. And as God in calling of men, (as they might observe),
does not, for the most part, call the wise, and noble, and great, but meaner
persons; so likewise he has not made choice of the lofty strain of preaching
to serve his glorious ends in converting sinners, but the plainer way. He has
chosen the way which the World will count foolish, on purpose that by the
success of it, the wise men of the World may be put to shame, (being so much
deceived in their expectation); and he has chosen that way which the World
counts weak, that he may make it appear, how much more power there is in it
(when his blessings concurs with it), than in those ways they account most
excellent and powerful: and lastly, he has chosen such means for the bringing
about his glorious ends, which to the men of the World seem despicable, and
abject, that it may appear how empty all those things are which are so much
valued in the World, when these which they so much despise, shall be manifested
to be more effectual than they. And this he does, that no man may have any
reason to boast of his wisd^m before him; but may be forced to ascribe all
glory to him. And he tells them, that it is of his working alone, that they are
now in Christ Jesus, that they believe in him, and are by Faith ingrafted into
him, whom God has made to all true Believers the Author of all spiritual
blessings; viz. Wisdom by the revelation of the mystery of Salvation;
Righteousness by his full satisfaction and perfect obedience; Sanctification by
the gift of his Spirit; and full Red^mption from all evils and mis^ries both of
Soul and Body; That so all this great good may be thankfully acknowl^dged to
come from God alone, and none else, as of due it ought; according to Jer. 9.23,
24. From Ver. 10. to the end.

Eloquence of Words, in publishing the Gospel, whereby God t^stifies and
reveals his Will concerning the way of saving sinners. Wherefore he thought it
not fit to profess, or teach any other Doctrine among them, then that of Christ
crucified. And when he was with them, being under some p^nsiveness Vide Grot.
in loc.
of mind, and fear of danger from enemi^s, h^ was far from s^tting forth
h^ms^lf with ostentation or pride, as their vainglorious Teachers now did.
Neither was his public preaching or private exhortations garnished with humane
eloqu^nce but though plain, yet were they accompanied with a s^cret power v 4.
Figura est quam Hendiadem vocant. Spiritus and virtutis, i. e. Virtutis
Spiritus sancti, quam videlicet Spiritus sanctus suppeditat. Estius.

v. 4. Neque se mo meus, etc.] (...), etc. significat, se simpliciter
demonstrasse seu testificatum esse veritatem Doctrinae Christianae: and per
hanc demonstrationem seu testifi^ationem Spirituam sanctum exseruisse suam
potentiam, atque efficacem fuisse in cordibus Co^inthiorum, ut testimonio illi
Dei fidem haberent, Ergo, in demonstratione Spiritus and potentioe, perinde
valet ac si diceret. In demonstratione per quam Spiritus potentiam suam
exseruit. Genitivus adjuncti, and (...). Piscat. in loc.

v. 4. (...).] Est Genitivus efficientis. Hunc totum versum optime ex. licat
Theophylactur. Haudquaquam, inquit, meus Sermo argutiolis and peritiasionibu^
nitebatur, nec erat dicendi art and cultu instructus; sed in Spiritus
constabat ostensione, hoc est, prae se ferebat ^piritum sanctum. (...).] Haec
illa est (...), qua Christus docuisse populum dicitur; and Stephanus, Act.
6.8.10. vide Heb. 4.12. Cujus parts duae, (...) interpretor authoritatem
illam, quam habet in Conscientus hominum is, qui recte secat verb^m fidei Math.
7. ult. (...) vide Heb. 4.14. 1 These. 1.5. Dr. Guil. Slater in loc.


, and conviction of the Spirit, inlighting the mind, and persuading the
Conscience. And he used such plainn^ss, that their Faith might not be grounded
merely on humane persuasion, but on the divinity of the Doctrine, witn^ssed to
their hearts by the convictions of the Spirit of God. But though h^ us^d such
plainness, yet his pr^aching was not void of all wisdom; for the Doctrine he
preach^d, was true and divine* wisdom, and appeared to be so, to all true and
sound Per (...) intelligo quosvis vere fideles, quorum pietas sincera minimeque
fucata est, etc. Slater.
Believers, who have arrived to a higher pitch of wisd^m than others. These
appreh^nd, admire and magnify it, though it be of a different strain from the
wisdom of the World and the Politic Maxims of the Princes and Rulers of the
World who (neglecting Christ) with all their worldly wisdom and policy dye and
perish. But that which he preached was the wisdom of the eternal God, touching
the redemption and salvation of man, hidden formerly under holy mysteries Romans
16.25.
and Jewish Types, and but darkly spoken of by the Prophets, which God
d^termined in himself, before the World began, to manifest in the Gospel, that
by the knowledge thereof all true Believers might attain eternal glory, This
wisdom few (...), i. e. fere nemo.
of the chief men among the Jews or Rulers of the Gentiles, had any clear
understanding of; for had they known it, out of reverence to the divine power,
they would have been afraid to crucify the Lord of Glory, who plainly
appeared, by the voice from Heaven, and his miracles, t^ be God himself come
down from Heaven, though clothed with our nature. Neither is it to be w^ndr^d
at, that these witty men could not perceive this wisd m; for those things that
the G^spel reveals, pass all men's understandings except they be supernaturally
inlightn^d. For (to accommodate the words of the Prophet Isaiah chapter 64.4. to
our present purpose), Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into
the heart of man, naturally to perceive the glorious things that God has
prepared, and holds forth in the Gospel, to them that love him. But (says he)
God has revealed these excellent things to us who believe, by his Spirit, who
knows (...) metonymice est Cognoscere sive perspectum habere. Slat.
all the secret Counsels of God, as being of the same essence with the Father
and the Son. As the thoughts and designs of a man, none knows but his own
Spirit; so these divine matters, none can know or reveal to us, but the Spirit
of God. And this holy Spirit (and not the Spirit that acts the men of the
world, which suggests only worldly things) is given to us who believe, that we
may certainly know the things that are freely given us of God, for our Comfort
and Salvation, viz. Christ and his benefits. And these spiritual things being
made known to us, we desire to manifest them, not with the painted language of
man's wisdom, but in a style and words which the Holy Ghost teaches, adapting
(...) adaptare, significat, and exhibito judicio ita connectere, ut omnia quam
aptissime inter se conveniant. Vide 1 Pet. 4.11.
spiritual language, to spiritual things. But such things as th^se, they that
are led only by the light of humane v. 14 (...) Est qui humanae tantum rationis
luce ducitur.
reason, do absolutely despise, and cannot apprehend or approve: for spiritual
things are only spiritually discerned; namely, by a spiritual light, which the
merely rational unregenerate man is destitute of. But he that is spiritual
(that is, that is enlightened and renewed by the Spirit of God) discerns all
these things of which we speak; so that he cannot be convinced of any error in
his discerning or judging of them, by any man that is not spiritual Otherwise
the Spirit of the Prophets must be subjected to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32.
and regenerate. And what carn^l man can be imagined to know the mind of the
Lord so well, as to be fit to inform and counsel the spiritual man, or to
convince him of any error? But for us Ap^stles (says he), we have had the mind
of Christ revealed to us by his Spirit, therefore none can teach you more of
the truth of God than we, From Ver. 1. to the end. See Isa. 40.13.

(...) Est convincere erroris, and sic convictum in suam sententiam adductis
argumentis inducere. Significat efficere condescentionem, i. e. argumentis
propositis efficere ut aliquis tecum in eandem sententiam conde^cendat.




Babes in Christ, and carnal Carnales vocat, non simpliciter Spiritu
destitutos, sed in quibus caro praevalet. Slat.
(if compared with those who have further progress and improvement in
Christianity), and therefore judged they had need of milk, and not of strong
meat, which they c^uld not at that time bear, neither indeed could they now.
And that they were yet something carnal (and had not attained to the true
Christian temper), he shows, the envy, strife and contentions that were among
them, did too much evidence; which while they continued in, they walked as
carnal and unregenerate men: yea, their denominating themselves from cert^in
Teachers, and making a Schism about them, and holding with them against others,
did plainly argue them to be carnal.

And by this means, he shows, they attributed more to their Teachers then was
meet. For what, says he, are Paul and Apollos but only Ministers and
Instruments of your Conversion and Faith, as far as God is pleased to furnish
them with Gifts, and enable them in his work; and their labor, either as to
Conversion or Edification, is no more available without the blessing of God,
than the planting or watering of the Gardener is, if God give not the increase.
From Ver. 1. to 8.

He now uses another Argument against this Schism taken from the unity that
ought to be among their Teachers; who in office, labor and teaching ought to
be one, and therefore neither by them, nor for them, is the Church to be
divided. Indeed their labor is not one, neither shall their reward be one: but
their work is one, for they are by their office to be co-workers together with
God in his husbandry, and in his building. And for his own particular, he
shows, he had been a builder (under God) am^ng them, and as became a prudent
and faithful Master Builder, he had laid the foundation, and by preaching the
Doctrine of Christ crucified, had begun a Church among them, and others have
come in since, and have superstructed on this foundation; but he advises such
Teachers, to take heed they superstruct no other Doctrine upon it, than that
which agrees with it. If they do, they will do it at their own peril. For he
having laid the only sure foundation among them, viz. the Doctrine of Christ
crucified, no Teachers whatsoever, ought to teach any thing contrary thereto,
nor go about to direct sinners to seek for the remission of their sins any
other way, then by Faith in Christ. Now whether a man build upon this
foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, (that is, pure, solid Doctrine), or
Wood, H^y, Stubble, (that is, vain curious Subtilties, and philosophical
Conceits, t^nding more to ostentation than edification, which though they do
not destroy the foundation yet disfigure it) every man's work shall be made
manif^st of what sort it is: for time Diem ego simpliciter interpretor temporis
longinquitatem. Veritas siquidem temporis filia.

Per Ignem ego intelligo lucem veritatis per Spiritum sanctum in Ecclesia
accensam.

Dies apt vocatur tempus illud, quo discussis tenebris, and caligne,
illustratur veritas. Ergo denunciat Apostolis, non semper latere posse, qui
fraudulent er egerunt in opere Domini, aut qui se fidos gesserunt; ac si
diceret, non semper erunt tenebrae, aliquando lux orietur, quae omnia
manifestabit. Calvinus.

Dies hic accipitur pro manifesta revelatione, cum tenebrae depellentur, ut de
re, prout ipsa est, judicium seratur. P. Martyr.


, and the light of Gods Word will manifest the verity, or vanity of Doctrines
delivered by Preachers. And if any man's Doctrine he like good metal that will
endure the Furnace or trial without being consumed, he shall receive a reward
for his faithfulness. But if his Doctrine will not endure the trial (as Wood,
H^y, Stubble, and Dross will not) he shall lose his labor, so as it shall not
be accepted or rewarded by God. Notwithstanding for his own person, if he has
held firm to the foundation, and be otherwise found sincere in the Faith of
Christ, he shall be saved Ipse salvabitur (...), i. e. beneficio lucis qua fit
ut ipse errorem and agnoscat, and revocet. Slater.

Docet illos qui Christum pro fundamento retinuerunt, etsi non semper optimam
structuram addiderunt, servandos tamen, sed aegre ac sic, sicut si ex igne
eriperentur. Illyr.


, yet with difficulty, even as a man that hardly ^scapeth out of the fire
Volunt hinc Papistae ignem purgatorium exstruere, sed inepte.

In omnibus and singulis parabolis semper unice attendendum est ad scopum ac
intentionem ejus, qui illas loquitur and usurpat. Salubre Theophylacti monitum.
Non oportet in omnes parabolarum parts curiosius inquirere; sed quatenus
apparent proposito inservire: reliquae sumendae sunt quasi parabolam
contexentes and nihil ad propositum facientes. Lepide vereque illud Solomonis
omnibus parabolis applicatur, Prove. 30.33. Qui vehementer emungit, elicit
sanguinem.


. From Ver. 8. to 16.

Another Argument which he uses to move them to take heed of bringing in any
false Doctrines among them, is this: All, says he, that are brought effectually
to believe in Christ, are the Temple of God, a Church of God, and the Spirit of
God dwells in them. Now if any man defile the Temple or Church of God, by
bringing in any impure Doctrine or Practices among them, he must expect that
God will severely punish him, except he repent and amend. And all you that are
true and real Christians, make up this Temple or Church, V. 16, 17.

And lest any of their vainglorious Teach^rs (being puffed up with a c^nceit of
their worldly wisdom) should notwithstanding all his admonitions, resolve to go
on in their way, he advises them to take heed, that this their carnal wisdom
deceive them not. For says he, I tell you, if any man among you seems to
himself to be wise, according to the wisdom that acts the men of this world,
his best way is to deny his own carnal wisdom, and submit himself to the wisdom
of God, and the plain Doctrine of the Gospel, which the World accounts
foolishness, and then he shall approve himself truly wise toward God, and in
the matters that concern his Soul. For God accounts carnal wisdom foolishness,
especially when it rejects his institutions, or (despising the simplicity of
them) sets up its own inventions, which will not further a man to true
happiness. So that according to the words of Eliphaz, Job 5.13. God catches
the wise in their own craftiness; and according to Psalm. 94.11. Paulus pro
(...) posuit (...) quia id instituto ipsius conveniebat, and haud dubie de iis
maxim agit Psalmographus qui sibi sapere plurimum videbantur. Grot.
God manifests the thoughts of the wolrdly wise to be vain. From Ver. 18. to 20.

From all that he has before said, he infers, that they should not glory in
their Teachers, nor ascribe too much to them, nor depend on them, as if they
were Lords of their Faith. For all of them, even the greatest as well as the
least, even the Apostles themselves, and all their gifts are ordained of God
for the use and service of the Church. Yea al^ things in the World, life,
death, things present, things to come, are all appointed to promote, advance,
and accomplish the eternal happiness Haec omnia propter vos sunt and ad vestram
ordinantur utilitatem. Estius.
of those that are the true members of Christ. And they being Christ's redeemed
ones, ought to reckon themselves his Flock, and to depend on him, and obey him;
as Christ himself, the well beloved Son of God, resigned up himself to the will
of his Father. From Ver. 20. to the end.

Masters of their Faith, but as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards and
Dispensers of the Mysteries of G^d [ viz. his Word and Sacraments] wherein
faithfulness is especially required. He declares how little he valued their
Ver. 3. (...)] Dies pro judicio ponitur, ex Cilicum idiotismo, ut Hieronymo
placet: Metonymia est adjuncti; nam judiciorum certi dies: Judicia autem humana
appellat ea, quae ex affectibus humanis proficiscuntur. (...): scilicet quod ad
dignitatem attinet, q. d. quanti sim, vel non sim, ego nequaquam disquiro aut
dijudico: est igitur hoc Pauli dictum ad certam hypothesin restringendum.
judgment of him, who preferred their eloquent Teachers before him. He shows,
he dare not judge himself, whether he had greater Gifts than they, nor determine
how much he was to be esteemed above other Teachers, or below them; much less
should they judge him, who knew him not so well. For though he was not c^nscious
to himself of negligence or unfaithfulness in his ministry, yet he durst not
justify himself, or think himself free from all blame, and so determine of his
own desert. This he left wholly to the judgment of the Lord, who knows all
things, and the very secret intentions of men's hearts, and at his Coming, will
reward every man according to his works; and th^n those who have done ill shall
be ashamed, and those who have done well, shall be commended and rewarded. From
Ver. 1. to 6.

He concludes this whole Discourse, and shows the scope of it to be, that none
of them should glory in their Teachers, or set them up so, as to disparage
others. He shows, how he had used his prudence in this business, concealing the
names of their ambitious Teachers; and transferring the whole matter by a
figure upon himself and Apollo, not that they had any part therein, but he did
it to this end, that the Corinthians might from them and their example, learn
to think soberly of all Ministers, and esteem them no more than Stewards (as he
had written to them before at the first verse), who were to distribute to them,
what Christ had entrusted them with. For if they were not to frame Sects to
themselves under the Name of Paul and Apollos; much l^ss ought they under the
Names of others, who could not be supposed to excel in such extraordinary
Gifts. And what Teacher (says he) is there, that has cause to boast, and lift
up himself above another? Who is it that differenceth him from another, but God
only? And if so, he ought to think modestly of himself, and not to despise
others. But ye Corinthians, says he, are so proud of the parts and gifts of
your Ministers, and think your selves so full, and rich, and furnished with all
kind of knowl^dg, that you fancy to your selves that you reign like Kings,
without us, as if you were not beholding to us before, nor now stood in any
need of us (your Apostles and spiritual Fathers), who first converted you to
the Faith. And I wish for my part, ye were in such prosperity and felicity as
you dream of, that so we, who are so sharply persecuted, might come to you, as
to a refuge, and enjoy some part of that prosperity with you. But I think God
has set us forth (who are the last Postremos haud dubie vocat, qui in ordinem
Apostolicum post Christi resurrectionem asciti fuerunt. Calvinus.
Apostles, and called since Christ's ascension) as a spectacle q. d. Propinamur
omnibus mortalibus irridendi and abominandi, nec in angulo quodam id fit, sed
veluti toto mundo in unum theatrum collecto, ut omnes saturentur nostris
miseriis. Glass.
to the World, to Angels and men [to good Angels and good men, as those who
compassionate us; so evil Angels and evil men, as those that delight in our
sufferings]. I say God has set us forth, as those that are to conflict with
all s^rts of miseries, and death it self. We are accounted Fools, both by the
World, and perhaps by you, because we run so many hazzards for Christ; but you
count your selves wise, and sufficiently skilled in the Doctrine of the Gospel,
whilst you mingle your worldly wisdom with it, and hazard nothing for it. We
are weak and broken with afflictions, but ye are strong as keeping your selves
out of the reach of tribulation. Ye are honorable, we are despised; We are
exposed to wants of several sorts; We labor with our own hands, and suffer
injuries and reproaches, and are reckoned as the filth and offscouring of the
world to this very day; and yet, as our Savior has enjoined us, We pray for
our Persecutors, and return good for evil. From Ver. 6. to 14.

He comes now in the last place, to mitigate his sharp reprehension of them,
telling them, his intent therein was only to warn them, not to shame them, and
that he did it out of his fatherly affeciion to them, whom he truly loved as
his spiritual Children, begotten by the Gospel which he had preached among
them. For though others had since instructed them, yet they might remember that
he first preached the Gospel unto them. Wherefore he exhorts them to be
obedient to him as their spiritual Father; which that they might be, he tells
them, he had for the present sent Timothy to them, who exactly knowing his
whole course of Life, Doctrine, and Practice, and what Way Vias in Christo
generatim, specialius vias docendi.
, and Rule he followed in teaching the Churches, should put them in remembrance
of th^se things that concerned them. He tells them, he hears, some among them
were puffed up by reason of his absence, and despised him, as if he would not
come again among them, and so they should escape censure. But he acquaints
them, that he intended (with the Lords leave) to come speedily unto them, and
would then try, whether in those their Teachers they so much boasted of, there
be only eloquence of words, or whether their preaching be accompanied with v.
19. (...) Hic intelligo (...) illam and (...) in docendo, quae in veris Christi
ministris cernitur. Slater.
power and efficacy, so as to work on the hearts of the hearers. For the
Kingdom of God is not set up in the hearts of men by eloquence, but by the
power of the Spirit, accompanying the Word.

Lastly, he asks them, whether they desired he should come to their correction,
with the authority of Church Censures (which he resolved to do if they
persisted in their Schism); or whether he should come to their comfort in the
Spirit of love and meekness, which he intended, if they reformed? From Ver. 14.
to the end.

He comes n^w to the second part of the Epistle, wherein he reprehends several
vices among them in the two following Chapters; and then satisfies some
Q^estions or Cases of Conscience propounded unto him. And in the first place,
he intimates to them, that they had no great reason to glory or boast of their
prosperous condition, seeing they had so many things among them, for which they
ought to be humbled.

As particularly, 1. For their neglect of Church Discipline, in not
excommunicating an incestuous person. He tells them, that it is commonly
reported, that there is such Fornication committed among them, which is not so
much as named among Heathens without abhorrence and detestation, viz. That one
should marry his Mother-in-Law, and that during his Fathers life, as seems to
be intimated, 2 Cor. 7.12. And whereas they should have mourned, and been
greatly humbled, that so scandalous a sin was committed among them; and should,
with the open expressions of sorrow Non luxistis ut tolleretur] Concisa oration,
h. e. Vos inflati estis, and non potius lugentes, seu cum luctu, id serio
egistis, ut tolleretur.
and grief (as was usual in the Church), have proceeded to excommunicate the
offender, they were puffed up Inflati] scilicet ex studio partium atque
acrimonia contentionum, exultante part ad versa in istam in qua tam gravis
lapsus contigerat. Chrysostomus and Theodoretus existimant, fuisse unum ex
istius Ecclesiae doctoribus.
, and gloried in their present condition; or possibly, one party insulted over
the other, whose Teacher this offender was. He tells them, that though he was
not personally present with them, ye he was in heart and spirit [see Col.
2.5.], and by virtue of that authority that belonged to him, he had already
passed sentence on that ossend^r; namely, that in a public Assembly, gathered
in the Name of Christ, (in which they were also to supp^se him, their Apostle,
in heart and spirit present among them), they sh uld by the authority of Christ
(committed to him and them) proceed t^ ^^^^mmunic^te and deliver up into the
power of Satan this incestuous person, that he may inflict some disease upon
him, that may be a means to humble him, and bring him to the sight of his sin,
and to repentance for it, and so be a means to save his soul at last, 1 Timothy
1.20. He tells them, their glorying and insulting one against another, on
occasion of this miscarriage, was very evil and vile. F^r they should consider
that sin like leaven is of a spreading nature, and ther^f re they should purge
out from among them (by the dreadful sentence of excommunication) this
incestuous person, and all other scandalous sinners, that their Church might be
a pure and clean body (a holy Society in truth and reality), as by profession
they were Saints and unleavened. And he draws an argument from the custom of
the ancient Jewish Church, in the celebration of their Passover, who were then
obliged to purge out all leaven among them, and during the whole Feast (in
commemoration of their deliverance out of Egypt) to eat none but unleavened
bread: so (says he) we that are Christians, Christ our Pascal Lamb being
sacrificed for us, should pass our whole time; and all our days, as a perpetual
celebration and commemoration of that great redemption wrought for us by Him,
keeping this spiritual Feast continually, so as not to allow in our selves, or
to tolerate among us the leaven of naughtiness and wickedness, of uncleanness
and vilany; but to practice all Christian purity, and to hold fast the truth
that has been delivered to us. From Ver. 1. to 9.

2. He tells them he had wrote to them in a former Epistle Ista Epistola, de
qua loquitur, hodie non extat. Nec dubium quin multae aliae exciderint: sed
satis est quod nobis supersunt quas sufficere Dominus providit. Calv. in loc.
to forbear all familiar converse with Fornicators, and to avoid them, as
scandalous flagitious persons. But he would not have them understand it of
Heathens among them, who had not given up their Names to Christ; n^r that they
should only avoid Heathens, that were guilty of those other scandalous sins of
Covetousness, Extortion, or Idolatry. For the Corinthians, being for the most
part Infidels, were many of them such, with whom they must needs have a civil
converse whilst they lived among them. But he would have them to understand it
of Christians. For what had his or the Churches censures to do with those that
are not members of the Church? These were the only persons they were to judge
and censure (as they knew by their own practice) and to leave all others to
Gods tribunal. And according to these rules, he orders them to proceed against
this incestuous person. From Ver. 9. to the end.

3. He reproves their contentious Law-Suit^s, and impleading one another before

1. The Saints at the day of Judgment, being acquitted themselves, shall, at
Assessors with Christ, and approvers of his righteous Judgment, judge the World
(...), i. e. impios, Joh. 17.9.
, and Apostatized Angels, therefore surely they are worthy to decide temporal
differences in this life. He tells them, they had better, if their D^ctors and
Teachers be not at leisure to end their differences Per Metonym. (...) hic
vocat res judicandas.
, refer them to the determination of some honest, pious, though poor (...)]
Comparative. v. 7. (...)] Defectus.
Christians, than bring them before Infidels. He tells them, they shame their
own Society, whilst they betake themselves to the Judicatories f Heathens, as
if there were never a wise man am^ng themselves. He shows them, that seeing
they are Brethren, they ought not to vex one another with Law-Suites,
especially before Heathens. It would be much more decent for them to suffer
injury and wrong, than with scandal to contend. And yet, those among them that
were most forward to go to Law, were commonly the injurious persons, and such
as had no Right on their side. And the root of these disorders, was want of
love, mutual forbearance, meckness and righteousness. He testifies t^ them,
that these unjust contendings, as well as other scandalous wickednesses, and
abominable impurities (which he there reckons up) will keep men out of Heaven,
except they repent. And seeing that some of them had formerly been defiled with
those, or at least with some of those vices, before their conversion, but were
now (as he did in Charity judge) changed persons, washed Ablutio, sanctificatio,
and justificatio mixtim complectuntur justificationem and renovationem. Ablutio
videri potest genus justificationis and sanctificationis. Ista asyndeta valde
amplificant: singula enim veluti novo impetu beneficia Christi exaggerant.
in the blood of Christ from the guilt of their sins (of which Baptism is the
Sacramental Sign and Seal), and justified by Faith in him (there being no other
Name Nomen hic nihil aliud significat quam ipsum Dominum Jesum. Erasmus
intelligit per nomen, virtutem ac potentiam Domini Jesu.
under Heaven by which they can be saved), and sanctified by the Spirit of God,
therefore they ought to take heed of defiling themselves again with scandalous
contentions, or with any other of the Vices there named. From Ver. 1. to 12.

4ly. He comes now to reprehend the growing Heresy of the Nicolaitans, which
allowed the Eating things sacrificed to Idols, and Fornication, as things
indifferent. And First, he grants, that all indifferent things are lawful, and
may be used; but with two restrictions, or cautions. 1. When they are
expedient, and may be done or made use of, without hurting our selves or our
Neighbors. 2. When they do not get such a d^minion over us, as to inslave us
to an intemperate use of them. He instances particularly in meats, and shows
the difference between the free use of them, and Fornication. He grants, that
it is lawful to use any kind of meat, because God has ordained it for the good
of man's nature. Meats are ordained for the belly, and the belly for meats; but
yet with a temporary conjunction: for as God will destroy meats, so he will
destroy the belly also, as to the use it now has: therefore for the sake of
the belly we ought not to endanger our eternal Salvation, or the Salvation of
others, eating so, as may tend to enc^urage them in sin. But now for
Fornication (he shows) the case is otherwise. This he proves, to be utterly
unlawful, and that for six reasons. 1. The body was not made for Fornication
(as the belly was made for meats), but for the service of Christ, and ought to
be employed to his glory, who is ordained to be the Head of man, to govern both
his Soul and Body, that both may be kept holy. For Christ was sent to redeem
and sanctify the Body, at well as the Soul, and consequently to rule and
command it, being Lord of both. 2, Our Bodies are not to be abolished and
utterly destroyed, but to be raised up to glory at the last day (as Christ's
Body was raised up) if we be such as truly believe in him, therefore they ought
not to be defiled now, with Fornication. 3. The faithful are Members of Christ,
therefore they ought not to make themselves members of an Harlot. For as
Wedlock makes Man and Wife one Body lawfully, so Fornication makes the
Fornicator and the Harlot one Body unlawfully. As on the other side, he that is
by Faith united to Christ is one Spirit with him, that is, is led and governed
by one and the same Spirit, and becomes a Member of his spiritual and mystical
Body. Therefore such a conjunction ought to be kept inviolable. 4. Other sins
abuse (chiefly and principally) some object, that is, without the Body, (as the
Drunkard wine, etc.) but Fornication injuries the Body, that acts it, and that
more than other sins. 5. The Bodies of Believers are Temples of the Holy Ghost,
(who dwells in them, being freely given them of God), and therefore they ought
to be kept pure and undefiled. 6. All true Believers and faithful Christians
are not their own, but purchased with the Blood of Christ, therefore they
should endeavor to glorify God their Redeemer (whose they are) both in their
Bodies, and in their Souls. From Ver. 12. to the end.

reprehensory part of his Epistle. He now resolves diverse Cases of Conscience;
about which the Corinthians had written to him. As in the first place,
concerning marriage, touching which he declares; 1. That for those that have
the gift of Continency, and can live pure, and chaste without marrying, it is
better for them so to do. But for the avoiding all sorts of uncleanness and
p^llution, it is generally most safe, that men and women should betake
themselves to the conjugal state. 2. He shows, that married persons ought not
to abstain from the conjugal society of Bed and Board, except it be by mutual
consent, f^r a time only, and that upon great and extraordinary occasion;
namely, when they desire to give themselves more solemnly to fasting and
prayer; which time being ended, they should come together again; lest by long
abstinence, Satan should gain advantage over them. But as to that which he had
said before, viz. that it was (generally speaking) most safe that men and women
do betake themselves to the conjugal estate, he would have them so understand
him, that he spoke it by way of permission, allowing them to marry that found
their condition to require it; but not by way of precept, as if he commanded
any to marry. For he could wish (if it were the will of God), that the
Corinthians v. 7. Omnes] h. e. Si convenienter fieri posset.
(who moved this Question), had the like gift of Continence which God had
bestowed on him. But seeing this gift is not given to all, every one should
consider how he is qualified by God, as to this matter, namely, whether with
ability to live chastely in a single life, or else had inclinations to marry;
and accordingly should dispose of himself. Therefore to sum up what he had
said, he tells them, that as to the unmarried and Widows, it was convenient
they should abide in that estate, (if they could contain), because of the
advantages of the single life; but if not, then it was better to marry, than to
live inflamed with sinful lusts. From Ver. 1. to 10.

2ly. He comes now to answer their other Case, about divorce, namely, whether
it be lawful, where the occasion is not adultery, but, 1. Only some
disagreements and discontents between the parties where both are Christians: or
2. Because a Believer is yoked or married to an Infidel. For the first, he
says, it is not lawful; in which decision, he only repeats an old command given
by the authority of God, who in the institution of marriage established, that
the married should be one flesh, and therefore should so continue: and not
separate one from the other, Math. 19.6. Wher^fore he commands, that the Wife
should not depart from her Husband, on the account of disagreements between
them. But if she, pretending necessary reasons of departing, as danger of her
life, etc, shall for a time depart, he commands, that either she endeavor to
be reconciled to her Husband, and so come to him again, or else abstain from a
second marriage. And the Husband likewise, he commands, not to put away his
Wife on any such account, or to give her cause to depart. For the second Case,
seeing (as it seems) some among them held themselves polluted by being married
to unbelievers (whom they had married before their conversion), and thought
therefore of parting from them; He tells them, God had not determined in the
Law, what should be done in such a Case, but he, by special revelation from the
Lord, and the assistance of his Spirit would determine it, namely, that they
should dwell together, unbelief being no sufficient ground of parting. For the
conjugal society of the unbelieving party is sanctified (that is, made lawful
and allowed) to the believing party, (to the pure, and believing all things
being pure, 1 Timothy 4, 5.); and this he proves, because the Children born of
such Parents, whereof the one is a Believer, and the other not, are federally
holy, and are to enjoy the like privileges, as if both Parents had been
Believers As meats are said to be sanctified in that place, by the word and
prayer, that is made pure, lawful and allowed to Believers.
. But if the unbelieving party will not co-habit, but will depart, and on his
side make void the bond of marriage out of hatred to the Faith, he declares
that in such a case, the Believer or innocent party is free, and not bound by
the bond of marriage any longer. But he tells them, God requires that we should
endeavor to live peaceably with all, and therefore the Believer should use all
peaceable endeavors to retain the unbeliever, and not give occasion of
difference or departure; because by a peaceable dwelling together, the Believer
may gain the unbeliever to the Faith of Christ, and be an instrument of his
Salvation, [1 Pet. 3.1.]. From Ver. 10. to 17.

Nam si radix sancta, etiam rami sancti, Romans 11.16.
And now taking occasion Mos est Pauli, obiter quaedam a re non aliena
interjicere, ac deinde coeptum sermonem recipere. Grot.
from what he had said, concerning the conjugal state, namely, that it is not to
be deserted, because of the infidelity of one of the parties, he disgresses to
a general Doctrine, concerning the outward condition and state of men; and
shows, that every one should be content with the lot and condition which God
has distributed (...) dicitur Deus, cum alicui sortem aliquam assignat
natalium, fortunae, conjugii.
unto him, and should frame himself to walk Christianly in it, as he taught in
all Churches.

Particularly he shows, that if any person that was before circumcised, be
converted to Christianity, he should never trouble himself to get off that mark
from his flesh, as some it seems did: nor on the other side, if any man that is
uncircumsised, be converted, he need not receive Circumcision, as some it seems
required, Act. 15.1. For such outward things as these, he tells them, avail
nothing now under the new Testament, or in the Church of Christ, who looks not
on the outward condition of men, but on their obedience to his commands.
Therefore he advises, that every one should abide contentedly in the Calling
wherein he was called, and not think that Christianity frees him from any
obligation that lay on him before. If a bondman be converted, he should not
think it a disparagement to his Christianity to continue a servant still, nor
be solicitous of changing his condition: yet if by any fair regular means, he
can obtain his freedom, he may make use of it. However let him know, that he
that is called to believe in Christ, being a servant, is by the Lord freed from
the bondage of sin and Satan; and he that is called being (as to his civil and
outward estate) a freeman, is yet not exempted from subjection to Christ. In
short, he tells them, that being dearly bought with a price by Christ Aliqui
sic. Are ye redeemed with a price? become not again the servants of men. scil.
of Heathens.
, they should not serve men in things repugnant Christianos monet, ne pravis
hominum libidinibus and voluntatibus inserviant, sed ei, qui eos redemit.
Lightf.
to his commands, nor submit themselves to such a servitude, as their
high-flown Doctors Vide Grot. in loc.
would impose upon them.

Lastly, He urges again his former exhortation, that every one should
contentedly continue in the outward state wherein he was, when he was called,
and not think of changing it, merely on the account of Christianity, but
holding to it, abide with God, and continue faithful to him in his Church, in
which he reigns. From Ver. 17. to 25.

3ly. He comes now to the third Inquiry, that the Corinthians made to him,
namely, concerning Virgins, Male and Female. And first, concerning such as are
at their own disposal, whether they should marry or no? To which Question,
before he gives his answer, he pr^mises, that he had no special command whereby
the state of Virginity was either injoined or prohibited, but he would
sincerely give his advice, as became him to whom God had vouchsafed mercy to be
faithful. Then he gives his answer in three Propositions. 1. That by reason of
the present distress, and danger of persecution, 'twas m st convenient, that
those that were single, should so continue, if they have the gift of
Continence. 2. He declares, that if they marry they do not sin, only they will
be like to meet with more troubles. But he would spare to speak any more to
them of that matter, lest he should seem to dissuade them from marriage more
than was fit. However in this advice, he consulteth their qui^t and advantage.
3. He advises, that whether they married or not, they should consider, that the
time is now but short, before persecution will arise, (possibly he means that
under Nero); insomuch, that they ought to have their affections very much
moderated to all things in the world: Those that have Wives, should be as if
they had none; those that weep, like those that do not; those that rejoice, as
those that rejoice not; those that buy and purchase, as if they possessed
nothing; and those that use this World Utere nummo quemadmodum viator in
stabulo utitur Mensa, Calice, Urceo, dimissurus, non permansurus. Augustine.
, as not using it (...), i. e. tanquam non utentes, scilicet usu firmo and
tenaci. Si mundo adhaerere vis, eo abuteris; quia re fluxa, quasi non fluxa sed
firma, solida, and stabili uteris. Abusus enim est superfluus usus, and modum
and naturam rei exsuperans. Cornel. a Lap.
. For as a Scene which is soon changed, and shows a new face, so the fashion
and shape of this present World is passing away, and the times are turning into
very troublesome. He gives another reason, why the single life is to be
preferred before the conjugal, namely, because single persons (comparatively)
are more free from cares and distractions, and have (ordinarily) more time and
leisure to attend upon the Lord in religious exercises than the married have.
For he that is unmarried, has but one obligation of care, namely, how he may
serve God most acceptably; but he that is married, has another care on him,
viz. how he may, in lawful things, please his Wife. And the like difference
there is (as to this matter) between married Women and Virgins. A Wife is
usually combred with household cares, and must, in lawful things, endeavor to
please her Husband; and is not, upon that account, so free for holy exercises;
but the Virgin (that has no family to care for) being freed from such
distractions, and endeavoring to approve her self more eminently holy both in
Soul and Body, she has more leisure to attend on the Lord in holy and
religious exercises. And what he spoke concerning the advantages of a single
life, he shows, he spoke not that he might cast a snare upon them, or precisely
to bind them to abstain from marriage, if they had not the gift of Continency,
but to lead them to that which is fit and comely, that they may attend upon the
Lord without distraction. From Ver. 25. to 36.

4ly. He comes in the next place to speak concerning Virgins, who are under the
power of Parents and Guardians; and to answer the Question, Whether those
Parents or Guardians may advise^ly give their Virgins in marriage? In answer to
this, he says, that if there be these three things in the case, 1. If any
Parent or Guardian be suspected to detain his Virgin longer from marriage than
is expedient. 2. If she have passed the fl were of her age, and begin to be more
than of ripe years. 3. If he see the mind of the Virgin much inclined to
marriage, then he advises, that the Parent or Guardian should please her
therein, and consent that she should marry, and in so doing he sins not. But
if the Parent or Guardian be steadfastly persuaded in his mind, that he wrongs
not his Daughter, or Pupil, in declining to marry her, and sees no necessity to
seek a Husband for her, so that he has power over his own will v. 37. Is
dicitur voluntatem suam in potestate habere, cujus voluntas ab altero non
pendet. Pendet autem hac in part Patris voluntas a liberorum voluntate, ita ut
teneamur illorum infirmitati consulere. Slater in loc.
, (that is, liberty to determine of her, as to this case, how he pleases), by
purposing in his heart to keep her unmarried, he says, he does a thing very
praiseworthy. Whereupon he concludes, that he that gives the Virgin in
marriage (if the case be, as is before supposed), does well. But if it be not,
the Parent or Guardian does better, that is, he does that which is more
behoveful to the benefit of the Virgin, if he keep her unmarried. So that there
is sin in neither way, only greater convenience on the one side than on the
other. From Ver. 36. to 39.

5ly. A fifth case they propounded to the Apostle, was, Whether second
marriages of Widows were lawful, or no? He answers, they were: provided, 1. The
Widow marry in the Lord, that is, holily, and in the fear of God; and with such
an one, whom she may marry by the Law of God; and with whom she may probably
expect the blessing of God: but, 2. Though it be lawful for her to marry again,
yet by reason of the present danger of persecution, he thinks, she will be more
happy and free from troubles, if she continue in her Widowhood. And he modestly
insinuates, that his counsel is not less than divine, whatever their
vainglorious Teachers might think of him. From Ver. 39. to the end.

6ly. A sixth Case of Conscience that they propounded to him, was, concerning
eating things offered to Idols; which case he resolves, by answering three
things that might be brought in the defense of it. 1. They might suppose that
they were all sufficiently instructed in the liberty allowed them by the
Gospel, so that they might lawfully eat things offered to Idols. Answ. He
answers, that a false opinion of knowledge, or knowledge which is not tempered
with Charity, for the most part, occasions men to be proud, and to despise
their weak Brethren; but knowledge joined with Charity, applies it self to the
instruction of others, and accommodates it self to the good and edification of
others that are weak; and considers what is fit to be done in reference to
them. And if any man has such a kind of knowledge, that is not accompanied with
Charity, he knows not all his duty, nor to what end he ought to refer his
knowledge, nor how to use it as he ought; and so, upon the matter, knows
nothing in such sort, as he ought to know. But he that knows God, and truly
loves him, and his Neighbor (according to his command), the same is known and
approved of God. Ver. 1.2, 3.

2. They might say, They knew an Idol to be nothing, that is, no God, nor to
have any divine power in it, and therefore meats cannot be made holy or
profane by being offered to an Idol.

Answ. He acknowledges that an Idol is nothing Ipsum illud simulachris
repraesentatum, nihil est.
. For says he, though in the vain opinion of men, there be many caelestial and
terrestrial Gods, and many Lords, or Baalim; notwithstanding we, that are
divinely enlightened, acknowledge but one The word one, does not here respect the
persons but the nature.
true God, the Father, by whose almighty power all things were made, and we for
him In him, i. e. we subsist in him, or by his power.
, that is, for his glory and service; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, namely, as co-working with his Father, Joh. 1.3. and 5.19. and we
by him, namely, are redeemed and purchased. But all have not this knowledge,
that an Idol is nothing but some even to this day, do Eat things offered to
Idols, their Consciences suggesting to them, that an Idol is something Multum
adhuc vigebat paganismus, etiam Corinthi. Grot.
, and that, things offered to them are thereby rendered the more holy, and so
their weak and ill instructed Consciences, are (by so doing) defiled and
polluted. From Ver. 3. to 8.

3ly. They might say, Meats are things so indifferent that neither eating
bette^^^, nor not-eating makes us worse; so that neither the one, nor the
other, ma^^s us more acceptable to G^d.

Answ. Th^^ (...) true indeed* unless in case of scandal; for in such a case,
he sins who uses his lib^^ty so, as it becomes a stumbling block to his weak
Brother, and s^, is he does thereby build him up, and encourage him in sin. As
in the f^r^nt^^t^^^ case, ly he that is weak, see another that has knowledge,
sit at meat, that is, at ^east in the Idol Temple, shall not the Conscience of
that weak Christian be (...) ^y the others example, to go on in this evil way?
And so he is in dang^^ of b^^^g encouraged in his heathenish error, and sin,
and to have his mind by degrees a^i^nat^d from Christianity; whereas before,
whilst he professed to be a Christian, he was in the judgment of Charity to be
esteemed one of those, for whom Christ died. Now this confirming a man in his
sin, and encouraging him to his after-commissions, whose Conscience was before
erroneous, and his practice sinful, is, as if instead of curing a sick man
(which Charity requires us to do), we should wound and hurt him more; which is
not only an act of great uncharitableness against our Brother, but an act of
injury and robbery against Christ, in betraying a soul to ruin (as much as in
us lies) and hindering his salvation, for the saving of whom Christ died
Augustimus dicit, pro omnibus valere Christi mortem quantum ad (...)
magnitudinem, and sufficientiam. Sufficeret enim Christi (...) universis
redimendis and servandis, si universi id fide susciperent.
. He concludes, that he had rather for ever abstain from all kind of flesh,
than be the occasion of the ruin, or damnation of any weak Christian; much more
would he deny himself the use of his Christian liberty in indifferent things,
in respect of the weak, (though not of the obstinate and wilful) and abstain,
at a certain time, and place, from flesh offered to Idols. From Ver. 8. to the
end.

his readiness to abridg himself in his Christian liberty, and therefore
exhorts them, by his example that they would do the like, especially in th^se
things that appertain to the Belly, and particularly in eating things offered
to Idols. The sum of his argument is this, I being an Apostle, and no less free
than any other, do not only abstain from things lawful and profitable to me,
but also accommodate my self to the infirmities of all; yea I keep under my
body, by abstinence for the service of the Gospel. Therefore ye Corinthians
ought to do the like. The Antecedent be proves from v. 1. to 24. The
Consequent, is an exhortation carried on, to the end of the Chapter.

1. He shows that he had as much right to Christian liberty as any other, for
he was an Apostle, he had been honored with the sight of Christ, and was
personally spoken to by him out of Heaven [Act. 22.18. 2 Cor. 12.2, 4.], and
was immediately called by him to the Apostleship, and he had a Testimony
thereof in their conversion, which was as a Seal confirming his Apostleship (at
least among them), and afforded him a defense against those that called his
Apostleship into Question. Ver. 1.2, 3.

2. He shows, he had power to eat and drink at the cost and charge of the
Church, as well as others; that he had liberty to marry, and to take a wife,
and lead her about with him, as some other Apostles had done, (particularly,
those that were Christ's Cousin-Germans, and Peter, Mat. 8.14.): That he and
Barnabas had power, as well as others, to forbear working with their hands at
manual Trades, to get a livelihood; and might require maintenance from the
Churches; it being a debt justly due to the Preachers of the Gospel; as be
proves by several Arguments. 1. By the Law of Nations, which appoints and
allows to Soldiers, Vine-dressers, and Shepherds, and those that labor for
the use of others, in their respective Callings, a due reward and wages: Why
therefore should there not be a reward by the same reason, due to the Ministers
of the Gospel. From Ver. 4. to 8.

2. He shows, he does not ground this, only upon human reason, equity, or
custom, but upon the Provision made by God himself in the Levitical Law for the
Ox that treads out the Corn. Now the end of Gods Law Quod de bobus praecepit
id propter homines secit.
is not only to show and prescribe how Oxen should be fed, but to enjoin, that
equity should be used, in the just rewarding those that labor for us; that he
that ploweth, and thresheth in hope of reward, should partake of his hoped-for
reward, which encourages him in his work. Why then should not they that labor
in the Gospel, partake of the fruit of their labors? 3. From common justice.
If the Apostles have sown unto them spiritual things, it is nothing but justice
they should, instead thereof, reap of their carnal things. 4. From the example
of their other Teachers at Corinth, who made use of this power, which was as
lawful for him to do, as for them; but he had forborne it, lest he should hinder
the course of the Gospel. 5. From the example of the Levites, to whom
maintenance, and a part of the Sacrifices was given by God for their ministry.
Even so has Christ ordained, (says he), that they who preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel See Mat. 10.10. and Luke 10.8.
. From Ver. 8. to 15.

Having thus asserted his liberty, he shows, his moderation in the use of it.
He tells them, he had not h^therto made use of this power among them, (though
from other Churches he sometimes received some liberality, 2 Cor. 11.8.), nor
desired to do it; nor did he write these things, that that should be done for
him, that was done for other Teachers; for he had rather dye, than that false
Teachers should be able to take this honor from him, which was so justly due
to him, namely, That he had preached the Gospel for sincere ends, and not
sought what was due to him for his pains. He shows, that if he had preached the
Gospel, merely out of respect to profit, he had had no cause to boast. For he
was obliged to preach it by virtue of his office, and the command of God, which
he must not disobey; but if he has done it willingly, and without respect to
any worldly profit thereby, it will be rewardable. But if he has done it
unwillingly Si ergo invitus hoc facio (nam viderer quasi invitus facere si
refugerem sumptu proprio id facere) dispensatio quaedam mihi credita est a qua
gloria mihi non est expectanda. Sin volens and sponte hoc facio, h. e. non
expectata ab aliis mercede vel sumptu, haec est mea merces and mea gloria.
Clarius.
(as they do, who preach not out of any love to God, or desire of the
conversion of Souls, and would not do it, if it were not for lucres sake) then
it may be said, that a dispensation or office has been committed to him, from
which he is not to expect any glory or reward. This therefore was that which
gave him hopes of a reward from God, namely, that he had preached the Gospel to
the Corinthians, without being chargeable to them. For if he had received
maintenance there, where his Reproachers endeavored to bring an ill report
upon him, to the prejudice of the Gospel which he had preached In hoc casu cum
aut detrimentum gloriae divinae accrescere, aut scandalum proximo oriri
verisimile sit, abutetur liberate sua, si quis utatur. Slat.
, then he should have abused his liberty in receiving of it. From Ver. 15. to
19.

He goes on to show, how he did abridg himself in the use of his Christian
Liberty; for though he was as free as any man, (being bound to none), yet he
had made himself a servant to all, that he might gain the more to embrace the
Gospel. For he had in a charitable condescension compli'd with the Jews (in
certain external Ceremonies, Act. 21.21, 24, 25. who thought themselves bound
to observe the Ceremonial Law), and that he did by the advice of the Council at
Jerusalem, which left to the Jews (born under that yoke) a liberty to use those
Ceremonies for a time, but in no wise to impose them on the Gentiles. When he
had to deal with the Gentiles, (that were not born under the Ceremonial Law),
he abstained from the use of those Ceremonies, as if he had been without the
Law, as they were; yet as to the Moral Law, or Law of Love, (which is the
perpetual Law of God, and re-inforc'd by Christ, and requires us to love God
above all, and our Neighbor as our selves), he did never account himself free
from that, but only from the Ceremonial Law, from which indeed he was freed,
and when he saw it for the advantage of the Gospel, he did freely abstain from
the observance of it. When he had to deal with those that were weak, and
doubted of their liberty, he abstained from things lawful, as they did.
Finally, in all things indifferent, he accommodated himself to all men, that he
might gain as many as possible he could, at leastwise, some. And this he did,
that the Gospel might be better esteemed among all, and more propagated, and
that he himself might partake of the glorious eternal rewards promised therein,
together with them to whom he had preached it, and who had effectually
entertained it. From Ver. 19. to 24.

Hitherto he has set before them his own example; now he c^mes to the
exhort^^^^n which he infers from thence, namely, that the Corinthians would
imitate him in denying themselves. And particularly, that they would labor
after ^emp^^^nce, and not so mind their Bellies, as to eat with offense that
which was offerr'd to Idols. To th^s end he shows them, that Christianity is a
race, and they must run carefully this race; in which, not only one (as was
usual in their common races), but all that run (according to the Laws See 2 Timothy 2.5.
of God) shall be Crowned. And as those that contended in those famous Games
(whether running or combating, usually celebrated near to Corinth), did not
indulge themselves in gluttony and pleasures, but were temperate in all things,
inuring themselves to a spare diet, by way of preparation, that the conquering
Crown might be won by them: After the same manner, he would have the
Corinthians to be moderate in the use of worldly things, and to abstain from
whatsoever may hinder them in their Christian course, that they may attain an
incorruptible and an eternal Crown.

And to press his exhortation yet further, he propounds his own example again,
who first did so run, not as at uncertainties, or as if he did not aim at a
certain Goal, or as if he knew not his reward, if he ran well; and secondly,
did so fight (not as making a flourish only in the air like a fencer), but he
did fight in good earnest, against the body Castigo corpus meum, h. e. adversus
carnem meam pugn^.
of sin, and the old man, and the lusts of the flesh, that they might be
subdued in him; and he denied himself in some indifferent liberties, that his
body might be subject to his spirit: And all this, lest having prescribed to
others the way of striving and getting the Crown, he himself should at last
prove a Castaway (...) (...).
, or one unworthy to be approved or rewarded by God. From Ver. 24. to the end.

He comes now to treat of the eating of things offered to Idols under a twofold
difference; the one public in Idol Temples, simply unlawful. From ver. 1. to
23. The other private, in private houses, which (when there was no scandal in
the case) was lawful, otherwise not, and accordingly he dehorts them from it.
From ver. 23. to the end.

1. He disswades from a public eating of things offered to Idols in
Idol-Temples by several Arguments. 1. If they preceed to be present at and t^
partake of such id^latrous Feasts, they will be in danger to fall into such
kind ^f sins, as the Israelites, on such an occasion fell into, and so
consequently will expose them selves to such punishments as they suffered. He
tells them that the Israelites v. 1. Patres nostri] i. e. Hebraeorum, quorum
erat Paulus.
(who came ^ut of Egypt with Mo^^) were such to whom God vouchsased many high
dignations; as particularly they had the favor of the Cloud t^ over shad^w
them [Exod. 13.21.] which was their protection and conduct, and they all passed
through the red sea, Exodus 14.22. And by the Clouds ^vershad^ning them, and by
their passage through the red Sea (both which possibly sprinkled them) they
were baptiz^d, as it were, and confirmed in a belief Unto Moses] i. e. Under
the Ministry and Guidance of Moses: Vel in doctrinam and legem Mosis.
of Moses (the Typical Mediator) as a person employed by God, and were obliged
to obey his Doctrine, and the commands which he should give them from God. And
this was a figure to which our Baptism answers, by which we are confirmed in
the Faith of Christ, and obliged to profess him, own him, and obey him. He
farther shows, that God fed them with Manna from Heaven, and gave them for
drink, the water that flowed out of the Rock (which he caused to follow their
Camp). And this Manna and water, he calls spiritual meat and drink, because
they had a spiritual meaning, and did figure and signify the same grace and
benefits of Christ, which the Supper of the Lord does to us; yet
notwithstanding all this, he shows, that many of th^se Israelites (by reason of
their inordinate lusts) perished in the Wilderness. N w th^se things, he tells
them, were to be examples to the Corinthians and other Christians, that they do
not indulge themselves in fleshly Lusts, as those ancient Israelites did, nor
frequent idolatrous Feasts, (made in the honor of any Idol) lest they suffer
the like punishment the Israelites did, who sacrificed to the honor of the
Golden Calf, and rose up, and danced before it, Exodus 32. And they should take
heed, that they mix not with Idolaters in their Feasts, lest they should be
given up to Fornication, as the Israelites were in the Wilderness [Numb. 25.]
with the Daughters of Moab, and so fell in one day three and twenty Numb. 25.9.
Mention is made of four and twenty thousand that fell: whereof possibly three
and twenty thousand died by the immediate hand of God; and execution was done
upon another thousand by Phineas, and his Companions. Vide Grot. in loc.
thousand. Further they should take heed of tempting Christ, and trying, as it
were, how long his patience will last; as the Israelites provoked the Angel of
the Covenant, or Christ (who went before them in the Wilderness, Numb. 8.21.),
and so perished by fiery Serpents. And Lastly, they should take heed of
murmuring, because it is not lawful for them, by the Christian Religion, to be
present at the Idolatrous Feasts of their Friends in the Idol Temples, lest
they should perish with the murmuring Israelites, who for that sin were
destroyed by the Angel of God, and perished by the plague, Numb. 14.37. Now he
shows, that all these sins and judgments of the Israelites are Emblems of their
state, and show what will befall them, that do not beware of such sins; and
these judgments are set down in the old Testament for warnings to Christians,
who should live in the latter times. Wherefore he advises them to take heed of
vain-confidence in themselves, and that those among them that seemed to
themselves to stand firmest, should be sensible of their danger, if they fed
securely upon things offered to Idols, in Idol-Temples. From Ver. 1. to 13.

But h^re they might object, that if they abstained from idolatrous Feasts,
there was d^nger hung over their heads from their Fellow-Citizens, (that were
Idolaters) who would interpret this forbearance, as an abhorring of their
society. He answers, that that temptation was no other then what was ordinary
to men. But God was faithful who would not permit them to be tempted above
their strength, but would open a way for them to escape those dangers, if they
continued faithful to him, or else would so strengthen them that they should be
able to bear whatsoever bef^ll them. Therefore he exhorts them to fly from that
Idolatry which is joined to the public eating of things offered to Idols. And
to excite their ^ttention, he tells them, he would make them Judges themselves
(who were understanding men) in this matter, whether they must not necessarily
communicate in that Idolatry, for which these Feasts were instituted, if they
joined in those Feasts: And first he reasons from the example of Christians
communicating in the Lords Supper. For as all that partake in that Sacrament d^
pr^fess themselves, in that act, to have c^mmunion with Christ, and with such
as profess Faith in him. S^ communicating in th^se Idol-Feasts, is no less a
sign, and prof^ssion of communion with those Idols, to whom the Sacrifice was
offered, and with those Idolaters that worship them. For as Christians, though
many, yet by virtue of their society in the same worship, are compacted
together, as it were, into one Loaf or Lump, that is, into one mystical Body
(whereof Christ is the Head) in that they partake of one and the same
Sacramental Bread; so those that communicate with Idolaters (in participating
of idolatrous Sacrific^s), by virtue of their Society in the same worship
(signified by their idolatrous f^^^ting together in Idol-Temples) are compacted
together, as it were, into one body, forasmuch as they communicate in one and
the same Sacrifices.

2. He reasons from the like example of the present carnal v. 18. (...)] q d.
nos (...) Israelitae sumus qui in Christum credimus. Illi (...).
Jews, who had their Temple yet standing, and their Jewish worship in use. For
as they, cating of the Sacrifices, did, in that, communicate with the Altar,
and profess themselves Members of the Jewish Church, and worshippers of that
God, whose the Altar was: So they that eat of Idol Sacrifices, in the
idolatrous Feasts, have communion with those Idols, to whose honor they were
instituted, and with those that w^rship them. He shows, he need not affirm,
that an Idol was any thing, that is, had any thing of divinity in it, or that
that which was offered in Sacrifice to Idols, was in it self, at all different
from any other ordinary meat See 1 Cor. 8.4.
. But the plain truth was, Those Sacrifices of the Heathens were Sacrifices to
D^vils [2 Chronicles. 11.15.], and whosoever did eat of those Feasts, was supposed
to join in those Sacrifices, and so to do service to Devils. Now the
communicating with Christ in the Lords Supper, could not consist with
communicating with Devils in Idol-Feasts; for this were to do homage to two
Lords, God and the Devil, and profess service to both. He concludes this
matter, by sh^wing what desperate madness it was, to provoke the omnipotent God
to jealousy, by j^ining Devils in competition with him. From Ver. 13. to 23.

Having thus resolved the case concerning public eating of things offered to
Idols, namely, in the Idol-Temples; He comes now to answer another Case
concerning private buying, and private eating of things offered to Idols. And
first he pr^mises that all things (that are of an indifferent nature) are
lawful, unless when it was not expedient in respect of our weak Brother to use
them, or when they edify not. And in the use of liberty, we must regard,
rather the Salvation of another, than our own temporal profit. Having premised
this, he tells them, They may lawfully buy what is sold in the shambles It was
a Custom, it seems, to set to s^le in the Market, Flesh that was sacrificed, as
well as other Flesh, the gain whereof went to the Priests.
, and freely eat thereof, without any scruple of Conscience. And he gives them
this reason for it, because, the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof,
that is, those things that are sold for food in the Market, are to be looked
upon as the Creatures of God, made for the use of man, and so lawful to the
faithful, if they be received with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4.4. And the Devil has
no power over them, to contaminate or defile them by his Idols, if man himself
do not do it, by same sin, and particularly by that of Idolatry. And therefore
if any Believer be invited to a Feast, in the private house of an Unbeliever,
he declares, The Christian may eat without scruple, any meat that is set before
him: But if the Master of the Feast, or any other there present, shall suggest
to him, that some part of the meat had been offered to Idols; in that case, he
wills him to forbear, l^st he should encourage any man in idolatry. And the
reason he gives is this, For the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
that is, there is plenty of other meat to be had, which God the Creator of all
things, the Lord of the whole Earth has allowed us the free use of, so that we
may well let the Idol-Sacrifices alone. In such a case, the Christian should
abstain for the sake of the other man's Conscience, lest he should, by his
Example, be encouraged in Idolatry. But in other cases, where there is no such
danger, they may freely eat without scruple, and none will have cause to blame
them for it. If any do, their liberty allowed them by Christ, is unjustly
condemned by such a man's Conscience. For if they, through the grace and favor
allowed them in the Gospel, do eat indifferently of meats set before them
(where they see no danger of hardening any thereby in Idolatry) why should they
be reproached for eating that which God allows them; they receiving it with
thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4 4. He concludes this whole discourse with these three
excellent Rules, whereby they should govern themselves in the use of things
indifferent. 1. They should always design the glory of God. 2. They should do
nothing that may tend to the hurt or just offense of Jews, Gentiles, or
Christians. 3. They should imitate the Apostles Example, who in indifferent
things accommodated himself to all men; so as to seek their eternal Salvation,
and not his own temporal profit or advantage. And so they should be followers
and imitators of him, as He was of Christ. From Ver. 23. to the end. And Ver.
1. of Chap. 11.

Being now about to reprehend certain disorders in the Church of Corinth, he
commendation of those among them who had written to him, and asked his advice
in those particulars.

He commends them that they had been so mindful of the instructions and
precepts he had delivered to them, concerning the matters appertaining to the
public worship of God, and had so closely adhered to them: yet
notwithstanding, it seems, there were many things reproveable in several others
of them. And so be proceeds to answer their next Query, which concerned decent
behavior of men and women in Church Assemblies. In order to which, he tells
them, it is fit they should consider the subordination of persons in the Church,
viz. that as Christ, in respect of his Mediatory Office, is inferior to God the
Father; but above all men (being Head and Lord of all men, as their Creator and
Redeemer); so the Man, being inferior to Christ, is yet above the Woman, being
her Head. From which they may understand, that order in Church Assemblies is to
be observed. Now, it seems, the Corinthians did not sufficiently observe this
order, because the Women in their public Church-meetings laid aside their Veil
Velamen, signum non solum subjectionis sed pudefactionis, quod Faemina primum
peccatum introduxerit in mundum. Lightf.
, and the Men covered their Heads and Faces. He shows therefore, that every
Man, that either makes the public Prayer in the Church Assemblies, or he^r^th,
or joineth therewith; or Prophesies, that is, expounds the writings of the
Prophets, and opens the mysteries of Salvation, or hears such expositions, or
instructions; or joins with the Congregation in singing Psalms or Hymns,
having any covering on his Head, that is, having his Head and Face covered, he
dishonors himself, and does an indecent thing against the liberty and
dignity of his Sex, it being a sign of shame and infamy for a man to have his
head covered, but was a sign of power and dominion (in that Country) As on the
contrary now at this day among us, those that have power over others, keep
their heads covered, and they that are inferior to others, keep their heads
uncovered before them.
, to have his Head, and Face bare and uncovered. Next he shows, that every
Woman, that lays aside her Veil in the Church Assemblies, dishonours her self,
doing a thing unbecomming her Sex, and against the dignity of the Man, to whom
she (by that action) seems to deny subjection. Now he says, it is as unseemly
for the Woman to be unveiled, as to be shorn or shaven, which would be a great
disgrace to her, yea, against the mod sty of her Sex, to wear her hair short as
men do, her hair being given her for an ornamental covering, and as it were a
natural Veil. 2ly. The Image of God shines most brightly in the Man (who is
immediately his Image), viz. the Image of his Power and Majesty; and ought so
to appear, by having his head uncovered. But the Image of God shines more
obscurely in the Woman, who is the image v. 7. (...), i e. (...), ^ox (...)
quae apud (...) LXX vertitur (...), (...) Psalm. 17.15.
of the man, to whom she ought to profess subjection by c^v^ring her Face. 3ly.
Another Argument of the inferiority of the Woman, he shows, is this, namely,
that original y the Man was not of the Woman, but the Woman of the Man, v^z.
made out of his Rib. 4ly. The Man was not created to serve the Woman, or to be
subject to her, but the Woman was created to be, a meet help to the Man, and to
be subject to him. And for this reason also must the W^man have a covering The
name of the thing signified is ascribed to the sign, a thing very frequent in
the Sacraments; power, that is, a sign of power.

v. 10. (...) hoc loco significat te^^re sive agnoscere. In capite vero est in
vire. (...) propter hoc, ergo, ^^let mulier potestatem agno cere in viro.

For this cause ought a Woman to acknowledge the power in her Head, viz. her
Hu^band; because of the Angels, or because of the Law of Subjection given her
by the Ministry of the Angel, vid. 1 Cor. 14.34. Genesis 3.16. Act. 7.53. Gal.
3.19. Heb. 2.2. Knatchbull. p. 156.


on her Head, as a sign of her subjection, and that she is under the power of
her Husband, because the holy Angels are present in the Assemblies gathered
together for the public Worship of God, and therefore Women ought to do
n^thing indecent and unc^mely in the presence of those pure and holy Spirits.
Yet notwithstanding this inferi^rity of the Woman, the man ought not to despise
her, for the man is not the cause of propagation without the Woman, nor the
W^man without the Man; but both are con-causes thereof, by the Law and
Ordination (...), i. e. ex lege and ordinatione Dei. Freillib.
of God For neither was the Man to b^ without the Woman, nor the Wom^n without
the Man by Gods ordination.
. And though the W^man in the Creation was made of the Man, yet according to
the course of ordinary propagation, the Man is by the Woman, and both are
equally the work of God. He further appeals to the common custom of those
Countries, and demands of them, whether it would not be unc^mely for men to
wear long and dish^velled hair, like Women Natura ipsa d^cet, quod viro comatum
esse dedecori est; ex hoc quod muliebre est. Nutritio e^mae in Naziraeatu, fuit
humiliationis specimen, atque abnegationi^ sui (forsan and p^de^actionis) ut
and erat abstinentia ^vino, and uvis. Religiosum quendam squallorem (ut ita
dicam) prae se tulit, and vilificationem sui.

Fallunt^r ergo plurimum qui Absol mum c^m^tum ex superbia inc^s^se ^b^^^ntur,
cum ita quidem in^ess^^it ob votum (sictum saltem) Nazi^^^^^.

Judaei, si non voto Naziraeatus astricti, se tondebant frequentissime! atque
utcunque aliis temporibu^ c^^^ nunqu^m non ante Festum; idque in honorem
adventantis Festi. Lightf.


, to whom Nature has given long hair for an ornament, and a covering, and so
to be a Token to them of their subjection. In Conclusion he says, that if any
not moved with these Arguments, shall further contend about this matter, they
should consider that other Churches of Christ have no Custom, that Women should
be unveiled in their public Assemblies; and why should they vary from the
practice of other Christians? From Ver. 2. to 17.

He comes now to discourse concerning the right administration of the Lords
Sup^^r, and he blames the Corinthians that their coming together to celebrate
that ordinance, was generally, not for the better, but for the worse. For he
heard there were divisions and factions among them [1 Cor. 1.11.]; nay Heresies
Schism, is a difference about ^^^es or external D^scipline. Heresy is a
difference about Doctrine and Faith.
; which, considering the corruption of Man, and the malice of the Devil, he did
not much wonder at, especially seeing God in his infinite wisdom permits it so
to be, that the sincere among them might the ^^r^ manifest their stedfastness.
He tells them, that their behavior when they met together on this occasion,
was far different from what was becoming the celebration of the Lords Supper,
they not carrying themselves therein as if they were to celebrate a religious
Feast This is not ^^^at the Lords Supper You do not do a legally and ^olemnly
according to Christ's institution.
. For in those their Feasts of Charity (at the end of which the Lords Supper
was celebrated) they did not now observe the true Church Communion, but every
one, that is, every faction or division, being come to the place of the
Assembly, did presently sit down to eat, what they had brought in the company
of those of their own party, not minding or regarding others; whereupon this
holy Feast, was neither celebrated at the same time by all, nor in holy
con^ord, c^^t^^^y to the true Union of Christians, signified thereby. And
further, the po^^r ^^re were excluded, while the rich f^^ted, and in their
feastings, drank t^o liberally, even unto drunkenness. He tells them, he could
not praise them f^r this. If they had a mind to feast, they should do it at
their own houses; and not dish n ^ur, and as it were, cast a contempt on the
public Assembly, by such irreligious carriage, nor so despise the Poor (which
are part of G^ds Church) and put them to shame, by excluding them out of their
Company for their poverty sake. For since God admits them into his Family, and
bids them to his heavenly ban^uet, they ought not to exclude them from this
holy Feast. That therefore he may correct th^se misdemeanors, he recites the
primitive institution of the Sacrament, which he had formerly delivered to
them, as he had rec^ived it from Christ by special revelation, either when he
was ra^t up into the third H^aven, or when Christ appeared to him at his first
Conversion [Gal. 1.12.]; viz. That our blessed Savior, in the night wherein he
was betrayed, took Bread, and having, by The prayer he used, consisted of two
parts: compare Mat. 26.26. with this place.
praising God for it, and imploring his blessing upon it, consecrated it to
this holy use, he brake it, and bad them eat it, as that which should signify
and represent his body This is my Body] Metonym. i. e. The sign or
representation of my Body. As he is called the Rock. 1 Cor. 10.4. Because it
represented him.

The flesh of Christ on the Cross was broken; there was solutio continui, with
the Nails in his Hands and Feet.


, that should now speedily be broken for mankind. This he bad them do in
remembrance Do this in remembrance] It must be a remembrance cum effectu, viz.
a relying on his death with a lively Faith.
of him.

In like manner after Supper, he took the Cup This Cup] i. e. The Wine in this
Cup, is the new Testament in my blood i. e. signifies unto you the New
Covenant of Grace, which is ratified and confirmed in my blood, i. e. by my
death.
telling them, that the Wine contained in it, was a sign and seal of the new
Testament or Covenant, that should be confirmed by his Blood, (which he was now
presently to shed on the Cross), as the old Testament or Covenant was confirmed
by the Blood of Beasts sacrificed and sprinkled upon the people, Exodus 24.8.
And as often as they do this, they would show forth v. 26. Do show forth the
Lords death] Hence a Sacrament was termed by the Ancients a representative or
commemorative though not a proper Sacrifice.
his death; which representation of his death was to be continued in the
Church, till he come to judge the quick and dead. From Ver. 17. to 27.

Having declared the original institution of this Sacrament; he comes next, to
instruct them in the right use of it. He tells them, that whosoever shall eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, that is, otherwise then
is meet, and becoming so holy an ordinance, (particularly without such a
disposition of mind, such a preparation of heart, such reverence and devotion
as ought therein to be exercised) shall be guilty of profaning this Sacrament,
(which is the remembrance of Christ's death), and of vilifying the signs and
pledges of his body and blood. Therefore every man should duly examine himself,
whether he be a fit guest for so holy, and heavenly a Table, whether he have a
competent knowledge of the nature, signification, end, and use of this Feast,
and discern how it represents the Lords Body; whether he truly repent him of
his sins, have a lively Faith in Christ, and be in Charity with his Neighbors;
such therefore as cannot examine themselves, are not to be admitted unto this
ordinance. And seeing the Apostle says, let him examine himself, and so let him
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, we may observe from thence, that he
calls it bread still, even after consecration. It Is bread still, though not
ordinary and common bread, whilst it is applied to this use. 2. We see from
hence that the Sacrament must be received in both kinds because Christ so
instituted it, and to receive it otherwise is a palpable violation of his
order. The Apostle further d^clares, that he that eats and drinks unworthily,
that is, ignorantly, irreverently, profanely, is guilty of the Body and Blood
of Christ, that i^, of profaning that Ordinance, which he has ordained for
the representation ^f his death, (wherein his Body was broken, and his Blood
shed for our sins) and so incurs the danger of temporal judgment and
chastisement here, and without repentance, of eternal hereafter, for hearing no
greater respect to this holy action; nor discerning how this Bread and Wine
represent the Lords Body, but coming to it as to an ordinary meal. And that
this would be the Fruit of approaching unworthily to this Table, he proves from
the sad experience of the Corinthians themselves, upon some of whom God had
inflicted diseases, and upon others death, for their profaning of this
Ordinance. Therefore this judgment ought to be prevented by their judging of
themselves, and repenting and reforming. For when God inflicts those
Chastisements on his own people, he inflicts them as f^therly Corrections to
bring them to repentance and reformation, that they may not perish with the
World.

In closing up this matter, he exhorts them, that they would partake of this
holy Supper together, tarrying one for another, and seems to forbid their
Ag^p^e or Love Feasts, that they used before the holy Communion, commanding
that if need were, they should eat at home, to satisfy their hunger, and avoid
the danger of profaning this holy Supper, and so drawing down judgment on
themselves. As for other things that concerned the good order and government of
their Church, he tells them he will take care himself when he comes to them.
From Ver. 27. to the end.

spiritual gifts, and the right use of them. It seems they, that excelled in
them, were proud of them, and used them to vain-ostentation and discord, and
not to their Brethrens edification. Therefore he t^lls them, that as touching
spiritual gifts, he would not have them ignorant, from whence they come ( viz.
not from themselves, but all from one and the same Spirit of God), nor to what
end they are given, and how they ought lo be used and employed. He tells them,
they may remember, they were once idolatrous Gentiles, serving dumb Though the
Devils sometimes sp^ke in and by the Idols, yet the Id^ls themselves had mouths
and spoke not.
Idols, according as they were led by their idolatrous Priests, and had nothing
of this divine Spirit among them; but now they ought to be sensible, that their
conversion from Gentilism to Christianity, was the powerful work of this Spirit
of God. And this Spirit of God, he shows, does always glorify Christ, and
proclaim him to be God and Lord, and whosoever blasphemes Christ (as the
unbelieving Jews did, and some vagabond Sorcerers) does not speak from this
Spirit. But he, that out of sincere affection, and true Faith, does profess
that Christ is the Lord, he does it by the guidance and instinct of the Spirit
of God. Having premised this, he shows, there are diversities of gifts, such as
prophesying, speaking with strange tongues, etc. (some more excellent than
others) and diversely imparted, and in diverse measures; but it is one and the
same Spirit that distributes them all. There are also diversities of
administrations, or offices, and functions in the Church, but one Lord Jesus
who instituted them all, and who calls one to this kind of Ministry, another
to that. And further there are diversities of operations, or miraculous works,
such as casting out Devils, etc. but it is the same God, namely, the Father, who
by his Son, and holy Spirit works all these, in all them in whom they are
wrought. But those diverse spiritual gifts (wherein the power of the Spirit is
manifested) are given for one end, viz the edification of the Church, as he
instances in nine kinds of them: 1. The word of Wisdom vid. Glassius in loc.
, whereby he can seasonably apply sound Doctrine to his Hearers; which is the
gift of a Pastor. 2. The word of Knowledge, whereby he can give the sense of the
Scriptures; which is the gift of the Teacher. 3. The gift of Faith, or of
Confidence and Courage in God, in great dangers. 4. The gift (...) Healing. 5.
The gift of working Miracles and powerfully casting out Devils, and curbing the
enemies of the Church, [See Act. 13.11.]. 6. The gift of Foretelling things to
come, and rev^^ling Secrets. 7. The gift of Discerning Impostors, from those
acted by the Spirit of God. 8. The gift of Speaking with diverse kinds of
Tongues. 9. The gift of Interpreting Tongues, though they had not the gift of
speaking them: These two being different gifts. All these gifts works that
one and same blessed Spirit; and the diverse distributions of them, are
according to the good will of God, Now that these spiritual gifts are to be
used without discord, to the good of the whole Church, he proves, because the
universal Christian Church, is but one spiritual body, where^f Christ is the
Head. For all true Believers are by the power and effectual operation of the
same Spirit ingrafted into Christ by Baptism, and so incorporated into one
Body, of what state and condition soever they be, and are all made to drink one
Cup in the Lords Supper, that they may be partakers more and more of the graces
of one and the same sanctifying vid. Piscat.
Spirit, who vivi^ies all the Members of that Body. So that all the faithful
are joined together in the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and
their union into one Church, and their partaking of one Spirit, is signified
thereby. And the diversity of gifts given to the particular Members ought not
to occasion any dissension or disagreement in the Church. This he illustrates
by a comparison taken from the natural Body; the very condition of which does
necessarily require plurality and diversity of Members. One Member, though
never so excellent, does not make a Body; and the meanest Members are of the
Body, and so to be reckoned, as well as the more excellent. Nay the more
excellent Members, such as the eye and ear, have need of the inferior. And as
God has set the Members of the Body, each one in his place, and each one for
its special use and service for the good of the whole: So he has given
diversity of gifts and administrati^ns to the Church, for the welfare of the
whole. And as it would be repugnant to the nature of an organical Body, to be
without diverse Members Corporis unitatem non tollit membrorum varietas, sed
ponit magis.
, so the nature of the organical Church would be overthrown, did it not consist
of many Offices, as of so many Members, united together in one Body. Therefore
the superior Members must not pride it over the inferior: for those Members of
the Body that seem most feeble and weak, are necessary to the others. The
Organs of nourishment, though they be not so noble, yet are they more
absolutely necessary than those of the Senses, for without them, Man cannot
subsist or live, as he may without Eyes, Ears, or Hands. And those Members of
the Body, which seem to us less honorable Membra illa ab Apostolo appell^ntur
inhonesta, and indecora non per se sed comparate, ratione eorum quae eximia
venustate sunt praedita. Fullerus.
, on them we put more abundant honor by decent clothing them, and on our
uncomely parts we put more abundant adorning by a decent covering them. For our
comel^ parts, such as the Face, have no need of covering or adorning, being
comely enough of themselves; But God has so disposed the several parts of the
Body, that some shall have a natural comeliness, or beauty; others that want
that, shall be supplied by Clothes, which are an artificial Beauty: By all
which, he shows, they should be instructed, that the meanest Officers, and
those that have the least gifts are as well of that spiritual Body the Church,
as those that have more excellent Offices and gifts. And as the meaner must not
envy the more excellent, and so, in a disc^ntent, withdraw themselves from the
Body, and forbear to employ themselves for the common good of the whole; so the
more excellent must not despise the meaner, but put a due respect and value
upon them. And as the natural Body would come to ruin by Schism, if the Members
should strive am^ng themselves, and should not regard the welfare of one
another; so great mischiefs must needs arise to the Church by dissentions. But
on the contrary, as in the natural Body, there is a sympathy Ut cum talo Spina
inhaeserit, universum corpus sentit delorem and curationem adhibet.
among the superior and inferior Members, a fellow-feeling with each other,
both of joy and grief; so all the true Members of the Church, of what degree
soever, ought to have the same common interests, and concernments, and mutually
to sympathize with each other, both in weal, and we. All this from v. 12. the
Ap stle applies to the believing Corinthians, whom he acknowledges to be a part
of this mystical Body of Christ, whereof each Believer in particular is a
Member, who ought therefore so to carry himself toward his fellow members as
is shown in the former comparison, namely, as the Members In corpore naturali
membra praecipua, decentissima, validissima procaeteris solicita sunt, ut
infirmitatem solentur, indecorum ornent, dolori condoleant: Ergo corporis
Christi membra eandem pro se curam and sollicitudinem mutuam praestare debent.
of the natural body do toward one another. And having spoken so much of the
diversity of gifts and Ecclesiastical administrations (of which be had sp^ken
in the general, v. 5.) he now comes to reckon up the particular officers that
God has set in his Church. 1. Apostles, as those that were appointed to lay
the foundation of Churches. 2. Prophets, who interpreted the Prophetical parts
of the Scripture, by a special and extraordinary gift. 3. Teachers, namely,
such who are ordinarily called to interpret the Scriptures for the edification
of the Church. 4. Such as are endowed with power to work miracles of various
kinds, and particularly of punishing enemies to the Gospel 5. Such as have this
power restrained to the cure of Diseases. 6. Helps, that is, such as were to
take care of the maintenance of Ministers, and the poor, namely, Deacons. 7.
Governments, that is, Ruling Elders (as some learned men understand it,
according to Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17.), who are to take care of the peoples
manners, with the Pastors and Teachers. Lastly, Such as were enabled to speak
strange Tongues, or to interpret them. In conclusion, he shows, that seeing the
Ministers of the Church have not all administrations of the same kind, nor of
equal dignity; therefore those that have the highest, ought not to despise
those who are of a lower degree; neither ought these to envy the other, and so
contend one against another, but all of them ought to employ their gifts for
the common good of the Church. And in order hereunto he advises them to lay
aside all evil emulation, and to covet the m st excellent gifts, namely, such
as are most useful and profitable to the Church. And he tells them, he will
show them a more excellent way than that they were in, which is this, to lay
aside all contention, pride, and envying one another, and to order all their
actions by the rule of Charity.

Charity, he proves it to be the most excellent gift, and for to surp^ss all
other gifts by four Arguments. 1. He shows them, that the gifts they were so
ambitious of, were nothing without Charity. This he proves by instancing in
five sorts of them. 1. Suppose a man had the gift of Tongues in the highest
degree, so that he could speak all the Tongues that any men in the World were
ever able to speak, or that the Angels Suppositio nihil ponit in esse.
themselves would speak, if they conversed with men, yet if he have not
Charity, he makes only an unprofitable sound, and a vain ostentation. 2.
Suppose he had the gift of Prophecy in the highest degree, so that he could
understand the darkest mysteries of the Scripture. 3. Suppose he had the
highest degree of miraculous Faith The Faith of working Miracles may be severed
from Charity; but justifying Faith cannot, which always works by Love. All
Faith] i. e. All degrees of miraculous Faith.
, so that he could remove Mountains. 4. Suppose he had the greatest liberality
toward the poor imaginable. 5. Suppose he had the greatest courage for
martyrdom that ever any had; yet all these without Charity will not profit him,
or conduce to his Salvation. From Ver. 1. to 5.

2. He shows, the superlative excellency of Charity from the famous properties,
and effects of it, which are fifteen in number. 1. It suffers long. 2. Is
kind. 3. Envieth not. 4. Vaunteth not it self, that is, carries not it self
insolently, mal^partly, and scornfully toward others. 5. It is not puffed up,
that is, highly conceited of its self. 6. Does not behave it self unseemly,
that is, is not transported to a carriage unbefitting ones place, calling, or
age. 7. Seeks not only her own but the good of others. 8. Is not easily
provoked to Anger. 9. Thinks no evil, that is, is not rashly suspicious, or
imputes no evil to any man unjustly. 10. Rejoiceth not in iniquity, that is,
rejoiceth not in other men's sins, but is sorry for them. 11. Rejoices in the
truth, or with the truth, that is, rejoiceth at the righteousness The Hebrews
by truth sometimes understand righteousness and integrity. Amat integritatem
and vias rectas. Vide Grot.
of the righteous. 12. Courageously bears labors and difficulties in
discharging its duty, or covers and conceals (...).
all the ill it knows of others, unless when it is greater Charity to reveal it.
13. Believes all the good of others, which rationally it may, or has any
ground to believe. 14. Hops all things, that is, hopes all things of the
amendment of others, that in prudence it can hope. 15. Endures all the
infirmities of others; or endures all things which may with a good Conscience
be endured, and which make for the honor of God, and the advantage of the
truth, without meditating revenge. From Ver. 5. to ver. 8.

3ly. He shows, the excellency of Charity, from the permanency thereof. Charity
never fails. This he illustrates by comparing it with other gifts. 1. With
Prophecy, and Tongues, which shall cease, because we shall not have use of
them in the other life, though here they are needful for the edification of the
Church. 2. With Knowledge, viz. that imperfect knowledge which we here obtain by
the ministry of the Word. For our knowledge now is but imperfect, in comparison
of the knowledge of divine things, which we shall have in the life to come. And
so likewise that gift whereby God enableth us to instruct others, is but
imperfect, and shall then cease, because we shall have no further use of it.
But when the perfect knowledge of divine things shall come, then our imperfect
gifts which served to promote knowledge in this life shall cease. He illustrates
this, by a twofold similitude; 1. By comparing this life to childhood, and the
future to the manly state, wherein childish things are abolished. 2. By showing
there is as great a difference betwixt our present knowledge in this life, and
that which we shall have hereafter, as between one that sees the image of
another face in a Glass, and one that beholds the face it self. Here we know
God in his Word and Works as in a Glass, by reflection; but there we shall know
him intuitively, and immediately. And as there is a great difference between
propounding a thing darkly and as a riddle, and propounding the same thing in
plain, proper, and express words. So here we see as by a Glass, or in a Riddle,
but then shall we know God face to face, that is, clearly and perfectly. And as
for himself, who was an Apostle, and had been rapt up into the third Heaven, he
acknowledges he knew but in part for the present, but hereafter he assured
himself, his mind shall be so enlightened by God, that he shall see him and know
him immediately, as God now sees and knows him, though not so perfectly. In
Conclusion, he tells them, that in this life, these three eminent Graces do
operate in the hearts of Believers Faith, Hope, and Charity; Without Faith we
cannot be justified, without Hope Faith cannot stand, and by Love Faith must be
operative. But of these three, the greatest is Charity. 1. In respect of its
extent, reaching to God, good Angels, our Brethren, our Enemies. 2. In respect
of its use, extending to the good of others; whereas Faith, and Hope are only
private graces. 3. In respect of its duration, because Faith and Hope shall
cease in the other life; Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision, and Hope in
Fruition, but Charity shall abide for ever. From Ver. 8. to the end.

And seeing Charity is so excellent a grace, he shows, they should very
carefully interpreting the Holy Scripture, as the most useful for the
edification of the Church. It seems, some among them much affected the gift of
Tongues, and despised Pastoral gifts in comparison thereof. He therefore proves
the gift of Prophecy, or Exhortation, to be more excellent than the gift of
Tongues, separated from the gift of Interpretation. For he that speaks in an
unknown Tongue Opinamur, nec sine ratione linguam istam ignotam qua usi sunt
isti vel abusi potius in Ecclesia fuisse linguam Hebraeam, etc. Lightf. in loc.
, although by the gift of the Spirit, he speak the mysteries of God, yet he
speaks without profit, because he is understood by God alone, and not by his
Hearers Prayer in the Church in an unknown Tongue, crosses, in a manner, this
whole Chapter.
. But a Prophet, or a Pastor speaking in a known T^ngue, teaches, exhorts,
comforts his Hearers, and so speaks profit^bly, and to their edification. He
that speaks in an unknown Tongue, edifies none but himself; but a Prophet
speaking in a known Tongue, speaks to the edification of the whole Church, or
Assembly. He wishes they all spoke with Tongues, but prefers Prophecy as m^re
useful to the Church, except it be joined with Interpretation. This he
amplifies, by instancing in his own person, who he says, should not profit them
merely by speaking to them in an unknown Tongue; but if he spoke intelligibly
to them, that is, either revealed things to come, or communicated his knowledge
in the deep mysteries of Religion, and the sacred Figures; or interpreted the
prophetic part of the Scripture; or in a plain Catechistical way instructed
them in things they were to believe and do, then indeed he should speak to
their profit. This he further illustrates, by a similitude taken from Musical
Instruments, the one used in peace, viz. the Harp; the other in war, viz. the
Trumpet; telli^g them, that as it is ordinarily seen in the world, if the Harp
sound something not understood, a man cannot apply himself to the dance; or if
the Trumpet give not such a sound as is understood, a man cannot prepare
himself to the Battle: so those that have the gift of a strange Tongue, if they
do not utter words intelligible to the Auditors, they will nothing edify them
by what they say; their words will be only unprofitably poured out into the
air. There are, it may be, he tells them, as many Voices or Languages in the
World, as there are Nations (...) subaudi (...).
; so that none of them are without some Language (...).
which they understand, and ordinarily no other. Now, says he, if he that has
any of these Languages, speaks to me in any Language but that which I
understand, and I speak to him also in a Language which he understands not, we
shall be Barbarians one to another. Wherefore he exhorts them, that of all
spiritual gifts, they would most earnestly desire the gift of Prophecy, for
the good of the Church. And in order hereunto, he advises, that he that has
the gift of an unknown Tongue, should pray Precetur vel ut ipse vel ut alius
interpretetur, quod locutus est, ut alii discant.
that he may be enabled so to interpret that Tongue, that others may profit
thereby. For, says he, if I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays, that
is, I make use of my gift which I my self understand, but that understanding of
mine is no way useful to others. I will tell you therefore what seems most
desirable to me in this case, Namely, that if I pray by the gift of the Spirit
in an unkn^wn Tongue, I may add an interpretation, and so pray with
understanding I will pray with the Spirit, that is, with a strange Tongue
ministered to me by the Spirit.

To pray with the understanding is to pray so as others may understand.


also, that is, so as others, which hear, may understand; and if I sing praises
to God by the gift of the Spirit, in an unknown Tongue, I may add an
interpretation that the hearers may understand and profit thereby. For else
when any man shall bless God in an unknown Tongue by the gift of the Spirit,
how shall ordinary persons in the Congregation give their consent, by saying
Amen to what he says. For the hearers (that cannot understand) are not edified,
nor can go along with the thanksgiving, though that which is spoken be v^ry
^xcellent. He t^lls them, he had the gift of Tongues in a larger measure than
any of them (and he knew how to value that gift) yet he had rather speak a few
words so as to express and interpret his understanding and meaning to others,
than many in a T^ngue unknown to the people. In sum, he shows them, that a vain
ostentation of things that tended not to profit, was but a childish thing.
Indeed in innocence they should imitate little Children, but in understanding
of things spiritual they should approve themselves to be men. He farther shows,
out of the Law, that is, the Scriptures of the Old Testament, (See Joh.
10.34.), and particularly out of Isa. 28.11. that because the people of Judah
would not be instructed by the plain preaching of the Lords Prophets therefore
he would cause them to be spoken to in an unknown Language for a punishment of
their unthankfulness and obstinacy, that is, he would visit them with
outlandish Enemies and Armies, whose Language they should not understand. So
that strange Tongues, except they were interpreted, were not given for a sign
of any good to Believers, but they were given as a sign of Gods displeasure to
unbelievers (f) insomuch that by the just judgment of God, Hinc vero Paulus
recte colligit linguarum peregrinarum u^um, ita ut eo utebantur Corinthii,
signum esse destinatum non iis qui credunt sed infidelibus, i. e. maledictionis
signum qua profanos Dominuus ulcisceretur non benedictionis qua suos crudiret.
Non solent autem Apostoli anxie syllabas numerare in citandis scripturae
testimoniis, etc. vid. Bezam in loc.
their ignorance by this means would be the more increased. But the gift of
Prophecy serves not only for the conversion of unbelievers, but for the
edification of Believers also. Therefore Prophecy is t^ be preferred before
Tongues. Moreover, when the Church meets together, if all that speak should
speak in a strange Tongue, what will an ordinary man, or an unbeliever (coming
into the Congregation) think or say? Will he not think them all mad? But if all
that speak, do Prophecy and interpret the Scripture, and open the Doctrine of
Christ to the edification of the Church; in such a case, if an unbeliever come
in, he is convinc^d of sin, and condemned according to the sentence of the Law,
by all those that Prophecy, and the secret sins of his heart are made manifest
unto him, and so falling d^wn he will adore God, and seriously give testimony
to G^ds presence with the Prophets of the Church. Therefore Prophecy is more
excellent than the gift of Tongues. From Ver. 1. to 26.

He now comes to give several precepts concerning good order in the Church, and
particularly to prescribe certain rules which they should observe as to the use
of gifts. And first says he, when y^u come together, has any of you a Psalm or
Hymn suggested to him by the Spirit, to the glory of God and the edification of
the Church? or has any one of you a Doctrine, a particular instruction, or
matter of consolati^n inspired into him by the spirit? or has be a strange
Tongue; or the gift of interpreting into the Greek Tongue, what another spoke
in a strange Tongue, (p^ssibly the Hebrew)? Let it be how it will, he exhorts,
that all be d^ne so as may most tend to the benefit and edification of the
Church. His s^c^nd Precept is, that those that were enabled with the gift of
Tongues should not speak in one and the some Assembly, one h^re and another
there, to the confusion of the Company, that no more than three should speak at
one time, and that not together, but by course one after another, and that too,
when there was an Interpreter present, (who^ could explain in the vulgar
Tongue, what they said) otherwise he that had the strange Tongue should be
silent in the Church, and keep his Tongue to himself, and use it at home
betwixt God and himself in private prayer. And accordingly he directs
concerning those that prophesied, to wit, that only two or three of them should
Prophecy at one meeting, and that the other Pr^phets should judge and examine
their Doctrine by the rule of the Word. Yet if any Prophet who sat by, desired
to be heard, (while the other was speaking), in order to the opening some
difficulty then before them, the Apostle orders that they should permit him so
to do, and that the other that was speaking should be silent. For all the
Prophets that were extraordinarily inspired by the Spirit were to be heard,
(provided order was duly observed therein), that so the knowledge and
consolation of the whole Church might be ther^by promoted. And he tells them,
the Spirits of the Prophets, that is, the Doctrines which the Prophets bring,
are to be judged and examined We are commanded to try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1.
by the other Prophets, whether they be agreeable to the word of God or no. And
these rules be exhorts them diligently to observe, lest a tumult, and confusion
should arise among them, which is hateful to God, who requires that peace
should be kept, and maintained in all the Churches of his Saints. From Ver. 26.
to 34.

And for the further carrying on of good order among them, he forbids that
Women should speak publicly, or propound any Questions in the Church, because
subjection is appointed by the word of God for that sex [Gen. 3.16.], of which
silence is a token. And therefore they should learn privately at home of their
own husbands, and seek instructions from them in the things they doubted of. He
further shows, that if any of their high-crested Doctors, or others among them,
will not submit to these Precepts, but take upon them to order otherwise, and
to suffer Women to speak in the Congregation, contrary to all other Churches,
they should consider that they are not the first Church, that was planted from
which the Gospel came forth to other places, as it did from Jerusalem, nor were
they the only persons to whom the G^spel was sent, that they should take upon
them to Judge of order and decency, and therein to differ from all other
Churches. He affirms that these Precepts he has given them are from the Lord,
and commands that those who esteem themselves Prophets, and persons that have
any spiritual gift or afflation, should acknowledge them to be divine. And for
others that affect to be ignorant, he leaves them to be ignorant at their own
peril. In fine, he exhorts them, earnestly to endeavor after the gift of
Prophesying; and for the gift of Tongues, that they that have it should be
allowed the use of it, provided they observed the rules by him before given.
And that in their public Assemblies for religious worship, all things should
be performed with gravity and decency, as may most conduce to the glory of God,
and the edification of the Church. From Ver. 34. to the end.

Resurrection, there being some, it seems, in the Church of Corinth at that
time that denied it. And first by way of Introduction, he recites the sum of
the Gospel which he had preached to them, which they had embraced; and in the
profession whereof, the greatest part of them had hitherto stood steadfast, and
by which, he tells them, they shall be saved Praesens pro futuro.
, if they faithfully retain and observe it, as he delivered i. e. Historiam cum
suis circumstantiis, and dogmata cum sua explicatione.
it unto them: and this he assures himself they will do, except their former
embracing the Gospel was rash, light, and inconsiderate. He tells them, that he
delivered unto them what he had received of Ananias, and the Apostles, and by
special revelation from Christ himself [Gal. 1.12. 1 Cor. 11.23.] namely, that
Christ the true Messiah died to make atonement for our sins, as Esaias and Daniel
had foretold in the Old Testament, [viz. Isa. 53.5. Dan 9.26.]. That he was
buried and rose again, as was prefigured in Jonas. That he was seen of Cephas
or Peter, Luke 24 34. Then of the Twelve gathered together, Luke 24.36.
Receptum erat ut coetus ille discipulorum Christi domesticorum nomine (...)
intelligeretur, quae appellatio, etiam Juda sublato, permansit. Slater.
, (for so the Company of Disciples, consisting formerly of Twelve, was still
called, though Judas was gone to his own place, and Thomas was now absent).
Then of Five hundred Brethren at once in Galilee, [Mat. 28.7.16.], whereof some
were yet alive, and able to testify it. Besides, he was seen of James, then of
all the Apostles [Joh. 20.26.], Thomas being with them, and possibly the
greatest part of the Seventy Disciples present also. Last of all, he tells
them, he was seen of himself, whom in great humility he calls an (...), an
untimely birth, because he was not by leisureable institution brought to
Christianity, whereby he should be as a natural birth, but was as an untimely
birth, by reason of his sudden and unexpected conversion, and which was not
without some some violence, Act. 9. And as an untimely birth Verisimile est,
hanc loquendi formulam apud Hebraeos usitatam fuisse, cum de re vili, quae
plane abjici soleat atque abscondi, loquuntur; praesertim si spectes, Numb.
12.12. Dieteric. Antiq. Bibl.
, is not fit to be called a birth, because Children that are so born, are very
imperfect, being lesser, and weaker than those of full growth, so says Paul, I
am a poor abortive, one whose conversion was after the Lord was ascended into
Heaven. And as an abortive Child is the least of Children, so he reckoned
himself the least Non ^^que adeo m^tutus ad Apostoli muneris functionem.
of the Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle because he had persecuted
the Church of Christ. H^wever, says he, by the grace and favor of God I am
what I am, that is, a believing Christian, and an Apostle; and so my t^stimony
to be received as well as that of the other Apostles: And his grace which was
bestowed on me was not in vain. For being by his special favor, constituted an
Apostle, I have since labored to walk worthy of it, and have been more
lab^rious and industrious than any of the other Apostles; yet what I have done,
I do not attribute to my self, but impute entirely to his gracious assistance,
that enabled me, and went along with me. Therefore, whether you l^ok upon me,
or upon them, (to whom he appe^red here on the Earth, and so were eyewitnesses
of his Resurrection), you can ^ave no ground to doubt ^f this truth; for both
they and I preach the same things, viz. that Christ died for our sins, and rose
again, and that we shall rise again by his power; and this is the Doctrine that
you Corinthians once believed and received. From Ver. 1. to 12.

2. Having promised these things, He comes now to refute the Error of those
that denied the Resurrection, showing the absurdity of it in six particulars.
1. If there be no Resurr^ction of the dead, then Christ the Head is not risen.
For if the Head be risen, he will certainly raise up his M^mbers also. 2. If
Christ ^e not risen, then the Ap^stles preaching, and so strongly asserting.
His Resurrection as an i^fallible argument of the divinity of his Doctrine was
in vain: (for if it had not been divine, God would not have so confirmed it,
and as it were set his S^al to it, by raising him from the dead on the third
day); and then their belief of it was in vain also. 3. Then Paul himself, and
the other Apostles had given a false testim^ny of God (which they could not
reasonably be suspected of) affirming, that he raised up Christ from the dead,
which yet he did not, if there be no Resurrection of the dead. 4. If Christ be
not raised, it will thence follow, not only that the Faith of these Corinthians
was vain, but that they are yet in their sins, and subject to condemnation for
them; and that Christ has not expiated them. For it would be an evidence he
had not satisfied for them, if he still remained under death. 5. If Christ be
not risen, then they which died in the Faith ^f Christ, are quite lost, seeing
they were not delivered from their sins by him. 6. Then Christians are of all
men m^st miserable, who subject themselves, f^r the cause of Christ, to many
sufferings, and dangers, and afflictions here; and deprive themselves ^f many
comforts and advantages which they might otherwise enj^y, if they expected only
from him the good things of this life In hac tantum vita spera^e in Christum
est tantum hujus vitae bona ab eo expectare cum futuram vitam non credant. Fla^.
, and had no h^pes to be raised by him to a better, when this is ended. From
Ver. 12. to 20.

Having thus proved by these arguments, that Christ is risen, he shows, it will
from hence follow, that the dead in Christ shall rise also. For as the first
Fruits v. 20. Primitiae dormientium] 1. Christus primus dignitate. 2. Primus
causalitate, per Christum enim omnes resurgemus. 3. Tempore, primus inter
resurgentes ad vitam immortalem. Licet enim aliqui ante Christum suscitati ab
Elia and ^lisaeo surrexerint, tamen illi tant^n re^urrexerunt ad praesentem
vit^m mortalem, rursumque mortei sunt. Sic Christus dicitur primogenitus
mortuorum, i. e. ante omne^ resurgens and q^^si renascens ex mortuis. Cornel. a
Lapide.
are pledges and an earnest of a future harvest; so the Resurrection of Christ
is a pledge and assurance of the Resurrection of all the Saints. For as death
came by A^am, so shall the Resurrection come by Christ. As by Adams s^n, all
that are partakers of his Nature are concluded under the sentence of death; so
all truly reg^nerate that are by Faith united to Christ, and are partakers of
his divine Nature, shall be made alive again by him. For the righteous he will
raise as their Head, and the wicked he will raise as their Judge. But here it
will be objected, If Christ the Head be risen Why are not those that are in
Christ raised also? He answers, that the order which God has appointed must be
observed, viz. that Christ as the first Fruits should rise first, and
afterward all the Faithful, (the rest of the harvest) at his Second Coming; at
which time, (when the end of the World will be) Christ having subdued and
abolished all adverse powers and dominions that were contrary to him, will
deliver up his Mediatory Kingdom into the hands of his Father, laying aside
that manner of ruling, by those means, he now uses for the gathering, and
governing of his Church. Not that he shall cease to reign with his Father, (for
in that sense, Of his Kingdom there shall be no end), but he shall cease to
reign as Mediator, and as deputed by his Father. Yet he must reign as Mediator
till he have subdued all his Enemies, whereof death will he the last; and death
being subdued, the resurrection must needs follow. Now that all enemies shall
be subdued under him, the Apostle manifests, because God the Father has
promised that all things shall be subject unto him [Psal. 8.6. Ephesians. 1.22. Heb.
2.8.], yet we are always to suppose, that he has not thereby divested himself
of his Sovereign Empire, but under the word All, He himself is excepted, who
has subjected all things else to his Son. And when all things shall be thus
subdued to Christ, and his Mediatory Kingdom delivered up to his Father, then
the Son himself, as Mediator and Head of his Church, [See 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians.
1.12.], shall he subject unto him. And then shall God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, fill all the Saints with glory and bliss eternally and immediately,
whereas now He conveys himself to them by means. From Verse 20. to 29.

He further proves, there will be a Resurrection of the dead. For else, what
benefit will accrue to those who are baptized for the dead? that is, that
suffer great persecution Beza takes the word (...) in the middle Voice, and so
renders it, Cur ablutione utuntur? Some take it passively, and render it, Why
are they then washed with the washing men use over the dead. q. d. If the dead
rise not, if the Corpse shall for ever perish, to what end do you wash them? Do
men give respect, where there is no hope?

See Note (b) of Sect. 4. Chap. 2.


for professing, asserting, and defending the Resurrection of some that are
dead, viz. of Christ, (whose Resurrection is past), and of the Saints (whose
Resurrection is to come): For so the word to be baptized is taken, Mar. 10.38.
and the Praeposition (...), signifies for, Act. 9.16. It Is absurd, therefore,
he shows, that they who suffer martyrdom, for defending the Resurrection of the
dead, and expecting of it, should be disappointed of their hope. And why should
he himself, and other Christians, run the hazard of so many dangers, and death
it self, if there were to be no Resurrection, wherein their patience and
courage for Christ shall be rewarded? He protests by that, which he t^ok the
most joy in of any thing in the World, viz. his fidelity to Christ, and the
success of his ministry among them (they being thereby brought to believe and
rejoice in Christ) that he died daily, (in preparation of mind) being daily
exposed to the hazzards of death; which sure he should not do, if he had not an
assured hope of a Resurrection to a better life after this. To what purpose was
he exposed to fight with beasts at Ephesus Id est, cum bestialibus hominibus,
(...), hominibus ferarum more saevientibus. Scaliger in notis, Feros and
praefracti ingenii viros, quibuscum illi negotium and contentio fuit, vocat
(...). Quidam haec verba intelligunt de disputationibus quas per tres menses
cum incredulis and pertinacibus Judaeis, Ephesi habuit. De mortuorum
resurrectione loquens, frustranea esse ostendit varia illa (...), quae propter
Christum sustinebant v. 30.31. and frustraneam omnem suam cum adversariis
veritatis (tanquam bestiis) de veritate religionis Chistianae concertationem,
nisi soret re^urrectio, and potius (his omnibus supine posthabitis) gulae,
luxui, and voluptati indulgendum esse. Aliqui intelligunt Pauli verba proprie,
ac si revera bestiis objectus suisset: sed si tale quid evenisset ei, non erat
rem tam insignem praeteriturus Lucas; and certe in malorum catalogo, 2 Cor.
11.23. (ubi potiores, and omnium maximas suas calamitates Apostolus enumerat)
hujus pugnae and periculi mentionem fecisset. Deinde si Ephesii tale quid
tentassent, Paulus ad jus civitatis provocasset; quomodo fecit, and evasit, cum
debebat flagellis caedi. Praeterea, non I cebat Civem Romanum bestiis objicere;
sed mancipiorum illud erat supplicium. Digest. leg. 3. ad legem Corneliam de
Sicariis. (...) quod attinet, si verbum (...) subaudiatur (uti illa ellipsis
alibi occurrit ut 2 Cor. 9.6.) omnia recte se habent. Secundum hominem enim sen
humanitus loqui se dicit Paulus, quando similitudinibus utitur, Gal. 3.15. Romans
6.19. qualis and hic sermo est, metaphorice conceptus. Vide Glassius and Treid
libius.
, and to run such a hazard of his life as that was, if he had no hope of a
better life after this, and of a glorious Resurrection? And further, If there
were no Resurrection, then there was some sense in that wild saying of the
Epicures among them, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; that is,
Let us take our fill of pleasures, while we may; for shortly death comes, and
will put an end to all, See Isa. 22.13. But he bids them take heed of attending
to such rotten kind of speeches, which might corrupt them with false
principles, and vicious manners. He advises therefore such among them, as were
sleeping in their ignorance and sottish security, to rouse up themselves, and
to awake to righteousness, viz. to live righteously, and to avoid Epicurism,
and the company of Epicures. For he tells them, there were some such among
them, which had not the right knowledge of the true God, which he spoke to their
shame. From Ver. 29. to 35.

He now comes to answer three Objections against this Doctrine.

Object. 1. It seems impossible the dead should arise. For, How shall it be?

Object. 2. Who can describe with what bodies they shall arise?

Object. 3. What shall become of those that are alive at the Coming of Christ?
For they are not capable of a Resurrection who never died.

To the first he answers, that it is as possible for the Body to rise again, as
for Corn sown to be quickened after it dies in the earth.

To the second, he says, that our Bodies shall arise the same in substance, but
not in qualities. They shall rise with far more excellent qualities, than those
they were buried with. As a bare grain of Corn that is sown, is raised in
substance and kind the same, but diverse in qualities, coming up with blade,
and ear, and corn in it: It does not rise in the same figure in which it was
sown. Seeds are sown and rot, yet notwithstanding they are so far from
perishing thereby, that they rise up far more beautiful; and whereas they are
sown dry and hard, they spring up green and fresh: So why should it seem
incredible, that our Bodies should arise from corruption, and yet with far more
excellent qualities than they had before? And as there are several kinds of
flesh, and one more excellent than another; and as celestial Bodies, are more
glorious than terrestrial, and one celestial Body differs from another in
glory; so it will be in the Resurrection. The Bodies that rise, will differ
from those that dyed. That which was here a corruptible Body, when it rises,
will be an incorruptible. The Body that was here obnoxious, and exposed to
diseases, griefs, and death, will be raised glorious and strong, beautiful and
shining, like unto the Stars, and the Sun in the Heavens [Math. 13, 43. and 17
2.]. That which was sown a natural or an animal Body, which needed here to be
supported, as other animals are, with meat, and drink, and such things as
afforded nourishment to it, shall be raised a spiritual Body, endued with
spiritual qualities, not needing meat, or nourishment, but shall be supported
immediately by the Spirit of God without means, as the Angels in Heaven are,
Math. 22.30. So that there are Bodies of both these sorts, which much differ
one from the other. And as from the first Adam, (according to Genesis 2.7.) we
received a natural, or animal Body, which yet could not be continued in life
without nourishment; so by the second Adam, namely Christ, we shall obtain a
spiritual Body in the Resurrection, which he will sustain without nourishment
by his Spirit, He being a quickening Spirit And as since the Resurrection,
Christ has a spiritual Body, which is immortal and incorruptible; so shall he
also give such Bodies to those that are his. Yet all things must be done in
order; we must have a natural Body first, and a spiritual Body after, as that
which is perfect follows upon that which is imperfect. The first Man is of the
earth, earthly, and therefore could communicate nothing but a terrene life. But
the second Man, is not only man, but God from Heaven also, and therefore could
support his own Body, that it should not see corruption (though in its own
nature terrene and resoluble into dust); and having raised it out of the grave
he could make it glorious, immortal, and heavenly, not needing earthly
supports. And so in like manner can he make our Bodies also. Such a Body as
Adam himself had, such have all we, (who d^scended from him in a natural way),
as long as we are upon the earth. And such a Body as Christ now has (namely,
glorified, immortal, and incorruptible,) shall Believers have, after they shall
be raised from the dead, and shall be taken up into Heaven. And as here we are
conf^rmable to the first Adam, in mortality and corruptibility; so shall we
hereafter be conformable to Christ in glory and immortality. F^r our Bodies, as
now they are, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, unless they be first fitted
f r that glori^us state, by the mutation of their qualiti^s, and be changed,
purified, and immortalized. From Ver. 35. to 51.

He now answers the third Objecti^n, namely, What shall become of those who
shall be found alive at Christ's coming? As f^r those, he tells them, they shall
not dye, but shall be ch^nged, and of mortal shall become immortal, and that in
a moment, when both all that are dead, and all that are alive shall be summoned
by the last Trumpet to Christ's Tribunal. And when this is done, then that
triumphant speech of the Prophet Hosea shall be ful^illed, chap. 13.14, O
death, I will be thy plagues! O grave, I will be thy d^struction! that is,
Death shall be destroyed for ever, and shall never rec^ver strength again over
any man. And that this Victory may appear the greater, he shows, that the sting
of death is sin, and the strength of sin, is the Law, that is, Unless
satisfaction be given to the Law, sin, wrath, and death remain in full force
and power. But after satisfaction is made to the Law for us, sin and wrath are
taken away, and death is disarmed of its sting. From the wh^le that he has
said, he infers two things; 1. That God should be highly praised, who has
through Christ given us Victory over Sin, Death, and the Law. 2. That we should
he st^dfast and unmovable in the pr^f^ssion of the G^spel, and in doing and
suffering the will of God, being assured there will be a Resurrection, at which
our labor will be recompensed and graciously rewarded. From Ver. 51. to the
end.

Jerusalem, how and in what manner it should be made, and how sent.
Particularly he orders, that on the Lords day every one should l^y something
by, as God had prosper'd him, that there might be a full sum c ll^cted, and so
no further need of gatherings when he came. And he tells them, that when he
c^mes, they shall choose the Messengers who shall carry their contribution, that
they may be sure of the due disposing of it, according to their own intentions.
And those whom they shall choose, he will by his ^^tter recommend and send to
Jerusalem; or if it be thought needful for himself to go al^ng with them, on
this occasion, (as he did sometimes, Act. 24.17. and Romans 15.25.), he declares
his willingness to do it. From Ver. 1. to 5.

He tells them, he designed to come to them, as soon as he had spent some time
in the several parts of Macedonia. For he intended to remove from Ephesus where
he now was, and to go to Jerusalem, through that Region. And perhaps he would
stay the whole Winter with them, which being done, he supposed some of them
would go some part of the way with him. And therefore he would not now come to
them, and only see them as it were in passing. For if he did s^, he should not
be able to stay; whereas his purpose was, (with the Lords leave) to spend some
time with them, when he next came. At present he purposed to stay at Ephesus,
till Pentecost, because God had opened a great door, and opportunity to him for
the gaining of many to Christ, and had abundantly blessed his labors. Yet
there were many adversaries in that place, that opposed the truth, which made
his presence requisite for some time longer; For Satan and his instruments in
his absence did much harm. From Ver. 5. to 10.

He charges them that if Timothy come to them, they should take care of his
safety among them, and that they would look upon him as they would on hims^^f,
because of his faithfulness in the ministerial work, and that they would treat
him him respectfully and bring him on in his journey, when he returned, that he
might come safely to him; for he and the Brethren expected him. Ver. 10, 11.

He acquaints them that Apollos was not willing at present for some reasons to
come to them, possibly because he would not countenance a Faction there begun
under his name [1 Cor. 1.12.]. Ver. 12.

He exhorts them, to watchfulness, stedfastness in the Faith, Christian
courage, and Fortitude, and that putting away Schisms and Division, they they
would make Charity the Arbitrator of all things among them. Ver. 13, 14.

He makes honorable mention of Stephanas and his Family, as those that
received the Gospel at the first preaching of it in Achaia, and first gave
their Names to Christ, and have since addict^d themselves to the ministry of
the Saints, being very serviceable and bountiful to them on all occasions. He
exhorts them to honor and respect v. 16. (...) hoc loco est revereri, honorem
and obsequia defer. Ut Ephesians. 5:21. 1 Pet. 5.5. Grot.
such, and all others that join with them in the propagation of the Gospel and
Faith of Christ. Ver. 15, 16.

He tells them, he was glad of the coming of Stephanas, Fortunatus, and
Achaicus unto him, who had acquainted him with the Schisms among them, and all
other matters of importance, and so had done that which they themselves ought
to have done. He tells them, they had much refreshed his Spirit, by acquainting
him, that there were so many yet among them that adhered to the truth; and they
had (he supposed) refreshed their Spirits, by sending them word of the
continuance of his great affection toward them. He would have persons of such
integrity as they were, much esteemed among them. Ver. 17, 18.

He comes now to the Conclusion of his Epistle, wherein he sends several
salutations unto them from the Churches of Asia; from Aquila and Priscilla, and
all the Christians in their Family, who wished them all spiritual blessings
from Christ. He wills them to salute one another with the kiss of Peace and
Charity, with which Believers (according to the custom of those Countries and
times) used to salute one another. He adds his own salutation with his own
hand, the rest of the Epistle being written by some Scribe, See 2 These. 3.17.
He adds also one remarkable sentence with his own hand, which he would have
them especially to take notice of, and remember, (as Augustus used to d^ when
he wrote to the Governors of Provinces) namely this, If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, (that is, be a secret or open opposer of him and his
Gospel), let him be accursed: Maranatha, the Lord comes. As if he should have
said, Let him be reserved to the last judgment of God, Jude v. 14, 15. Behold
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment, etc. In
which sentence he threatens utter destruction to wilful opposers of Christ,
and hypocrites (except they repent): not out of any evil passion of mind, but
out of an holy zeal, and an Apostolical Spirit. He concludes all with his
wonted benediction, and the signification of his love to them. From Ver. 19. to
the end.

SECT. VIII.
APollos being unwilling for the present (as we have heard, Sect. 7.) to go to
Corinth, but choosing rather, as it seems, to go to Crete, (now called Candia),
Paul thought good by him and Zenas, (a Doctor of the Law) to write an Epistle
to Titus, whom he had left in that Island, further to propagate the Gospel, to
ordain Elders in every City where the Gospel was propagated, and to finish what
was lacking, and conducing to the good of that people, which the Apostle
himself had not time to do. And understanding that many in that Island
ambitiously aspired to the Pastoral charge; and that several false Teachers,
erroneous in judgment, and scandalous in life, had already crept in, to the
great hurt of the Church; he writes this Epistle to Titus (which is of like
argument with the First and Second to Timothy) to direct him how to carry
himself in reference to that people, and the work he was to do there.

Epistle to Titus.
In this Epistle there are three parts,

1. A Preface. 2. The Substance or matter of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface is contained in the four first Verses; wherein we may observe,
1. The Person writing this Epistle, who is described by his office, A Servant
of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, for the propagating the Faith v. 1.
(...)] Missus ad enunciandum eam fidem quam habent qui electi sunt a Deo.
Vatabl.
of Gods Elect, (namely, Faith in Christ), and the knowledge of the truth which
tends to godliness, and this in hope of eternal life to be attained thereby,
which the Righteous God promised long ago (...), ante tempora secularia, h. e.
ante multa secula; jam inde a primis mundi temporibus
, in the First Ages of the World, [viz. Genesis 3.15.], but now has more clearly
manifested by the preaching of the Word ante (...) subaudi (...), q. d.
Manifestavit autem proprio tempore per verbum suum in praedicatione quae mihi
concredita est.
, which was committed to him, among others, by the command of God, who gives us
Salvation by Jesus Christ, [See 1 Timothy 1.1.]. 2. The Person written to, viz.
Titus, described by his spiritual relation to Paul, who converted him to the
Faith, which is the common means of Salvation, both to Jews and Gentiles. 3.
The Salutation it self, wherein are the Blessings prayed for in Titus's behalf;
viz. Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God. From Ver. 1. to 5.

2. He comes then to the Body of the Epistle; wherein, 1. He tells Titus, for
what end he left him in Crete, namely, to set in order the things that were
wanting in those new planted Churches, to ordain Elders in every City, as he
had appointed him, v. 5. 2. That he might not err in the choice of fit men, he
tells him, how they should be qualified. The Qualifications of an Elder, which
he sets down, may be reduced to three Heads: 1. Oeconomical. 1. That he be
blameless. 2. The Husband of one Wife, and not guilty of Polygamy. 3. That his
Children be brought up in the Faith, and in good order, and obedience. 4. That
he be a Lover of Hospitality, and be ready to receive and entertain Strangers,
and the banished Servants of God. ver. 8.
2. Moral, set down 1. Negatively. 1. Not self-willed. 2. Not soon angry. 3.
Not given to Wine. 4. No striker. 5. Not given to filthy lucre, v. 7.
2. Affirmatively. 1. A lover of good men. 2. Sober. 3. Just. 4. Holy. 5.
Temperate, v. 8.

3. Ecclesiastical. 1. That nothing be found in him unworthy of the Steward of
God, who ought to be so much the more blameless, by how much his office is more
holy. 2. That he be studious to know the truth, and tenacious of the truth,
when known, and that for a double end: 1. That he may be able to feed the Flock
with right knowledge, and vigorously to exhort them to the performance of their
several duties. 2. To convince gainsayers, and to stop their mouths.




And he shows, that great care should be taken, that Persons so qualified
should be chosen, and that both in respect of the false Teachers, that did at
that time abound in their Island, as also in respect of the people of Crete
themselves. The false Teachers he describes by their evil manners, declaring
them to be unruly, vain-talkers, deceivers, especially those of the
Circumcision, viz. the Jewish Doctors, who taught things they ought not; and
subverted whole houses for filthy lucre's sake. Ver. 10, 11.

As for the people of Crete; he shows, that one of their own Poets, viz.
Epimenides (held by them for a Prophet) has set forth the disposition of that
Nation, viz. that they are liars, given to idleness, serving their own
intemperance; which Character he acknowledges to be too true, (namely, as to
the generality of them), and thence inferrs, that the false Teachers that were
among them, (and others also who were misled by them) must not be handled too
mildly, but reproved, and rebuked sharply Ita tractandi sunt Cretenses prout
Cretenses tractari par est, adeoque libere redarguendi.
, that they may submit themselves sound in the Faith, and to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and may not give heed to Jewish Fables, and the Commandments and
Traditions of men, which turn many from the truth; of which sort he instances
in one, viz. the distinction of meats, as clean and unclean; which he shows is
against the liberty which Christ has purchased, and allows to all that truly
believe in him. For, unto the pure all things are pure; that is, to true
Believers, whose hearts are purified by Faith, all kinds of meats are lawful;
but to the impure and unbeli^vers it is quite otherwise; nothing can be used
purely by them, their minds and consciences being defiled with sin, and not
purged from their guilt by Faith in Christ. And he further tells them, that
though some of these false Teachers may seem to be religious, and profess to
know God, yet in their works they plainly deny him: being abominable
hypocrites, rebels against the truth of God, and unmeet for the performance of
any good work which he requires. From Ver. 5. to the end.

3ly. He proceeds to direct Titus, touching the faithful discharge of his
Ministerial office: injoining him,

1. More generally, That he speak the things that become sound Doctrine.

2. More particularly, he directs him how to accommodate himself to several
sorts of persons.

1. To teach old men to be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, charitable
and patient.

2. To teach ancient women to be in all their behavior and deportment as
becomes persons that profess holiness; not false accusers, not given to
drinking or tippling, but teachers of good things, and that they be exemplary
to the younger women, and teach them their duties, viz. to be sober, to love
their Husbands, to love their children; and to be discreet, chaste, keepers at
home, good, obedient to their own Husbands, that the Name of God be not
blasphemed, nor the Christian Religion be thought to infuse any thing into them
contrary to moral virtue.

3. To teach young men to be sober-minded. And upon occasion of this direction,
he gives Titus himself (who probably was now young as Timothy was) his lessons,
exhorting him to be exemplary in his life and conversation, (in all things
showing himself a pattern of good works), and in his public Doctrine or
preaching, to show incorruptness, gravity, sincerity; and in his private
discourses, sound speech, that cannot be condemned; to the shaming and
silencing of opposers. Ver. 7, 8.

4. To teach Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, to please them w^ll
in all lawful things, not answering again, nor murmuring or repining at their
just commands, reproofs, or corrections; not purloining or stealing, but
showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior
by a conscientious discharge of their duties. Ver. 9.10.

And he adds a further reason, why all sorts of persons should labor to
discharge their respective duties faithfully, because the grace of God
manifested in the Gospel, bringing and offering Salvation, has now appeared to
all sorts of persons, (which before was only manifested to the Jews) teaching
them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godlily in this present world, expecting eternal Salvation and bliss, (the
blessing which all good Christians hope for) and the glorious Coming of Jesus
Christ to judgment, (who is here called the great God), who gave himself for us
that he might redeem us from the guilt of all our iniquities, and so justify
us, and purify us unto himself, and make us a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, and so sanctify us. These things he commands Titus to press with all
authority, that none may have any just cause to despise him. From Ver. 11. to
the end.

4ly. He directs him to exhort all sorts of Christians to these duties; 1. To
be subject to civil Powers and Magistrates Sponte nempe non coacte.
. 2. To be ready to every good work. 3. Not to revile any man. 4. To be no
Brawlers. 5. To be gentle toward all, even the worst of men; and the reason he
gives for it, is this, Because Cum dicit Paulus (...), non tam se intelligit
quam eos qui ex Gentibus vocati erant, per (...) satis ipsi familiarem, neque
nimium obtortam, cum Christiani omnes unius corporis membra sunt. Grot.
we (says he) before our conversion were such as others now are; in which
carnal state whilst we lived, we were foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, and would not have
thought our selves well dealt with, to have been imperiously and roughly
handled: what therefore, we would not that men should have done to us, when we
were such; let not us do to others, that now are, as we then were. But when the
transcendent mercy and loving kindness of God toward lost sinners, was
effectually manifested to us by the preaching of the Gospel, then there was a
blessed change wrought in us. Yet the cause of this change was not any thing in
us, or any works of righteousness done by us, but merely the free grace of God,
which moved him to rescue us out of that wretched miserable estate, and to work
a work of regeneration in us, whereof Baptism is the outward visible sign, and
the Holy Ghost the inward invisible worker; whom Christ has obtained of the
Father, that he should be sent down and imparted unto us, and should dwell in
us, (not essentially but energetically) abundantly illuminating, guiding,
strengthening, and comforting of us. And the end of God herein is, that being
justified by his grace, that is, by Faith in his Son, we should be made heirs
of eternal life, according to the hope which the Promises of God have given us
thereof. From Ver. 1. to 8.

5ly. He directs Titus to inculcate this into his Hearers, with firm and solid
reasons, That true Believers ought especially to be careful to employ
themselves in good works, and to go v. 8. (...), i. e. bonorum operum
singularem curam gerere, ut facere tenentur qui negotio alicui praefecti sunt.
Metaph. Pisc.
before others in the practice of them; because these things are profitable not
only to others, but especially to themselves, seeing God of his grace will
reward them for them. 2. That they should avoid foolish questions and disputes
about genealogies, and contentions about the various interpretations of certain
places in the Law; because these things are unprofitable. 3. That they should
reject, that is, avoid, shun, and refuse communion with an Heretic, who does
pertinaciously persist in great and dangerous errors, and labors to draw
Disciples after him, (see Act. 20.30.), after they have once and again
admonished him; concluding that such an one is perverted, and sins
grievously Adeo ut culpa non tam in intellectu sita sit quam in voluntate.
, inflicting that punishment on himself, which the Church is wont to inflict on
those that are guilty of great misdemeanors, that is, cutting himself off from
the Church, of which he is a Member. Ver. 10, 11.

6ly. In the Conclusion of the Epistle, he speaks of private business; he
orders Titus that when he shall send Artemas or Tychicus to supply his absence
there, he should make haste to come to him to Nicopolis, where he did intend to
winter. That he should bring Z^nas and Apollos on in their way (who were coming
to him), and supply them with moneys and other necessaries for their journey.
And he orders, that not only the faithful among the people, but that the
Preachers v. 14. Nostri, i. e. Nostri Ordinis homines, Ministerio, scil.
fungentes, ne sese immunes censento ab Eleemosynarum collatione. Beza. Alii per
nostros intelligunt solum fideles in Creta.
themselves, and those of the Pastoral Order should look to it that their Faith
be accompanied with Charity and good works, and that they excel therein upon
all necessary occasions. Such (among others) are, friendly to entertain and
dismiss strangers, especially those that labor in the Gospel; lest whilst they
exhorts others to good works, and to bring forth the fruits of Faith, they
themselves should be found unfruitful. Lastly, with salutation sent to Titus
from the Brethren with him, and desiring him to salute all the Christians in
Crete who loved him, and the Brethren with him, for the common Faiths sake, and
with such a love as the Christian Faith requires. He concludes all with his
Apostolical Benediction. From Ver. 8. to the end.

SECT. IX.
THE Apostle by his Epistle had ordered Titus to meet him at Nicopolis, (a City
in Thracia, not far from Philippi in Macedonia, where he intended to winter),
but afterward upon some reasons having altered his mind, he now sends for him
to come to Ephesus; and from thence not long after sent him to Corinth, that he
might by him know the state of the Corinthians, and what effect his first
Epistle had had among them.

SECT. X.
IN the mean time Demetrius a Silversmith (who made silver Shrines for Diana,
or little Models of the famous Temple there, with the Image of Diana Diana suit
una ex sex Deabus majoribus quas Ethnici colebant. Invocabatur a viatoribus and
itinerantibus tanquam dux viarum; item a venatoribus tanquam tutrix sylvarum,
item a praegnantibus and parturientibus tanquam matter viventium and nascentium
animalium, unde pingebat^r (...) seu multimammia.

Huic Dianae in urbe Ephesina extructum erat Templum tam magnificum ut ex
omnibus partibus orbis ad hoc templum spectandum homines confinerent: and
numerabatur inter septem mundi miracula; and bello Persico propter
pulchritudinem ejus, Barbari huic pepercerunt, cum omnia alia templa
comburerent. Tota Asia in aedificando hoc templo suit occupata, idque per annos
plus quam ducentos. Longitudo dicitur ^uisse pe ^um 425, latitudo 220: Columnas
habuit 127 a totidem Regibus aedisicatas, quarum singulae habuerunt altitudinem
sexaginta pedum. Aedificatum erat in loco palustri; and pro fundamento habuit
carbones and vellera lanae. In hoc templo erat simulacrum Dianae, quod
credebant coelo delapsum, and adorabant. Denique de hoc Templo illud
memorabile, quod quidam Herostratus illud accendit and combussit, eo solum sine
ut aeternum sibi nomen compararet in historiis; quasi inter felicitatem esset
numerandum, Per maleficia inclarescere and in historias inse^i, sicut Pilatus
in symbolum fidei, and Judas in historiam passionis. Succensum est ab
Herostrato eodem die quo natus est Alexander Magnus, sed postea restitutum,
donec novissimo fato periret ex incendio Gothorum, quod refert Capitolinus in
Gallieno.


in them, (which strangers which came thither, used to buy, and to employ to a
superstitious use) fearing that if Paul's Doctrine prevailed, he should lose his
profit; he called together the workmen of the same craft, (whereof it seems, he
had many that wrought under him), and showing them the danger they were in,
lest their trade should come into contempt; he greatly exasperated them against
Paul, as one that taught the people, that those were not gods which were made
with hands, and one that cried down the worship of Diana, whom all Asia, and
other parts of the world Non inde sequetur cultum Dianae esse veram religionem.
Non est Catholica religio, quam totus orbis amplectitur. Nam major orbis pars
semper adhaesit erroribus; sed est vera religio quam tota vera Ecclesia omnium
temporum and locorum amplexa est. Hoc de nostra religione asserimus, de
Pontificia negamus. Stres.
had in so high veneration: A great hubbub was hereupon raised, and the enraged
multitude cried down the Doctrine of Paul, and cried up the Goddess of the
Ephesians; And in this hubbub they seized upon two of Paul's companions, Gaius
and Aristarchus [See Romans 16.23. Col. 4.10.], and drew them into the Theater.
Paul seeing nothing likely to ensue from this popular tumult, but the present
destruction of himself and his fellow Christians (See 2 Cor. 1.8.), if the
providence of God did not wonderfully prevent it, thought he must attempt
something (though with evident peril to himself), for the rescue of his Friends
out of that danger ( see 1 John 3.16.). And therefore he was about to have
adventured himself into the Theater Theatrum est locus publicus and amplu^,
ludis spectandis idoneus, ubi sine dubio etiam curia suit, and ubi publica
civium negotia tractari solebant.
, there to have made an Apology for himself and the Christian Religion to the
people; but the Disciples earnestly dissuade him from it. And some of the
Asiarchae (...)] Sir. Primores Asiae; licet aliqui existimant quod sic vocat,
non qui Asiae praeerant ut principes* sed praecipuos sacerdotes, quorum munus
erat, ludos theatrales in Deorum honorem edere.

Some hereby understand certain public persons, which were sent from the Greek
Cities of the lesser Asia, as Procurators in public businesses to Ephesus,
which was the chief of them.


sent to him, and gave him the same advice, who it seems privately favored his
Doctrine, and were secretly his friends. The hubbub therefore continuing and
the rude people being enraged (as it seems) against the Jews (as enemies to
their heathenish worship), as well as against the Christians, the Jews caused
one Alexander a Jew to come forth, and to speak to the people in justification
of their Nation and Religion, and as it is probable, to cast the occasion of all
this discontent on the Christians. But when the people understood he was a Jew,
they would not hear him, but with a wild confused noise cried up their goddess
Diana for two hours together. At length the Town Clerk coming forth to the
people, by his wisdom appeased the tumult, representing to them, that their
Religion and the worship of Diana was so publicly known, and so generally
approved in the world, that there needed no tumult or uproar to vindicate the
same, as Demetrius suggested. And as for these men they were now so enraged
against, he tells them, they had offered no violence to the Temple to demolish
it, nor had defaced any of the Images in it Sciebant Apostoli, hoc non suum sed
magistratus esse officium: Concionando ejiciebant imagines ex cordibus hominum,
sed non per vio. lentiam ex templis.
, nor had spoken evil of the Goddess Diana, that he knew of. However, if
Demetrius and the Artificers that depend on him have any matter of accusation
against any of them, he tells them, the Court-days are come, and the Proconsuls
Officers or Deputies are ready to assemble, from whom they may seek for
justice. And therefore they had best be quiet, and do nothing rashly; for they
were in danger already to be called in question and fined by the Romans, for
that days riot. And having thus appeased them, he persuaded them peaceably to
return to their own homes.

Act. 19. v. 23. And the same time there arose no small stir about that way.

v. 24. For a certain man, named Demetrius, a Silver-smith, which made silver
shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen:

v. 25. Whom he called together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said,
Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth.

v. 26. Moreover, ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost
thorowout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away much people,
saying, That they be no gods which are made with hands.

v. 27. So that not only our craft is in danger to be set at naught: but also
that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.

v. 28. And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried
out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

v. 29. And the whole city was filled with confusion, and having caught Gaius
and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they rushed with
one accord into the theater.

v. 30. And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples
suffered him not.

v. 31. And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto
him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the theater.

v. 32. Some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was
confused, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.

v. 33. And they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him
forward. And Alexander beckned with the hand, and would have made his defense
unto the people.

v. 34. But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the
space of two hours, cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

v. 35. And when the town clerk had appeased the people, he said, Ye men of
Ephesus, what man is there that knows not how that the city of Ephesus is a
worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image that fell down from
Jupiter?

v. 36. Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be
quiet, and to do nothing rashly.

v. 37. For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of
Churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.

v. 38. Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a
matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies; let them
implead one another.

v. 39. But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be
determined in a lawful assembly.

v. 40. For we are in danger to be called in question for this days uproar,
there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse.

v. 41. And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the Assembly.

v. 22. (...) pro (...) quae mutatio frequens Hellenistis.
v. 24. (...)] Exiguas aediculas argenteas and in iis simulacrum Dianae ad
essigiem very templi and simulacri, quae vulgo ab iis emebantur qui Dianam
Ephesiam visebant. Tales aediculas Veneris Cnidiae meminit Plinius, 36.5.
v. 27. (...), Illud quod nobis est peculiare. Beza. Id quod nos tangit (i. e.
ars nostra). Grot.

Euturumque ut etiam destruatur majestas Dianae] q. d. Parum est de nostro
quaestu: tota Religio hic perielitatur: sub obtentu Dianae numinis velificasur
lucro. ^uam orbis terrarum colit] Apuleius lib. 2. de eadem. Cujus numen unicum
multiformi specie, ritu vario, nomine multijugo, totus veneratur orbis.


v. 30. Non siverunt eum] i. e. precibus eum dimovebant.
v. 33. Alexandrum] Aliqui Judaeorum (ut videtur) promoverunt eum extra turbam
in eum locum unde ab omnibus exaudiri posset, and eum proponebant tanquam
idoneum Pauli accusatorem, ut qui ipsius dogmata nosset omnia, and ab iis
descivisset. Videtur enim hic esse Alexander faber aerarius de quo queritur, 1 Timothy 1.26. 2 Timothy 4.14. Hoc autem modo Judaei volebant odium omne hoc a se
amovere, cum scirent se quoque invisos esse tanquam inimicos Deorum. Grot.
v. 35. (...)] Nempe (...). Erat id ex vite factum ut Muciano auctore tradidit
Plinius. Sed quia fabricatio ejus omnem memoriam excedebat, ideo facile
facerdotes plebi persuasere, esse de coelo delapsum, ut Suidas notat in voce
(...). The like fictions had the Heathens concerning the Palladium of Troy, and
the Ancile of Rome.
v. 37. (...), etc.] Quia ne intraverant quidem templum, nec Dianam Ephesiam
speciatim nominaverant.
v. 38. (...)] Recte notat Suidas (...) dici diem, quo lites disceptantur. Ita
omnino scribendum in Actis, (...) and subaudiendum (...) dies quibus lege
agitur, quos fastos Romani vocant. vid. Causab. in Theophrasti Charact.
v. 39. (...)] Legitimus coetus est qui a Magistratu civitatis convocatur and
regitur.
SECT. XI.
PAul having thus by the wonderful providence of God escaped this danger (at
which he seems to point, 2 Cor. 8, 9, 10.), not long after, calling the
Brethren together, he took his leave, and departed from Ephesus, to go into
Macedonia, leaving Timothy there, (who was come again unto him from Macedonia),
to carry on the work of the Gospel in that place.

Act. 20. v. 1. And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the
disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia,

1 Timothy 1. v. 3. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou might charge some that they teach no other doctrine;

v. 4. Neither give heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister
questions, rather than godly edifying which is in faith: so do.

SECT. XII.
ABout this time (as it is conceived) Aquila and Priscilla leave Ephesus, and
return to Rome, having ventured their lives here to save Paul, as he himself
gratefully acknowledges Romans 16.3, 4. Many other Jews also from other quarters
returned to Rome, as is intimated Act. 28.21. the Edict of Claudius the Emperor
for their expulsion thence, now after his death wearing out of date.

SECT. XIII.
FRom Macedonia Paul first goes to Troas, where though there was a door opened
to him of the Lord to preach the Gospel, yet being troubled because he found
not Titus there, (whom he had sent to the Corinthians, with another Brother,
greatly desiring to know their state), he staid not long in that place; but
because he neither heard from Titus, nor any other, how his first Epistle had
took with the Corinthians, he thought it best to go directly into Macedonia (2
Cor. 2.12, 13.); which he traveled over, from place to place, exhorting the
Brethren with much exhortation, Act. 20.2. And when his afflictions there were
nothing abated, but without were fightings and contentions from false Brethren,
or open Enemies; within were fears, lest all did not go well at Corinth; at
last the coming of Titus, and the joyful message he brought concerning the
Liberality and Charity of the Corinthians did much comfort and revive him, 2
Cor. 7.5, 6. by whose example he provokes and stirs up the Macedonians to
provide Collections to be sent to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 9.2. And
the Macedonians being moved by this example, though laboring under many
pressures and afflictions, beyond their power showed themselves liberal. 2 Cor.
8.1, 2, 3, 4.

SECT. XIV.
Anno Christi Neronis 58 2.


THE Apostle having understood from Titus the present state and condition of the
Corinthians, sends him to them again; and with him, the Brother whose praise is
in the Gospel thorowout all the Churches, 2 Cor. 8.18. (supposed to be Luke),
and another whom he commends for his great diligence, 2 Cor. 8.22. And by them
he sends his second Epistle to them. For though his first failed not of a good
effect among many of them, yet some vainglorious Teachers persisted in their
contumacy, and not only vilified the Apostles authority, but presumed to
compare themselves with him, yea, to prefer themselves before him, to the no
small detriment and prejudice of the Gospel. And out of their ill will toward
him, they interpreted all his sayings and doings to the worst sense. He had
promised in the latter end of his former Epistle to come to them shortly. But
for certain reasons he did yet forbear to come. This they interpreted as an
argument of levity in him. He had in his fifth Chapter commanded the incestuous
person to be delivered over to Satan. This they interpreted as an argument of
his overgreat rigorousness and severity; and other things they ill
interpreted, as particularly, that he carried himself toward them, as if he
affected domination over them: That he overthew the Law, and made men carnal
and dissolute; that he was imperious in writing, though his person was abject
and contemptible. These and such like Calumnies of theirs, the Apostle sets
himself to refute in this Epistle: yet notwithstanding all this, he professes
his sincere love to them; but being forced to it by his Adversaries, he
resolves to vindicate himself and his Apostolic authority from their contempt.

In which Epistle we may observe these three parts. The Second Epi^ to the
Corinthia^


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
THE Preface contains the Direction of the Epistle to the Church at Corinth,
and to all the Saints, and Churches in Achaia, and his Apostolical salutation
and benediction. Ver. 1, 2.

The Body of the Epistle consists of three parts. In the 1st. He apologizes for
himself in the five first Chapters.

In the 2d. He exhorts the Corinthians to sundry duties. Chap. 6, 7, 8, 9.

In the 3d, He vindicates his own Authority and Doctrine. Chap. 10, 11, 12, and
to the 11th. ver. of Chap. 13.

In the first part, we may observe these particulars.

1st. Lest any of them should be offended at his many afflictions and troubles,
The first part of the Epistle.
and be tempted to think (as worldlings use to be), that if he were a faithful
Servant of God, he would not suffer him to be so extremely afflicted. He
thereupon begins his Epistle with solemn thanksgiving to God, for the comforts
he afforded him in those his trials, that so he might by his own experience be
able to comfort others that were in the like condition. For though his
sufferings for Christ were many, yet his consolations from Christ were many
also. And he tells them, that whether he was afflict^d, it tended to their
consolation and salvation, which is to be wrought out by a patient and
christian enduring such kind of afflictions as he endured, when they are called
to it: or whether he was comforted, it tended also to their consolation and
salvation; who by his example, might learn willingly to undergo afflictions for
Christ, that they might also partake of his consolations. And he had a steadfast
and firm hope concerning several of them, that they did sympathize with him in
his sufferings, and accordingly should partake with him in his comforts. From
Ver. 1. to 8.

2. He clears himself of some aspersions cast on him by false Teachers. As
first of levity in not coming to them according to his promise made, 1 Cor.
4.19. and 1 Cor. 16. from 2. to 8. And secondly of too much rigor toward the
incestuous person.

To the first, he answers, that he was hindered by that affliction he met with
in Asia, viz. at Ephesus, that was so great, that he even despaired of life.
The history of which, (as some conceive), we have Act. 19. Videntur indicari
illa pericula de quibus Act. 20.19. Grot. Cajetanus putat hujus tribulationis
nusquam alibi in Scriptura fieri mentionem.
, where it is intimated in what extreme danger his life was, so that he had no
humane means to escape it. Yet out of this danger God (who can deliver from
imminent death those, that are ready to dye, and can, and will raise up those
that are dead at the last day) delivered him, and he trusts will still deliver
him out of all such dangers; they affording him the help of their prayers
(which he earnestly desires) that so the mercy of such deliverances being
bestowed through the prayers and intercessions of many, God may be glorified
and praised by many for them. From Ver. 8. to 12.

2ly. He shows that the fairness and uprightness of his conversation, and
especially among the Corinthians (among whom he had conversed a year and half,
Act. 18.11.) might testify for him, that he was not acted by fleshly wisdom or
dissimulation, but by the grace of God. Neither did he write v. 13. Veram
lectionem esse arbitror quam secutus est Syrus, (...). Non alia vobis
scribimu^, (quam quae vera sunt scilicet) sed quae hic legitis, ea sic gesta
agnoscitis. Grot. in loc.

And I write no other things to you concerning my uprightness and sincerity
than what ye read of me in the Epistles I have sent to you and other Churches,
and which ye know of me, and I hope shall acknowledge the same unto the end.


any thing to them that was disagreeable to his professed sincerity, but those
things they here read, they cannot but acknowledge to be really so, and he hopes
to the end they shall always acknowledge him to be the same. And as it was
matter of rejoicing to them, that they were converted by him; so it was to him
that he had gained them to Christ, and so he hoped to glory in them at the last
day. And with this affection to them, and persuasion of their kindness to him,
he design^d to come unto them, that they might have a second benefit by him;
and be confirmed at his second coming, as they were converted at his first, and
that he might receive offices of kindness and friendship from them. And
therefore he did not make promis^s lightly and r^shly after the manner of
carnal men, (promising wh^t they intend not t^ perform), so that there should
be Etiam justorum, est Etiam, and eorum Non, est Non.
yea and nay with him, that is, saying and not doing concerning the same
things. For Christ Jesus whom he had preached among them, and whom he and they
ought to imitate, was not inconstant and changeable in his Promis^s; but
whatsoever is promised by him or of him, is certain and invariable. For all the
Promises of God, made in the Covenant of Grace, have their foundation, firm
establishment, and unalterable ratification in the death of Jesus Christ, the
Mediator and Surety thereof [Gal. 3.17. Heb. 9.15, 16, 17. and Chap. 7.22.],
and in and through him, are firm and steadfast, sure and certain; and he, and
the other Apostles ought to declare the same in their ministry, to the glory of
God. And he shows, that he that establishes and confirms both him and them in
their Faith in Christ, is God alone, who has anointed and consecrated them his
Apostles to this high office of the Apostleship, by plentifully pouring forth
upon them the gifts and graces of his Spirit, and thereby fitting them for it;
and by the Miracles he has enabled them to work, has set his Seal to their
Doctrine; and by the in^ffable, and glorious joys of his Spirit, wrought in
their hearts, has given them, as it were, an earnest and taste of their future
happiness: And therefore surely such persons as they, are not to be accused of
leightness and vanity. From Ver. 12. to 23.

Further he solemnly professes, that his end in delaying to come to them, was
to give some among them time to repent and reform, and that the disorders in
their Church might be rectified by themselves, lest when he came, he should be
compelled to use more severity among them, than they could well bear. And this
he spoke, not as one that arrogated to himself a dominion over their Faith,
(and designed to impose upon them in the matters that concerned their souls,
what he pleased), but as a minister and co-worker with Christ, to bring them to
a right and due sense of their faults, and consequently to that true joy and
comfort which follows upon true repentance and amendment; and so he should be a
means to strengthen their Faith in Christ, by which alone they stand in the
favor of God, and obtain a right and title to the Kingdom of Heaven. From Ver.
23, to the end.

He comes now in the second place, to vindicate himself from the aspersions of
rigor toward the incestuous person. In order to which, he tells them, that he
had no mind to come to them in such a manner, that his coming should bring
sadness, and heaviness to them, by reason of the severity he should be
necessitated to use toward the reforming of the evil manners among them. For
if he was forced upon such an occasion to grieve them, nothing could comfort
him so much, as the amendment of the person against whom he was forced to use
severity. And concerning this thing, viz. the amending of the faults among
them, he had written to them in his former Epistle [chap. 5.], lest if he
should come to them, and find any scandalous unreform'd persons among them,
besides his sorrow for their sin, he should be forced to a new sorrow, which
necessary severity would create both to them and himself: And he was confide^^
that they rather desired he should find matter of joy among them, by the
removal of such offenses, than matter of sorrow, by continuing of them. He
professes, that what he wrote in his former Epistle concerning the incestuous
person, was not written with any intention to grieve them, but out of his great
and abundant love to them, which could not endure that they should make
themselves guilty of such faults. He tells them, that the incestuous person's
sin, had not so wholly grieved him, as if they were all offenders with him; for
since he had proof of their obedience in their excommunicating of him, he did
sorrow but in part, only for his sake who was guilty, not for them all, they
having cleared themselves, that they were no upholders or maintainers of him in
his sin. And that it might appear that his former severity proc^eded not from
any other principle then love, and a desire of good to the Church of Corinth,
he declares, that the censure and chastizement inflicted on this incestuous
person by the authority of many (that is, the Governors of the Church, the
Church it self consenting) seeing he had manifested his repentance, was
sufficient. And sherefore he advises, that he be received into favor again,
because they were bound to f^rgive and comfort him now, as well as they were
bound to excommunicate him before; and this they ought the rather to do, lest
if they should not, he should be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow. Wherefore he
exhorts them, to confirm their love toward him, by showing, that by
excommunicating him they did not intend to destroy him, but to save him, by
bringing him to repentance. And for this end he had now written to them, to see
whether they would be as obedient to his directions and appointments, in
absolving of penitents, as in afflicting Church Censures on offenders. He tells
them, that whom they were willing to forgive and restore from excommunication
(being satisfied of their repentance), he was willing also to forgive, as one
present in spirit with them, see 1 Cor. 5. And if in the beginning of the
Church, before the orderly government of it was settled, he alone had received
some repenting sinners to mercy; he d d it, not out ^f ambition, but with
regard to them, to give them an example of showing lenity as well as severity;
and with respect to the person of Christ, that he might keep people steadfast in
the Faith of Christ; and that S^tan might not get an advantage against any of
them; who sometimes by too great slackness of Ecclesiastical discipline s^eks
to lull sinners asleep, and sometimes by too great severity endeavors to drive
them to despair. From Ver. 1. to 12.

3dly. He shows, he was so far from wanting any true affection to them, that
when he came to Troas See Act. 20.6. 1 Timothy 4.13.
, though a door See 1 Cor. 16.9.
was opened to him by the Lord for the preaching of the Gospel in that place,
yet he had no rest in his spirit because he found not Titus there, to inform
him of their state; and in pursuit of him he left that City, and went into
Macedonia, in hope that he might find him there, and having met with him he
understood by him the happy success of his former Epistle, and that caused him
to bless God exceedingly, who had hitherto so graciously prospered him in his
ministry, and had given him and his fellow-Apostles such a victory and conquest
in every place, (where they came to preach the word) by the conversion of so
many, and had spread the sweet odor or savor of the Gospel by their preaching
up and down in the world. And (says he) we spread this sweet savor of Christ,
(to the honor and glory of God), both among such as are thereby brought to
repent and believe, and among such as remain impenitent and unbelievers. To the
one, the Gospel is the most comfortable vital savor that ever came to them,
and a ministry of life See 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.
, and the power of God unto their Salvation; but to the other, by accident,
it is a savor of death Odor mortis in mortem, i. e. odor mortifer, mortem
afferens: Odor vitae in vitam, i. e. Odor vitalis, vitam afferens.
and aggravates their condemnation. And the preaching of this glorious Gospel,
he shows, is a weighty employment, and no man is sufficient of himself for it.
Lastly, he declares, that he was no corrupter of the Word, as many false
Teachers were, who mixed their own passi^ns of pride or covetousness with the
true Doctrine they preached; but he preached it out of uprightness and
sincerity, as one taught of God, and who eyed God in what he did, and was acted
by the power, and guided by the Spirit of Christ. From Ver. 12. to the end.

4ly. He shows it was not requisite he should go about to commend the fidelity
of his ministry, especially to them, considering they had been converted by it;
and therefore he needed not Letters commendatory to them (or from them to
others) such as the false Teachers possibly strove to commend themselves by;
for they themselves were his Ego Evangelium vestris inscripsi animis. Grot.
Epistle of commendation, given as it were by God to him, affording him a clear
Testimony of the soundness of his Doctrine, and the efficaciousness of his
Ministry, by their conversion; which Testimony being written in their hearts
Legendum puto (...) cordibus vestris, collatione versiculi tertii and ex re
ipsa. Pisc.
, and openly appearing in their Christian conversation, was legible to other
Churches, and accordingly acknowledged by them: yet he would not say, they were
so much his Epistle, as the Epistle of Christ, Christ himself having written
his Will and Law on their hearts, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, after a
more excellent manner than any thing was wont to be written with Ink upon
Paper; and he and Timothy were only the Pen or Instruments of the Spirit in
this writing Their Faith was the work of the Spirit, though, wrought by his
Ministry.
. And they had still a great confidence of being further instrumental in this
way, and of the acceptance of their endeavors with God, through Christ
enabling of them. Not that they were able by any natural wisdom of their own,
to think or contrive any thing that was fit to convert the hearts of men; but
their sufficiency was Gods assistance, who had made them fit or meet to be
Ministers of the New Testament, which is accompanied with the efficacious
operation of the Spirit, and not of the Old Testament which literally declared
what was to be done, but gave no spiritual ability for the doing and performing
of it. For the Old Testament, or old dispensation of the Covenant of Grace
(called here the Letter), though it shaddow'd out the way to life, yet
conferred not on fallen man any power to perform what is required thereunto, but
convinced him of sin, and consequently that he was worthy of death v. 6. Litera
occidit, i. e. convincit hominem quod sit aeternae morti obnoxious. Romans 7.10.
, which is threatened to transgressors. But the New Testament, or G^spel, does
not only clearly show the way to life and salvation by Faith in Christ Jesus,
but is also accompanied with the power of the Holy Ghost, whereby that Faith is
wrought, and whereby the Soul is raised up, and quickened from the death of
sin. Now if the Old Testament which was a ministration of death, and was
written in Letters, and engraven in Stones, (as to some part of it, to wit, the
Ten Commandments), was so glorious, as was signified by the splendour of Moses's
face, which the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold when he came
down from the Mount See Exodus 34:40.
; which Ministration was yet to be done away, (as far forth as it was opposite
to the Gospel Dispensation Abolitionem legis, cujus hic fit mentio, interpretor
de toto Veteri Testamento, quatenus Evangelio opponitur. Calv.
): How much more glorious is the Ministration of the New Testament, which is
accompanied with the quickening Spirit of God? If the Ministration of
Condemnation were glorious, how much shall the Ministration of Righteousness
and Justification excel in glory? So that the former, though in it self
glorious, yet when compared with the latter, has, as it were, no glory; it is
so far out-shin'd by it: and if that Administration which was to be abolished
was glorious, surely that which is to continue is much more glorious. From
hence he infers, that seeing himself and the other Apostles had such hope that
their Ministry should be accepted and owned by God, they used the greater
boldness in publishing the Gospel; and did not imitate Moses, who veiled his
face, which was a sign of the obscurity of the Legal Administration, and of the
blindness of the Jews, who could not see the end and scope of that which was to
be abolished, but generally rested in the outward letter Volunt vitam aeternam
per legem, quae nullibi in lege promissa est. Gro^.
, and apprehended not the mysteries hid under those shaddows, and to this day,
the veil remained upon their hearts untaken away, in the reading of the Old
Testament. But in the New Testament, by the clear Doctrine of Christ, this
cov^ring or v^il is done away. Nevertheless, when their hearts shall be turned
to the Lord, and shall own Christ, then the veil shall be done away as to them
also, and they shall clearly see and understand what is now hid from them. For
Christ is that quickening Spirit who takes away the veil and powerfully changes
the heart; and where his Spirit powerfully works, there is liberty and freedom
from the yoke of the legal Administration, and from slavery to sin. And as
Moses when he went to appear before the Lord put away the covering from his
face, and by his converse with God his face became more and more shining and
glorious, so (says he) all we who have received the Spirit of the Lord, do with
open face, without any veil or covering, clearly behold the glorious Attributes
of God, and the glorious manifestations of his grace, mercy, and wisdom shining
in the face of Jesus Christ, (as in a mirror or glass), and thereby are
transformed into his Image, and are made like to him in the glory of holiness
and grace, growing from one glorious measure and degree of it to another,
through the operation of his Holy Spirit. From Ver. 1. to the end.

5ly. He professes diligence and faithfulness in preaching this glorious
Gospel, letter and of death, but of the spirit and life); and that,
notwithstanding all his troubles, he fainted not, nor was discouraged. He
declares that he had renounced ambition and covetousness (which some secretly
allowed themselves in), and that he did not was walk craftily, nor handle the
word of God Dolo tractant verbum Dei qui hominibus placent, aut partem very
tacent, aut falsa admiscent. Grot.
deceitfully, so as to accommodate it to the corrupt humors and dispositions of
men; but he preached the truth sincerely, and endeavored to approve himself to
the Consciences of all those, who would judge understandingly and uprightly. He
tells them, If the Gospel so clearly preached, be not understood by many
worldly wise men, that is no argument of the obscurity of it; but of the
incredulity of the hearers, who are blinded by the Devil, whom the world
generally serves, and who (by the just judgment of God) has got such a
dominion over multitudes, that they serve him as their God Sic vocatus tum a
suberbia quae sibi arrogat honorem Dei, and vult adorari ut Deus; tum a
potentia quia haec obtinet in reprobis, qui sunt major pars seculi, Zanch. Vide
Joh. 12.31. Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12.
; and by him it is that they are so blinded, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ cannot shine into their hearts, wherein is manifested the
Majesty of Christ's person, and the sovereign Excellency of his benefits, and
that he is the Image of God, the Eternal Word and Wisdom of the Father, by whom
the Glory, Wisdom, Righteousness, Grace, and Power of the Father is revealed to
us, and presented before us. He further manifests his fidelity, by showing
them, he sought to advance the glory of Christ in his preaching, and not
himself, acknowledging himself a servant to Christ, and to his people for the
promoting of Christ's interest in them. For he humbly acknowledges, that God,
who at first by his omnipotent word produced light out of darkness, by no less
efficacy and power brought him (a lost sinner) out of the darkness of
Pharisaism and sin, and shined into his heart with his glorious light, to the
intent that he should communicate and impart this divine light of the knowledge
of God, which shines in the face or person of Jesus Christ, unto others. It Is
true, the glory of God shon once in the face of Moses, but that was covered and
veiled: But it shines much more gloriously now in the face of Christ, and is
not covered to us. As a man sees the Fathers countenance in the face of his
Son; so God represents himself most lively, sweetly, and savingly in Jesus
Christ, But he tells them, that himself and his fellow-Apostles, (who were
entrusted with this rich treasure of the Gospel) were but earthen Vessels,
frail and contemptible, and exposed to many sufferings, that the success of the
Gospel preached by them, might be imputed to Christ alone, and not to them.
From Ver. 1. to 8.

6ly. He shows, they had no reason to be offended at his sufferings, nor to
object, that if he had preach^d the Gospel sincerely, God would not have
permitted him to be so persecuted and afflicted. He tells them, all his
afflictions were so moderated, and himself so upheld by God, that he sunk not
under the burden of them. We are troubled (says he) on every side, but are not
brought into such streights as to be overwhelmed; perplexed Haesitamus, sed non
prorsus haeremus. Beza.
sometimes, and doubtful what to do in great dangers, but not brought so low as
utterly to despair of help; persecuted by men, but not forsaken of God; cast
down indeed, but not utterly destroyed; so that in our sufferings we represent
the death and passion of Christ Jesus; and are in continual danger of death for
Christ's sake, that it may appear we are supported by the quickening power of the
Spirit ^f Christ under all these afflictions; so that death is wrought (...)
hic sumitur passive. Grot.
in us, that is, the preaching of the Gospel exposes us to the dangers of
death, and yet our ministry brings eternal life to you: we dye, that is, are
expos^d to death, that you may live eternally in happiness. And we having the
same spirit of Faith which was in holy David when he wrote the 116 Psalm, where
at v. 10, he says, Because I believed therefore I spoke, I was sore afflicted,
etc. As he (I say) being in many troubles believed, and testified his
confidence in God for deliverance, so likewise do we, being assured that he Deo
Patri tribuitur excitatio Christi e mortuis, Act. 3.15.
that raised Christ from the dead, will raise us up also by Christ, and will
present us glorious together with you, if ye believe. All these things, says
he, viz. the dangers we have been in, and the deliverances God has afforded to
us, they all tend to your advantage, and to the confirming of your Faith, and
the increasing of your thankfulness, that so the benefit having abounded, and
the mercy of God having extended it self to many persons, by the thanksgiving
of many for it, more glory may red^und to God. And for this cause (says the
Apostle) we faint not, nor are slack and sluggish in our work. For though these
Bodies of ours be attenuated and weakened by so many afflictions, yet our inward
man, our minds and Souls grow more strong and vigorous. For our transitory
light afflictions (to speak of them comparatively), are so accepted by God,
that they work Operari dicuntur nobis gloriam, non meriti modo Romans 8.18. sed
ratione misericordiae promittentis Dei. Slat.
for us, (not for any merit in them, but through Gods free grace and mercy, and
Christ's merits), a most excellent eternal weight of glory, we having our minds
intent by Faith, not on things visible and temporal, but on things invisible
and eternal. From Ver. 8. to the end.

7ly. Having mentioned this eternal glory, he proceeds to describe it,
testifying his assurance that after this mortal body of his, which is but an
earthly tabernacle shall be broken down, his Soul shall (...)] Praesens pro
futuro. Grot.
have a building made by God, that is, an immortal glorious body (see 1 Cor.
15.44, 46.) divinely made and fitted for Heaven, and the fruitions and
employments of that glorious place. He shows, that while he is in this mortal
body he groans by reason of his daily troubles, desiring earnestly to be
clothed with that glorious Body Apostolus duas hic metaphoras conjungit; una
petitur a Domo, secunda a Vest. Solent enim Hebraei, ^ quos hic imitatur),
multas metaphoras simul implicare, and convolvere. Id videre est, tum in
Prophetis, tum in Psalmis, tum in Parabolis Christi. Nolumus exspoliari], scil.
corpore, ut anima nuda, solaque beatur; sed supervestiti gloria coelesti.
. This he speaks upon supposition Si non dies iste deprehendat cum corpore, non
exutos corpore; si erimus inter mutandos, non inter mortuos. Grot.

Si tamen (...), i. e, Si vestiti carne and corpore, non ea nudati per mortem
inveniamur. Apostolus enim ita loqui solet de resurrectione, and die judicii,
quasi ea instet, and quasi eam ipse cum aliis tunc viventibus sit visurus. Vide
1 These. 4. ult.


that he be found clothed with his mortal body, that is, alive at Christ's
Second Coming, and not naked, that is, unclothed of it by death. For he tells
them, that himself and many other Saints, being burdened with sin and many
other evils in this life, desire (if it so pleased God) that they might put on
this blessed immortality without a dissolution Domum] i. e. Corpus gloriosum.

Optaremus superindui gloria, non spoliari vita. Paulus, and mori desiderat,
and tamen carne exspoliari formidat.


, as it will happen to the Children of God that are found alive at Christ's
Second Coming, that so this mortal life may be exchanged, yea swallowed up by
that which is life indeed. And that he might give them further assurance of
this future happin^ss, he tells them, G^d had prepared them to be capable of
this heavenly glory in their Souls, and of this blissful immortality in their
Bodies, by working a work of grace in their hearts, and by giving them his Holy
Spirit Et, Quia hanc gloriam, and vitam aeternam quasi haereditatem speramus,
ejusque pignus Spiritum Sanctum accepimus; ideo audemus quaevis ardua, and
agere, and pati.
as an earnest and pledge to assure them thereof. Therefore they b^re up with
courage under all afflictions, and could look death it self cheerfully in the
face, as kn^wing that that will bring them home to God, from whom th^se earthly
Bodies keep them as strangers at a distance Dum sumus in hoc corpore,
peregrinamur a Domino] i. e. absentes sumus a Domino (de quo v. 9.) festinamus
ergo, and peroptamus Illi praesentes esse.
. For here (says he) we live by Faith only, and cannot attain to sight and
fruition till we come to Heaven. And hence it is, that we bear up with so much
courage against the fear of death, being willing rather to go out of this Body,
and dye, that by this means we may come to our home, to enjoy the blissfull
presence of God in Heaven, than to continue in the Body and be deprived of that
happiness. So that all our ambition and design is this, that whether we
continue in this mortal Body, or go out of it; whether we live or dye, we may
be accepted of God, and may come at last to enjoy his blessed presence in
Heaven. For we with full assurance expect a day of Judgment, at which all must
appear, and at which every one shall receive according to their works (...)] ea
quae corpori ipsius, i. e. ipsi, debentur. Grot.
. And knowing the terribleness of that judgment, we do the more earnestly
persuade men to come in to Christ, and to live as those that must be thus
judged. But whether they would be persuaded or no, he tells them, the sincerity
of his intention was manifested to God, and he hoped to their Consciences also.
He shows, he speaks not these things to commend himself to them, but to furnish
them how to answer the Calumnies that false Teachers brought against him, who
gloried much outwardly, ^ut knew in their hearts and Consciences they had
little reason so to do. And if I seem mad, says he, in thus comm^nding my
ministry and sincerity unto you, I aim at G^ds glory therein, (that the Gospel
may not be undervalued), and not to arrogate to my self any thing. And on the
other side, if I write and speak only that which you must needs account sober,
it is for your good and edification. For the love of Christ constrains me to be
faithful to him, and to refer all to his honor and praise, seeing he so loved
us, as to lay down his life for us, when we were all dead in respect of the
desert of our sins, and the claim of divine justice: And he has done it, that
all that are delivered from deserved perdition; through faith in his blood,
should not live to themselves, but to the honor and praise of their Redeemer.
And for his own part, he professes, he was so highly affected with this great
redemption wrought by Christ, that he could not value any man, or esteem him
happy, merely for the outward advantages of this world, viz. for his wisdom,
riches, learning, etc. except he had a share in this Redemption. And if he
himself formerly has had carnal and earthly thoughts and hopes of Christ (as
many of the other Jews had) expecting that he should begin an earthly temporal
Kingdom among them, wherein they should enjoy all outward prosperity, yet now
he should know him so no more, but put off all such carnal imaginations of his
Kingdom. For his Kingdom (he tells them) was of another nature, and whosoever
is in him, (not externally only, by outward profession, but is really inserted
and implanted into him by Faith, and made a member of that mystical body
whereof he is the head), is renewed by his Spirit, and receives life,
influence, and direction from him, and is thereby effectually changed, and made
a new creature, as to his principles, affections, and practices. And he shows,
that all these things that concern the new creature, or the renovation of man,
depend on G d as the Author of them, who of his free grace reconciles sinners
to himself, by the death of his Son, and has committed to them, his Apostles,
the ministry of reconciliation, giving them commission to declare, that God was
in and through the merits and intercession of his Son, ready to be reconciled
to all those, both among Jews and Gentiles, that truly believe in him; and upon
their Faith in him, he did actually pardon them, not imputing their trespasses
to them. And he had entrusted them, his Apostles, to publish the same in his
name. And accordingly, as Ambassadors for Christ, and as sent from God on this
great Message, they most affectionately besought sinners to accept of the
reconciliation offered by God in and through Christ Jesus; who being an
innocent, pure, and sinless person, God sent into the world to offer up himself
a Sacrifice for our sins [Lev. 7.2.], that we by Faith resting on him, might be
made fully righteous, with such a righteousness as God approves, and accepts,
and for which he is pleased to justify us. From Ver. 1. to the end.

The Second part of the Epistle.
Having dispatched the Apologetical, or Excusatory part of his Epistle, he comes
now to the Hortatory part of it; wherein we may take notice of these
particulars.

1. He exhorts the Corinthians, not to receive in vain the Doctrine of Grace
and Reconciliation, which was offered to them by him, as an Ambassador of
Christ, and a co-worker with him, this being the very season and time wherein
God did open the treasures of his mercy and bounty to poor sinners. So that he
might accommodate that which was promised to the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 49. v. 8.
to this present time, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
salvation have I helped thee, Prophetice ponitur praeteritum pro futuro.
Exaudivi, i. e. Exaudiam.
: Which words, though in the first sense they were a Promise to Isaiah, that
God would bless his ministry to that people, (which he had prayed for); yet in
a more sublime sense, they may intimate, that in the times of the G^spel, God
would, upon the intercession of his Son, work effectually upon the hearts of
sinners by the preaching of his word. And that this exhortation may be the more
effectual, he shows, how he and his fellow-Apostles had labored to avoid all
occasions of giving any just offense, approving themselves faithful Ministers
of Christ (so that their ministry could not justly be blamed), by a patient
suffering of several sorts of evils, by the exercise of purity, and the study
Anselmus per scientiam intelligit cognitionem sacrae Scripturae.
of the holy Scriptures, by longsuffering, and kindness, and love unfeigned, by
the exercise of the gifts of the Spirit, and clearly preaching the truth of
God, being accompanied therein with the power of God enabling them to work
miracles, and to convince the obstinate, and having on the armor of
Righteousness for the right A dextris and sinistris] Quasi dicat, Undique
armati adversus omnia.

Armis justitiae dextris and sinistris] i. e. offensivis and defensivis.
Capellus.


hand, and for the left; that is, being furnished with weapons offensive, and
defensive, against all assaults and temptations, either of a prosp^rous or
adverse condition. And this, whether they were honored or despised, well
reported of or reproached, though counted deceivers when they were most
faithful, and while by some doubted of, whether they were the sincere Servants
of Christ, or no, though by others owned and acknowledged; while by reason of
the greatness and multitude of their afflictions they seem daily dying, yet by
the special favor and protection of God are still preserved. They seemed sad
indeed sometimes under the evils that oppressed them, but yet rejoiced in
spirit, and had the inward testimony of their Conscience, and the comforts of
the Holy Ghost to support them: They were poor in respect of worldly things,
yet enriched many with spiritual riches. They had in a manner nothing, yet were
so well provided for by the special providence of God, that they wanted nothing
needful or necessary for them, and were as well contented as if they were
Masters of all things. From Ver. 1. to 11.

2. He declares his great love toward them, and exhorts them, to show the like
again toward him. He tells them, he used freedom and largeness in speaking to
them, his mouth was opened, and his heart enlarged toward them, and they had a
large place in his affections; but he doubted whether he had so large a place
in theirs: he feared they were straightened in love and affection toward him: and
yet in way of recompense, it was no more than just and fit, they should, like
good Children, answer the affections of their spiritual Father. From Ver. 11.
to 14.

3ly. He exhorts them to avoid all intimate fellowship v. 14. (...) Est alteram
partem jugi trahere, i. e idem jugum subire. Ne sitis filii unius jugi cum iis
qui non credunt.

Jugum ducere] commercium inire, jugari, and copulari; metaphora a bobus jugo
colligatis.


in marriages, or otherwise, with infidels and idolaters, whereby they might he
brought into communion with their idolatry, or other sins, there being no more
agreement between a Believer and an Infidel, than between light and darkness,
between Christ and Belial. For they that believe in Christ are the Temple of
the living God, as he proves, partly out of Lev. 26.11, 12. partly out of Ezekiel.
37.26, 27. Therefore with the words of the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 52. v. 11. he
exhorts them to abstain, as much as they could, from the Society of Idolaters,
and not to touch the unclean thing, that is, not to join with them in their
sinful actions; and then God promises to receive them, and own them for his
Sons, and Daughters as it is Jer. 31.1, 9. From Ver. 14. to the end.

And having such precious promises, he exhorts them to abstain not only from
Ver. 1.

4ly. He exhorts them to receive him, their Apostle, into the bos^m of their
love, seeing he had not given them any cause of distaste, either by wronging
any of them in their reputation, or corrupting any of them in their judgments,
or defrauding any of them in their estates. And these things he spoke for his
own vindication, not to reproach them: for he had such an affection for them,
that he could be content (if God saw it good) even to live and dye with them.
And though he spoke freely of their faults to themselves, yet he gloried of
them to others, and was exceedingly comforted in the midst of all his
afflictions, by the report he heard of their repentance. He shows, that when he
was come from Ephesus into Macedonia, [Act. 20.1. See Sect. 13 of Chapter 6.
], though he met with great oppositions from some there, yet the fears he had
concerning them were very troublesome to him. But he was exceedingly comforted
by the coming of Titus; and it was not his bare presence that was so much a
comfort to him, as the news that he brought, (with which he himself was also
much comforted), viz. the news of their earnest desire to see him, their
mourning for the sins he had in his former Epistle charged them with, and their
zeal to defend him against his Calumniators, the false Teachers. And though in
his former Epistle he had written something sharply to them, by reason of their
many enormities, yet he did not now repent of it, though it is true he was once
sorry he had done it, lest such as were innocent among them should think
themselves struck-at, in those his reprehensions. But though that Epistle did
for a while grieve them, yet now he was glad he had written it, not merely
because he had grieved them, but because it had brought them to a Godly sorrow,
for the evils that were among them, so that they received no damage at all, but
much advantage thereby. For a right sense and sorrow for sin, wrought by the
Spirit of God, works true repentance and reformation never to be repented of;
whereas worldly sorrows, occasioned only by disgraces, or worldly losses or
crosses, usually increases sin and misery, and works diseases and death. Now
that their sorrow was from God, he assures himself by the excellent fruits and
effects of it. 1. Their carefulness to amend what was amiss. 2. Their clearing
themselves, that they did not approve the fact of the incestuous person. 3.
Their indignation against that sin, and their own neglect of censuring of him.
4. Their fear of divine vengeance if they persisted in that neglect. 5. Their
desire of taking away the scandal, and satisfying all good men by proceeding
against him. 6. Their zeal to execute what the Apostle had commanded for the
removing this scandal, and this evil from among them. 7. The revenge which they
exercised upon the incestuous person by excommunicating him; by all which, they
declared their repentance to be sincere, and that they did not at all approve
of that miscarriage, but were clear from it. Wherefore he tells them, that he
wrote not to them* only, or chiefly, that the incestuous person might be
punished, and satisfaction made to his Father, whose Wife he had taken unto
himself See Genesis 49 4.
, but that the singular care he had of the welfare of their Church, to remove
sin and scandal, might be manifested unto them. Further, he shows them, that he
was much comforted for the comfort they had received in the course they had
taken with the incestuous person, and the more also for their kind reception of
Titus, whose spirit was much revived and refreshed by them. And as all things
that he himself had spoken to them they found to be true, so all the good he
had spoken of them to Titus, he by experience found to be true also. He tells
them, that Titus's affection was much toward them, remembering with what ready
obedience and humility they received him, as an Evangelist, and a more than
ordinary Servant of God sent unto them. Lastly, he acquaints them that he much
rejoiced, that from his own experience of them, he might confidently promise
himself, and others, all good from them. From Ver. 2. to the end.

5. He exhorts them now, to a liberal contribution to the poor Saints of Judea,
using several arguments to persuade to it. 1. From the example of the
Macedonians, into whose hearts God had put that excellent gift and grace of
Charity; of whom he boasts, as those who had great joy and peace v. 2. In
priore membro subaud^endum est suit. Magnum fuit eorum gaudium, (nempe ex pace
conscientiae, ut supra 6. 10.) etiam tum cum per adversa maxima explorarentur.
Grot.
in their Consciences, even then when they were exercised with great outward
afflictions, and who gave liberaly and bountifully, even in their deep poverty
Ipsorum summa paupertas, i. e. Ipsi Macedones valde pauperes exundarunt in
egregiam liberalitatem.
; yea, gave beyond their ability. He shows, how instead of being entreated by
him, they earnestly desired him to receive their Charity and Collection, and
that he with others would take upon him to dispense their alms; so that they
did more than he could hope or expect v. 5. Non hoc tantum fecere quod
sperabamus, subaudite (...).
, giving themselves first to God, and afterward committing themselves to him,
and his Apostolical care, to be guided and g^verned by him according to the
will of God* 2. Because he had desired Titus to go to them, and as he had begun
to stir them up to this duty, and to exercise this grace at his first coming to
them; so he would further promote and finish it. 3. Because they abounded in
other graces and gifts, viz. in faith, in ability to instruct others, in
knowledge, in care of the salvation of their Brethren, and in love toward
himself, their Apostle; therefore they ought to abound in this grace also. 4.
Because hereby they would testify the sincerity of their love to the Saints;
which he mentioned not to them, as commanding them, but as moving them thereto,
even by the example of the Macedonians. 5. Because Christ (who was Lord of all)
emptied himself (Phil. 2.5.), that they, and all others that believe in him,
might be enriched with his spiritual and heavenly blessings; therefore for his
sake it was fit they should be ready to distribute. 6. It was expedient for
them, in respect of their reputation and the future reward they might expect,
that this good work which they had begun a year ago v. 10. Genus loquendi
inversum. Gr.
(and that with great forwardness and readiness of mind) should be carried on;
yet according to their ability, and the proportion of their estates: for God
values not so much the quantity of the gift, as the good will and cheerful mind
of the giver. He tells them, it was not his intent to overburden or impoverish
them, to ease others, but that things equal and just should be done; that you
(says he) supplying the present poverty of the Christians in Judea out of your
fullness; if you should hereafter want, and they be full, they should by a just
retribution supply your wants. As in the collection of Manna [Exod. 16.], God
commanded that they which gathered more, than the prescribed measure, (which
was an Omer for every single person) should give to him, who had gathered less;
so God would have it, that they that have great riches should impart of their
abundance, to them who are in want. 7. He further excites them to this duty
because several faithful Brethren were stirred up by God, and sent by him, not
only to promote this collection, but also to carry it to the poor Saints in
Judea; and he hopes they will not frustrate the expectation of such worthy
persons; the first of whom was Titus, who took upon him to exhort and move them
hereunto, and being very diligent, willingly traveled unto them. The other is
supposed to be Barnabas, who was highly praised in all the Churches, for his
excellent gift in preaching the Gospel; and was by the Churches suffrage made
Paul's Companion, and sent with the same diaconary charge, which was administered
by Paul, for the glory of God, and their encouragement (c). And he shows, (...)
Vide Knatchbull. in loc.
why he joined to himself persons of so great integrity in this charge and
ministry, lest evil-minded men should suspect him of dishonesty, if he alone
should manage that business of receiving and distributing so great
contributions as were m^de by the Churches. And he tells them, he must provide
for a good reputation before men, as well as labor for a good Conscience
before God. He mentions a third whom he sent with Titus and Barnabas (whether
Luke, or Apollos, or another is uncertain) whom he often had found faithful,
and now very ready to come unto them, upon the special confidence He has
toward you, (...).
he has of their goodness and liberality. And as for the persons that are
entrusted in this business, he shows, they are such as they may have confidence
in. As for Titus, he was his Companion and fellow labourer in strengthening and
confirming them in the Faith, and correcting things amiss among them. And for
the other Brethren, he tells them, they are the Messengers of the Churches,
sent to gather this contribution, and persons in wh^m the grace of Christ
eminently shines, and such by whom the honor of Christ is singularly promoted.
Wherefore he desires them to show unto them, and so consequently to all the
Churches whose Messengers they were, a proof of their love; and so they would
manifest that his boasting of them has not been without reason. From Ver. 1.
to the end.

Having thus assured them concerning the integrity of the Messengers, he
proceeds Macedonians, that the Christians of Achaia (of which Corinth was the
chief City) had made a preparation to supply the poor Saints of Judea, a year
ago; and their zeal therein, had provoked many to the like forwardness. However
he had sent these Brethren that they might find true what he had boasted of
them; and that (as he said before) they might be ready at his coming, and not
surprised, having this warning given them before hand. For otherwise when he
came with some of Macedonia accompanying him, if they should not have their
supplies ready, it would tend to his and their disgrace. Therefore he sent
these Brethren to them before hand, to exhort them to get their collections
ready before he came, that so their beneficence may appear to be their own free
bounty, and not a collection difficultly extorted from them Ut extortum
aliquid* (...). Metonym. efficientis. (...) significat plus habendi
cupiditatem. Pisc.
, as from covetous men, who give grudgingly and unwillingly. From Ver. 1. to 6.

In the next place he exhorts them, to give liberally and freely, because the
reward will be proportioned to their freeness therein; and to give cheerfully,
and willingly (every one as he is prompted by his own heart, for God loves a
cheerful giver. And lest they should fear their Charity might bring themselves
to wants and straights, he shows, that God is able (and having promised it,
they may expect it) to make them the richer for their liberality, so that what
they give shall return to them with usury and increase v. 8. (...)] Gratiam, i.
e. omne donum, quicquid donaveritis. Vatab.
. As it is said of the liberal Almsgiver, Psalm. 112.9. that, He shall evermore
continue to show himself righteous v. 9. (...), hic est Misecordia. Vide Hos.
10.12.
, that is, bountiful, and shall have enough all the days of his life wherewith
to exercise his liberality: so far shall he be from wanting. And as God
blesses the increase of the Earth so largely, that it suffices for the
nourishment of men, and for seed to sow again; so he prays, that G^d would
supply all their pr^sent wants, and also grant them such pl^nty and ability,
that they may be liberal still toward others, and that he would incre^se and
multiply to them the rewards and fruits of their righteousness and mercy. That
being thus enriched by the goodness of God, and abounding unto all
b^untifulness (...), hic est candida liberalitas.
, many prayers may be rendered to God by those, to whom he and his Colleagues
should distribute their Alms. For he tells them, what he and they had
undertaken, ( viz. the distribution of their collecti^n) would not only supply
the necessities of the Saints, but occasion abundant thanksgivings unto God;
and so be, not only an act of charity in the Givers, but an occasion of piety
also in the Receivers. And this their liberality would be a pro^f that they did
truly subject themselves to the Gospel of Christ (which injoins Charity and
Almsgiving) and would occasion many to glorify God for it, and for their
readiness in communicating unto them, and unto others that are in want, as
occasion required. And lastly, they will ende^v^ur to be thankful to them as
they are able, by their hearty prayers to God for them, and by their longing
after and earnestly desiring their welfare, rejoicing exceedingly for that
great measure of grace God had bestowed on them. He conconcludes this whole
matter with thanksgiving unto God for that great gift of Charity he had
bestowed on them, which inclined their hearts, in so liberal a manner, to
relieve the necessities of the Saints (which gift he cannot sufficiently
commend) whereby much glory redounds to God, and much honor to the Christian
profession. From Ver. 6. to the end.

The third part of the Epistle.
He comes now to the third part of his Epistle; wherein,

1. He vindicates his authority from the contempt cast upon it by false
Teachers, his speech contemptible, but when absent, bold and severe. He
therefore beseeches them by the gentleness and meekness of Christ (whom he was
not ashamed to imitate) not to interpret this his behavior among them
otherwise than they ought. He tells them, he desires and wishes that when he
comes he may not be forced to use his power with that boldness, which he
thought to use against some of them, who accused him of a weak carriage and
behavior in his Apostleship, as either fearing or flattering men, and so
walking carnally, and being too mild on one of those grounds. For though he was
not free from humane infirmities and weaknesses, yet he did not exercise his
Apostleship in a weak manner, or by weak weapons. For the weapons he used were
spiritual, viz. Christian fortitude, zeal, freedom in speaking the truth of
God, and courage in administering the censures of the Church, which had a divine
force upon the Conscience, to throw down the strong holds of carnal wisdom, and
the corrupt reasonings and proud conceits, by which corrupt m^n think to defend
themselves, either in their errors or vices, against the Gospel, having in
readiness that which serv^s to revenge all disobedience upon the refractory,
(viz. excommunication), which he was resolved to make use of against such
persons, when the Corinthians, (to wit, the greater part of them) shall have
made good their obedience, and reduced themselves to good order again *, having
been seduced by these false Teachers. He tells them, they ought not to judge of
him, or of the power of his Apostleship and Ministry, by his external humble
and mild behavior among them, which seemed to some of them so vile. He shows,
that he may (and that justly) be compared with any of those that emulate him.
For by all those arguments, by which any of them can prove he is a Disciple of
Christ's, he may conclude the same of him also. Nay if he should pretend to some
more authority from Christ (being an Apostle) than has been given to others,
(and that for the advantage and not the hurt of any), he might make it good.
And that his Epistles may not seem only Bug-bears (as his Calumniators
affirmed, saying, that his Letters were indeed severe and authoritative, but
his personal presence weak, and his speech contemptible), he tells them, that
such as his Letters and Words are when he is absent, such shall his
performances be when he shall be present among them. From Ver. 1. to 12.

2ly. In the next place, he refells the vain brags of the false Apostles; who
arrogated to themselves the things they never did. He tells them, (Ironically),
he will not compare himself with those Boast^rs, that so highly magnified
themselves, and took so much upon them; yet he suggests, how foolish they were
in judging of themselves by their own s^lf-conceit, and the opinion that such
as were like them had of them, without looking upon others, to whom the Lord
had imparted greater gifts and power, such as were the Apostles. But whatever
they did, he s^ys, he will not b^ast of things without the bounds which God
has measured to him, as if he had converted those whom he did not convert; or
as if he had authority over those, that are not within those bounds; but would
contain himself within the measure, line, and bounds assigned him by God, which
certainly reached unto the Corinthians. For though the Apostles had commission
to preach unto all Nations, yet they betook themselves unto several parts, and
were careful not to interrupt or hinder one another, nor to enter upon one
another labors; but the false Apostles ranged where they listed, and
arrogated to themselves the conversion of those, where the true Apostles had
before planted the Faith. He shows, by extending his inspection and authority
to them, he did not over-extend it, or go beyond his line, as they do, who
intrude into, and boast of other m^ns labors; for he had advanced as far as to
them in the preaching of the Gospel, and had first planted the Faith among
them. He tells them, he would not pretend any Title to those whom others have
converted, (as was the manner of his Emul^t^rs), but yet he hoped, that when
the Corinthians shall be more strength^ned in the Faith, they will deal with
their Neighbors to entertain the Gospel, and to be willing to hear him preach
it to them, and so the borders of his ministry (through them) shall be more
abundantly enlarged, and that according to the rule of his calling, to whom the
Apostleship of the Gentiles was committed. And so he shall preach the Gospel
beyond Achaia, without entering on those parts where the Gospel had been
formerly preached by others, or arrogating to himself what they had done. But
that he may not seem to glory in himself, or in the gifts of God as his own, he
shows, that no man ought to attribute or refer any thing he h^th to himself,
but to acknowledge all his Talents to come from God, and to ascribe the success
of all his gifts and endeavors entirely unto Him. For no m^n is approved
because he conceits well of himself, or commends himself; but he that approves
his heart and ways to God, and seeks his glory, He is accepted, accounted of,
and approved by Him. From Ver. 12. to the end.

3ly. That he may further vindicate himself and his Apostleship from the
contempt Corinthians to bear with him a little in his just and necessary
self-commendation, which he acknowledges had a show of folly in it. He tells
them, the reason that moved him to it, was his holy jealousy for them. For he
had by the preaching of the Gospel brought them to believe in Christ, and so
betrothed them to him. And the Contract being made in this life, and the
Marriage to be celebrated at the last day, [R^v. 19 7.], he desired he might as
a faithful Paranymph present them then a pure and chaste Virgin, a spotless
Church to Christ. But he feared lest as Eve was seduced by the subtilty of the
Devil, so their minds should be corrupted by false Apostles, and seduced from
the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, and drawn to admit of human mixtures, and
Jewish antiquated observances. He tells them, that if any of th^se false
Teachers could acquaint them with another Savior then he had preached, or
bestow on them more excellent gifts of the Spirit, than they (by his ministry)
had received, or could preach another Gospel, (which was of God), they might
well b^ar with them in their boasting. But that being imp^ssible, they might
well bear with him in his modest gl^rying, by whose preaching they had been
brought to the kn^wledg of Christ. And he tells them, he would not only compare
himself with those D^ceiv^rs, but he thought he might justly compare himself
with the most eminent of the true Apostles, [^ven P^ter, J^m s, and John, Gal.
2 6.]. And th^u^h he was held to be rude in speech, by those proud Boasters of
their Eloquence; yet n^ne could im^gine him to be so in knowledge or skill in
the mysteries of Salvation, which was sufficiently known to the Corinthians
themselves, as were also his other gifts. From Ver. 1. to 7.

4ly. He shows them, that it ought not to be esteemed a fault in him, that he
so much tendered their advantage, and so little his own, as to preach the Gospel
gratis and freely to them; and that he humbled himself so low, as to work with
his own hands to get his maintenance, (whilst he preached unto them), that they
might be exalted to the high dignity of knowing and believing in Christ. It Is
true, when he was among them he was sometimes in want, but he troubled none of
them, but sometimes wrought with his own hands to get his Bread, [1 Cor. 4.12.
and 9.6.], and som^times was supplied by the Macedonian Philippians, [Phil.
4.15.]. And as he had not been burdensome to them hitherto, so neither did he
intend to be; and he solemnly prof^ss^s that no man shall deprive him of this
matter, of boasting in th^se parts. Yet he d^sires them not to think it was
want of love to them that made him thus resolve, (for he could appe^l to God as
to the sincerity of his love to them), but he did it to cut off occasion from
f^lse Apostles, who sought to traduce him; and to demonstrate, that if they
gloried that they preached freely and gratis, (as possibly they might, now and
then out of cunning do), yet therein they should be found to do no more, nay
not so much as he. For these men (he tells them) are deceitful workers, seeming
to do the same things that the true Apostles of Christ did as Satan himself
will pretend sometimes to be like a good Angel, and th^r^f^re it is no wonder if
his Ministers imitate him, whose end shall be according to their works From
Ver. 7. to 16.

He deprecates again the censure of folly in this his necessitated boasting,
and desires them to bear v. 16. (...) forte, tolerate.
with him, and to suffer him a little further to expatiate himself in this
matter. He confesses he speaks this, as it were, and in appearance not after
the Lord; for the Spirit of God in the Scripture, no where advises us to
commend our selves, or glory of our gifts, but rather the contrary. He
acknowleges, it was unbeseeming him thus to boast, and therefore he did as it
were, foolishly to go on in this confident boasting, if they looked upon the
outward thing only, and did not mark the scope and end of it, which was to
vindicate himself and his ministry from the aspersions of these false Apostles.
But se^ing they did glory in outward things, he would assume that liberty to
himself also And he hoped they would bear with him in it, seeing wise m^n, (so
h^ Ironically calls those among them, who were apt to be puffed up with a conceit
of their own wisdom), do often with pleasure bear with fools; and they, as wise
as they were, did bear with far greater faults in his adversaries. For they
suffered themselves to be imposed upon by these false Teachers, to be
tyrannized over, to be exhausted, to be contum^liously used, and smitten as it
were on the face, that is, upbraided to their very faces, because they had
subjected themselves to so mean and weak a person as Paul, an Handicrafts-man.
But whatever they thought of him, he assures them, that in whatsoever any of
those false Apostles had cause to boast or speak boldly of themselves, he had
much more. He was not only equal to them in outward privileges, (as nobility
of Race, etc.), but superior in office, (being more than an ordinary Apostle of
Christ), having undergone both from Jews and G^ntiles, m^re sufferings,
labors, and dangers of imminent death, than any of the very Twelve Apostles,
as he proves by sundry particulars v. 25. The three Shipwracks of the Apostle
are not mentioned in the history of the Acts, for that of Act. 27.42. can be
none of the e, seeing it happened long after. It seems he was a day and a night
upon some parcel of the wreck.
, [See chapter 6. v. 5. and chapter 1. v. 9, 10. and chapter 4. v. 11, 12. and 1 Cor.
15.30, 31.]. And besides th^se outward sufferings, a pressing inward care and
solicitude for all the Churches lay upon him. If any were we^k and w^vering in
Faith, he trembl^d for them, apprehending their danger. If any, through the
folly or sin of others, were scandalized, and in danger of falling, he was
i^flam'd with a holy zeal to have them set right again. And seeing he was
constrained b^ his adversaries to glory, he would glory in his sufferings
(...)] Sic vocat in hac disputatione tota, molestias sive extrinsecas, sive
intrinsecas: vel quod, cum iis premimur, aliis infirmi videmur and
contemptibiles; vel quod tum potissimum imbecillitatem humanam prodimus per
impatientiam, murmurationes, and similia. Slat. in loc.
and affl^ctions for the Gospel, Gods strength having been so eminently
manifested in his weakness and infirmities; and that he spoke true, God was his
Witness. Among other of his afflictions, he would not omit that trouble which
he met with at D^mascus in the beginning of his ministry, wh^re he wonderfully
escaped the hands of the Jews, being let down in a Basket over the walls of the
City, [see Act. 9.24.]. From Ver. 16. to the end.

He comes now to another kind of holy glorying, wherein yet he acknowledges
visions and revelations which he had from G d; one of which was this; About
fourteen years ago, He v. 2. A man in Christ, that is, a Christian.
was rapt up into the Third Heaven, Act. 22.17. (which thing he had kept to
himself for so many years, and had not now d^clar^d it, had not the importunity
of his adversaries forced him to it), and it was doubtful to himself, whether
in this visi^n his Soul were abstracted from his body, or whether he were
bodily transported and carried to the Third Heaven. But however it was, there
he had such r^v lations made to him, as were very wonderful, but he had no
commissi^n to declare them to others Quamvis quaenam fuerint haec arema
explicari non possit, verisimile t^men est fuisse illa quae ad statum vitae
aeternae, and ad conditionem beatorum pertinent. Freidlib Sicut Moses
intellexit omnem illam dispensationem, qua Deus populum Israeliticum tuebatur
ac regebat, sic Paulus illam per quam Christus Ecclesiam suam gubernat. Unde
factum est ut ad danda consilia aptior fuerit ipso Petro, sed haec quae
intellexerat vetitus est nunciare. Grot.

Some understand those unspeakable words, of such words only as concerned Paul's
particular confirmation, and preparation for those conflicts he was to undergo.
Otherwise he revealed the whole Counsel of God the Churches, Act. 20.27.


. And though he might justly boast of himself, [as thus exalted], in ref^rence
to the glory of God, yet of himself, [barely considered]* he would not boast
nor glory in any thing, but only in his sufferings for Christ. Yet if he had a
mind to glory of this revelation, he might do it without vanity, it being most
cert^inly true; but he would forbear l^st he should thereby give occasion to
any to overvalue him, and to think m^re highly of him, than his common
behavi^ur, ( viz. his ordin^ry actions and words), gave them reason to do. Yet
he would not conceal this from them, that after he had th^s^ high revelations,
that he might not be too much ex^lted with them, there was given to him a thorn
Motio scil. concupiscentiae aliqua ad porro peccandum tendens. Dickson. See
Romans 7. Miserable man that I am, who shalll deliver me, etc. Others, Angelus
Satan, that is, Satan himself did furiously set upon him to sh^ke his Faith and
sincerity: with which buffeting the Apostle was much d sheartned for the
present, and hindered in his business, as by a thorn in the foot, with which a
man can go but lamely, and with pain.

Ego Conscient^ae terrentis stimulos fuisse reor. Slat.

Dolorem auriculae vel capitis significari ait Tertul^ianas de pudicitia.
Carnis and Corporis multa ac gravia tormenta, Cyprianus. A Satana autem morbos
etiam piis immiti, Deo id sinente, ex Jobi historia discimus. Vid. and Luc. 13,
16.


in the flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him; for deliverance from which,
he earnestly besought the Lord, and received this gracious answer, that though
God would not suddenly remove this temptation from him, yet he would support
him by his grace against it and would manifest his own strength v. 9. (...)] h.
e. per sectius agnoscitur.
in the Ap^stles weakness; and the more he was assaulted, he would confer on
him the more power and strength to overcome. He tells them therefore, that he
rather chose to glory in his afflictions and crosses, than in his revelations,
as by which he had experience of the power and presence of Christ, covering and
sheltring of him, and being his safety and protection. And he was perfectly
pleased with his sufferings for Christ's sake; for then the strength of Christ
did more manifest it self in him; and the heavier his pressures were, the
greater were his supports. And when he was weak in himself, he was strong in
Christ. From Ver. 1. to 11.

He comes now to excuse his boasting, and to show, that they compelled him to
it, and might have saved him this labor, by defending him themselves, if they
had done as they ought. For he had done and suffered as much as any of the
eminentest Apostles, (through the grace of God that assisted him, 1 Cor.
15.10.) though of himself he was nothing, [1 Cor. 3.7.]. He shows, they had
^vident arguments, and plain demonstrations, that he was indeed an Apostle of
Christ, both by his patient suffering of afflictions, as also by the mighty
deeds and miraculous works he had done among them. And they had as great and
illustrious gifts of the Spirit bestowed on them by his ministry, as any other
Church whatsoever, either founded by him or any other Apostle. Only they
differed from from others in this, that all was done for them gratis v. 13.
(...)] Non fui piger vestri damno. Non sumpsi a vobis quae me a manuum labor
liberarent. Vid. supra 11.8, 9. Grot.
. From Ver. 11. to 14.

He tells them, he now prepared himself a third time to come to them, having
been twice crossed in this his design before, [see 1 Cor. 16.5. 2 Cor. 1.15,
16.]; and he intended to do it without putting them to charge; for he coveted
not their possessions, but their salvation. And as natural Parents usually lay
up for, and give to their Children, and do not take from them; so he desired,
as their spiritual Father, to enrich them with spiritual good things, and not
to take from them any of their temporals. Nay, he was willing to spend and to
be spent for them, though they no way answered his love; and received the false
Apostles, his Emulators, and made more of them, than of him their spiritual
Father. But (says he) it will be objected by some, that though I was not
burdensome to you my self, yet I have cunningly and underhand gotten a great
deal from you by my Emissaries. To that he answers, that neither Titus, (whom
he desired to go to them), nor any other v. 18. (...)] Qui putatur Lucas.
he had sent among them, did make any kind of gain of them, but behaved
themselves just after the same manner he had done, being guided by the same
Spirit, and walking in the same steps. From Ver. 14. to 19.

He shows, he did not speak all this, merely to purge himself (...) ^^fend his
own innocence, but to maintain his Apostol^ck authority, tha^ (...) ^^proofs
and exhortations might be of more force and effect among them, and so for their
good, which he heartily desired, as he solemnly protests v 19. I speak as a
Christian, or man in Christ, in the presence of God.
. For he fears, when he comes among them, he shall not find them such as he
would, but guilty of many sins, and that will force him to be severe in his
censures. He fears he shall find some among them fallen into enormous crimes,
and continuing in them without repentance, and that will occasion great-heart
grief to him, much humiliation and dejection of mind, and necessitate him to
exercise his Apostolic authority among them in censuring of them, From Ver.
19. to the end.

He tells them again, how he was now a third time preparing to come to [see chapter
12. 14.], and if the things amiss among them were not amended, he would punish
the committers of them; and such as were convicted of their crimes by the
testimony of two or three witnesses [as the Law injoins, Deuteronomy. 19.15] shall be
exclud^d from Church Communion. As he told them before, so he tells them now,
(as if he were present with them), that in case there be no amendment among
them, he will make use of his Apostolic power, (which was very great and
extraordinary), by which he inflicted not only spiritual censures, but
sometimes also corporal punishments, as appears by the instance of Bar Jesus,
whom he smote with blindness, Act. 13.11. And they did tempt him thereunto, in
that they required a proof from him, whether Christ's power did concur with his
ministry and jurisdiction, and whether Christ would ratify his censures, by
his judgments following them. He shows, that Christ had owned him, and
manifested his power in his ministry among them, by converting many of them,
and bestowing the gifts of his Spirit upon them, and by many signs and
miracles, which he enabled him to do in the midst of them and by his exercise
of spiritual discipline among them. And as Christ appeared to be a weak and a
frail man by being crucified, but was evidenced to be God omnipotent by his
rising from the dead; so he tells them, if they look upon him, as in himself,
and in respect of the afflictions he has been exercised with, he may appear a
mere weak and ordinary man, and to be weak with Christ, and therein like and
conformable to him; but yet they should find, that he would show a resemblance
of Christ's life and strength [2 Cor. 10.3.], and that the power of Christ
lives in him, and does manifest it self in him, against impenitent and
contumacious sinners. And since they seek a proof of Christ's speaking in him,
(who first preached the Gospel among them); he bids them look to it, and to
examine themselves, whether they be in the Faith, (that is, have a true Faith
in them), and whether they be in the state of true Believers, and whether
Christ live in them by his Spirit; which they will find to be so, except for
the present they are only mere counterfeit unapproved Professors of
Christianity. But whatever they were, he hoped he should not be found such an
one himself, but a faithful Servant of Christ, and a true Apostle. From Ver. 1.
to 7.

Drawing now toward a Conclusion, he tells them, that he earnestly prays and
desires they may do that which is good and right, and may abstain from all
evil. And he prayed thus for them, because he had rather have them good, than
having occasion, by punishing their evil manners, to testify himself an
approved and faithful Apostle. For he passes not for his own credit or
reputation, how he be esteemed, so their salvation may be promoted. And if they
be innocent, and walk in the truth, they had no reason to fear his authority;
for the end of it was to uphold innocence, truth, and righteousness, and only
to suppress the contrary; and in this sense, the stronger they were, and more
vigorous in the actions of the spiritual life, and the more they disarmed him
by their innocence and harmless walking, of his Apostolic power to censure the
obstinate, the more it pleased him. For he desired nothing more, than that all
things might be brought into good order among them, and the members of the
Church which had been put out by Church c^nsures might be restored, and s^t
right again v. 9. (...) est in recta constitutio, reconcinnatio.
. Therefore he used the more severity in his Letters, that when he came he
might not be forced to exercise his authority with sharpness; for the end of it
was principally edification, and not destruction, but only by accident, and in
case of willful and final impenitency. From Ver. 7. to 11.

He concludes his Epistle, seriously exhorting them to union (...), Be knit
together.
among themselves, to be of good comfort in their sufferings for Christ, and to
live in peace, praying, that God who is the Author and Injoiner of love and
peace may be with them, and dwell among them with his favorable presence. He
exhorts them, according to the custom of those Eastern Churches; to salute one
another with a holy kiss, as a token of unity, sincere love, and honor; and so
with his accustomed Salutation, he bids them Farewell. From Ver. 11. to the end.

SECT. XV.
THE Apostle (as it seems) shortly after this, from Macedonia comes into
Greece, and there stays three months, Act. 20.2, 3. And about this time he
seems to have written his first Epistle to Timothy, then at Ephesus, whom he
had besought to abide there, for the better ordering, instructing, and
establishing of that Church.

Timothy signifies an Honourer of God; and so he proved, both in Doctrine and
Conversation, according to the happy omen and presage of his Name. He is
supposed to be of Lystra, (a City of Lycaonia in Asia Act. 16 1, 2. compared
with Act. 14.6.
), for there the Brethren reported well of him. His Father was a Greek, and a
Proselyte; his Mother a Jewess, Daughter of Lois, both sincere Believers. They
trained him up from a Child in the Holy Scriptures 2 Timothy 1.5. and 3.14, 15.
, so that Paul was persuaded that the like unfeigned Faith dwelt in him as did
in his pious Mother and Grandmother. His Father being a Greek, a
Gentile-Proselyte, and uncircumcised, Timothy was not circumcised in his
infancy after the custom of the Jews, but being come to maturity Paul
circumcised him Act. 16.3.
, for the gaining of the Jews, by his ministry. The Apostle made him his
Companion in his travels throughout the Churches far and near, whom he most
diligently and faithfully served in the work of the Lord, sometimes being left
with the Churches newly planted, further to instruct them, sometimes being sent
as a Messenger to comfort and establish them. Though he had many bodily
infirmities upon him, yet he abounded with many eminent graces and gifts, and
in process of time being ordained a Minister, with imposition of the hands of
the Presbytery, he so approved himself in that office, that he became most
affectionately dear to Paul, insomuch that he makes frequent and honorable
mention of him, especially to the Philippians, chapter 2.19, 20. I have no man like
minded, who will naturally care for your state; for all seek their own, not the
things which are Jesus Christ's. But ye know the proof of him, that as a Son
with the Father he has served with me in the Gospel. And elsewhere he dignifies
him with excellent titles, calling him his Brother, his beloved Son, and
faithful in the Lord, his natural Son in the Faith, his fellow laborer in the
Gospel of Christ, yea he joins Timothy with himself in the inscriptions of
diverse Epistles to the Churches, that so he might both commend Timothy's worth
and authority to the Churches; and also propound him as an exemplary pattern to
all faithful Ministers. From Corinth he accompanied Paul into Asia, and when
they came to Ephesus, the Apostle besought him to abide. there to instruct that
Church; touching which employment the Apostle now gives him sundry Precepts and
Directions throughout this whole Epistle.

In which Epistle there are three parts.

^he First Epistle to Timothy.
1. The Preface. 2. The Matter or Substance of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
Preface he asserts his Apostolical authority from the command of God, (whom he
styles our Savior, because he gives us Salvation by Christ See Luke 1.47. Tit.
1.3.
), and from the c^mmand of Jesus Christ, who is the ground and object of our
hope. He directs his Epistle to Timothy, whom he calls his own Son in the
Faith, either because he had gained him to the Faith of Christ; or else,
because he was his Disciple, and resembled him in Faith, and Doctrine, and holy
Conversation, as a Son resembles his Father in face and manners. From Ver. 1, 2.

After the Preface he comes to the Body of the Epistle; wherein, 1. He tells
him, that he left him at Ephesus v. 3. Sicut te monui manner Ephesi] Supple ita
and nunc moneo.
, to take care that no strange heterod^x Doctrines be broached in that Church,
and that Fables Quia inanes il^ae speculationes otiosae sunt and in^erminatae,
quarum nec usus est, nec sinis. Vid. cap. 4. v. 7. and 6.4. 2 Timothy 2.23. Tit.
1.14. and 3 9.

v. 4. Gene^logia^ vocat infinitas, i. e nunquam terminandas aut satis liquido
explicandas Illas quaestiones negat praebere aedificationem Dei, i. e.
profectum in solida veraque pietate, qui fit proprie per fidem; quae
aedificatio a Deo venit eique probatur, ac ab eo exigitur, eoque Illius dicitur.


, and Jewish Genealogies, and praeterscriptural Traditions be not heeded or
regarded, which rather occasion perplex disputes, than edifying in true piety
toward God, and in the Faith of Christ. Ver. 3, 4.

2ly. Because some false Teachers seemed to be carried with a perverse zeal to
the Law, and mingled Faith and Works in the point of Justification; he shows,
that the true end of the Law, and the main scope and drift of it was Love,
(viz. to God and our Neighbor), springing from a pure heart, and a ^^^d
Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, which some not rightly understanding have been
carried aside to vain discourses. And while they affect to be thought learned
Teachers, and Expounders of the Law, they betray their own ignorance, not
understanding either what they say, or what they affirm. But here some of his
Adversaries might object, that by saying thus, he showed himself not very well
affected toward the Law. He answers, he did not at all detract from the Law
(in reproving those that abused it), but rather commended and taught the right
use of it. For he acknowledges, that the Law rightly understood and preached,
was very good, and given for, and serves to excellent purposes, if we make use
of it as we ought, not seeking to be justified by the observation of it, but to
be directed by it in our obedience, as a perfect rule of life; and to be
brought by it unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. But yet notwithstanding, they were to
know that in respect of its damnatory and terrifying use, ( viz. to constrain
to obedience for fear of punishment), so it was not given to the righteous Lex
lata est, non ut fideles justificati jam per fidem in Christum, justificarentur
per legem (sicut perversi legis doctores intendebant) sed ut injusti and
infideles (quales sunt omnes flagitiosi and profani) per legem condemnati, suam
injustitiam, and meritam condemnationem agnoscerent, resipiscerent, and ad
Christum consugerent.

Lex justo non est posita] i. e. Non est lata ad justos coercendos. Justi enim
sponte sua, se conformant legi, amore justitiae and obedientiae, non timore
poenae, quam lex transgressoribus minatur, sed lata est ut minis suis, and
poenis coerceat impios. Corn. a Lap.

Chrysostomus hosce duos usus in diversis personis commoda similitudine
explicat, quod, Sicut fraenum domat, and cohibet ferocem equum; domitum autem,
and obedientem tantum regit in via recta; si^ Lex praefractos securosque
peccatores domat, pios vero tantum regit, eisque rectam vitae normam mons^^at.

Lex justo non est posita] h. e. Maledictio legis incumbit tantum petulantibus
legi^ transgressoribu^, non autem justis, etc.


, but to the unrighteous and wicked, to lawless and disorderly persons. It was
given to condemn all sins that are against the sound Doctrine, which is
according to, and taught in the Gospel, (wherein the glorious mercy of God is
displayed), and to restrain disorderly persons from such crimes: so that the
Gospel agrees with the Law, as to the right regulating of men's lives and
manners: for the sins forbidden in the Law, are contrary also to the Gospel.
From Verse. 1. to Verse. 12.

3ly Having m^ntion'd the G spel, which was committed to him by Jesus Christ,
he takes occasion from thence to assert the Authority of his Apostl^ship
against th^se that d^nied it, or by reason of his former course of life, did
endeavor to l^ssen it. And, 1. He gives solemn thanks to Christ who committed
that great tru^t of preaching the Gospel to him, and enabled him to preach it
with suc^^ss, and esteemed him faithful, (giving him grace to be so), and
honored him with the office of an Apostle, who was before a Blasphemer and a
Persecutor, yet n^twithstanding mercy was showed him, because he did it
ignorantly through a false zeal, not rightly informed; and the goodness of God
(he acknowledges) abounded toward him, in drawing him to believe in Christ,
and removing his former unbelief, working in him l ve to Christ and his Gospel,
notwithstanding his former opposition against it; which graces of Faith and
Love Christ requires and frames in the hearts of all his Members by his
Spirit, [see 2 Timothy 1.13.], giving them a right knowledge of himself, and the
benefits that are obtainable by him. He further declares, that it need not seem
incredible that so wonderful mercy and favor was showed to him, seeing this is
most certain and true, that Christ came into the world to manifest his mercy to
sinners, yea great sinners, of which number he had reason to reckon himself to
be one, because of his persecuting the Church of God [see 1 Cor. 15.9.]. He
further shows, that the Lord had set him f^rth for an example and pattern of
his long-suffering, mercy, and admirable grace, that sinners to the end of the
World, (who shall hear of his wonderful conversion, and the bounty of Christ
toward him), may be assured of his readiness to receive sinners, and may, upon
their repentance and believing in him, expect the like goodness and kindness
from him t^wards themselves. And thus the Ap stle being ravished with a sweet
sense of the greatness of Gods mercy to him, concludes this whole matter with a
pathetick doxology or thanksgiving. From Ver. 12. to 18.

4ly. He charges Timothy to carry himself courageously in the ex^cuti^n of his
ministry against all discouragements and oppositions whatsoever, encouraging
himself by the Prophesies of holy men, that were uttered before of him, n^mely,
that he would war a good warfare, (in defense of the Gospel) joining sound
Doctrine with a good Conscience, and a good holy life; and so should escape the
dreadful ruin of those, who falling first into impure courses of life,
afterward fall into foul errors, and depart from the sound Doctrine they
before embraced: Such were Alexander and Hymenaeus, [who, it seems, denied the
Resurrection, 2 Timothy 2.14. and 18.], whom he had by excommunication delivered
up to Satan, to chasten and afflict them, that so they might repent and come to
an acknowledgment of their errors, and might take heed for the future of
blaspheming or speaking evil of wholesome Doctrine and the truths of God. From
Ver. 18. to the end.

5ly. He instructs Timothy concerning public prayer, showing him first for it
is to be made. In general, for all sorts of men; particularly, for Kings, and
all in authority, that Christians may lead a peaceable and quiet life under
them in all godliness and honesty. And the reasons he gives for it are these;
1. Because this is pleasing to G^d, whose will it is, that some of all sorts of
men should come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved, and therefore some
among Kings and Magistrates as well as others. And, 2ly. Because there is but
one God, who is the Creator of all Nations, and one Mediater between God and
man, Christ Jesus, who died for all sorts, and gave himself a ransom (or price
of redemption) for all kinds, orders, and degrees of men whatsoever; and this
great truth God designed in his due time to reveal and manifest, and therefore
it was now to be declared and published in Christian assemblies by their making
prayers and intercessions for all sorts of men. And particularly, he shows,
that the publishing this Doctrine was in an especial manner c mmitted to him,
and he was sent of God to instruct the Gentiles therein, (who where accounted
the worst of men), and to teach them Faith in Christ, and all other necessary
Truths. And this he solemnly protests to be true, that name of the Jews might
be scandalized at his preaching to the Gentiles. 2ly. He shows, where public
prayer is to be made, viz. every where, in any place without exception, where
the Church-assembly meets, (all ceremonial d^stinction of places being now
removed), and that men be enjoined, when they come to pray, to lift up holy
hands free from injustice and oppression, and to pray with hearts free from
hatred and malice Maimonides in regulis orandi, Si quis senserit animum sibi
commotum, and cor turgens, ne oret; sed quiescat dum men's sit sedata.
, or doubting of the truth of Gods Promises. He requires also, that Women, when
they come into the Church Assemblies to join in prayer and other duties, should
be very modestly attired; and that they should study rather to exceed others in
good works, than brave Clothes. And that they set themselves quietly to learn
and receive instruction in the Church Assemblies, and not presume or take upon
them to teach; for that were to usurp authority over the man, which he utterly
forbids, for two reasons; 1. Because the man was first formed, and the woman
out of him; and that may serve to denote, her subordination to, and dependence
on him. 2ly. The woman was first deceived and seduced, and became Satan's
instrument to seduce her Husband to transgress Gods Commandment; whence God
imposed upon her, subjection to her Husband, and sorrow in Childbearing, Genesis
3.16. But lest women should be too much discouraged at this, he c mfortably
levisies what he had said, by assuring them, that notwithstanding this their
sorrow and danger in Child bearing, they may be saved as well as men, if they
persevere in faith, love, sanctity, sobriety, and modesty. From Ver. 8. to the
end.

6ly. He comes now to instruct him concerning Church officers, viz. Bishops and
Deacons, showing him, how they, and how their wives ought to be qualified. And
first he premises, that the Pastoral office is an honorable Function, and
commends those who being fitly qualified, and duly called, do out of sincere
ends undertake it, viz. that by laboring in the Gospel they may bring men to
eternal Salvation. Then he sets down Sixteen requisites to a good Bishop. He
must be blameless, that is, free from scandal; the husband of one wife, no
Polygamist; vigilant over his Flock, to preserve them from seduction; sober and
temperate; of good behavior, gravely weighing and considering his words and
actions, and carrying himself so as not to expose himself to contempt; given to
hospitality, ready to entertain and refresh those that are in need, according
to his ability, especially strangers and banished Christians; apt to teach,
well instructed in the Doctrine of Christianity, and skilful to divide the word
aright, and to accommodate his teaching to the edification of his auditors; not
given to wine, no striker; not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient; not a
brawler; nor covetous; one that governs his own Family well, else he cannot in
reason be thought fit to take care of the Church of God; not a novice, that is,
one n^wly instructed in the Faith, and planted in the Church, and not
sufficiently experienced in the mysteries of the Gospel, lest being lifted up
with pride and vanity, he fall into condemnation with the Devil, who for his
pride was cast out of Heaven into the torments of Hell, 2 Pet. 2 4. likewise
that he be of an unstained reputation, even among those that have not yet
embraced the Faith, lest being upbraided by them for his former wickedness, he
be tempted to seek occasions to revenge himself, which is a great snare of the
Devil; or lest the Devil make use of those reproaches to ensnare others, and
give them aversions to the Doctrine of such a man, who is under so much scandal
for his former life. He shows also, how Deacons must be qualified, prescribing,
that they should be proved and tried concerning their sufficiency, piety, and
good behavior. He shows, they must be sober and grave persons; not cunning and
deceitful, not given to excess in drinking, not greedy of filthy lucre; but
such as being orthodox in point of Faith, live pure and Christian lives,
according to the Doctrine and directions of the Gospel. He declares, that they
must be no Polygamists, as too many in that age (it seems) were, but the
Husbands of one Wife at once; and such as govern their Children and their
Families well. And lest any should despise the Deaconship as a mean office, he
shows, that those who faithfully discharge this office Qui Diaconi munere been
suncti sunt, si Presbyteri fiant, liberius and cum majori fiducia aliis
Evangelium praedicabunt.
, purchase to themselves a good degree of respect, and also lay a foundation of
rising to a higher degree in the Church, and if they come to be Presbyters,
they preach the Gospel, or the Doctrine ^f Faith (...), hic ponitur pro
Doctrina ipsa, ut Gal. 3.23. and alibi saepe, Grot.
in Christ with greater boldness and confidence. From Ver. 1. to 14.

7ly. He shows him, why he gave him these Directions, namely, that he might
kn^w h^w to behave himself in the Church, which is the House or Family of God,
in which he dwells by his Spirit, and wherein he is truly worshipped; which
Church is the Pillar or Basis of Evangelical truth, holding it forth, and
publishing it to the world; sustaining it and keeping it from sinking. Now of
this Evangelical truth he sets down six principal heads and mysteries 1. That
Christ the Eternal Son of God, took on him our nature, and did visibly appear
among men in an humane shape. 2ly. That he was justified by the Spirit, by or
by his Divine Nature, by which he raised himself from the dead, and
consequently demonstrated himself to be the Eternal Son of God, and proved
himself to be just and innocent, although he was condemned as a Malefactor by
the Jews and Gentiles, [Rom. 1.4. 1 Pet. 3.18.]. 3. That he was seen and
attended, acknowledged, and adored by Angels at his birth [Luk. 2.14.], at his
temptation [Math. 4.11.], at his passion [Luk. 22.43.], at his resurrection
[Luk. 24 4.], of which things they were glorious witnesses, [Math. 28.2. 1 Pet.
1.12.]. 4ly. That he was preached by his Apostles among the Gentiles as well as
the Jews. 5. That he was believed on by many in the several Nations of the
World; the sound of his Gospel going out into all the Earth, [Rom. 10.18. Col.
1.5, 6.]. 6ly. He was visibly and with a glorious appearance of Angels received
up into Heaven, from whence sending down the Holy Ghost, and giving gifts unto
men, to this very day he manifests the glory of his Deity. These are the
Doctrines which he orders the Church should hold fast, from whence all the rest
derive their original and establishment. From Ver. 14. to the end.

8ly. He now prophetically warns Timothy, (that he may forewarn the So the
times of the New Testament are called from the spreading abroad of the Gospel
to the end of the World.

Appellatione (...) intelligitur totum illud t^mpor s spacium quod inter primum
and secundum Coristi advent^m intercedit ^ T^m. 3. 2 Pet. 3 3 1 John 2.18. G^th
in loc.


times, [or in the following times]; which defection was expressly revealed to
him by the Holy Ghost. The cause of which defection he shows, would be the
arising of seducing Spirits, who being hypocrites, and men of feared
Consciences, would preach and propagate Doctrines of Devils See Medes Apostasy
of the latter times.
, that is, whereof the Devil is the Author and Fomentor, forbidding marriage,
(to some me^), which God allows, and ertain meats, (at some times), whereas God
allows a free use of his good Creatures to Believers, and permits those who
know and believe the Gospel freely to partake of them, with thanksgiving; all
difference of meats, being taken away under the New Testament, and every
Creature Sanctificatur, i. e. fit mundum Act. 10.15.
sanctified, (that is, made holy and lawful for us to use, 1 Cor. 7.14. Tit.
1.15.), by the word of God certifying us, and warranting us, that we may
lawfully use it; and by prayer, which must be put up to God that it may be made
wholesome and blessed to us. From Ver. 1. to 6.

9ly. He gives Timothy several Exhortations, in reference to his ministerial
office. As first, To suggest th^se things, which the Apostle had taught him,
frequently to the Brethren, whereby he would approve himself a good Minister of
Christ, and one nourished Enutritus] Potest etiam active accipi enutriens
illos: est enim participium medium apud Graecos l'atablus. Vel innutritus
sermonibus fidei bonaeque doctrinae, i. e. Verbo Christi vero, and sincero, ceu
spirituali cibo, nutritus and educatus.
up with the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, which he had attained to by the
Apostles preaching. And 2ly. That he should avoid Jewish Fables, and human
Traditions, (which are no more to be valued than old Wives Fables), and
exercise himself unto real Godliness. For bodily exercise, such as outward
austerities, abstinences from meats, and such like voluntary afflictings of
themselves, prescribed by men, are not the things wherein man's true holiness
before God consists. For though these things may be of some use in some cases,
yet they are but of little value in comparison of true Godliness, seeing they
do only tame the body, not sanctify and change the heart, as a lively faith
and love, and the fear of God, do. And then these may be abused and degenerate
into superstition, (as the Apostle testifies, Col. 2.23.), but true Godliness
is always acceptable unto God, and profitable unto men, having promises of
happiness both in this life and that which is to come, annexed to it. This, he
shows, was a true saying, and very worthy to be received. And for rejecting the
inventions of men, and defending and maintaining true Godliness, (which
consists in Faith and Obedience); he shows, he labored and suffered reproach,
having confidence in Gods promise made to true piety, and in his salvation, who
as he is (in respect of outward preservations) the Preserver of Men and Beasts,
Psalm. 36.6, 7. so he affords more especial preservations to Believers in this
life, when he sees it conducing to his glory and their good), but assuredly and
certainly, he will preserve them from eternal misery in the other world. These
things he charges Timothy to teach and inculcate. 3ly. He exhorts him, to give
no occasion that his Youth be despised, but to supply what was wanting to him
in age, with gravity of manners; and to be an example to Believers in speech
and conversation, in charity, in spiritual zeal, and holy affections, in
faithfulness and fidelity in his office, and lastly, in all purity. 4ly. He
exhorts him, to be diligent in reading the Scriptures, and in the preaching the
Word, while he had an opportunity to stay there; for when the Apostle came
thither, he must go along with him, and accompany him in his travels. He
exhorts him, not to neglect the gift or office that was given him at his
Ordination Paul laid hands on him in the Name of the Presbytery, and together
with other Presbyters, among whom for the time he was President, by which
imposition of hands they signified, that the man was consecrated and dedicated
to God.
, because this office was committed to him by a special prophetic revelation
given to some Prophet, that he should be taken into the ministry, and should
prove an eminent instrument therein, [see chapter 1.18. 2 Timothy 16.7.]. He exhorts
him, to meditate on the things that concerned his Function, and to give himself
up wholly unto them, that his improvements in all the parts of his ministry may
be manifested to all. And lastly, that he should take heed to himself and his
Doctrine Attend tibi, ut recte vivas: attend doctrinae, ut recte alios
instituas.
, and continue so doing, which would conduce to his own and his hearers eternal
salvation. From Ver. 6. to the end.

10ly. In the next place, he directs him, how to order and temper his reproofs,
elder and younger men and women. The elder sort, he shows, must not be dealt
with roughly and rigidly, but with due respect to their age, according to the
fifth Commandment. The younger sort must be treated with all kindness and
friendliness; and he must look that he behave himself with all purity in the
discharge of this duty. Ver. 1, 2.

11ly. He gives Precepts concerning poor widows, who were to be Servants of the
Church, as Deaconesses, and to be kept by the public charge of the Church,
which he calls honoring of them He speaks of widows who were to be Servants
of the Church, Romans 16.1. and to live upon the Churches contribution, which he
calls an honoring of them, because the Church testified thereby the virtues of
those so sustained, and that they were worthy persons.
; for so their repution would be preserved, whereas if they should be reduced
to extreme poverty they would be contemptible. He shows, what kind of widows
are thus to be maintained. 1. Such as have neither Children nor Grandchildren
to perform this duty duty of piety (...), quandoque significat, pietatis
officio fungi erga Parents, ut apud Virgil. Tum pius Aeneas.
to them, (which is so acceptable to God), and to take care of them, as part of
their Family; this being due by way of gratitude to Parents who have done so
much for their Children; and therefore Children should imitate the Stork (...).
herein, which Bird is famous for nourishing and cherishing its aged Parents,
and as it were, endeavoring to requite them. 2. Such as being destitute of
friends, have none to trust in and rely upon, but God alone, (who is the Father
of the widows and the fatherless, Psalm. 68.6.), and such as daily Tam assidue
quam fieri potest. Grot. vide 1 These. 2.9. and 3.10. 2 These. 3.8. 2 Timothy 1.3.
give themselves to the exercises of piety and devotion, as Anna did, Luke
2.36. 3. Such as are not of the number of wanton widows, who indulge themselves
in idleness and pleasure, being as it were dead while they live, both in
respect of God whom they do not serve, and in respect of humane society which
they do not benefit. These Precepts he gives, that none but blameless persons
may be taken into the Church's allowance, and those that are really
necessitous. And that the Church may not be unnecessarily burdened, he
declares, that if any man or woman provide not for those of their own family,
(if they be able), they do that which is utterly incompatible with the
Christian Faith, of which they make profession, and are worse than infidels,
who even by the light of Nature use to do this. 4ly. He orders, that no widows
be admitted into the number of those that are to be maintained by the Church,
but such an one as is not under sixty years of age Agit Apostolus de illis
Viduis quarum opera in cura aegrotorum, and pauperum, utebantur. Romans 16.1.
, and that has been the wife of h.e. Quae sua culpa non transivit ad secundas
aut tertias nuptias, puta per divortium aut repudium aliquod illegitimum.
Vorstius. Secundas nuptias mortuo conjuge non damnat sed concedit. Romans 7.2, 3.
one husband, that is, has not had two husbands at once, or if her husband
has sent her a Bill of divorce, upon his repudiation of her, has married no
other. 5ly. That she be such an one as has been well reported of for good
works, and bath, by acts of duty and charity, approved her self to those among
whom she has lived, in all things of which her condition has been capable;
such as are, careful edification of Children, hospitality, friendliness, and
humility Washing of the Saints feet was an office of courtesy performed to
Strangers in those hotter Counties, Genesis 43.24.
, and exercising her self in all sorts of good works. He comes now to show,
what widows are not to be received into the Churches service, or to the office
of Deaconesses, nor to live upon the Churches maintenance, viz. the younger
women. 1. Because there was danger, left being pampired with the Churches
bread, they should wax wanton against Christ, that is, not regard the service
which they have promised to Christ, and his Church, as some younger widows
(whom possibly he points at) had already done: who despairing of marriage in
the Church had revolted from the Faith, that they might marry some infidel out
of the Church; whose condition he shows, to be damnable and miserable, because
they had renounced that Faith in Christ, which they at first made profession of
in Baptism; and further he shows, that such widows are commonly idle, and
wander about from house to house, curiously prying into, and tatling of other
folks matters, and meddling with things they ought not. He advises therefore,
that the younger widows, (if they have not the gift of Continence^) should
betake themselves to a married life, and serve God in that, bearing and
bringing up Children, guiding their own houses and families, that they give no
occasion of reproach to these that are strangers to the Faith, and are apt
enough t^ seek occasion to accuse and find fault with Christians. And he tells
them, there were some such, who having foraken the Christian Faith, had betaken
themselves to the territories of Satan, and being bitter enemies to Christians,
would be glad to have somewhat to say against them. Concluding therefore this
matter, he advises, that if any Christian have any helpless wid^w of his own
family, that he undertake the care and charge of her, (if he be able), and not
cast her upon the Church, lest there be not in the stock of the Church
sufficient to provide for all that are truly helpless. From whence it appears,
that if there were no poor and honest widows in the Church, of sixty years of
age, there was no necessity to make provision for them, or empl^y them in the
Churches service, and by c^nsequence, that the ministry of women in the
Deaconship was not needful, unless by accident, when they were maintained by
the public charge, that they might not be altogether useless. From Ver. 3. to
17.

12ly. He gives directions concerning Presbyters or Elders in office, that are
employed in the government of the Church, as well as in preaching the word. And
he i^j^ius, 1. That they be accounted worthy of double honor, and be liberally
maintained, especially those that labor in Word and Doctrine From whence it
appears, that there were two sorts of Elders in the Church, namely, some th t
labored in the word, and others who were employed only in the governvernment
of the Church, who are called Overseers, or Rulers, Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28.
; which Precept he confirms, partly from the analogy of the Law of Moses,
forbidding the muzling the Ox that treads out the Corn, [Deut. 25.4.], but
allowing him to feed all the time he does the work, and so to have a certain
reward for his labor; and partly from the rule of our Savior, that the
labourer is worthy of his reward, Luke 18 7. Mat. 10.10. 2ly. He injoins, that
an accusation be not received against an Elder under two or three witnesses.
3ly. If Elders, or any others, sin openly, he orders, that they should be
publicly reproved, that others may fear to offend after their example. 4ly. He
solemnly charges Timothy, that Ecclesiastical administrations and censures be
performed without partiality, or respect of persons. 5ly. That he do not rashly
ordain or receive persons into the sacred ministry, l^st if they prove wicked
and unworthy afterward, their miscarriages he imputed to him; and if other
Presbyters will rashly ordain such, he advises him not to consent to them
therein. He advises him, to keep himself pure from these and other sins, which
were then so rise among them. Yet he spoke not this, to prohibit him from
drinking a little Wine v. 23. Versus iste videtur irrepsisse in hunc locum
praeter mentem Apostoli: quo f^cto incertum. Forte appositu, erat in margin,
and incuria Apographi, non suo loco insertus. Vicessi^^s ^^^m secundus and
quartu^ invi^em cohaerent. Knatchbul. vide ibi plu^^.
m^derately for his health. And as to that Precept, of not partaking of other
men's sins, he shows, he spoke not of open sins, which were manifest; for the
sins of some Candidates for the ministry are manifest before they are chosen,
and go before Praecedentia ad judicium] de quibus ideo judicare potest qui
imponit manum.

Quosdam vero subsequuntur peccata] i. e. manifesta siunt post judicium and
impositionem manuum, tum demum incipientia s^ exerere, unde and de iis certo
judicare is non potest; idcirco nec eorum siet particeps qui manus imponit.


to condemn them, as utterly unfit for that office; but some men's sins follow
after judgment has passed upon them, that is, appear not, and are not known
till after their ordination, and then their hypocrisy breaks out. In like
manner the virtues and good works of some are manifestly known, that it is easy
for the Church to judge them fit to be admitted into the ministry; and the evil
works of those that are otherwise (which upon inquisition made, cannot for the
present be discovered) notwithstanding will not long be hid, but in their own
time be brought to light; so that if the Church cannot prevent sometimes, but
that some hypocrites will be admitted into the Ministry, yet when their faults
are manifest, they may deal with them according to the discipline of the
Church. From Ver. 17. to the end.

13ly. He now directs him, to instruct Christian Servants to be obedient to
Masters, whether they were Infidels or Believers. If their Masters were
Infidels, they should notwithstanding carry themselves dutifully and
respectfully toward them, seeing by the providence of God they were placed
under them, that so the Gospel be not evil-spoken of among Infidels, through
the miscarriages of Christian Servants. If their Masters were Believers, they
should serve them the more readily, because they were Believers, and Brethren,
beloved of God, and partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, and of the
grace of Adoption. Or, (as some translate the words), because believing Masters
are such as will be careful to recompense the well doing of their Servants
(...), Qui beneficentiam suscipiunt, and vicissim bonis bene^aciunt. (...),
est, curam alicujus gerere. Sic (...), Isa. 26.2. q. d. Domini diligendi eo
nomine quod curam gerant, ut vobis benefaciant, i. e. ut vos vestiant, pascant,
ab injuriis protegant.
. These things he enjoins Timothy to teach and to exhort other Pastors to teach
the same likewise. Ver. 1, 2.

14ly. He exhorts him, not to have fellowship with newfangled Teachers, who
depart from the Apostolical verity and simplicity in the matter and manner of
their teaching; and being proud, and knowing nothing solidly in the mystery of
the Gospel, are contentious about words, and verbal controversies, (from which
springs nothing but uncharitableness), being men of a corrupt and perverse mind
discovering themselves more studious of gain than godliness, and designing by
their preaching, to serve and promote their worldly profit. Ver. 3, 4, 5.

15ly. He exhorts him and other Pastors, to pursue after real piety, out of
which springs true contentment Est mercatura magna picta s cum animo contento,
qui non properat ditescere.
, (and so is the greatest gain); and to take heed of covetousness, and the
inordinate love of money, which is the root of so many evils, and betrays men
to so many temptations and snares, to so many hurtful and ruining lusts, to
defection from the faith, to vexation and anguish of mind here, and eternal
perdition hereafter: And instead of following after that, to f^llow after
spiritual riches, namely, those excellent graces of righteousness, godliness,
perseverance in the Faith, love, meekness, patience, with which the Pastors of
the Church ought more especially to be enriched. From Ver. 6. to 12.

16ly. He excites and stirs him up to Christian fortitude, in maintaining the
true faith of the Gospel [Jude v. 3.], against all the persecutions of the
world, and oppositions and contradictions of Heretical Teachers [2 Timothy 4.7.],
and so to strive in this course, that he may secure a right Notandum, vitae
aeternae nomine hic and alibi significari jus ad vitam aeternam. Sensus idem,
Phil. 3.14. Grot.
and title unto, and at last attain the Crown of Eternal Life, unto which God
had graciously called him; remembering, how he had, either at his Baptism or
Ordination, made a famous profession before many witnesses, that he would
faithfully serve Christ. He solemnly charges and adjures him and others, to
whom the Pastoral charge should be committed, before God who gives life to all
that have life, and will raise all dead men to life again; and before Jesus
Christ who bore his Testimony to the truth before Pontius Pilate [Joh. 18.37.],
and therein gave him an example of confessing the truth, which be should
imitate, that he and they faithfully observe this command, which is contained
in ver. 11.12. of this Chapter; laboring to be without spot and blemish in
their several times and ages to the coming of Christ to judgment Hic apparet,
loqui Paulum ad Timotheum tanquam qui vivere possit ad tempus quo Christus ad
Judicium erat venturus. Sic 1 Cor. 15.12. Id evenit quia de die ultimo, quando
is futurus esset, nihil Christus suis revelaverat ut semper expectaretur, vid.
1 These. 5.15. Grot. v. 14. Usque ad adventum Domini nostri Jesu Christi, i. e.
Ita serva hoc mandatum ut quotidie Christum expectes, atque ita, ut si tibi ad
id usque tempus esset vivendum tamen nihil remittas de studio. Camer. See
Paraphrase on 1 These. 5.23.
, whose appearing the All-glorious God will in his due time manifest, who is
omnipotent and immortal in himself, and dwells in light inaccessible, whom none
can see with mortal eyes, who ought by all men to be praised and magnified for
ever. From Ver. 12. to 17.

17ly. He directs him, what duties to charge upon the rich, viz. that they be
humble, that they trust in God and not in their riches, (who gives us all
things liberally, to make use of with moderation and thankfulness); that they
be charitable, laying (...) per allusionem de omni re dicitur, quae clam
deponitur, ut Eleemosynae apud pauperes.
up for themselves, as a treasure against the time to come, a good foundation,
or a well-grounded hope of attaining eternal life, settled on the promise of
God, made to all those who in Faith apply themselves to the practice of good
works, Mat. 10.42. Gal. 6.8, 9. Heb. 13.16. 1 Pet. 2.5. From Ver. 17. to 20.

18ly. Lastly, He solemnly exhorts Timothy, to maintain the purity of
Evangelical Doctrine, which was committed to his trust, as a pledge to keep
safely, and transmit to posterity; and that he restrain the profane wranglings
and disputings Oppositiones, falso nominatae scientiae, sunt Sophisticae
oppositiones quibus omnia fiunt dubia, dum hinc inde disputantur. Significat
curiosa and inutilia dogmata: Vera scientia est quae ad salutem aeternam
proficit.
of Sophisters about divine matters, framed out of erroneous grounds, and
principles of Sciences, so termed, but falsely; which some professing and
glorying in, have miserably erred concerning the Faith; and deserted
Christianity; by which words, he seems to point at the Gnostics, who have
their name from Science, and profound knowledge, which they vainly arrogated to
themselves. And so he concludes with his Apostolical Valediction. From Ver. 20.
to the end.

SECT. XVI.
PAul in the time of his three Months stay in Greece, visits Athens and
Corinth; and being almost ready to sail into Syria, (to carry the Alms and
Collections made in Macedonia and Achaia for the poor Saints in Judea); he
writes from Corinth that eminent Epistle to the Romans, as may be gathered from
Romans 15.25, 26. and sent it by Phoebe a Servant of the Church of Cenchrea, near
Corinth, as appears from Romans 16.1.

The Apostle Paul had a great desire and real intention to visit the Romans,
that he might personally, and viva voce, confirm them in the Faith; but seeing
himself still hindered by one thing after another, at last (being stirred up by
the Spirit of God) he resolves to write unto them, and accordingly sent them
this Epistle.

In which we may observe these three parts. The Eipstle t^ Romans.


1. The Preface, wherein he testifies his great affection to them, and prepares
their minds to receive his subsequent instructions. Chap. 1. from Ver. 1. to 17.

2. The Body of the Epistle, which is partly doctrinal, asserting the main
point of the Christian Religion, viz. Justification by Faith in Christ; from
ver. 17. of chap. 1. to chap. 12. And partly practical, treating of Moral
duties, and a Christian Conversation, required of all justified persons. From
chapter 12. to ver. 14. of chapter 15.

3. The Conclusion. From ver. 14. of chapter 19. to the end.

The occasion of this Epistle seems to be this: The Apostle had heard of some
disagreements, both in judgment and affection, among the Christians at Rome,
who were partly believing Jews, and partly believing Gentiles. The Jewish
Christians, it seems, mingled Law and Gospel together in the point of
Justification; and so zealously upheld the Jewish Law, and the Mosaical Rites,
that they opposed the preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, except they
would become Proselytes, and submit to Circumcision: On the other side, the
Gentile-Christians understanding themselves exempted from the observation of
the Mosaical Rites, used their Christian Liberty with offense. Now to reconcile
these controversies, and to settle them, both in the truth, and in unity of
judgment and affection, and to remove all emulation between them, the Apostle
writes this Epistle. In which we have,

1. THE Preface or Introduction: wherein, to gain the more credit and belief to
his following Instructions, he shows, That he was one who had received Apostle,
and was authorized, and set apart to the office of preaching the Gospel, which
God had promised long before by his Prophets in the Old Testament, that it
should be revealed, and that to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. The
subject matter of which Gospel, he shows, concerns Jesus Christ, his Son, who
according to the flesh was born of the Seed of David; but according to the
Spirit of Holiness, or that other Divine Nature in him, (called his Eternal
Spirit, Heb. 9.14. see also 1 Timothy 3.16. and 1 Pet. 3.18.), he is most fully
and powerfully demonstrated, and declared to be the Son of G^d; as by many
other signs, so especially by his Resurrection from the dead. From this
Savior, he tells them, he had received the favor of this glorious office of
the Apostleship Grace and Apostleship] (...). See chapter 12.3. and 15.1. 1 Cor.
15, 10. Gal. 2.9. Ephesians. 3.2, 8. Glass.
, to preach the Gospel in his Name, and by his authority, and for his glory;
among all Nations, to bring them to the obedience of the Doctrine of Faith, and
to confirm them therein. And though he had not planted By whom the Church of
the Romans was planted, or when, the Scripture is silent. Papists say by Peter,
but learned men demonstrate, that Peter never was at Rome; much less planted
the Church there. See Dav. Paraus in Romans 16. dub. 11. Barnabas is supposed to
have first preached Christ at Rome, and to have converted the Romans in the
reign of iberius. See Clem. Recogn. l. 1. The reason why this Epistle stands
first of all the Apostolical Epistles in our Bibles, is not because it was
first written, but because of the dignity of the City to which it was
addressed, viz. Rome, the Imperial Seat.
the Gospel among them at Rome, yet he held himself bound to contribute to the
advancement of the Faith of those of them, who were effectually called by
Christ, and had obedientially subjected themselves to the Gospel. And
accordingly he heartily wished the abounding and increase of all grace, and the
sweet sense of the favor and love of God to all real Christians at Rome,
whether Jews or Gentiles. And in the first place, that he may testify his
great affection to them, he declares, how heartily he gives thanks to God
through Jesus Christ, (in whose Name all prayers and thanksgiving ought to be
presented, Ephesians. 5.20. Col. 3.17.), that their Faith and submission to the
Gospel, was so famous, and the report of it spread far and near, and made known
in all the Churches of the whole World, and spoken of to their great advantage
and commendation. Insomuch that he solemnly professes in the presence of God,
(whom he heartily and sincerely served in the Gospel of his Son), he did not
forget them in his daily prayers; but earnestly requested of the Lord, that
what he had so long desired and designed, might happily, (if it seemed good in
his eyes), at last be accomplished, namely, that he might come personally unto
them. For he had an extreme great desire to see them, not for any other reason,
so much as that he might impart unto them some of those spiritual gifts which
God had endued him with, and might communicate to them a further knowledge of
the mysteries of the Gospel, that they might be more established and confirmed
in the Faith, against all temptations whatsoever. Yea he desired to see them,
that they might be mutually comforted, by a mutual communication of the Faith,
that both he and they had in Christ Jesus. For it could not but greatly comfort
and strengthen them, to hear him discourse of his Faith in Christ, and it would
also revive him to hear them declare their Faith in the same Jesus also; and so
they might be mutual comforts each to other. He desires they should know that
he had often purposed to come unto them, but still by one obstacle or other was
hindered; and he desired to come to them, that he might be a means of converting
some there to the Faith, and of confirming others already converted, as among
other Gentiles he had been a means of converting several, and gaining them to
Christ. For by the nature of his office, and by the special command of Christ,
he was a debtor to all sorts of men, being obliged to preach the Gospel to
them, whether they were Greeks, those of the most polite Nations; or
Barbarians, and those of the ruder. And as far as concerned himself, he was
most ready to take a journey to Rome, to preach the Gospel there also. For he
was far from being ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which is a powerful means
(in the hand of God) of bringing all those to Salvation, that effectually
embrace it, whether they be Jews (who had the privilege to have it first
preached to them) or Gentiles. From Ver. 1. to 17.

2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle: And having mentioned the Gospel,
he shows, that by it the Righteousness of God, that is, the Righteousness
whereby we stand just and righteous in the sight of God, (which God imputes to
sinners, and accepts for their righteousness, and pardons them for it, see chapter
3.22.), is revealed and taught, and clearly made known to be of Faith, [or by
Faith], unto Faith; that is, it is revealed to be by such a Faith as grows and
increases from one degree i. e Ex fide promovente, a^subinde angescente, ut
sit Hebraismus, qualis in Psalm. 84.7. vid 2 Cor. 3.18. Sic Theophyl, Occum.
Paraeus, cum aliis.
and measure to another. As Faith increases, and is more and more capable of
discerning Gods righteousness, so more of his righteousness is still manifested
unto it. Or from one kind of Faith to another, viz. from the Faith of the Old
Testament, to the Faith of the New; so that never any was, or shall be
justified otherwise than by Faith Ex fide veteris Testamenti obscura in clar^m
fidem novi Testamenti: ad quam vetus illa nos ducit quasi paedagogus. Sic
Chrysostom. Theodoret. cum aliis.
. Or by Faith, unto Faith; that is, the righteousness of God is revealed to be
by Faith to encourage people unto Faith, and to believe in Christ, that by
believing they may obtain Salvation. And this is the main proposition, which he
explains and confirms by many arguments, from ver, 17. of chapter 1. to chapter 12.
namely, that we are justified by Faith in Christ, and not by Works, or our
internal Righteousness. This he proves, 1. By a citation out of the Prophet
Habuccuc, chapter 2. v. 4. A famous Text, thrice alleged in the New Testament,
Heb. 10.38. To persuade to patience. Gal. 3.2. to prove no justification by the
Law. And Romans 1.17. to prove justification by Faith The Hebrew is, The just
shall live by his Faith. The Apostle still omits the particle His. The LXX have
my for his. Richardson.
., where the Prophet speaking of the calamities that was coming upon the Jews
by the Caldeans, shows, how different the carriage and behavior of the wicked
would then be, from that of the righteous in such a danger. The heart of the
wicked would be high, and proud, and lift up in a foolish conceit of their own
wisdom, and power to secure themselves. But the righteous, (such as were in a
state of reconciliation with God), should live, and find comfort in that
trouble, by their Faith in God. So the Apostle shows, that he that is
evangelically righteous, or just, shall live, not only a life of grace here,
but attain to a life of glory hereafter; by Faith in Christ, and resting on his
righteousness and merits. 2ly. He shows, that men have need of this imputed
righteousness of Christ; because of themselves, they are all unrighteous; and
God has revealed his wrath from Heaven against such. This he proves by
instancing first in the Gentiles, secondly in the Jews.

1. For the Gentiles, he shows, they were guilty of detaining the truth of God,
(that is, the true notions they had of God, and their duty to him, and their
Neighbor by the light of Nature), in unrighteousness; so that they would not
walk according to that light, but suppressed it, and resisted it. For that
which may be naturally known of God, ( viz. his infinite power, wisdom, and
goodness), is manifest in them, that is, in their minds and consciences,
(though they followed not the light shining in them): or is manifest among
them, viz. by the writings and discourses of their learned men. For God has
made it known unto them, partly by imprinting those Notions of Himself, and of
good and evil in their hearts; and partly by the Book of the Creatures, in
which his glorious Attributes are written in great Characters. For his
invisible and incomprehensible Nature, and Almighty Power, are (even ever since
the Creation of the World) clearly to be understood by his works which are
seen, viz. his works of Creation and Providence, so far as to render those,
which do not discern them, nor take notice of them, inexcusable. And seeing
they glorified not God according to that knowledge, which the light of Nature
gave them of him, nor were thankful for his benefits; they became vain in
their imaginations and reasonings concerning God, and his worship, and feigned
many fabulous and vain Gods unto themselves, whereby their foolish heart was
more and more darkened concerning the true God; and those among them that seemed
to be most wise and learned, were in those matters as blind and foolish as
others. Insomuch, that they horribly dishonored the All-glorious God, by
framing the vile Images of men and beasts to represent him, [Isa. 40.18. Psalm.
106.20.]; whereas they should have conceived God to be so infinitely glorious,
that nothing could set forth his glory sufficiently. Upon which provocation of
theirs, God gave them up judicially to the lusts of their own hearts; so that
being left to themselves, (and not restrained from the pursuit of their filthy
desires), they brake out into pollutions and uncleanness, of the most odious
kinds; which God permitted them to fall into, as a punisment upon them for
their horrible Idolatry, they having changed the truth of God, that is, the
true Notions they had of God, into an Idol 1 Cor. 8.4. Not for the matter or
form, but in respect of the opinion men have of them, thinking they can help
when they cannot.
(called here a lie, because it seems to be, what it is not, and deceives men
as a lie does), and worshipped and served the Creature, forsaking the Creator,
who is blessed for evermore, and whose glory and blessedness will abide for
ever, notwithstanding all the impiety of Idolaters. Yea upon this provocation
it was, that God so far left them to themselves, that they fell into the most
unnatural lusts, such as are not found even among brute Beasts. And so they
received a just recompense and reward for their Idolatry, (which is called
spiritual whoredom), in being left by God to the vilest of all corporal
uncleanness. And it is no wonder, that they should not keep the Order of Nature,
who forsook the Author of Nature, as Anselm speaks. Furthermore, He shows, that
they regarding not to know God, so far as by the light of Nature and the works
of Creation they might have done, nor to acknowledge and reverence him
accordigly, God as a just Judge, gave them to a reprobate or injudicious mind,
whereby they approved of nothing that was right and good, but fell into most
gross abominations and enormities; and that against the second Table as well as
against the first. Of which sins, reigning among the Heathen Romans, he gives a
large Catalogue Among which he reckons haters of God, that is, quarrellers at
his providence, when any adverse thing happens unto them.
. And in conclusion, as an aggravation of their guilt and unrighteousness, he
adds, that though they had a sense implanted upon their hearts of the righteous
(...)] Intelligitur hic jus partim per rationem, partim per traditionem
inscriptum humani, mentibus, recte puniri qui gravia delinquunt. Grot.
judgment of God, and the punishment that he will inflict upon such
transgressors, yet they not only committed those sins themselves, but also took
pleasure and delight in those that committed them. From Ver. 17. to the end.

Gentiles, generally, to be most grievous sinners, and so condemned, and not
justified by their own works; He now comes to answer an objection which some of
them might make against what he had said. They might possibly say, What shall
our Lawgivers and Magistrates (who condemn vice, and commend virtue) be so
deeply censured? For answer to this, the Apostle (by an elegant Apostrophe,
wherein he speaks as it were face to face to this Gentile who thus objecteth)
acknowledges, that 'twas true, they had some among them that declared against
wickedness and punished it. But those were the most inexcusable of all others,
because they themselves did the like, or as ill things (though more secretly)
as those which they condemned in others. And they might assure themselves that
the wrath and judgment of God (which is just and according to the merit of the
deed) is against them that do such things, whether secretly or openly. For tell
me (says he) thou Magistrate, who judge another for crimes that thou thy self
committest; can thou in reason think to escape the righteous judgment of God?
Or can thou think, because God has hitherto spared thee, that thou shall
finally escape? Do not thou consider that Gods long suffering and forbearance
invites thee to repentance, and not to go on in thy sins. Do not thou
consider, that by thy impenitence and persisting in thy sins, thou treasurest
up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his works, either
the rewards of his grace, or the punishments of his justice; namely, eternal
life to them that persevere in obedience to the truth, hoping for, and
expecting such a reward; but to the Adversaries of the truth, and servants of
unrighteousness, besides the manifestations of his wrath in this life, eternal
death and misery at the end of it. And God will have no respect to any Nation
(however privileged) in this matter, but in every Nation they that fear him,
and work righteousness shall be rewarded with glory, honor, and eternal peace;
and they that go on in their sins and impenitency, shall be punished with
eternal death and misery; and that, whether they be Jews or Gentiles. For God
measures not men by their outward conditions and circumstances, so as upon that
account, to accept or reject any man. And therefore the Gentiles, who had not
the Law written in Tables, but had it written upon their Hearts, shall be
judged by that innate Law which they have violated, and not by the other. And
the Jews, who sin against the Law given them by Moses, shall be judged
according to the threatenings of that Law. Nor is it possible that the Jews,
because they know the Law, and hear it often read in their Synagogues, should
be accounted righteous before God, except they perform perfect obedience to it,
which because they cannot do, it follows that they cannot be exempted from
deserved condemnation; and so they have need to seek for righteousness by
Christ, as well as others. And as for the Gentiles, who have not the written
Law as delivered by Moses, yet have it imprinted in their hearts, and do by the
light of Nature, some things which God has commanded in his Law; to these,
that Law within them, is a Law, as their own Consciences do witness, their
thoughts, or reflections, v. 15. (...)] Legis opus est declarare, quae recte,
quaeve inique facta sunt.
by turns v. 15. (...), h. e. Vicissim, sive alternante sententia. Grot.
accusing them when they do ill, and excusing them when they do well. Therefore
they have nothing to pretend, why they should not undergo deserved condemnation
for their sins; much less have the Jews. And this he tells them, will appear to
be most just at the day of judgment, when God shall judge the secret and hidden
things of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Doctrine which he, his Apostle,
(having learned it of him), had every where preached See 2 Timothy 2.8. Act.
10.42. Act. 17 31. 2 Timothy 4.8.
. For by the light of Nature it did not appear, by whom God would judge the
world, but it was declared and manifested in the Gospel From this Text, the
Ancients called the writings of Paul, his Gospel, as particularly Clemens in
his Epistle to the Corinthians. Take (says he) blessed Paul's Epistles into your
hands; mark what he writes in the beginning of his Gospel. (...)]
, whereof Paul was a Minister. From Ver. 1. to 17.

2. Having thus handled the case of the Gentiles, he comes in the next place to
speak of the Jews, who would possibly alledg for themselves, that something
surely must be allowed to their privileges, and that they are not to be
brought into the same condemnation with the Gentiles. That he might therefore
speak more particularly to this case, he brings in (as it were) some principal
Teacher of the Law, and Patron of righteousness by Works, producing seven props
of his vain confidence; all which the Apostle (by way of concession) allows;
and yet proves, that the Jews are not to expect to be justified by these before
God, any more than the Gentiles may, by that obedience which they perform to
the Law of Nature. And in the first place, says he, thou say, Thou art a
Jew, which was a name, not of a Nation only, but of a Professor of the true
Religion, and of a Worshipper of the true God. 2. Thou dependest on thy outward
performances of Law, on thy Circumcision, etc. as if justification were to be
had thereby, and could not be had without it. 3. Thou make thy boast of God,
viz. that thou art of that People that were chosen above all other Nations, and
are in covenant with God. 4. Thou know his will, not from the mere
collection of reason, but from the books of Moses and the Prophets. 5. Thou
triest things that differ, (being instructed therein out of the Law) v 15.
(...).
, that is, can distinguish betwixt lawful and unlawful, between what is
commanded and what is forbidden. 6. Thou have such abundant knowledge that thou
can teach others. 7. Thou have a model, or scheme, or system in thy head of
that knowledge, which is here and there scattered up and d^wn, and contained in
the Law. The Apostle answers, that all these things being granted, yet they are
insufficient to make any man righteous before God, or to free him from
condemnation; for it could not but be granted, that many, if not most of their
Rabbis and Teachers did not practice the duties they taught others, but lived
in those or the like sins and vices Cum haec scriberet Paulus, recens erat
memoria Asinaei, and Asilaei, in Babylonia Judaeorum, ad quos ingens multitudo
confluxerat; qui omnes non nisi ex rapto vivebant, Joseph. Antiq. 18. 12. Non
multo post, sacerdotalium familiarum Principes, fraudatis minoribus
sacerdotibus, decimas sibi totas abstulere, Josh. 20.6. Josephus etiam inter
crimina quae popularibus suis, dicto loco, exprobat, ponit and (...). Hi
fructus fuere siduciae in solis ceremoniis collocatae. v. 22. (...)] Non multum
distat, falsos Deos colere, and verum spoliare, quod faciebant sacerdotes non
offerendo ex proventibus ea quae Lex Dei ipsis praecipiebat, ant certe non
qualia oportebat, Mal. 1.8, 12, 13, 14. and 3.10. Grot.
, which they condemned in others, and so caused the Name of God to be
blasphemed among the Gentiles through their impieties; as the Prophet Ezekiel
complains [ch. 36.22, 23.] the hypocrites of his time did, who boasted in the
same privileges that these present Jews boasted of. From Ver. 17. to 25.

But the Jews might here possibly urge and plead their Circumcision as a Seal
of the Covenant between God and them, and thence infer, that they were not in
such danger of condemnation as the Gentiles. The Apostle answers, that for men
that so lived as they did, 'twas madness to think that Circumcision will stand
them in such stead, as to exempt them from condemnation. For Circumcision will
not profit nor avail to justification, except it be joined with perfect
obedience to the whole Law; but if transgression of the Law be found in him
that is circumcised, he is in the same condition with an uncircumsised Heathen.
Yea, if the uncircumcised could do that which the Law requires to
justification, that is, perform perfect obedience to the moral Law, they should
be accepted of God, as well as if they had been circumcised So that if a
Gentile, who is by Nature without Circumcision could fulfill the moral Law
perfectly, he would condemn a Jew, who is only outwardly (and according to the
Letter of the Law Legem facere, non est verba legis exterius sequi, sed mentem,
and intentionem legis obedienter implere. Cassiodorus.
) circumcised, but has not that purity of heart and life, which that Ceremony
was appointed to signify and engage all that are circumcised unto. For he
tells them, that he is not a Child of Abraham, (such to whom the promise of
life appertains), who is only born of Abraham's race, and no more: neither is
that the available Circumcision, which is only outward: viz. the mark imprinted
in the flesh: But he is a Jew indeed, a true Son of Abraham, (who shall be
accepted with God, although he be not so by birth), who is so inwardly, and by
a true conversion of his heart to God. For the renovation of the mind and heart
by the Holy Ghost, is the true Circumcision, and not that which is outwardly
visible in the body, performed according to the Letter of the Law; and such
renewed persons shall have praise and commendation, if not among men, (who see
the outside only, and among whom it is a great dignity to be a circumcised Jew);
yet with God, who looks into the heart. From Ver. 25. to the end.

Jews would be apt to make against what he had said. 1. If the case be so, then
it will be said, that the Jew has no advantage or privilege above the Gentile,
neither is there any profit of Circumcision. He answers, that the Jews have a
great advantage above any other Nation, and that, 1. Because unto them were
committed the oracles of God, that is, all the revelations of his will, the
Law, the Sacram^nts and Seals of the Covenant, the Prophecies and Promises of
the Messiah, by which they might more easily come to know the true God, and the
way of Salvation by the expected M^ssias, than any others. And if any shall
say, that this advantage was lost, by the unbelief of a great part of them, He
answers, that the faithfulness of God in his Promises and Covenant, is not made
void by the unbelief of men. For it ought ever to be acknowledged and
confessed, that God cannot be otherwise than true and faithful in performing
what he has promised, though all mankind should be false and deceitful, and
should fail to perform their duty: And for the proof of this, he cites a
passage out of Psalm. 51.4. (according to the version of the Septuagint) where
David humbly confesses his heinous sin against God, that by his penitent
confession God might be justified, and acquitted from all injustice in
reproving him by Nathan and denouncing those heavy Judgments that he intended
to bring upon him, and that he might be clear and unreproveable for so judging
him for his sin, and might clearly overcome and win the victory when he should
be judged or questioned, or impleaded by any man, for his dealing so severely
with David. So that the Apostle applies these words from the hypothesis (in
David's singular case) to the thesis, viz. to Gods general faithfulness, truth,
and righteousness in all his Promises, Covenants, and Proceedings. And thus the
unrighteousness of men is so far from making void, that it more commends, and
sets off, and illustrates the righteousness of God. But 2ly. It will be said,
If this be so, then God seems to be unrighteous in punishing those sins, which
do so illustrate, and set off his righteousness. This Objection the Apostle
makes in the person of a carnal man (...).
, ignorant of God, and replies, that the Objection is blasphemous; for it is
impossible, that he that shall judge the world should be unjust. But 3ly, This
man will further object, that, If the truth and faithfulness of God be made
more abundantly manifest, by the falseness, lying, and unfaithfulness of man;
then he is so far from deserving condemnation for it, that he may securely go
on in it, (according to the Apostles Doctrine Videntur hi vecordes hujus
calumniae occasionem sumpsisse ex eo quod saepe doceret Apostolus,
Superabundasse gratiam Dei, ubi superabundavit hominum iniquitas, and eam
cessisse in laudem gratiae, and justitiae Dei. A Lap.
), that the glory of God may be more advanced thereby. The Apostle answers,
that they were malicious slanderers that charged him or the other Apostles that
they held such a wretched position as this, viz. that they might do evil, that
good might come of it, which he was so far from owning or approving, that he
declares their condemnation to be just who bold and practice such Doctrines,
and vent such Calumnies. 5ly, But the Jews will further say, What are not they
better, and more righteous, and in a better estate, as to justification by
their works, than the Gentiles? He answers, Not at all; for he had hitherto
proved, ( viz. in his two first Chapters), that both Jews and Gentiles are
naturally under sin, and therefore the Gospel-righteousness is no less
necessary for the one, than for the other. This he further proves, by many
clear testimonies out of the Old Testament, as out of Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3. and
Psalm. 53 1, 2, 3. where the Prophet speaking of the unregenerate in his time,
and of all others in their natural estate, out of Christ, pronounces, 1. That
no man is righteous. 2. That all are naturally blind and ignorant of the things
that concern their Salvation. 3. That none seeks after God, to know and
worship him as they ought. 4. That they are all gone aside from God, and from
the way wherein God appointed them to walk; and being so corrupt by Nature they
are unfit to bring forth any good fruits, or to do any good. He goes on further
to demonstrate this, from Psalm. 5.9. where from what was spoken of David's
enemies in particular, he proves the corruption of all mankind in general; and
that because (naturally) there is the same fountain of corruption in all. Their
throat, says he, is like a Sepulcher newly opened, out of which comes nothing
but stench and filthiness, viz. murderous pestilential threatenings; they have a
false and deceitful tongue; their slanders are no less hurtful than the poison
of Asps, Psalm. 140.3. their mouth is full of cursing and bitter speeches, Psalm.
10.7. they are ready to commit all manner of cruelty, and violence, and know
not how to live quietly themselves, nor to suffer others to be quiet, Psalm.
59.7, 8. There is no fear of God before their eyes; and so there is nothing to
restrain them from running into all sorts of wickedness, Psalm. 36.21. And, lest
the Jews should think to elude and evade the force of these Testimonies, as not
belonging to them, he tells them, that what the Law, that is, the books of the
Old Testament, the Psalms and Prophets thus say, they say to and of the Jews;
and by complaining so much of their universal defection and wickedness, they
include them, and otn only the Gentiles, to be obnoxious to the wrath of God,
and justly punishable by him, without being able to say any thing for
themselves. From all these forecited Testimonies, he concludes, that by the
works of the Law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, because man,
since the fall, is disabled by his innate corruption and sin, to fulfill the
Law, either natural or written; so that all the efficacy it has, is only to
discover to him his sin, and (without Gods mercy in Christ) to seal up to him
his condemnation, [Gal. 2.16.]. From Ver. 1. to 21.

Having thus showed negatively, that by the works of the Law, righteousness and
justification is not to be had, he comes now to prove the affirmative part of
his position, viz. that God has manifested another way of justification in his
word, viz. by Faith in Jesus Christ v. 22. By Faith of Jesus Christ,] Faith is
to be taken here passively to signify the Faith whereby Christ is believed on.
. For he tells them, that now, since the coming of Christ, the righteousness of
God (that is, which avails before God, and which he freely allows to man for
his justification) is manifested to be the righteousness of Christ, imputed to
all such, as by a lively Faith receive it, and not to be that which men pretend
to, by the performance of the works of the Law, either natural or written. And
he tells them, that both the Law and the Prophets bear witness unto this
righteousness. As for example, In the Law, (or one of the books of Moses, viz.
Genesis, chapter 22.18.), God promised Abraham, that in his seed (viz. in the
Messiah that was to come of him) all nations of the earth shall be blessed. And
this Doctrine was taught by the Prophets See Act. 26.22.
also, as we may see, Isa. 53. Dan. 9.24. This is the righeousness which God
has appointed for man's justification, even the righteousness which is by Faith
in Jesus Christ, and this blessedness belongs to all, and rests upon all that
believe [see chapter 4. v. 9.], whether they be Jews or Gentiles, there being no
difference between them in this matter. And he assures them, there is no other
way of justification but this. For all mankind are sinners, infected and
polluted with sin, and so will fall v. 23. Et destituuntur gloria Dei] h. e.
Quae a Deo collata est in prima creatione, and quae conferetur in vita aeterna.
Glass.
short of obtaining the glory of God, See chapter 5. v. 2.
and eternal life, if they seek it not in this way: All therefore that are
justified, that is, abs^l^'d and acquitted from the guilt of their sins, and
acc^u^ted righteous before God, cannot otherwise be so, than by the free grace
and goodness of God, and the redemption and ransom of Jesus Christ; whom God
from the beginning purposed to set forth unto men, as the only means for the
expiation of their sins, and as the only way by which he would be propitiated
(...)] Sicut Deus promiserat se praesentem fore in propitiatorio, ita in
Christo solo quaeri, agnosci, and invocari vult. Ut Propitiatorium, sive
operculum arcae foederis, tabulas legis in arca obtegebat; sic Christus
peccatorum nostrorum contra legem commissorum, multitudinem ac magnitudinem,
itemque maledictionem legis sua obedientia, and merito, operit, atque tegit, ne
in conspectum Dei peccata ea veniant, Psalm. 32.1, 3. Glass.
, viz. through Faith in his blood. And he intended hereby, that his
righteousness, that is, his goodness, faithfulness, and truth, should be
clearly demonstrated, by his forgiving (...) propter, sive per, remissionem.
Freidlib.
to Believers their past transgressions, through his infinite mercy and
forbearance, whereas he might justly and immediately have destroyed them for
their transgressions. And he intended the rather at this present season, (viz.
before he brought destruction on the Jews for their incorribleness), to make
his righteousness and goodness appear to all the world, in that he had sent the
promised Messiah, for whose sake he was freely ready to pardon sin, and to
justify those that believe in him. And seeing these things are so, he asks
what man had any cause of boasting in himself? Indeed if he were justified by
his own works, or inherent righteousness, he might boast that the meritorious
cause of his justification was in himself; but seeing that cannot be, all
boasting is excluded, and that not by the Doctrine of Works, but by the
Doctrine of Faith The Prescript or Doctrine of Faith is by a Hebraism called a
Law.
. Therefore he concludes, that a man is justified by Faith, and not by the
works of the Law, done either before conversion or after. He shuts up this
discourse, by showing, 1. That this way of justification is common both to Jews
and Gentiles. For as God is one and the same, so is his way of justifying
sinners one and the same to all Nations, both to circumcised Jews and
uncircumcised Gentiles, namely, by Faith in his Son. 2. He shows, that the
Doctrine of justification by Faith, and not by the works of the Law, does not
make void the Law, but rather establishes it. For the Gospel shows, how firm
and irrevocable the Law is, seeing Christ was made under the Law, and was, by
his fulfilling the Law, to purchase for man a right to the life it promised;
and by believing in Christ (who obeyed the Law, and satisfied the breach of
it), we acknowledge, that without exact obedience to the Law there can be no
salvation; which exact obedience we being not able to perform, our Savior has
performed it for us. And lastly, he tells them, this Doctrine of Faith
establishes the Law still as a rule, though not as a Covenant. From Ver. 21.
to the end.

The Ap^stle proceeds to confirm his principal position, viz. that a man is
And, in order hereunto, he instances in Abraham; touching whom he argues in
this manner; What shall we say then? shall we say that Abraham our father
found, or obtained righteousness Justitiam, scil.] quae vox jam praecesserat.
Grot.
by, or according to the flesh, that is, by being circumcised in his flesh, or
by his own righteousness and works, which are seen outwardly, and by men
esteemed praiseworthy? No, in no wise. For if he were justified by works, he
has whereof to glory, (the cause of his justification being in himself); but
he has not any thing whereof to glory, at least before God; though possibly in
the sight of men, (who can see no further than the outside) he might have
whereof to glory Qui ad civilem modum, i. e. externa aliqua specie, est
innocens, laudem potest ab hominibus sperare temporariam, non illam aeternam a
Deo. Grot.
. Therefore the Scripture affirms that Abraham's Faith, or firm believing the
Promise of God, [viz that he would be his shield, and great reward, and give
him a Son in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed, Genesis 15.6.]
was counted to him for Righteousness; that is, by means of his Faith he was
esteemed or reckoned Phineas's executing judgment, Psalm. 106.3^. was counted to
him for righteousness to all generations, that is, by means thereof he was
reckoned or esteemed a righteous man in all ages.
righteous before God, and not by means of his works. For he that works, in
order to his reward with God, and has or brings works before God, which are
Gods-justice-proof; upon his perfect innocence, or blamelesness, God will,
according to the Law of justice, reward and crown his innocence, paying it him
as a due debt, and not giving it him by way of favor or grace. But he that
works not, as hoping to be justified thereby, (though otherwise he makes
conscience of good works, Jam. 2.26.), nor pretends to have any such works as
he dares confide in, or bring before God for his justification, but trusts in
the gracious promise of God, who justifies, or absolves those who have been
ungodly, but now repent and believe in his Son; such a man's Faith is counted to
him for righteousness; that is, by means of his Faith he is accounted, or
adjudged righ^eous Faith is accepted to justification, neither in respect of
the worth of it to procure it, nor yet as being the form of righteousness; but
instrumentally only, because it apprehends that for which we are justified,
namely, the Merit and Righteousness of Christ. Slater in loc.
in Law, and absolved and acquitted in judgment. And agreeable to this is that
description of blessedness given by David, Psalm. 32. who being sorely oppressed
with the guilt of his sins, and the fear of Gods wrath, pronounces the man
blessed, to whom God imputes righteousness, (viz. the righteousness of the
Messiah, he having no works to bring before God to be justified Indeed that
Faith which is without works is dead, no true Faith. But Faith only acts in
the point of our justification before God, applying Christ, and the promises of
the Covenant of Grace to our selves, whereby Christ does become ours, his
righteousness our justification, and all the benefits of his redemption do
redound to our Salvation. Idem.
by, and whose transgression is forgiven, and his sin covered Sin in respect of
the offense, is remitted: in respect of the filth or turpitude of it, is
covered: in repect of the punishment, not imputed. This heap of words serves
only to amplify the grace of God in this business. Remittere, and tegere, and
non imputare, unius significationis sunt verba, quia cum tegit remittit, and
cum remittit non imputat.
, (viz. from the sight of God so that the Lord looks upon him as no more lying
under the guilt thereof) and to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity God is said
to impute sins to a man when he will have him make satisfaction for the same,
by punishment; and not to impute them, when he forgives them, and acquits a man
from punishment. Likewise he accounts Faith for Righteousness, when he ascribes
or imputes to Believers the Righteousness of Christ, by them apprehended by
Faith, and by this gracious imputation accounts them righteous thereupon. Not
to have sins imputed, is, not to have them laid to ones charge [ Act 7.60.].
nor come into reckoning against us before God, to be punished for them. David's
words expressly mention not the imputation of Righteousness, but run only upon
Gods forgiving, covering, and not imputing sin; and yet Paul says, David
describes the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes Righteousness. Here
therefore a Synecdoche must needs be acknowledged, and that remission of sins,
(here expressed by forgiving, covering, and not imputing of sin) does plainly
import and imply also an imputation of Righteousness.
. From Ver. 1. to 9.

He now moves a Question, Whether this blessedness of justification by Faith
alone, belongs to the Circumcision, that is, the Jews only, or to the
Uncircumcision, that is, the Gentiles also? And seeing he had before asserted,
that Abraham's Faith was reckoned to him for righteousness, he now inquires,
when it was reckoned to him, and in what state Abraham was when he was
pronounced righteous? He answers, it was fourteen years, at least, before he
was circumcised [Gen. 15.2.], therefore this way of being Righteous does not
belong only to the Circumcision, or the Jews, but to the uncircumcised Gentiles
also, who believing in Christ become sharers with Abraham in that blessedness.
But then it may be objected, If Abraham was justified whilst he was
uncircumcised, to what purpose was he circumcised? He answers, that Abraham
received Circumcision as a Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace, made to him
and his Seed [Gen. 17.2.4.10.], and as an obsignation that the righteousness of
Faith Sigillum justitiae] quo scil. testificabatur Deus, Abrahae justitiam
certam esse, and legitimam, justitiam; adeptam, inquam, ante per fidem cum
adhuc esset praeputiatus. A Lapide.
, was the true way for a sinner to become righteous; which righteousness
Abraham had obtained whilst he was uncircumcised, to the end, that he might be
the Father (in a spiritual sense) of Believers among the Gentiles (that were
uncircumcised), and the Father of those that believe among the Jews (who were
circumcised), namely, to as many of them, as (besides their Circumcision)
imitated his Faith. Therefore the righteousness of Faith is common to
Believers, both circumcised and uncircumsised, and reckoned, or imputed to all
that follow the example of the Faith of Abraham, which he had when he was
uncircumcised; and therein they are all his Seed, if not by generation, yet by
imitation. And marvel not, says he, that I interpose the condition, if they
walk in the steps of Abraham's Faith; for the great Promise made to Abraham and
his Seed that they should possess that rich, and fertile, and pleasant part of
the world Mundus, pro part mundi primaria. and a Deo singulariter in peculium
populi sui selecta, terra nimirum Canaan, accipitur. Glass.
, to wit, Canaan, with the Countries adjacent, (under which Heaven it self was
also typically promised and comprehended, Heb. 11.14, 16.), was not made upon
Condition of their performing perfect obedience to the Law, either of nature,
or that afterward given at Sinai; but they were to obtain it, by the
righteousness of Faith, and their trusting and depending on the gracious
Promise of God. Now (says he) if they that are of the Law, that is, that seek
to be justified by the works of the Law, be heirs of this promised inheritance,
then the way of Faith prescribed by God, is to no purpose. And if it could be
supposed, that God had promised to conveigh the inheritance to them who
performed perfect obedience to the Law, that Promise would not avail them,
seeing no man is able to perform perfect legal righteousness. And it is evident,
that the Law is so far from justifying, and so giving a title to the
Inheritance, that it works wrath, that is, it reveals and pronounces
condemnation, and death, upon the guilty for their transgressions: not that of
it self, it was originally destined to subject men to punishment, but by
accident and occasionally in respect of man's disobedience, it does inevitably
adjudg him thereunto. Whereas were there no Law written in nature, or given by
God, there would be no transgression, and so no Condemnation. The Law therefore
is so far from justifying, that it condemns. Seeing then, that neither
Justification, nor the promised Inheritance, (which typified Heaven), is
obtained by the works of the Law, it follows, that it must needs be obtained by
Faith. And God has appointed it to be obtainable by Faith, that it might be of
free and undeserved grace and favor; and to be of grace, that His promise
might stand firm and sure to all the believing Seed of Abraham, (whereas it
would be unsure and uncertain, if it depended on the condition of performing
perfect obedience to the Law), and not to them only, who are his Seed according
to the flesh, (to whom the Law was given), but to them also which imitate his
Faith, (though they be Gentiles); for he is the Father of all that believe,
whether Jews or Gentiles. From Ver. 9. to 16.

Lastly, He goes on highly to commend the Faith of Abraham, setting it out as a
pattern to be imitated and followed. He shows, that it was promised to Abraham
by reason of his Faith, that he should be the Father of many Nations, that is,
of all Believers in the several Nations of the World, answerable (...)] Ad
instar Dei. So far has God honored Abraham's Faith, that in respect thereof,
He has made him like himself, a Father, not of this or that Nation only, but
universally of all Believers, among all Nations, believing after his Example.
, or like unto God himself, (in whom he believed), who is the Father of the
Gentile as well as of the Jewish Believers. This God, Abraham's Faith rested
upon, who by his omnipotent power is able to quicken the dead, and raise them
to life again, and will certainly do it, (and so likewise is able to quicken
the Gentiles, who are dead in sins and trespasses, as well as he quickened
Sarahs dead womb), and calls those things which be not, as though they were,
that is, causes those things by his word and power, to appear and subsist,
which had no being before, as he did in the creation of all things; and
therefore it is not so much to be wondered at, if he makes the Gentiles (by
conversion) what they were not before, viz. the children of Abraham. He further
declares, that this Patriarch Abraham believed, and had a strong hope and trust
in the promise and power of God against all natural grounds of hope, namely,
that he should have a Son, and so be a stock from whence many Nations should
spring, according to what was said, Genesis 15.5. So shall thy seed be, viz. as
the stars of heaven for multitude. He further adds, that Abraham regarded not
the great difficulties objected to his Faith, from his own and his wifes age.
He admitted no doubts, or questions touching the promise of God (through
unbelief Dominus Saram reprehendit ridentem [Gen. 18.12] non Abrahamum [Gen.
17.17.]: Quia illius risus admirationis and laetitiae fuit, Sarae autem
dubitationis. August. de Civ. Dei. lib. 16. c. 31.
), but without all dispute, or arguing to the contrary, depended fully on God
for the performance of it, and so gave to God the glory of his faithfulness,
and power, assuring himself, that he who is omnipotent, could and would perform
what he had promised. Which steadfast Faith of his was imputed to him for
righteousness, because he looked by Faith to the Messiah promised, who was to
come of his Seed. N^w this, that his Faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, was not written, (says the Apostle) for Abraham's sake alone, but
for ours also, that is, for our profit and comfort; to show us, that Faith
shall be imputed to all others also for Righteousness, who shall firmly trust
in God through the merit and mediation of Christ Jesus for that blessing. This
Jesus, he tells them, God sent into the world to be our Redeemer, and he was
delivered to death for the expiation of our sins and offenses, and God has
raised him again to life, to assure us, that our Surety has paid our debts,
and that we shall certainly be justified, if we truly believe in him. From Ver.
16, to the end.

justification by Faith in Christ alone, and that is, from the blessed fruits
it produces, namely, peace, and reconciliation with God, and an introduction of
us into his favor again, and a confirmation Stare in gratia, est de gratia
certum and securum esse; hoc alterum est beneficium mortis Christi ex
justificatione fluens, certitudo immota gratiae praesentis, and futurae. Par.
in loc.
of us in it; also rejoicing in tribulation, as the means God will sanctify to
accustom us more to patience, and so to increase that grace in us, and in the
exercise whereof he will give us more experience of his faithfulness, and care
of us, and so strengthen a well-grounded hope in us, (which will not deceive
us), that he will never forsake us. And that which further strengthens this
hope, is, that his Holy Spirit (which cannot lie) does usually in time of
tribulation more abundantly testify his love to the hearts of true Believers.
From Ver. 1, to 6.

Under this head he also proves, that they that are justified by Faith shall
certainly be saved from the wrath to come; and this he demonstrates, 1. From
the greatness of Christ's love to such, before their justification, when they
lay weltring in sin and misery, unable to help themselves. He shows, that for
such ungodly persons as these, Christ in the fullness of time came to dye. And
what a degree of love this was, he tells them, they may judge by considering how
things usually are carried among men. Among whom, though for a very merciful
and benign person, some one man would perhaps venture his life, yet for any man
else, (though he were a righteous and just man), they would scarcely find any
body that would be willing to do it. But God expresses a mercy and kindness
infinitely above this; for He, when he had nothing in the Object to move him to
it, when we were profane ungodly sinners, yet even then He was pleased to send
his Son to dye for us. And if the love of Christ was so strong and efficacious
toward us, as to m^ve him to dye for us before we believed; surely his love
will be much more toward us now, and his complacency greater in us, when we
are actually justified by Faith in his blood; so that there is no cause to fear
but that we shall be saved from wrath through him. 2. He shows, that if, when
we were enemies, Christ dyed to work our reconciliation and peace with God
(through Faith in his blood); certainly, being now actually justified and
reconciled to God, by our believing in him, we need not doubt but we shall be
saved by him, seeing he now lives and sits at the right hand of God, and
there intercedes for us, and has all things subjected unto him. 3. Seeing
Christ by his death, sufferings, and intercession has procured God to be our
God and Father (which is more than merely to save us from wrath), we need not
doubt, but that he will do that also for us. From 6, to 12.

He further pursues this Argument, by showing, that the righteousness of Christ
is not less effectual to save those that by Faith are united to him, than Adams
sin was to destroy those who naturally descend from him. This he proves by
comparing Christ and Adam together, and showing their similitude and
dissimilitude; 1. As by Adam sin entered into the world, and death by sin, upon
all that are his Children by nature; so by Christ righteousness came into the
world, and by righteousness life, unto all that are spiritually born of him.
For, before the giving of the Law by Moses, sin was in the world, and was
imputed, as may appear by this, that Death (which is the wages of sin) reigned
over Infants, that had not sinned actually as Adam had done. Therefore, besides
the Law of Nature which Infants could not transgress, there was another Law
which God had given to the first man, the transgression whereof was imputed to
all his posterity, yea even unto Infants. And this first man (he shows) was a
type or figure of him that was to come, viz. of Christ Jesus. For as the first
Adam was the fountain, head, or root of sin and misery, so Christ is the
fountain and head of righteousness and life. And having thus showed, wherein
they agreed, he comes now to show, wherein they differ: And that he manifests
by these positions. 1. The sin of Adam is not so pernicious, as the
righteousness of Christ (which is freely given) is beneficial. For if the
offense of the first Adam brought forth death to all that are naturally
propagated of him, much more shall the free grace of God convey life to all
those who are in Christ by Faith, and born of him after the Spirit. 2. Though
from Adams sinning, the guilt of his one offense redounds to the condemnation
of many, yet the free gift of God, viz. the righteousness of Christ, redounds
to the justification of many, not only from the guilt of that first sin, but of
all other actual sins also. 3. As by one offense death reigned over all
mankind, much more shall they, who by Faith are united to Christ, and so
participate of his abundant grace, and the free gift of his righteousness, be
made partakers of everlasting life, wherein they shall reign with Him in glory.
As therefore by one offense v. 18. (...)] supple (...) res processit (...).
etc. vide Grot.
guilt came upon all naturally descended of Adam to their condemnation, so by
the righteousness and perfect obedience of one, viz. of Jesus Christ, (the
meritorious cause of pardon), grace and absolution come upon all that believe
in him, and are born again by his Spirit to their justification. From Ver. 12,
to 20.

But here then it may be objected. If we are made righteous only by the
righteousness of Christ, To what end was the Law given to the Israelites by
Moses? He answers, It was not given that we should seek to be justified by it;
But 1. That sin might abound Per legem magis innotuit peccatum.
, that is, be more clearly manifested to us, to be sin, and exceeding odious.
2. That grace might super-abound, that is, might appear much more conspicuous
and glorious in pardoning sin, and subduing of it. That as the power of sin
appeared in making us liable both to temporal and eternal death, so might the
power of grace appear, in beginning in us a spiritual life here, and bringing
us to an eternal life in glory hereafter, through the righteousness of Christ
held forth in the Gospel. From Ver. 20, to the end.

He comes now to show, that this Doctrine of justification by Faith in tends
exceedingly to promote holiness. And that he may the more clearly prove it, he
first answers an Objection, which some (its like) in those times were ready to
make against this Doctrine. They would be apt to say, If we be justifi^d freely
by the grace of God, through Faith in Christ; Why may we not then freely
indulge our selves in sin, that we may more inhaunce the grace of God, and make
it appear more abundant and glorious in the pardoning of us? This Objecti n the
Apostle answers with detestation, showing that this Doctrine allows no such
wicked inferences, but tends altogether to promote holiness. And this be
plainly proves by this argument. True Believers are dead Mori peccato] Est ei
non esse subjectum, seu non servire ei. Flac. Glass. Mori peccato] Est
renunciare peccato, and abdicare illud. e contra vivere peccato est fraenum
laxare and indulgere peccato ut in carne dominium acquirat.
to sin, (that is, being partakers of the Spirit of Christ they renounce it,
and labor to mortify it) therefore they cannot live in it. And this he shows
is signified by their Baptism, whereby they are incorporated into Christ, and
testify their communion with him; 1. In his death; so that they are to imitate
his death by dying unto sin, and by mortifying their corruptions. 2. In his
burial, being buried with him in Baptism unto a similitude of his death and
burial, by the immersion of the whole body into the water, (a custom much used
in hot Countries); and therefore they are obliged to endeavor the burial of
the old man, and to labor to abolish the body of sin. 3. In his resurrection,
therefore they are to imitate him by rising to newness of life. And as plants
ingrafted, receive juice and moisture from the stock, so Believers being by
Baptism implanted into Christ, do by virtue of their union with him, obtain
power to kill sin, and to dye to it, in conformity to his death; and to rise
from death in sin to newness of life, in conformity to his resurrection. And so
the the old man Veterem hominem apellat non naturam sed pravam mentem. Theod.
is crucified with Christ, he having by his merits obtained not only remission
of sins, but also the spirit of regeneration for Believers, that the viz.
Habitual corruption compacted as it were into one monstrous body prepared with
all its members to commit actual sins.
body of sin may be destroyed, and they freed and delivered from its power, as
those that are dead are no longer subject to the power of any man. And if they
be conformed to Christ in his death, there is no doubt but they shall have a
spiritual life here, and enjoy with him a celestial and everlasting life
hereafter. And as Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, so likewise
it shall be with his members. For he died once to make atonement for sin
Christus mortuus est peccato, illud expiando: nos morimur peccato, illud
destruendo. Illyr.
, and to ab^lish it. But being now alive, he lives to the glory of God his
Father Vivit Deo] i. e. apud Deum, and similem Deo vivit vitam coelestem,
divinam, beatam, immortalem. Vel vivit Deo] i. e. Ad Dei gloriam, ut Deum
perpetuo laudet, and celebret. Corn. a Lap. Vivit Deo] Nempe ut eum glorificet,
colligendo Ecclesiam, and suo Sacerdotio fungendo, 8. and ab eo vicissim
glorificatur. Flac. Illyr.
, by whose power he was raised to life again: And so they likewise ought to
look upon themselves as those that are dead to sin, and therefore must not live
in it, but unto God, though grace received from Jesus Christ. From Ver. 1. to
12.

Having showed how this Doctrine tends to promote holiness, he comes now to
exhort those who are justified by Faith, to endeavor to be holy, and to take
care that sin get not any dominion over them, and that they obey it not by
yiedling to the sinful lusts, inclinations, and motions of the flesh, nor
employ the faculties and powers of their souls, or the members of their bodies
in the service of sin and the Devil, but in the service of God, who has so
graciously raised them by the power of his grace from the death of sin, and
endowed them with the life of righteousness through Faith in Christ Jesus. And
he tells them, that if they did contend and strive duly against sin, it should
not have dominion over them, because they are not under the Law as a Covenant
of works, exacting perfect obedience, and ministering no strength to perform it;
but under a Covenant of grace in Christ, which ministers strength to resist
sin, and to overcome it. Yet none ought to infer from hence, that because they
are not under the Law as a Covenant, therefore they are not under it as a rule;
or that because they are under the Covenant of grace, therefore they may
indulge themselves in sin, seeing the contrary plainly follows thereupon. For
standing in the relation of servants to God, they must not serve sin; for they
must of necessity be the servants to him whom they obey, and must receive a
reward proportionable to the work they do. If they be the servants of sin Servi
estis cui obeditis, sive peccati (quod ducit) ad mortem sive obedientiae (quae
ducit) ad justitiam:
, it will bring upon them eternal death; if they be the servants of obedience,
that is, obedient servants to God, it will bring them the reward of
righteousness, which is eternal life. Indeed before their conversion, he
acknowledges, they did serve sin, but (through the grace of God) the time of
that bondage was past, and now they had begun sincerely to obey that form of
sound Doctrine, into which they were led by them, that first preached the
Gospel unto them In quam traducti estis ab iis qui Evangelium vobis
annunciarunt. Vatablus. vide etiam Pisc. in loc. vide 2 Timothy 1.13.
. Therefore being made free from the slavery of sin, they were now become
servants to righteousness. He tells them, he speaks plainly to them in an
earthly similitude (because of the weakness of their understandings in
spiritual matters, Joh. 3.12.), and accordingly declares unto them, that is was
but equal, that as before they had obeyed sin, and yielded up their members to
be servants to uncleanness and iniquity, even to the acting of all
unrighteousness; so now they should yield their members to be servants to
righteousness, that they may attain to a high degree of sanctification. As
therefore when they served sin they were void of righteousness, ( that had no
whit of their service), so now it is but equal, that seeing they are servants
of righteousness, they should be free from sin, and not servants at all unto
it. Lastly, he minds them of the sad nature of the service of sin, it being for
the time past unprofitable, for the time present shameful, and for the time to
come deadly. But they that have gained liberty from the bondage of sin, and are
become servants unto God, he shows, have great benefit thereby. For they will
daily grow more and more in grace and holiness, and at last shall obtain
eternal life. So that the wages, due reward, and end of sin, is death; but life
eternal is the end of righteousness; not as its wages, but as a gift freely
given by God, upon the account of the merit and intercession of Christ. From
Ver. 12. to the end.

He comes now to answer another Objection which the Jews would be apt to you
Christians, seeing you do not observe the Law of Moses, and so sin
contemptuously against God. Nay not only the Gentiles who are converted to
Christianity, are by you permitted to neglect Circumcision, etc. [Act. 15.],
but the converted Jews are taught by you also, that they need not observe the
Law of Moses, [see Act. 21.21.]? To this the Apostle answers, that they who
believe in Christ are now no longer under the Mosaical Paedagogy, or tied to
observe the Ceremonial Rites; which he proves by this general position, that
the Law has power over a man as long as it (...)] Quamdiu lex vivit, i. e.
Quamdin extincta non est. Lex enim abrogata, mortua est, i. e. vim obligandi
non habet. Grot.
lives, and abides in force, and no longer; as he instances in the case of
marriage. The Law of marriage binds a married woman to her husband, as long as
he lives; but if he die, she is free from the obligation of that Law; that Law
ceases as to her, and she is at liberty to marry to another. So for those of
the Jews that believe in Christ, the Law v. 4. (...) pro, (...) hypallage,
figura quae frequenter occurrit in Novo Testamento.
(through the offering up of Christ's Body on the Cross Nam Christi crux, and
mors, inter caetera and hoc a Patre impetravit, ut legis illius imperium
tolleretur, Ephesians. 2.15, 16. Col. 2.14.
) is dead to them, and they are freed from the obligation of it, and are now
rightfully joined and espoused to another, viz. to Christ, (whose resurrection
from the dead shows he is alive); that so living in conjugal affection and
obedience to him, they may be made fruitful by his Spirit, and may bring forth
such holy actions as are agreeable to the will of God, and tend to his glory.
This he shows was not done whilst they lived under the paedagogy of the Law,
and those external carnal ordinances, (called here the flesh Pauci sub statu
legis erant (...), and qui tales erant, non erant tales ex sola vi legis.
Plerique erant (...).
); for though all sinful practices were forbidden by the Law, yet sinful
affections were not thereby mortified, or subdued, but rather more irritated
and stirred up; insomuch that they were obeyed, and yielded to, and executed by
their members, and so they brought forth that sad fruit, to wit, obligation to
eternal punishment. But now they were freed from the Law, and those carnal
external observances, (that obligation v. 6. (...)] Alii codices habent (...).
Cujus lectionis and Origines meminit. Quomodo and Chrysostomum legisse, apparet
ex ejus interpretatione (...). Christus moriens intersecit legem Mosis, quae
Judaeos sibi alligatos habebat, sicut lex conjugii soeminam. Grot.
being cancelled by which they were due), that for time to come they might
serve God in newness of life, and with Evangelical obedience; begun and carried
on, by the Spirit of Christ, and not according to the directions of the Law;
written for their use of old, by Gods appointment, and called here the oldness
of the letter Legem Mosis vocat literam vetustam. Literae vetustae solent
evanescere, Heb. 8.13.
. From Ver. 1. to 7.

Yet lest what he had said might be ill understood, he comes now to Apologize
for the holiness of the Law, and to answer an Objection which he foresaw some
might be apt to make against this discourse. Some might say, If vicious motions
be stirred up by the Law, then the Law may seem to be the cause of sin. He
answers, That the Law manifests and discovers sin, and therefore cannot work
it. For as for his own particular, he should not so exactly have known the very
desires of the heart to be sin, had not he by a more attentive consideration of
the Tenth Commandment found that they were so. But when he knew this original
corruption, or the inward depravation of his nature, taking occasion by the
Law, that is, being stirred up, and more irritated by the prohibition of it,
brought forth all the vicious motions of Concupiscence The Schoolmen
distinguish between the first motions of concupiscence which have not the
consent of the Will, which they call Concupiscentiam informem; and those
motions of concupiscence whereunto the Will consents, which they call
Concupiscentiam formatam.
in him. Indeed whilst he knew not the Law, (that is, the exact holiness and
purity it required), this kind of sin lay as it were dead in him, that is, was
not known to him to be sin, neither did it terrify his Conscience: But after
the Law came to be better known by him, he found, by the prohibition of the
Law, his appetite to sin was more increased and enraged. Formerly, when he
lived a Pharisee, and had the Law, but did not sufficiently consider it, nor
the exactness and perfection it required, he seemed to himself to be alive
Concedimus Apostolum, a v. 7. ad 14. agere de homine non renato. At a v. 14.
usque ad finem agit de homine renato. Quod probamus, quia Apostolus, v. 9, 10,
11. perpetuo loquitur in praeterito. A versu autem 14 incipit loqui in
praesenti tempore. Ego, inquit, Carnalis siem, non eram, etc. Secundo, quia
descriptio subjecti ita se habet, a v. 14. ut nemini nisi renato competat.
Etenim pugna inter carnem, and spiritum, non est nisi in regenitis. Consule v.
15. 17. 22. Ipsa delectatio boni non nisi gratiae deputanda. Augustine. Vide
super hac re Freidlib. Laurentium, Willetum. Ego putabam verba ista Apostolica
dici non posse nisi de iis quos ita haberet Carnis concupiscentia subjugatos ut
facerent quicquid illa compelleret, quod de Apostolo, dementis est credere; sed
postea melioribus and intelligentioribus cessi, vel potius ipsi (quod fatendum
est) veritati; ut viderem in illis Apostoli verbis gemitum esse Sanctorum
contra carnales Concupiscentias dimicantium. Augustine. Tom. 7. Col. 1135. and
1136. Et libro Retractat. cap. 23. dicit. Potest quisque Sanstus sub gratia
positus, dicere ista omnia. Et lib. 6 contra Pelag. c. 11. Non ego solus aut
primus hunc locum Pauli ita intellexi sed sic quoque intellexit Hilarious,
Gregorius, Ambrosius, and caeteri, Ecclesiae Sancti, notique Doctores, qui and
ipsum Apostolum adversus carnales concupiscentias, quas habere nolebat, and
tamen habebat, strenue conflixisse, cundemque conflictum suum illis suis verbis
contestatum fuisse, senserunt.
, that is, to be righteous, and so not liable or obnoxious to death: but when
the grace of God had opened his eyes, and showed him the true sense and
spiritual meaning, and extent of the Law, and how that even inward desires
contrary to the Law are sins, then he began to see his manifold sins and
guiltiness, and that he was in the state of death. Then he understood these two
things, which he knew not before: 1. The proper end and use of the Law, which
was ordained to give life to them that should perfectly keep it. 2. The
accidental effect of it, viz. that through the corruption of man, it became a
cause of death to him, by irritating his inward corruption. He further shows,
that sin, or the depraved nature in him, excited him to disobey the Law by
suggesting to him, it was more pleasant to indulge himself in sin, and so
seducing him, made him liable to the punishment of it, which is death. However
the Law, he acknowledges, is in its self holy, just, and good. But some might
then object, How can that which is in it self good, be a cause of death to any
man? He answers, It Is so only accidentally, not of it self, but through the
corruption of man's nature, which therein manifests it self to be more
superlatively evil and vile, by being irritated by so holy a Law, and so being
the cause of actual sins, and of death. From Ver. 7. to 14.

In the next place, he shows, how he himself was grieved with the remainders of
corruption, which he found in himself, even after he was delivered from the
dominion thereof, and how much he strove against them, and how he got the
victory over them, only by Christ. He complains, he consisted of a regenerate
and an unregenerate part; the one was irritated by the Law of God, the other
sweetly complied with it; from which two principles, arose a spiritual combat
in him, (see Gal. 5.17), which he comes now to describe. And first he
acknowledges, that the Law was spiritual, but when he looked upon himself, and
compared the imperfection of his obedience with the spiritualness of the Law,
he was compelled to acknowledge, that he was still in part carnal The regenerate
are in part carnal, because they have inchoatam, non plenam liberationem.
, (namely, in respect of the remainders of corruption that were in him), and
sold under sin, not as if he were willingly obedient to it, but as one that
against his desire and will, was often instigated by it, and sometimes
overpowered by the tyranny of it, and carried away whither he would not, and
from which he was not yet able wholly to free himself. For that (says he) which
sometimes I do, being overpowered by the force of corruption, and violence of
temptation; I do not allow, or approve in my renewed judgment, but utterly
condemn, before those corrupt passions are stirred in me; and the good which I
will and approve, that I do not, in such perfection as I gladly would. For I
would perform perfect obedience to the Law, but I find that in many things I
fall short and offend, yea sometimes am hurried into the evil, which I am
utterly averse from, when I am not thus assaulted. So that therein I show and
manifest, that I approve and own the Law to be good, and a perfect rule of
righteousness. From Ver. 14. to 17.

He further shows he stood not in fear of being rejected of God, for those
remainders of corruption in him, so long as he heartily strove against them,
and endeavored to subdue them. For God judges of his Children, that are thus
exercised between flesh and spirit, according to the better and sounder part in
them, unto which they do willingly cleave and adhere, and not according to the
other (the flesh) which they do resist and combat against Dicit se secundum
repugnantia principia, repugnantia habere studia. Tolet.
. Ver. 17.

He acknowledges, that in his nature, so far as it is yet corrupt and
unrenewed, there dwells no spiritual good, by which he can please God; and
consequently not so much as power to will any good. Indeed he found his renewed
will somewhat inclining to good, but the corruption yet remaining in him, often
hindered the execution of those good motions and inclinations, insomuch that he
could not but accuse himself of manifold omissions of good, and commissions of
evil, which he was heartily sorry and displeased with himself for: so that it
was not he as renewed, but as overpowered by this in-dwelling corruption, that
did this evil. And further he declares, that when he was ready to do good, he
found the pravity of nature present with him, as a Law over-swaying, and
forcing, and inclining him to evil; yet, according to his renewed nature,
(called the inward man because hidden, and concealed from the eyes of man), he
delighted in the Law of God. From Ver. 17. to 22.

But he tells them, he had sad experience of another Law, viz. the power of
sin, yet exerting it self in him, and warring and fighting against the Law of
God, by which his inward and renewed man was guided, (and with the purity and
spirituality whereof it was delighted), and endeavoring to captivate him unto
evil. Ver. 23.

Under a feeling of this misery, he cries out, O that I were delivered from
these carnal lusts, that are a death to me! O that I were out of this animal
and terrestrial life! O that I were delivered from this body subject to death!
for till then I cannot expect to be delivered from the remainders of sin, and
the old man, (which he here calls the body of death, see Romans 6.6.), Yet for
all this he does not faint and despond, but blesses God who in and through his
Son, delivers him from the curse of the Law, and the dominion of sin, and will
perfect his deliverance from all the power of it in his due time. At last he
concludes, that in this his present regenerate condition; though with his mind,
that is, with that part that is renewed in him, he serves the Law of God, yet
by reason of the corruption that remains in him, (against which he did strive),
he is sometimes tempted and seduced to the commitment of sin. From Ver. 23 to
the end.

justification by Faith in Christ affords Believers strong ground of comfort
against all fear of evil or punishment, to be endured after this life; which a
sense of the imperfection of their sanctification, and of sin dwelling in them,
might strike them with. And under this Head, (from v. 1. to 9.), he shows, 1.
That this consolation, viz. security to be freed from Condemnation, is proper
and peculiar to justified persons, only; who being implanted into Christ by
Faith, endeavor to be more and more holy, and fulfill not the lusts of the
flesh, but follow the guidance of the Spirit of God. For the power of the
quickening Spirit of Christ, (which rules in the hearts of Believers as a Law,
dictating to them what they ought to do), frees them and himself in particular,
from the reigning power of sin, the wages whereof is death: From neither of
which the Law of Moses was able to rescue any man. For the Law cannot justify
any man now, since man's transgression of it, but it only condemns and works
wrath; it shows sin, it cannot abolish it. What therefore the Law cannot do by
reason of man's first transgression thereof, and his present pravity of nature,
God was pleased to do, by sending his Son (who took on him our true human
nature, yet not a sinful nature, though he had the likeness of it, in being
subject to our infirmities), to be made a Sacrifice for us on the Cross, and
there he condemned sin in the flesh of his Son, and did exact of him the
pun^shment due to it, that we believing in him might be justified, and reckoned
as those, that have performed perfect obedience to the Law; and that, by the
inchoation of sincere Evangelical obedience to the Law in us, we might be
enabled to walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh. For those that are
in their corrupt and natural estate do savor only fleshly things, which lead
and bring a man to death, but they that are regenerate do savor spiritual
things, which lead to everlasting life and peace. For the wisdom of the flesh,
or the carnal mind, is enmity against God, there being a natural repugnancy in
it to submit it self to his will. Therefore they that are in their carnal and
corrupt estate, and follow the lust and concupiscence of the flesh, cannot
please God till they be converted and changed. From Ver. 1. to 9.

2ly. He addresses himself to the Believing Romans, applying this consolation
of immunity from condemnation unto them, who being united to Christ by Faith,
have the Spirit of Christ, by his gracious operations dwelling Non tanquam
hospes sed indigena perpetuus [Joh. 14.16.] qui in domo imperat.
in them. And if Christ be in them by his Spirit, though their body be mortal
and subject to death, (by reason of sin, which still dwells in them), yet their
spirits or souls are made partakers of eternal life initial, by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and a work of sanctification begun in
them, which Christ, who has begun it will carry on. And if the Spirit of
Christ dwell in them, he will never leave his habitation, but will raise their
bodies to life again at the last day, as his own body was raised from the dead
by the power of God. From Ver. 9. to 12.

3ly. He shows from ver. 12. to 17. what use they are to make of this Doctrine,
(which affords so great consolation), namely, to engage themselves with all
seriousness to subdue the flesh, and to be more and more holy. For if they live
after the flesh they shall dye, not only a temporal but an eternal death; but
if they through the grace and assistance of the Spirit, do subdue and mortify
the sinful lusts of the flesh, they shall live, not only a spiritual life here,
but an eternal life in glory hereafter. And he further tells them, that all
that follow the guidance of the Spirit of God do evidence themselves to be the
Children of God. For after that they have received Christ by Faith, a servile
fear of condemnation is no more wrought in them (as was before wrought by the
Spirit Spiritus servitutis] Sic vocatur Spiritus Sanctus ab effecto, quod ille
efficere solet per praedicationem legis.
in the preaching of the Law, in order to bring them home to Christ), but the
Spirit of adoption Spiritus adoptionis] i. e. Spiritus Sanctus qui credentibus
adoptionem ipsorum testatur, nimirum, eos esse filios Dei.
, which testifies to them, that they are the Children of God, and so encourages
them with an humble confidence to call on God as their reconciled Father Per
(...) notantur ardentes illi gemitus, quos Spiritus Sanctus in piis excitat,
quoties opus est, etsi illi ne verbum quidem loquantur. Abba pater; ista
conduplicatio facit ad (...). Hic personam mutat Apostolus, ut sortem communem
omnium Sanctorum exprimeret. Calv.
. So that they shall not need to fear condemnation any more (...), sicut olim
Israelitae quum iis Lex promulgaretur.
, being freed from it by Christ. And this Spirit of Adoption witnesses
inwardly unto their Spirits and Consciences that they are the Children of God.
From Ver. 12. to 17.

He comes now to show, how this Doctrine of justification affords grounds of
comfort to justified persons against the afflictions they may meet with in this
life From Ver. 17. to 31.

And, 1. He shows, that they are Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint-Heirs with
Christ Christ only is the Natural Heir, being the only begotten Son of God, but
we are Heirs by Adoption and Grace, and so are admitted to be Heirs with Christ.
, their Elder Brother; and if they be willing to suffer with him, (when called
to it), and to have communion with him in afflictions Our Sufferings are for
Christ when we suffer for righteousness sake, as He did, and bear the like
rebukes for the truth, that he did.
, they shall also be glorified with him. And he tells them, that the sufferings
of this life Quae sunt parvae, paucae, breves, and mixtae gaudio.
, let them be what they will, are no way to be compared to the glory that shall
be revealed hereafter, and conferred on those that suffer for Christ. He shows
them, that the whole frame of the Universe, and all the visible Creatures in
it, being now (contrary to the first institution of God) made subject to
vanity, and in a great part to destruction, long (...) est ipsa (...), more
Hebraico.
as it were, for the manifestation of the glory of the Sons of God at the day
of judgment, that they may be redeemed and delivered from their corruption, and
the abuse of men. For the Creature against its natural propension and
inclination, (which inclines it to self-preservation), was made subject to
vanity and a frail condition, and that by reason of the sin of man, for which
God subjected it to this curse and malediction. And if the Creature Haec omnia
de creaturis irrationalibus atque inanimatis quoque, enunciantur non propire
sed figurate and per Prosopopaeiam.
being made thus subject to vanity and misery, (not for its own, but our
fault), does patiently bear it, in expectation of deliverance from this bondage
of corruption, and to be restored into that excellent and primitive state of
its creation Expectatur post (...) multo melior puriorque machina. 2 Pet. 3.13.
, (namely, at that time when the Children of God shall attain unto their
glorious Estate), how much more should we patiently bear afflictions, in
expectation of a glorious deliverance? For the whole Creation Peter Martyr
shows the vanity of the Creature in these respects, 1. They are in continual
labor to serve man's necessities. 2. They are often punished together with man,
as in the destruction of the old world and Sodom. 3. They are constrained to
serve the lusts of wicked men.
(after the manner of a traveling woman) does groan and sigh with us, to be
delivered of this burden of vanity and misery, unto which it is subjected. And
we also (says the Apostle), who have received the first fruits of the Spirit, (
viz. peace and joy, which are the pledges and beginnings of Eternal life), do
breathe after the completing and perfecting of our Adoption, in the glorious
resurrection of our bodies, and redemption of them from all evil and misery.
And the hope of this should comfort us under all afflictions. For we have not
at present actual possession of the glory we expect, but have it as yet only in
hope; but hope So Faith, Gal. 3.25. signifies the thing believed,
, (that is, the thing hoped for), when it comes once to be seen with our eyes,
and possessed, is no longer hoped for, but enjoyed. So that it is the property
of hope, to wait for, and expect a future good, and of Christian hope to expect
the glorious manifestation of the complete Adoption, and glory of the Sons of
God, and to wait patiently for it. From Ver. 17, to 26.

2. He shows, that justified persons are not left to themselves in those
afflictions that come upon them, but the Spirit of God supports them in their
distresses and anxieties of mind, and teaches them how to pray, (which is the
surest refuge in trouble), helping their infirmities, and directing them to ask
things agreeable to the will of God, and in a due manner. He also intercedes
for them, that is, causes and exciteth them to intercede, and cry, and pray
for themselves So Gal. 4.6. The Spirit is said to cry, Abba Father. Christ
makes intercession for us, vigore meriti. The Spirit, nos interpellare
faciendo, by causing and stirring us up to make request.
, and that with lively feelings, groanings, and pangs of affection, such as
cannot be expressed or uttered by words. And God who is omniscient, knows what
is the mind and intention of those groans, which his Spirit excites in his own
Children. For the Spirit teaches and guides the Saints to pray in such a manner
as is best pleasing and acceptable to God. Therefore, being sure to be heard,
they may comfort themselves in their afflictions. From Ver. 26, to 28.

3. He further declares how He and other Believers did know by daily
experience, that all things (even afflictions) do work together Etiam ea quae
nocitura videntur. Sed iis qui Deum non amant, quae profutura videntur damna
sunt.
for good to the Saints, they being effectually called to believe in Christ,
according to the eternal counsel and purpose of God; according to which he has
purposed in himself, to save mankind only by grace through Christ. For whom he
did foreknow, chose and mark, for his own, from all eternity; he did
predestinate, fore-appoint, and design to make conformable to his Son, not only
in holiness and happiness, but in the Cross and sufferings, as the means
conducing thereunto; intending, that his own Son should have many adopted
Brethren, of whom he should be the Head and Captain, (as the firstborn was
wont to be in all families), in courageous bearing of afflictions, and passing
through them to eternal glory. And those whom he did thus fore-ordain See 1 Pet.
1.2. 1 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 1.5.
to eternal happiness, he effectually calls in time to believe in his Son; and
whom be thus calls he justifies; and whom he justifies them he decrees to
glorify; first, by sanctifying of them, (which is glory begun), and hereafter
by giving them a full possession of glory in Heaven. Therefore justified
persons have a solid ground of Consolation, though they be afflicted in this
life. From Ver. 28, to 31.

4. He concludes this Argument of his, for justification by Faith, with a holy
insultation, and triumphing in Christ against all accusations and tribulations
which the Devil or the World might be able to bring upon justified persons;
arguing in this manner: If God declare himself to be so much for us, as that he
has chosen, called, justified, sanctified, and intends to glorify us
hereafter, who shall be able to hurt us? If God spared not his only begotten
Son, but gave him over to death for all us who believe in him, we have no cause
to fear but he will give us whatsoever else is good for us, and may tend to
promote our Salvation. And to pursue this Argument further, he asks, Who can
implead any of Gods Elect, as Satan and their own Consciences (sometimes) are
apt to do? If they do, he replies, It is God that justifies Here the importance
of the word justification is shown, that it signifies nothing else but a
judicial absolution, or declaring one to be free from guilt.
, acquits and absolves them from condemnation for the sake of Christ. And he
demands, Who can condemn those who are freed by Christ, who dyed, rose again
Christ's death would not have profited us, if he had been swallowed up by it,
and still detained under the power of it.
, now sits at Gods right hand, and intercedes for them? He asks, What can
separate them from that love wherewith Christ has loved them, and manifested
toward them, in doing all this for them? Shall tribulation, or persecution, or
any afflictions, which are only trials of Faith? No, none of them can hinder
them from enjoying the full effect and sweet sense of Christ's love, though such
trials have been the lot of Gods people, both under the Old and New Testament.
So that they may apply the words of David in Psalm. 44, 22. unto themselves,
saying, For thy sake, O Lord, we are persecuted continually, and are in daily
expectation of death, and are used as if we were sheep destinated to the
slaughter; nevertheless in all these conflicts we do more then overcome,
through Christ helping of us; our graces being strengthened thereby, and our
reward increased. He concludes that he is persuaded, that neither the pleasures
of life, nor the terrors of death, nor evil Angels, nor any of the powers and
principalities of this world, nor evils present, nor any that can happen to us
hereafter, nor height of prosperity, nor depth of adversity, nor any thing
else, can separate us from the love of God, wherewith he loves us; being by
Faith united to Christ. For his love is founded on an immutable foundation,
viz. the infinite merit of his Son. From Ver. 31. to the end.

He further confirms the assertion, that justification is by Faith in Christ,
from the experience of the Israelites, who seeking justification by works, and
not by Faith in Christ, found it not, and were therefore cast off; and from the
experience of the believing Gentiles, who not trusting in their own works, fled
by Faith to Christ for justification, and so obtained it. And he answers four
Objections, which he foresaw would be made against what he should say touching
the rejection of the Jews.

1. Some would perhaps say, that what he spoke upon this Argument, savored of
ill will and disaffection to his own Nation. For answer to that, he solemnly
protests in the presence of Christ, his Conscience also bearing him witness
(which was guided by the holy Ghost), that he was greatly afflicted, and
grieved at the very heart, for the rejection of the Jews, who would not be
brought to look after Christ, but depended on the Law, and confided in their
own righteousness. For he had such an affection for them, that if it were
possible, (and might consist with the will of God), that retaining his
communion with Christ in holiness and love, he might be separated from him in
bliss and happiness, he could even be willing to suffer it It Is true, happiness
and holiness cannot be separated, neither could Paul be separated from Christ,
in either Conditionaliter hoc intelligendum, and hoc moderamine, si id salva
pietate liceat. Amor Extaticus procedit etiam ad impossibilia. Lutherus. It is
not to be understood of a separation from the Spirit and grace of Christ, but
from the glory and comforts of Christ. If he had desired the first, he had
sinned. For we should not desire to be in a sinful condition to save all the
world.
, to redeem his Kinsmen and Nation from that judicial rejection. And besides
his natural affection to them, he tells them, he had other reasons to inflame
him to this Charity, and to oblige him to have a high respect and esteem for
them, they being the people whom God had extraordinarily dignified with many
great and glorious privileges. Particularly, they were Israelites descended
from Jacob, who wrestled with God for the blessing, and had thereupon the
honorable name of Israel (...) princeps Dei fortis, principatalem potentiam a
Deo consequutus. Deducunt a (...) dominari, praevalere, and (...) Deo, ut sit
formativum proprii nominis. Est una ex literis tetragrammati addita Jaacob,
Israel, etc. ut ad umbraret, ex illo eum proditurum, qui verus Deus and
Salvator esset.
given him, Genesis 32.28. 2ly. God assumed and adopted them for his peculiar
people, before all other Nations of the world, [Exod. 4.22. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Jer.
31.9.] 3ly. They had the high privilege to have the presence of God in a more
eminent and glorious manner manifesting it self among them, from between the
Cherubins on the Ark, [2 Chronicles. 6.41 Psalm. 63.2. Psalm. 78.61. 1 Samuel 4.21,
22.]. 4ly, With them the Covenants were made, viz. that Covenant first made
with Abraham, and often repeated; and the Sacraments of the Covenant were also
given to them, viz. Circumcision and sprinkling of blood, [G n. 17.10. Exodus
24.8.]. 5ly. To them God give his Laws, moral, judicial, and ceremonial,
prescribing his own worship and service. 6^y, To them the promises of the
Messiah were made. 7ly, They are descended of those honorable Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Lastly, They are they, of whose stock Christ took
his humane Nature, who in the unity of his person, is true man, and true God,
blessed for evermore This was the title by which the one supreme God was known
and expressed among the Jews. See Dr. Hammond in loc.
. From Ver. 1, to 6.

2. Objection: If the Jews be rejected, then some will be apt to say, That the
Word of God, and the Promises of Grace made to the Israelites is void, wherein
God promised to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. He
answers, that all that are born of Israel the Patriarch, according to the
flesh, are not true Israelites, that is, such to whom the Promise appertains.
Neither are all that are begotten of Abraham according to the flesh, the true
Children, and Heirs of the Promise, but only his spiritual Seed, namely, true
Believers, begotten after the Image of his Faith. For Abraham had two Sons,
Ishmael, and Isaac: Ishmael was a type of those that are born, only according
to the flesh, and were to be cast out; and Isaac, of those that are born, not
merely by the power of Nature, but by virtue of the Promise and free grace of
God, and these are to be reckoned for the true Seed In Isaaco, i. e. per
Isaacum vocabitur, h. e. existet tibi semen, nempe illud numerosissimum quod
tibi promisi, and praecipue Christus. Pisc.
, that shall inherit, [see Gal. 4.24, etc.]. So that the carnal Seed of
Abraham, born according to the course of Nature, are the Children of God, to
whom the Promise was made; but the Children Filii promissionis, h. e. fidei,
quae promissionem in Christo gratuitam complectitur. Descriptio credentium.
Filii dicuntur per Metaphoram, respiciendo ad Abrahamum, qui pater credentium,
a Spiritu Sancto statuitur, Romans 4.16. q. d. qui vestigiis Abrahae insistunt,
and fide ipsi fiunt similes, Gal. 3.7. and 29.
represented by Isaac The birth of Isaac was a special effect of Gods promise,
he being miraculously born, of a naturally-barren woman, and according to the
ordinary course of nature past Childbearing, had she been never so fruitful;
and his Father being a very old man.
, born of the supernatural power of the Spirit of God, (who by Faith lay hold
on the Promise of Salvation made in Christ), they are to be accounted for that
Seed mentioned in the Covenant, I will be thy God and the God of thy Seed. This
also, he shows, was typified in the twins Rebecca had by Isaac, viz. Esau and
Jacob, who though they had not only one Father, but one Mother, (which Ishmael
and Isaac had not), and were born at one time, yet their condition was very
different, neither had they equal favors and privileges vouchsafed to them by
God. If therefore any shall wonder that the Gentiles should become Heirs to the
Promise, by Faith in Christ, and that the carnal Jews should be cast off, for
their infidelity, and adhering to their own righteousness, let them consider
this instance of Esau and Jacob, of whom when Rebecca was with Child, and found
the Babes struggling in her womb, (in a manner not usual to other women, Genesis
25.22, 23.), she enquired of the Lord by prayer, or by some Prophet, what the
meaning of it should be, and received this answer, that two Nations (that is,
the heads of two Nations, viz. Edomites and Israelites) were in her womb, and
that God had determined before either of them had done good or evil, to prefer
the younger before the elder, and declared, that the elder should serve the
younger Esau in his own person did never serve Jacob; but the people descended
of Esau, did serve those descended of Jacob.
, [which was fulfilled, when the Israelites subdued the Edomites, 2 Samuel 8.14.
1 King. 22.47. Obad. v. 17, 18.]. And in the Prophet Malachi, chapter 1. v. 2, 3.
it is expressed in higher terms, Some, by hating in this Chapter of Malachi
understand severely punishing; and alledg, that the Apostle does only allude to
the words of the Prophet: and that he does not say, that before the Children
had done either good or evil, God said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated: but only, The elder shall serve the younger: But as for that saying,
Esau have I hated, it was after their wicked and unnatural behavior toward
their Brethren the Israelites, and also upon that account, as you will see, if
you compare this place with the prophecy of Obadiah, v. 10. it is said, For
thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shall
be cut off for ever And in the next verses we see what the violence they are
charged with was. Verbum odisse aliquando significat alium alii praeferre,
unumque prae alio negligere, praeterire, ac minus diligere. vid. Genesis 29.30.31.
Odisse idem est, quod minus dilexisse. Vasquez. Et hoc impletum est historice
and literaliter. 1. In ipsis personi Esaui and Jacobi; Nam jus primogeniturae
Deus ab Esau transtulit in Jacob, Genesis 27.27, etc. 2. In posteris utriusque.
Nam Idumaei in servitutem redacti sunt ab Israelitis, 2 Samuel 8.14. Terram item
fertilem, and amaenam, scil. Canaan, dedit Deus Israelitis; Idumaeis vero
regionem montosam and desertam, Mal. 1.2, 3. Ex Jacob quoque and non ex Esau
voluit Deus nasci promissum Messiam. Esavus and Jacobus hic non in sese sed, ut
typi, considerandi; itaque quae istis tribuuntur, antitypis, seu potius rebus
significatis, sunt accommodanda. Non est autem necesse ut typus antitypo suo
respondeat semper in omnibus; sed sussicit ut conveniant in proprio scopo quem
intendit is qui eis utitur. Non ergo sequitur, si Esau in re certa, and externa
typice adumbret reprobationem gentis Judaicae, ut propterea ipse quoque
damnatus sit. Non est necesse, ut is qui repraesentat filios carnis (aut
reprobos), sit ipse filius carnis (aut reprobus), ejusdem definitionis modo.
Oecolampadius in Mal. 1. Non ausim ipsum Esau (propter hoc dictum) dicere
reprobum. Item Mollerus in eundem locum, Ex Genesi verisimiles conjecturae sumi
possunt Esavum non ita rejectum esse a Deo, ut sit damnatus. Et propendere in
hanc partem mitiorem videtur Dr. Prideaux in lectionibus suis, viz. lect. 8.
addens, Etiamsi Canaan typus suit coelestis patriae, non inde tamen
concludendum, Omnes illos e coelo fuisse exclusos, quibus Deus in istam typicam
requiem negavit introitum. Affirmamus Paulum, ea quae partim ex Genesi partim
ex Malachia profert, sub ratione figurae, and typi, accommodare ad illustrandum
negotium illud reprobationis Judaeorum, de quo ex professo hic agit. Ita
videlicet, ut, quemadmodum Esau, licet natu prior, and major, a jure
primogeniturae annexaque promissione possidendae terrae Canaan rejicitur; sic
ab aeternae vitae possessione reprobantur Judaei, qui promissionem foederis
divini ab externa praerogativa aestimant. Hunnius. Sunt autem alii viri docti
qui hoc testimonium de Jacob and Esau, Genesis 25. and Mal. 1. exponunt, and
applicant doctrinae de praedestinatione Dei circa singulorum hominum, tum
electionem and salutem, tum reprobationem and interitum. Sed de hac re penes
pios and doctos judicium esto.
viz. Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: where, by Esau his posterity, the
Edomites are to be understood, and by that word hated, seems to be meant, that
God less loved them, than the Israelites; or was not so kind to them, as to
these; in that, whereas he gave to Jacob or the Israelites, a Land flowing with
milk and honey; the portion of Esau, or the Edomites, was the stony and barren
Mountains of Seir. For the word hate in Scripture many times signifies no more
than less to love: As Genesis 29.31. Luke 14.26. Joh. 12.25. And this was spoken,
that by this type the eternal purpose (...), h. e. Propositum Dei electivum,
vel propositum Dei, quod in mera Dei electione positum est.
of God, founded in his own free choice, might be manifested and declared,
fixed and firm, to save sinners, not for the works that they should do, but by
Faith in his Son, which is wrought in them by the free and effectual vocation
Non ex operibus sed ex vocante] Vocatio fidem praecedit. Ex vocante, h. e. ex
gratia Dei vocantis.
of his Spirit, illuminating their minds, and changing their hearts; that so
they may acknowledge their justification and salvation to his free grace in
Christ only, and not to their own merits and works, which the carnal Israelites
so much depended on. From Ver. 6, to 14.

3. Objection: But if God deal thus unequally with men, and do not dispense his
favor according to men's merits and works, Does he not seem to be unjust?

Answ. Far be it from us to think, that God can be in the least unrighteous.
For he is debtor to no man Nemini quippiam debeo; gratis do mea; Posset Deus
sine injuria omnes qui gravia peccarunt, morbo suo relinquere, nec ullam
adhibere medicinam. Grot.
, and therefore he is free to dispense his favors where he pleases, and to
deny them where he pleases, without giving account thereof to any one. And this
is agreeable to what he himself says to Moses, Exodus 33.19. I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, etc. Therefore no man is injured that is not
effectually called by his grace, seeing it is of his free grace and mercy that
any one is called. It Is not therefore to be ascribed to man's free will or
endeavor that any obtain Salvation, but to the free grace and mercy of God.
And as God is free in showing mercy to whom he pleases, so he may justly cast
off and reject obstinate contemners of Christ and his Gospel, for their own
contumacy; as he proves by the instance of Pharaoh, who having often hardened
his own heart against the judgments of God, [Exod. 8.15, 19. and 9.34.], at
last God was provoked judicially to leave him to himself, and to give him up to
his own obstinacy and obduration, [Exod. 9.12.] Insomuch that God tells him,
[Exod. 9.16.], for this have I raised thee up (...) feci ut restares Jun. and
Trem. and L. sustentavi te. LXX (...). servatus es.
, [or made thee to continue]; and have preserved thee amidst all these plagues,
that (thou abusing my patience by thy desperate obstinacy), I may show forth my
divine power, and make it appear more illustrious before all the world, in the
tremendous and exemplary punishment I shall inflict upon thee. Upon the whole,
the Apostle concludes, that as God is free to show mercy where he pleases, and
is not bound to render any reason thereof, beyond his own will, and divine
pleasure; so when he delivers up any obdurate sinner to the obduration Deus
dicitur indurare, quando permittit hominem in sua malitia perseverare, and
secundum eam agere. Tolet. August. Tom. 2. 464. Non obdurat Deus impertiendo
malitiam, sed non impertiendo miserecordiam. Et alibi: Deus dicitur eum
indurare, quem mollire noluerit. Sic excaecare dicitur eum, quem illuminare
noluerit; Sic repellere eum, quem vocare noluerit. Ita Carthusianus in Comment.
Indurat Deus non influendo malitiam, sed non conferendo subsidium. Et hoc
convenit Deo per accidens, scil. qui non removet prohibens, nec impertit
gratiam, cordis duritiem mollificantem. Origines, Hieronymus, Theophyl.
exponunt de patientia and lon^animitate Dei, qua abutentes impii, indies siunt
deteriores. Nec tamen accusanda est Dei patientia, sed eorum duritia, etc. vid.
Hieron. Tom. 30. Pharaoh semet obduravit voluntaria obstinatione; Deus
Pharaonem: i. e. sivit duriorem fieri, ac qu^lis esset, ostendit, servando
vivum, molliusque eum tractando, quam merebatur, ut postea tarditatem
supplicii, gravitate compensaret.
and hardness of his own heart, this he may justly do, without any impeachment
of his righteousness. From Ver. 14, to 19.

4. Objection. If the case be thus, that God does sometimes (and that justly)
leave obdurate sinners to harden themselves, why is he so offended at it, why
does he so complain of it by his Prophets, why does he severely punish it? For
who can resist his will?

Answ. It Is not fit Negat decere hominem jacente^^ p^ccatis, and ex^rema
commeti^um, Pe^m in jus trahere, si min^^^ei gr^tiam impertitur suam: Sicut e^m
sigulo licet ex luto, re vilissima, pro arbitrio, vas aliud ad honestum usum,
aliud ad minus honestes usu^ singere; sic Deo pro arbitrio licet ex h minibus
peccatoribus alios (ut in ii^ ostendat divitias miserecordia^ s^ae) sancta
vocatione ad gl^ti^m prap rare, alios vero quotamen patienter sert) sibi
permittere, sua culpa c^mp^ratos ad intentum. Quod discrimen Apostolos
prudenter notavit, v. 22, 23. Nam quam de iis quos Deus vocat sermonem
instituit (...) inquit, nempe ut designet hic efficacem Dei actionem; at ubi
agit de illis quos non vocat, co^dicit vasa, non quidem (...) sed (...), iuxta
il^^d, Perditio tua ex te Israel, etc. Deinde id ip^um confirmat Prophetarum
testimoniis, v. 24, 25, 26. quibus aperte non de justificatione, sed de
vocatione agitur. Camero
that Man, who is a guilty Creature, and obnoxious to God, should presume to
object any thing against Gods proceedings, which are always just and holy. It Is
not fit the Creature should dispute with his Creator; or question him, why he
has dealt thus or thus with him. Has not the Potter power and liberty, out of
the same lump of Clay to make one Vessel f^r an honorable use, and another for
a vile and more abject, [ see Isa. 29.16, and 45.9.]. Are not all mankind in
the hand of God, as Clay in the hand of the Potter, Jer. 18.6? What if God,
after he has expressed patience, and b^rn with the vessels of wrath A late
Author has these words, Observe, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction,
are such as the Apostle says God endured with much long-suffering and
therefore they were not made so by any absolute decree of hi^, but made
themselves so by their wilful and free sinning: For what long-suffering can it
be, to bear with the sins of those, that could never possibly have been avoided.
, a great while, who by their sins fit themselves for destructi^n, do at last
give them up to it, and to the judgment they have deserved? is there any thing
that can reasonably be objected against this? And thus the case stands with the
incredulous Jews, whom God rejected not, till they had showed themselves
obstinate refusers and contemners of Christ and his Gospel. And what if God
willing to render the riches of his free grace more illustrious toward the
vessels of mercy, do effectually call them to believe in his Son, and by
justifying and sanctifying of them, prepare them for glory. And thus the case
stands with those that are brought to believe in Christ, not only among the
Jews, but among the Gentiles also. And what is there in this that any can
blame, there being so much righteousness, wisdom, and goodness manifested
therein? From Ver. 19, to 25.

And lest the Jews should yet stumble at this Doctrine, he comes now to prove
that the calling of the Gentiles was foretold by the Prophet Hosea, chapter 2. v.
22. where God declares, that he will call them his people which were not his
people, and will have mercy on them which have not obtained mercy. And Hosea
1.10. he says, it shall come to pass instead of that which was said unto them,
ye are not my people, it shall be said to them, ye are the sons of the living
God; which notes his receiving the Gentiles into the Church, which was an act
of Gods free and undeserved mercy; at which the Jewish Believers were much
astonished, as we may see, Act. 10.45. He shows also, the rejection of the Jews
to be f^retold by the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 10.22. whose words he accommodates to
this matter, in which place the Prophet proclaims on this wise, Though the
number of the people of Israel, according to the flesh, shall be very great,
that they may be compared with the sand on the seashore Intelligit Isaias
ingentem vastitiem quam terrae Judaeae (quae per excellentiam vocatur (...))
intulerat Sennacharibus. Pauci qui Hierosolyma se recepere relicti erant,
tanquam ex clade superstites, quos Graeci interpretes (...) and (...) vocant.
Deus enim secerat quod in rationibus putandis fieri solet, ubi post expuncta
ea, quibus expensa acceptis aequantur, exigua aliqua summa restat, quae
debeatur. Quod tunc ^ccerat Deu, non mirum si rursus faciat, and de multis
paucos ad veram salutem perducat. Grot
, yet a very few only of them shall be saved. This the Prophet speaks of th^se
Jews that escaped the hands of Sennacherib (which were only those few that fled
to Jerusalem); and the Apostle considers the deliverance of those few as a type
of those that shall believe in Christ to their salvation. The Prophet further
adds, that God would make a quick dispatch, and deal in justice with that land,
and that people of the Jews; and though there were never so many of them, only
a few should be left, the far greater part should be involved in that
destruction. And this the Apostle cons^ders as a type of the rejection of the
greater part of the Jews, for their incredulity and contemptuous refusal of
Christ. And to this also he accommodates what the same Prophet had before said,
chapter 1. v. 9. Erat receptum inter Hebraeos, omnem liberationem Veterum figuram
gessisse eju^ liberationis, quae expectand^ esset tempo ibus Messiae. Cui (...)
multa p^ssim superstruunt Apostoli. Idem.
concerning those shut up in Jerusalem, when Rhezin King of Syria, and Pekah
King of Israel besieged it, but could not prevail against it, 2 King. 16.5.
namely, that if the Lord of Hosts had not by that means preserved a small
remnant, viz. a small seed to them, out of which that people might afterward
spring up again, they had been as utterly destroyed as Sodom and Gomorrah were.
And in the like manner God would now in these times only bring some few Cur non
plures, and cur hos, non alios, causa penes ipsum. Grot.
of the Jews to believe in Christ, and would reject the greater part of them
for their obstinate refusing of him. From Ver. 25, to 30.

In sine: he shows, that the experience of the believing Gentiles might confirm
this Doctrine of justification by Faith. For they not following after the
righteousness of works, nor seeking to be righteous that way, had attained to
true righteousness, viz. that which is by Faith in Christ; and the unbelieving
Jews, seeking to be justified by the Law, and following after that way v. 31.
(...) hic viam significat.
of righteousness, came short of that righteousness which they sought after and
no wonder seeing they sought it, not by Faith in Christ, but despised him to
their own destructi^n, stumbling at his humility and mean condition in this
world. And thus it was predicted in those two places, Isa. 8.14. and 28.16. See
my Harmony on the four Evangelists, chapter 5. p. 144.
Behold I lay in Sion (that is, in the Church of God among the Jews) a
foundation stone, viz. the true Messiah Jesus Christ, who to the unbelieving
Jews and Gentiles, is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, but
whosoever believes in him shall not be frustrated of his hope, or ashamed In
Isa. 28.16. He that believes shall not make haste, the Septuagint renders it
shall not be ashamed, and so put the consequent for the antecedent, and the
effect for the cause, because he which is rash and makes haste, is ashamed in
the end, and confounded.
, whether he be Jew or Gentile. From Ver. 30. to the end.

Jews temporary rejection; showing this to be the cause thereof, that they
foolishly and stubbornly rejected the righteousness which God presents in the
Gospel. And being first to convince them of their folly therein, lest they
should think he spoke out of disaffection to his own Nation, he professes he
was so far from it, that he heartily prayed to God for their conversion and
salvation. For he could not but bear them record, that very many of them had a
zeal, in their way, to please God, but for want of true knowledge they were
greatly mistaken. For being unsatisfied of Gods way of justifying sinners, by
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith, and desiring and endeavoring
to establish a way of righteousness by their own works and obedience to the
Law, they have refused to submit to Gods way of justification, which is by
Faith in Christ. He tells them, they should have considered, that Christ is the
end of the Law, that is, that all the Ceremonies of the Law prefigured him, and
had reference unto him as their scope and end; and that the moral Law
convincing men of their sins, and condemning them for them, did plainly show,
that the expiation of sin could no where he found but in the sacrifice of
Christ, and therefore righteousness must be sought by Faith in him, and not by
the Law. For Moses when he commended the Law to the people, Deuteronomy. 30.11, etc.
spoke in this wise; This is the commandment which I command thee this day, it
is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou
should say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it down unto us, that
we may hear it and do it. Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say,
who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may know it and
obey it: but the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, (that is, thou
can not plead ignorance, for this word is fully declared to thee, and thou
have it daily in thy mouth) and in thy heart, (thou understandest sufficiently
what the Lord requires of thee), that thou may do it. It remains therefore,
that thou take care fully and exactly to perform it. For the man that does all
things prescribed in the Law exactly and perfectly, without ever failing in any
one particular, shall live thereby: And on these, and no other terms does the
Law promise eternal life, which now are not possible to be performed by any
mere man since Adams fall. But as for the Gospel which presents justification
by Faith, he tells them, that if he may bring it in speaking, in allusion to
Moses, they should find it would speak in this wise: Say not in thine heart,
(nor give way to any such vile thoughts), Who shall ascend into heaven to bring
the Messiah down from thence, that we may believe in him and obey him? For he
is already come from heaven, and actually exhibited and offered to thee, and if
thou will be saved, it is necessary thou believe that this Jesus is the true
Messiah, sent of God; and not only so, but that being crucified here by wicked
men, and put to death, and laid in the grave, he rose again the third day, and
ascended to the right hand of his Father, there to intercede for us. And say
not thou in thy heart, Who shall descend into the deep, (that is, into the
grave), to bring Christ again from the dead? For as he died for the sins of
men, so he is assuredly risen again for their justification. And further, he
shows, it is agreeable to the righteousness which is by Faith, in allusion to
what Moses said, to speak thus. The Gospel (which holds forth all these things
concerning Christ, and by which men are exhorted, and brought to believe), is
openly proclaimed and preached by the Apostles, and other Ministers of Christ
(so that none of you can reasonably pretend ignorance) this word, I say, is
come near unto you, and so plainly declared that you may apprehend it in your
understandings, believe it in your hearts, and confess it with your mouths
Verbum hoc in ore tuo] scil. ut ore confitearis. Et in cord tuo] scil. ut
cord credas. Piscat.
. And he that shall sincerely confess with his mouth, and own Jesus Christ for
his Lord and Savior, [see Gal. 2.20. 1 Timothy 1.15.], and with his heart believe
in him, and depend on the merits of his death and passion, and believe also his
resurrection, shall certainly be saved. For Faith is the means whereby the
righteousness of Christ is received and made ours; and a sincere confession of
Christ is an effect and fruit of that Faith, and so a way Confessio est via qua
pervenitur ad vitam aeternam. Beza.
unto eternal salvation. And that there is a real connection between true Faith
in Christ, and eternal salvation, (so that he that has the one, shall not fail
of the other), he proves from Isa. 28.16. where the Prophet says, he that
believes, [viz. in Christ the precious Cornerstone laid in Sion] shall not be
ashamed, nor frustrated of his hope and expectation. And there is no difference
between Jew and Gentile in this matter. For he that is Lord over all, is rich
in his mercy to all, that truly worship him, and call upon him, with a true
Faith and Contrition, as he proves from the testimony of the Prophet Joel, chapter
2.32. which promise belongs to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, as may
appear from Act. 2.21. From Ver. 1. to 14.

Having thus showed, that the Promise is universal, that whosoever call upon
the Lord in a due manner shall be saved, whether they be Jews or Gentiles,
hence he infers, that the Gospel must be preached to the Gentiles, and that
himself and his fellow Apostles did nothing but what was agreeable to the will
of God in so doing. This he proves by an heap of arguments clapped together after
this manner. Those that Sorites. Nemo invocatur in quem non creditur; Fides
autem ex auditu. Nemo autem audiet verbum a nullo annunciatum. Nemo praedicabit
verbum Dei nisi missus. Le gatis igitur opus est qui non a seipsis sed a Deo
veniunt, and bona ab illo nova annunciant.
call on the name of the Lord and worship him in a right manner shall be saved:
but none can call on him, except they first believe in him; nor believe in him,
except they have been first instructed, and taught to know him; nor can they
ordinarily be taught to know him without a Preacher, nor can any lawfully
preach them, except they be authorized of God, and sent; and to such the words
of the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 52.7. may be adapted (which were first spoken on
occasion of the joyful tidings brought by the messengers who brought the news
of the Jews deliverance out of the hands of the Babylonians), How beautiful are
the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad Tidings of
good things. For if the news of that corporal deliverance by Cyrus was so
welcome, how should the Gospel-tidings of spiritual deliverance from the slavery
of sin and Satan by Christ be much more welcome? From Ver. 14, to 16.

But here he supposes the Jews (who could not abide to hear the Gospel should
be preached to the Gentiles) might object, If the preaching of the Gospel to
the Gentiles be of God, how comes it to pass, that so few of them obey it? To
this he answers, that the Jews were not to be offended hereat. For as the
sending of the Apostles to preach the Gospel was foretold in the Scripture as
he had proved, so the incredulity of the greatest part of the Jews and
Gentiles, and the small fruit and effect of the Apostles labors was foretold
also, in those words of Isa. 53.1. Lord who has believed our report? that is,
how few have been persuaded, and wrought upon by our preaching. It follows
therefore, that the Faith of the Gentiles could not in an ordinary way be
otherwise wrought, than by hearing the Gospel preached v. 17. Per verbum Dei]
h. e. ex mandato Dei qui Apostolos ad praedicandum misit. Pisc.
, and the Gospel could not be lawfully preached unto them but by the command of
God. But then here it might be objected again; If God intended that the Gospel
should be made known, and preached to the Gentiles, as well as to the Gentiles;
how comes it to pass, that the Apostles have preached it to so few of them? He
answers, that not a few only of the Gentiles have heard it; for what was said
by David, Psalm. 19.4. concerning the preaching of the heavens, may well be said
concerning the preaching of the Apostles; their sound The Hebrew Text has
(...) their line, the Septuagint (...) their sound. They seem to have read
(...) instead of (...). See Col. 1.5, 6. The Apostles had preached the Gospel
to some of all Nations, Act. 2.5. and planted the Gospel in the remotest parts
of the world.
went into all the earth, and their words into all the world. From Ver. 16. to
19.

v. 19. Per non Gentem] Puta per Gentiles qui hactenus non fuerunt Gens mea.
Per Gentem insipientem] Puta per Gentiles qui hactenus insipienter vixerunt and
stulte adorarunt idola. A Lap.
But the Jews might here further object, That they did not know that the Gospel
was to be preached to the Gentiles, and that they should be called to a
participation of the grace thereof.

He answers, that Moses and Isaiah do both plainly affirm it: As first, Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32.21. where he foretells, that because the Jews violated the conjugal
Covenant between God and them, He would cast them off for their wickedness, and
bestow their privileges on the Gentiles. As if God should have said, You have
chosen another God, even your idols; and I will choose another people, even the
Gentiles; you have angered me by giving my honor to Idols, and I will anger
you, by giving your prerogatives to the Gentiles. 2ly. Isaiah affirms the same,
who in chapter 65.12. predicts the conversion and coming in of the Gentiles, by the
ministry of the Gospel; and also the rejection of the Jews, declaring boldly
and plainly, that God would be sought v. 20. Inventus sum] i. e. inveniar.
Prophetice enim ponitur praeteritum pro futuro.
unto, and called upon, by those that have not in former times asked any thing
of him; that he would manifest himself to them who before inquired not after
him, and prevent their seeking of him by sending unto the seeking of them, [see
2 Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 2.17]. And, that the Jewish Nation, whom he had long labored
with, from time to time, to reduce and reclaim them, spreading forth his hands
all the long day of their visitation, to invite them, and call them by the
preaching of his Prophets, and afterward of his Apostles, (but in vain). He
was resolved, for their wilful obstinacy, to reject them, and to receive the
Gentiles in their room. From Ver. 19, to the end.

rejection of the Jews for their refusing Christ, in the 9th and 10th Chapters,
and of the calling of the Gentiles; he comes now to show, That the Gentiles
ought not thereupon to insult over the Jews. For their rejection is neither
total, nor final. The former he proves from ver. 1, to 11. The latter, from
ver. 11, to 33.

1. The first he proves, viz. That God has not totally rejected all, and every
one of the Jews, by these Arguments. For, 1. He himself being a Jew was not
rejected. 2ly, God has not cast away those of the Jews which he foresaw
Scriptura hanc (...) ad fidem express resert, 1 Pet. 1.2. Freidlib.
would (through the operation of his grace) embrace Christ, and believe in him.
3ly, He proves this, by instancing in Elias, in whose days the ten Tribes
having generally revolted from God, and followed Jeroboams Idols, the Prophet
comes to God, and complains of the wickedness of the people of that time, that
they had killed the Lords Prophets, and thrown down his Altars Altaria scil. in
excelsis locis, and collibus Deo vero erecta. Unde haec altaria vocantur
Excelsa in Scriptura. Quae licet Lege Deuteronomy. 16.2. vetita essent, ac proinde pie
ab Hezekia, and Josia eversa sint, tamen impium erat evertere ea, ex odio
cultus divini, verique Dei, uti fecerunt Achab and Jezebel.
, (built by pious men of the ten Tribes to serve God with, when they were not
permitted to go to Jerusalem In which case the prohibition of building private
altars is by the learned Jews said to have ceased.
), and that himself was now the only pious man left in the Land, (thinking
possibly that all that Obadiah had hid were destroyed by Jezebel), and that was
the reason they now attempted to kill him also. God answers him, that he had
reserved Seven thousand to himself, that continued in his true worship, who had
not bowed the knee to the Image of Baal. As therefore there were many true
worshippers in Israel in that time of general defection besides Elias, 1 King.
19.14. so he tells them at this time, though the generality of the Jews for
their refusing of Christ be rejected, yet God had reserved to himself a
remnant, according to his free and gratuitous election, whom he will draw to
believe in his Son. Hence he infers two Conclusions. 1. If a remnant be
reserved, merely by the free and gracious election of God, then it is not upon
the foresight and consideration of the merit of their own works; for that which
is of grace is not of works. Grace and works (as causes) mutually destroy each
other. Grace is free and Gratia non est gratia ullo modo, nisi sit gratuita
omni modo. Augustine.
gratuitous, and gives a favor which is not due; but whatsoever is given for
the merit of works, is not freely given, and consequently is not grace. Works
challenge a reward as a due debt, else they would lose the nature of works done
to merit by. The nature of grace is to be free; but the nature of works is to
make indebted. If therefore the Election be merely of grace, God ought to have
all the glory; If it be upon the merit of works foreseen, then corrupt flesh
will boast.

2ly. His second Inference is this, that though the generality of the
Israelites, (who are so after the flesh), seeking justification and salvation
by their own righteousness, and observance of the Law, (and not in a right
manner), have not obtained it, (see chapter 9.31.); yet the elect among them,
seeking it in a Gospel-way, by Faith in Christ have obtained it; and the rest
(being left to themselves and the power of the Devil) by the just judgment of
God, are blinded and hardened even unto this day Cohaerent haec verba cum verbo
(...) in fine, v. 7.
; so that in them is accomplished what the Prophet Isaiah [ch. 29 10. and 6.9.]
long ago prophesied of those Israelites, who having first hardened their own
hearts against God, should be after given up by God to a further obduration;
insomuch that the spirit of slumber Spiritum soporis] i. e. animum somnolentum
and quasi veterno oppressum adeoque omni sensu privatum.
should fall upon them, and they should have eyes and ears, wherewith (as the
case stood with them) they could neither see nor hear; that is, such a mind
wherewith they could not understand the things that concerned their peace. And
what David said prophetically Paul ties not himself to the very words of the
Psalm, but being guided by the same Spirit by which David wrote, adds, and
alters some words without diminishing the sense.
of some in his time, Psalm. 69.22. (by way of retribution to their wickedness),
that the things that were appointed for their good, ( viz. their necessary food
and refreshment), should turn to their mischief, saying, Let their table i. e.
Omnes illorum deliciae vertantur iis in perniciem.
be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block Metaphorae tres
continuatae: prima ab avibus, altera a feris, tertia a saxis, aliisve
obstaculis in quae impingimus.
and tend to their hurt; and bow down their back v. 10. Praedicit eis
obscurationem intellectus, and servilem quendam terrenumque animum, ut nunquam
sese erigere, and assurgere possint in altum, ad spirituales verasque
sententias, sed semper incurvati, and veluti humi repentes, terrena cogitent,
ut sunt terrenum regnum Messiae, etc. Alii intelligunt de onere legis servili,
and malae conscientiae, quo essent premendi, expertes libertatis Christi. Atque
haec caecitas, justo Dei judicio ita permittente, ob incredulitatem eis
infligitur. Flac. Illyr.
always, that is, let them savor nothing but earthly things, having their
minds and hearts intent upon them; who being often warned of God, would not
mind heavenly things. All this the Apostle applies, and adapts to the
incredulous Jews of his time, to whom the very preaching of the Gospel was an
occasion of obduration, they growing worse, and not better, by it, and being
blinded, discerning nothing of heavenly things. From Ver. 1, to 11.

2. Having thus showed, that the rejection of the Jews is not total, he comes
now to show, it is not final, and that they shall be generally called before
the end of the world, that both Jews and Gentiles may make one sheepfold, and
one flock under Christ Jesus the great Shepherd. To prove this point, he brings
diverse Arguments for the comfort of the poor Jews, and inserts an Admonition to
the Gentiles, not to insult over them. From Ver. 17, to 23.

1. He shows them, that the Jews have not so stumbled, that they should fall
and never rise again; but God in his righteous judgment has permitted them to
fall, that they having obstinately refused the Gospel, it might be preached to
the Gentiles; and the calling of the Gentiles, and their receiving of the
Gospel, he will in his infinite wisdom make use of, to make the Jews jealous,
and emulous, and troubled to see themselves so far out-stripp'd by those whom
they so contemned. And so make that emulation a means to bring them to embrace
Christ also. So that his Argument lies thus; If the rejection of the Jews
occasioned the Calling of the Gentiles, whom they shall one day be provoked See
chapter 10. v. 19.
to emulate and follow, then the Jews shall be called. But the first is true,
in the Text, therefore the last.

2. If their casting off were so profitable to the World, much more will their
calling home be. If their rejection did further the salvation of the Gentiles,
insomuch that the paucity (...).
of Believers among them, proved the riches of the World, that is, occasioned a
numerous and copious conversion of the Gentiles, and spread a rich and an
abundant knowledge of Christ in the World; how much more shall a general calling
and c nversion of them confirm the Faith of the believing Gentiles, and be a
means to convert those of them that do not believe all over the World.

3. He shows, that he himself is an Apostle of the Gentiles, and did earnestly
desire to make his ministry glorious, in converting as many of them as he
could, and the rather, that he might provoke his own Nation, not to suffer the
Gentiles alone to enjoy the privileges of the Sons of God, but that they would
join themselves unto them, that so they also might be saved. Therefore he
intimates, that the case of the Jews is not desperate, nor ought to be looked
upon with contempt by the Gentiles.

4. That he might further urge his Argument which he had made use of at v. 12.
he shows, That if the casting off of the contumacious Jews be a means of
sending the Gospel to the Gentiles, and so of bringing them to Faith in Christ,
(whereby they obtain pardon of their sins, and reconciliation with God), What a
miracle of mercy will the re-assuming of them again into Gods favor be, (upon
their embracing of Christ), even as great, and as fit to work upon the
Gentiles, and make them rejoice, as if they should see their dear friends (whom
they entirely loved) raised from the dead again Perinde erit ac si mortuus quis
ad vitam revocetur. (...)] summum gaudium.
.

5. He uses another Argument, taken from the relation of the Jews to the
Covenant made with their Fathers, arguing after his manner: The holy Nation;
that is, the Nation which is Gods peculiar people, and federally holy, cannot
be cast off for ever; but the Jews are an holy Nation, which he proves,
because they are descended of holy Parents; and if any doubt of that, he proves
it by two similitudes, viz. of the first fruits, and root, which being holy
make the lump, and the branches holy. Concerning the first fruits, the Law is
set down Lev. 23. by which the people were not permitted to put sickle into
their corn till they had offered a sheaf to the Lord, and then it was lawful
for them to reap it; and when they had inn'd their Corn, they might not eat of
it, till they had offered two loaves to the Lord, and then was their whole lump
sanctified, and made lawful for them to eat. Now he shows, that the
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were as the first fruits, and the people
of the Jews were as the lump. The Jews therefore being descended from those
holy Patriarchs, to whom and their seed the Covenant is made, [I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed], have still a relation to that Covenant made with
their Fathers; and so their case is not desperate. And the same is the sense of
the other similitude. As the branches follow the nature of the root, so do the
Jews the condition of those holy Patriarchs, in regard of the outward
privileges of the Covenant; that is, not in respect of personal and inherent,
but faederal and external holiness, so as they may expect to be owned by God as
his visible Church. From Ver. 11, to 17.

But here some Gentile might object, We acknowledge the root of the Jewish
Nation to be holy, but what good does the holiness of the root to these
incredulous branches, that are now broken off, and rejected of God? The Apostle
answers, That some of the branches are indeed broken off from the sweet
Olive Tree, (that is, from the Church of the holy Patriarchs); and the
Gentiles, that are as a wild Olive, and not sprung from that holy root, are by
Faith grafted in among the branches that remain in the sweet Olive, and so
imitating the Faith of the holy Patriarchs, are made one Church with them, and
thereby partake of the root and fatness of the sweet Olive, that is, of the
Doctrine and grace of Christ, and all the spiritual benefits and privileges
which he conferreth on his Church. But yet seeing the Gentiles are, of mere
grace, grafted in, (being before in a forlorn condition), they should not
disdainfully boast, or insult over the branches that are broken off, viz. the
incredulous Jews; for they are natural branches of that body and root, which
bears the believing Gentiles, and have an outward fellowship with the Olive;
that is, they are the natural Children of Abraham, who in some degree is
despised, when his Children are despised; so that if they insult over these
branches, they do in a manner lift up themselves against the root, which bore
these branches, even against Abraham himself, who is called the root of this
Olive Tree, in respect, that he is the Parent from which the Jews naturally
descend, and in respect of the Covenant that God made with him. And further,
they should consider, that this root does bear the believing Gentiles, and not
they the root. The Church of the Jews is our Mother Church; Salvation is of the
Jews, as our Savior speaks, Joh. 4.22. The Gentiles are not called to make a
several Church by themselves; neither do they so: For there is but one Church;
but they are called to be members of the Church of the Jews, as Christ says,
Joh. 10.16. I have other sheep which are not yet of this fold, (that is, the
Elect among the Gentiles), them I must bring into this fold, that there may be
one fold, (or Church), and one shepherd. But the Christian Gentile might here
again object, that though the Jew be the natural Olive, and the Gentile the
wild Olive; yet the Jews are broken off, that the Gentiles might be grafted in.
He answers, The proper cause of the breaking off of the Jews, was their
infidelity, and not the coming in of the Gentiles; for they came in by
accident; and the proper cause of the coming in, and the present standing of
the Gentiles, is their Faith: Therefore they should not be high-minded, but
fear, and accordingly look to their standing. And as a man that is on the top
of a tree brags not of his height, but looks to his hold, so ought they. For if
God spared not the natural branches, but proceeded with so much severity
against his own people the Jews, the Gentiles have no reason to expect less
severity, if they take not heed to themselves. Two things therefore he
intimates in this matter, are especially to be considered by them. 1. The
severity of God against the incredulous Jews, to whom Christ was a stone of
stumbling. 2. His infinite mercy and grace, in effectually calling the Gentiles
to Faith in Christ, in which they are to continue Si permanseris in
benignitate] i. e. in eo statu in quo te Deus constituit per benignitatem suam,
nempe in fide. Meton. efficientis pro effecto, vide v. 31. Paul here speaks to
the whole Church of the Gentiles, among whom there were many hypocrites. He
speaks to the Elect, to make them carefully look to their standing, not
intimating thereby, that they should finally fall away. v. 24. Wild by Nature]
Understand Nature, not as it was first made, but as it was corrupted in Adam,
and so derived from him to his posterity.
and abide; otherwise they also shall be cut off from the Olive, that is, the
true Church. So likewise the Jews, if they continue not in their unbelief,
shall be grafted in again; for God is able to do it. Yea he shows, the thing is
not only possible, but very probable, because God has grafted in the Gentiles,
that are branches of the wild Olive; and it is contrary to nature, to graft a
wild Olive branch into a right Olive; but natural, to graft into it one of its
own kind. If therefore he has grafted in the Gentiles, it is much more likely
he will re-ingraft the Jews, that are the natural branches, (naturally
descended of Abraham and the holy Patriarchs, with whom he made his Covenant),
into their own Olive tree, from which they were cut off for their unbelief.
From Ver. 17, to 25.

Having thus showed the possibility and probability of the Calling of the Jews,
he now comes to show, the certainty of it; and takes his argument from the
revelation of this mystery or secret made to himself by the Spirit of God,
which he was to impart to the Gentiles. And accordingly tells them, he would
not have them ignorant of it, Lest they should be tempted, proudly to despise
the Jews as utter cast-aways. For he acquaints them, that blindness and
obduration is not come upon the Jews universally, but on some of them only, and
that for a certain time; namely, till a greater number of the Gentiles, than
ever before, shall be brought to believe in Christ, and so enter into the true
Church; with the coming in of which great multitude, the Jews shall be provoked
to turn to Christ; and so all Israel; that is, the generality of the Israelites
shall be brought to embrace Christ, and thereby be put into a way of salvation.
When therefore the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, there shall be a famous
and universal calling of the Jews. And this he shows, is agreeable to the
Prophecy, Isa. 59.20, 21. where the Prophet, respecting the time of the coming
of the Messiah, says, The deliverer (viz. the Messiah, who was typified by
Cyrus) shall come to Sion; but the Apostle looking further, even to those
things that were to follow the coming of Christ, by way of accommodation,
says, The Redeemer shall come out of Sion, that is, out of the midst of his
Church, where he dwells and abides by his Spirit, and shall effectually call
the Jews. The Prophet indeed says, He shall come to them, that return from
iniquity in Jacob. But the Apostle (following the Septuagint, which was
understood by the Gentiles) says, he shall turn iniquity from Jacob; and so
instead of mentioning Christ's coming, he speaks of a benefit that should
follow his Coming, which is, the remission of sin. Now where God forgives sin,
he first gives the grace of true conversion, and therefore the Jews shall be
converted. And he further shows, that this is Gods Covenant, which he will
fulfill unto them, namely, to pardon their sins, and they that shall have their
sins pardoned, shall be first effectually called, and so the Jews shall reap
the benefit of the Covenant, when they shall feel the efficacy of it, turning
their hearts to God, and persuading them to embrace Jesus Christ by Faith. From
Ver. 25, to 28.

But some might here object, What! shall the Jews be called and pardoned, that
are Gods enemies, whom he hates for rejecting the Gospel? He answers, They are
enemies, and yet beloved in diverse respects. If we respect the Gospel, they are
Gods enemies, and hated by him; namely, because they refuse and persecute it,
spurn and kick against it; and do the more persecute and hate it for the
Gentiles sake, because they see them love and embrace it, and that thereupon
they are admitted into the Church. But if we respect Gods election of this
people, above all other Nations, to be his peculiar people, and how they are
descended of those holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (with whom the
Lord entered into Covenant, and promised to be their God, and the God of their
seed after them); in this regard they are beloved of God. For Gods special
favors to the Jews, and his calling them to be his people, are such things as
he will never change, or repent of. From Ver. 28, to 30.

His last argument for the general calling of the Jews, is this; God after a
long time of disobedience received the Gentiles to mercy; therefore there is
reason to think, that he will at last receive the Jews also. For (according to
the rule), Of like things there is the same judgment to be made. Now the
Gentiles, who were formerly disobedient, have obtained mercy, by occasion of
the Jews infidelity and obstinacy; God sending the Gospel to them which the
Jews rejected. And as the Gentiles were disobedient, so are the Jews now: as
the Gentiles have obtained mercy, so shall the Jews: yet with this difference,
The Gentiles obtained mercy by the unbelief of the Jews; but the Jews shall
obtain mercy, by the mercy showed to the Gentiles, being provoked Ut
miserecordiae Gentibus factae exemplo provocati, miserecordiam and ipsi Judaei
consequantur.
to emulation by the multitude of converted Gentiles; and shall themselves also
be brought to believe in Christ; and shall count it a shame for them, [a people
so highly favored of God), to be out stripped by the Gentiles. So that the
argument is from the less to the greater. If the infidelity of the Jews was an
occasion of mercy to the Gentiles, much more shall the mercy showed to the
Gentiles, be an occasion of mercy to the Jews. And all this serves to
illustrate the grace and mercy of God, both to Jews and Gentiles, that both may
obtain salvation, not by their own works, but by his grace, without which
neither of them can be saved. For God, as a just Judge, has suffered Conclusit]
i e. Concludi permisit. Sivit esse sub imperio, and potestate incredulitatis.
both Jews and Gentiles, successively (for some time) to remain under the power
of their unbelief and disobedience, that he might in his own time, fulfill the
great counsel of his goodness, in showing undeserved mercy upon them all Vt
omnium misereatur] scil. non hominum, sed nationum, i. e. tam Gentilium quam
Judaeorum. Intelligitur de Generibus singulorum, non de Singulis generum. A L p.
, namely, both Jews and Gentiles. From Ver. 30. to 33.

In the Conclusion of this discourse, he falls into an admiration of the depth
of the abundant goodness of God, in bearing with the disobedience and contumacy
of the Gentiles first, and then of the Jews; and of his wisdom in making the
rejection of the Jews, a means of calling the Gentiles; and of his knowledge in
knowing how to work upon the obstinate Jews, by his mercy showed unto the
Gentiles. He shows, his judgments and works are unsearchable, and the ways and
methods of his providence past finding out. For no Creature can pierce into the
mind of God, nor was ever called to be of his Counsel; see Isa. 40.13, 14. 1
Cor. 2.16. In fine, he shows, That if any shall yet complain of these
dispensations of God, which he has been speaking of, and shall think that God
deals hardly with the Jews in rejecting them, and calling the Gentiles; let him
remember, No man can challenge God, as if he were indebted to him, or owed him
any thing. He asks, Who ever gave any thing to God, that he did not first
receive from him? or who can merit any thing at his hands? see Job 41.2. He
owes us nothing, but what he is pleased of his own mere goodness, freely to
promise us? And if so, who has cause to complain, if he deal more bountifully
with some, than with others Beneficii sui quemque oportet esse arbitrum.
Liberalitas a liberate nomen habet Nul^i Deus ullo jure aut titulo
obstringitur, quia nihil ab ullo accepit, quod prius non illi dederit. Nulli
ergo Deus est debtor, ac proinde non est injustus si Gentes illuminet, Judaeos
vero in sua caecitate relinquat.
. For all things are of him, as the first Author: all things are upheld by him,
as the Preserver: all things are disposed of by him as the supreme Director:
all things tend to him, as the ultimate End: therefore all things ought to be
subservient to his glory, to whom all praise, honor and glory ought for ever
to be ascribed. Amen. From Ver. 33, to the end.

The Apostle having now done with the First part of his Epistle, viz. the
doctrinal: practical; wherein he gives diverse precepts of Christian life. From
Chap. 12. to Ver. 14, of Chap. 15.

1. He entreats them by those great mercies which God has vouchsafed to them,
to present their bodies By a Synecdoche of a part for the whole.
, (that is, their whole man both Soul and Body), a living sacrifice, (enlivened
and quickened by the Spirit of Christ), holy, (in respect both of inward
affections, and outward actions), acceptable to God, (through Christ) which is
a reasonable service; and far more valuable in his sight, than the offering or
sacrificing of unreasonable beasts. He entreats them also, not to conform
themselves to the carnal conversation of the world, that lies in wickedness,
but to endeavor to be transformed, and changed by the renewing of their minds
and wills, that so they may discern what is the good and perfect will of God,
revealed in his word, and may heartily approve it, and willingly conform
themselves to it. Ver. 1, 2.

2. By virtue of his Apostolic Office, which he had of grace received, he
injoins those among them, who had any special gifts, or public office in the
Church, that they should not be proud of them, nor pretend to be wise above
their capacity and calling, but carrying themselves soberly and modestly,
(according to the measure of the gifts and graces of the Spirit conferred on
them, upon their believing Quisque se coutineat intra mensura^^ doni, gratiae,
talenti, officii sibi commissi, quod, per fidem, credendo accepit, nec alia
attentet: v. 9. cui datum est ministerium, ille ministret, non doceat; vicissim
cui data est doctrina, ille doceat nec se ingerat ministerio alteri tradito. A
Lap.
in Christ, Ephesians. 4.7.), should employ them to the best advantage of the Church.
For as in the natural body, several members are deputed to several offices; so
it is in the Church, where all the faithful are one body under Christ the Head,
and members one of another, and on that account, ought mutually to serve one
another. Therefore every one should demean himself soberly in the use of the
gift given him; as particularly, if any one have the gift of Prophecy, or
interpreting the Scripture, he should prophecy according to the analogy or
rule of Faith, that is, conform his interpretations to the rule of the Holy
Scriptures, and teach nothing disagreeable thereunto. He likewise that has any
office or ministry in the Church should attend on that; as for instance, He
that teaches, or is employed in laying down sound doctrine, and confuting
error (as Professors in the Schools, and Catechists in parochial Congregations
now do) should diligently attend on that work. He that has the office of a
Pastor, to exhort the people, and apply the word, he should attend to that. He
that has the office of distributing the Churches stock, should labor to do it
with simplicity and good fidelity. He that has the office of a Ruler in the
Church, [1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 5.17.], and is to look to the manners of people,
should do it with diligence. Lastly, He that shows mercy, viz. that has the
particular care of strangers, or the sick, or impotent persons, and Orphans,
should do it cheerfully, and with a willing mind. From Ver. 3, to 9.

3. He exhorts to several Christian duties necessary in our conversation. Such
as are, 1. Sincere love. 2. Abhorring evil, and embracing that which is good.
3. Brotherly kindness. 4. Giving to others the honor due to them. 5. Sedulity
and industry in their particular Callings. 6. Fervency of Spirit in the Lords
service. 7. Encouraging themselves under afflictions with hope of deliverance,
being patient in tribulation, and continuing instant in prayer. 8. Beneficence
and communicating to the poor Saints, hospitality to distressed strangers that
come to them. 9. Blessing their persecutors. 10. Sympathizing with one another
in prosperity and adversity. 11. Unanimity and mutual concord, [Phil. 2.2.4.],
wishing the like good unto others as unto themselves. 12. Not minding or
pretending to high mysterious things, but following the examples of lowly,
modest, and meek Christians; not conceiting themselves wiser than others. 13.
Not recompencing injuries with injuries. 14. Taking care by honesty and
innocence of life to cut off all occasion from any, of reviling them, 2 Cor.
8.21. 15. Peaceableness with all men as far as they can. 16. Forbearing private
revenge, and to suffer their own, and their adversaries anger to cool,
remembering that it belongs to God either immediately by himself, or else by the
Magistrate to revenge injuries. Therefore they should do good to their enemies
instead of evil, which is the way to heap Coals of fire on their heads, and to
melt them and soften them, if there be any ingenuity in them. And, Lastly, Not
to suffer themselves to be so far transported or overcome with injuries as to
be prompted to revenge them. For to conquer the malice of their enemies with
kindness, is the best kind of victory. From Ver. 9, to the end.

5. In the next place, he exhorts them, To yield due obedience and subjection
lawful power, ruling according to righteousness, is Gods ordination; and he
that resists and opposes such a power, sets himself against Gods ordinance, and
so brings upon himself punishment (...), poenam ferent. Grot.
, as well from God as the Magistrate. For the office of the Magistrate is
ordained by God, (and to such he enjoins this conscientious obedience), to
restrain and punish wickededness, and to encourage what is good and
praiseworthy. The Magistrate is the Minister of God for the good of men, and
ordained for this end, to keep up good order in the world, being armed with the
sword of power to punish those that are wicked and exorbitant. Therefore, he
shows, it is necessary they should be subject, not only that they may avoid the
anger of the Magistrate, but in respect of Gods command, who injoins this
subjection. And for this cause, ( viz. the avoiding wrath, and to perform their
duty toward God), he tells them, they ought to pay tribute to Magistrates, as
to the Ministers of God, who are continually employed in the defense of the
public peace and tranquillity, and in maintaining justice, righteousness, and
good order among men. And seeing justice requires us to give every one their
due, they ought to pay to Magistrates, (whether supreme or subordinate),
tribute, custom, fear, reverence, and honor, according as their respective
places and degrees require. From Ver. 1, to 8.

6. Having exhorted them, to pay every man what they owe him, whether money,
service, or respect; he tells them, there is one debt they can never be quit
of, but must be always paying, and that is, to love Charitas reddendo
multiplicatur; cum redditur ab homine, crescit in homine.
one another; which duty if any man perform absolutely, and in all respects as
he ought, he may be said not to have performed obedience only to one or two
Commandments of the Second Table, but to have fulfilled them all. For all of
them (many whereof he enumerates, though not in order) are branches, and parts
of that great duty of Charity, and loving our Neighbor; so that he that truly
loves his Neighbor as he ought, will not injure him in any thing, whether in
his life, wife, goods, good name; and so fulfills the Law. From Ver. 8, to 11.

7. This duty of loving one another, he shows, they should the rather perform,
seeing they were not unbelievers now, and in the dark night of ignorance as
formerly, but the Gospel Light had arisen unto them, and therefore it was high
time for them to rouse v. 11. (...), Considerantes quale jam sit tempus.
up, and awaken themselves to a performance of those duties, which that
glorious revelation called them to; and the rather, because now they were come
nearer salvation, (which is the end of their race, 1 Pet. 1.9.), than when they
first believed. As therefore they that run a race, the nearer they come to the
stand, the faster they run; so should they increase more and more in holiness,
the nearer they come to their end. They should remember that the night of
Heathenish ignorance and gross darkness is in great measure past, and the
Gospel Light has dawned upon them; therefore they should renounce the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of light, that is, all manner of Christian
virtues, (which become those that walk in the light, and are both the habit and
armor of a Christian), whereby they may be armed to combat Satan, and all
their spiritual enemies, [1 Thessalonians. 5.8.]; and they should labor to walk
piously before God, and honestly and fairly before men, as becomes those to
whom the glorious light of the Gospel has appeared, abstaining from all
intemperance, and filthiness, from all strife and envy, and should put on
Christ and his righteousness, by Faith, deriving virtue from him to enable them
to all holy walking, and should adorn themselves with an holy imitation of his
virtues, not making provision to satisfy or please the inordinate lusts of the
flesh. From Ver. 11, to the end.

8. He comes now to give some directions concerning the right use of Christian
liberty. It seems, some of the Jews at Rome, (who had given their Names to
Christ), thought the observation of the Ceremonial Law, (as to meats and days),
was yet to be continued; for the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. left them to a
free use of those Ceremonies, till the Gospel shining forth more clearly to
them, should convince them that they were to be laid aside. But the believing
Gentiles being fully persuaded of their freedom from this yoke, and of the
liberty given them by Christ, refused communion with those Jews that lived
after that manner. Among these therefore there arose a dissension Acerbis
altercationibus verias, saepe; Charitas, certo amittitur.
which hindered the work of the Gospel; the weak censuring the strong, as
profane, for using such a liberty; and the strong despising the weak, as
over-scrupulous in not using it. Hereupon the Apostle, that he might obviate
this evil, goes in a middle way, admonishing the believing Jews, that they
should so follow their own opinion as not to condemn the believing Gentiles,
who were otherwise persuaded; and he admonishes the believing Gentiles, that
they should not refuse communion with the believing Jews, who still adhered to
some of those Ceremonial observances; but though they were weak, as to the
knowledge of some points of the Christian Faith, yet they should receive them
into their fellowship, and not take upon them, to judge their thoughts Non
sumentes vobis dijudicandas ipsorum cogitationes, nempe an legalia ut
necessaria usurpent an ut utilia. Grot.
, whether they used those things as necessary, or as things only profitable for
the time. He tells them, he understood, that the strong among them, and such as
were well-grounded in the liberty Christ has given under the Gospel, thought
they might freely eat any thing: Others that were weak, rather than eat any
meats forbidden by the Law, [see Lev. 11.8.], contented themselves only with
herbs. The case being thus between them, he forbids them both from censuring
each other, and that for diverse reasons. 1. Because God has not rejected
either of them, but called the one as well as the other to the knowledge and
belief of his Son, and so received them into his Family. 2. They are both
Servants of Christ; he is Lord of all. And therefore (says he) consider, O man,
whether thy Brother stand, and continue firm in the Faith Solius Domini judicio
relinquendum est, been an male agat servus. Ad Dominum pertinet judicare,
stetne an cadat. Unus est omnium Dominus Christus Jesus: Illi stat, si firmus
est fide; illi cadit si quid, peccat, ut tu suspicaris. Ille judicandi
potestatem in ipsum habet, non tu.
, or whether he fall, and sin against God, he stands or falls not to thee,
but to his own Master. Thou have no authority to judge him, look thou to thy own
standing. Neither do thou, O Jew, who see the Gentile use his Christian
liberty as to meats and days, judge him as profane, and suspect his Apostasy
from the Faith; for God (who is able) will preserve him from such a fall. 3. As
to that other matter, [ viz. the observation of days] he advises, that every
one should be well satisfied in his own mind, as to the grounds of his doing or
omitting those things, that so he may not knowingly offend God. And in this
case, they ought not to censure one another, because the Jew by observing these
days, intends to do honor and service to God thereby. And the Gentile by not
observing them, intends to do that which he thinks is agreeable to the mind
and will of God in that matter; so that both aiming at the same end, they ought
not to condemn one another. And the case also stands thus, as to that other
matter of meats; the strong gives God thanks for his liberty, and for the meat
which he allows him freely to eat of; and the weak, though he abstain from
meats that were by the Law once forbidden, yet he gives God thanks, because he
has meat enough that is not forbidden. And if it be the general intention, and
design of every faithful Christian, (as certainly it is), so to live, that he
may live to Christ; and so to dye, as he may be for ever his; surely he ought
so to direct all his particular actions, (and consequently his use of days and
meats), as may tend to his glory. And there is great reason he should do so;
for Christ both dyed and rose again for this end, that he might be Lord over
his redeemed ones, both living and dying; and having redeemed us with his
precious blood, we ought to conform our selves to his will, and not rashly to
judge one another, but to leave judging to him before whose tribunal we shall
all be judged, and where all (will they, nill they) shall acknowledge subjection
to him; as he proves from Isa. 45.23. where the Prophet says, God has sworn;
but the Apostle sets down the form of Gods Oath, who because he has not a
greater to swear by, swears by Himself. And whereas the Prophet says, every
tongue shall swear Cultus omnis Dei per unam speciem, i. e. per juramentum
exprimi solet. Grot.
by me; the Apostle (following the Septuagint) says, every tongue shall
confess, which is a consequent of the other; for he that swears, confesses
God, and calls him to be a Witness and a Judge; and what is there in the
general spoken of God, is here particularly applied to Christ, to whom every
one of us must give an account of our selves. From Ver. 1, to 13.

9. He advises the strong, to take heed of giving offense to the weak, and to
judge it best, and most becoming them, to take heed, that by the unseasonable
use of their liberty, they do not lay a stumbling block in their way, [Lev.
19.14.], which may cause them to fall, that is, either to do a thing
doubtingly, or else to take offense, and fall off from Christianity. But some
Christian Gentile might here object and say, I am persuaded in my Conscience,
that no meat is impure, or prohibited under the Gospel. He answers, that meat
that is in it self clean and allowed, is made unclean to him, that thinks it
unlawful. And on the other side, if any one fully satisfied of his liberty, do
eat it to the hurt of his weak Brother, in that case he does amiss; for these
reasons. 1. It Is against Charity to act so in things indifferent, as to induce
a weak Brother, to do such things as may afterward be a great grief and
perplexity to him v. 15. If thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, thou walk
not charitably] that is, Seeing thee eat, he by thy example is induced to do
the like, and afterward is grieved at it.
. 2. It Is the way to occasion him to sin, and so to do what lies in us to bring
destruction upon him, who, (professing Faith in Christ), is in the judgment
Omnes, fidem Christi profitentes, pro redemptis habet charitas Christiana.
Pareus.
of Charity to be esteemed such an one for whom Christ dyed, [1 Cor. 8.11.]. 3.
Eating with offense, causes Christian liberty, purchased by Christ, to be evil
spoken of. 4. The spiritual kingdom of Christ consists not in such things as
meats and drinks, but in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, [1
Cor. 8.8.]; therefore we may well abstain from an undue use of them, and of
other indifferent things, when our Brother is like to be hurt thereby. So that
upon the whole matter, he tells them, That they that use these things wisely to
the honor of Christ, (taking them with his leave when they may, and abstaining
from them at other times, when his work and service may be thereby promoted,
and not hindered), do please God, and are acceptable to men. Lastly, he tells
them, they ought to follow after peace, and the things whereby they may edify
one another. Therefore the work v. 20. Noli propter escam destruere opus Dei]
i. e. aedificium Dei, scil. religionem Christianam in proximo. Vel opus Dei, i.
e. proximum ipsum quem, Deus fecit Christianum.
of God, viz. the Christianity of a weak Brother ought not to be endangered for
such a small matter, as to eat this or that meat is; lest he should thereby be
offended, provoked, and fall off from his Christian profession. But here some
might urge, that all meats are pure and lawful. He answers, It Is true, they are
so in themselves, but it is evil notwithstanding for us to eat them with
offense. Therefore when our Brother is like to be offended, and made more weak
or infirm in his Faith by our using such or such meats and drinks, it is best
for us to abstain. But some will urge again, I have Faith Intelligitur fides de
rebus mediis, and non quae ad dogmata pertinet. (...) hic est persuasio ea, per
quam quis credit licitum esse id quod facit.
, (that is, I am fully persuaded, it is lawful for me to eat), and it is
necessary that I profess it, and own it, and assert this my liberty. He
answers, Thou may enjoy thy persuasion to thy self, but may not use it, or
profess it to the hurt of thy Brother; yea thou must so use it, as one that
must give an account of thy self and thy actions to God. And he tells them,
that he is a happy man Felix, qui quod facit non judicat apud se non esse
faciendum. Peccatum enim est quicquid fit, conscientia non adstipulante.
, that when he knows a thing to be lawful, does so use his liberty about it, as
to have no reason to accuse, or condemn himself; and who judges not in
himself, that that ought not to be done, which he does. Therefore he advises
those that are doubtful concerning the lawfulness of using such or such meats,
to abstain; because he that doubts whether he should eat, and yet eats, he is
condemned of himself, because he does it without being satisfied of its
lawfulness. For whatsoever is not done of Faith, that is, with a persuasion
that it is lawful, is to him that does it, sinful. From Ver. 13, to the end.

10. He further shows, that those that are strong, and have attained to a
greater measure of knowledge, should bear with the infirmities of the weak, and
labor to keep them from falling, not seeking only to please themselves, but
their neighbor, in things tending to his good and edification. This he urges
from the example of Christ, who did not seek to please Non quaesivit sibi
dulcia. Grot.
himself, or the inclination of Nature, (which abhors pain and suffering);
but he so carried himself, that that may truly be applied to him, which is
written Pal. 69.9. The reproaches of them that reproach thee are fallen upon
me, that is, The sins of men, which in their own nature are injuries against
God, and cast reproach upon him, I have taken them upon me, or they are laid
upon me to expiate them, [Isa. 53.4.]. And seeing Christ sought not his own
ease, but our benefit, we ought in like manner to seek the good of our
Neighbor, and to do that which may tend to the promoting his salvation. And
lest any should object, that such passages as those of the Psalmist belonged
not to them, he tells them, that those things that were before written, were
written for our instruction, that we exercising such patience as the Scripture
prescribes, especially in bearing with the infirmities of our weak Christian
Brethren, might have the comforts the Scripture promises, and particularly be
confirmed in hope of obtaining eternal Salvation by Christ Jesus. He prays,
that God who works patience and comfort in the hearts of his people by the
holy Scriptures, would give them the grace of Unity and Charity, such as Christ
commands and expects from them; that all strife and discord being laid aside,
they might with one heart and mouth glorify God, who is the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Wherefore after the example of Christ, (who came from Heaven, and
laid down his life to redeem both Jew and Gentile, and receives both into the
arms of his mercy, intending to make them both, upon their Faith in him, to be
partakers of the glory of God), he exhorts them, with all love and kindness, to
receive one another into their communion, not disdaining, or rejecting, or
judging one another. And that the Christian Gentile might not despise the
Jewish Believers, he tells them, that Christ was appointed a Minister to the
circumcised v. 8. Christ a Minister of the Circumcision] Metonymia adjuncti pro
subjecto. Christus dignatus est ministrare Judaeis, ergo non decet ut a
Gentibus spernantur. Rursum, Christus assumsit ex misericordia Gentes; ergo
Judaei non debent eas ut extraneas despicere.
Jews, that God might appear to be true in his promises made to the Fathers, of
sending the Messiah to them. And accordingly Christ preached to the Jews in his
own person, but to the Gentiles by his Apostles. And on the other side, that
the Jewish Christian might not reject the Gentile believer, (who makes use of
his lawful liberty), he tells them, that God has been most wonderfully
merciful to the Gentiles, and has received them according to his promises made
in the Old Testament, and they have great cause to glorify God for his mercy,
which they would have no reason to do, if they had not been received to mercy.
And this he proves by a fourfold testimony. First, from Psalm. 18.49. I will
praise thee, and sing unto thee among the Gentiles. Where David who was a Type
of Christ, promises that he will publish Dicit David se etiam vicinis
alienigenis narraturum Dei in se beneficia. Optime autem haec ad mysticum
Davidem, Christum, aptantur. Grot.
the name of God among the Gentiles David hoc facturus erat per Messiam.
Gejerus.
. 2ly. From Deuteronomy. 32.43. Where the Gentiles are commanded to rejoice and praise
God with the Jews. 3^y. From Psalm. 117.1. The Gentiles are commanded to praise
God, and that plainly intimates, they shall obtain mercy. Lastly, From Isa.
11.10. Where the Prophet prophesying of Christ, who was to come of David's
Family, (under the type of Hezekiah lineally descended from David), says, that
he shall be for a standard Quod in Hebraeo est (...) in vexillum LXX verterunt
(...) quia Vexillum signum imperii. Locus prophetae de Hezechia agit, sed qui
and ipse non obscura suit Christi Imago. Orietur, inquit, ex Jessae domo
soboles quae erigetur Gentibus pro vexillo, nempe in id ut Gentes ei se
committant cum bona siducia. Haec pertinent non tantum ad ostendendum Gentibus
quid Deo debeant, verum etiam ad retundendam Judaeorum ferociam, q. d. Quid
est? Vultis vos aegre far, si Deus promissa praestet?
to the Gentiles, to whom they shall come and resort, by the preaching of the
Gospel, and over whom he shall reign as King, and that they shall trust and
rely on him, and believe in him.

He concludes this discourse concerning their abstaining from the unseasonable
use of their Christian liberty with a most ardent prayer, that God, in whom all
true Believers repose all their trust, and from whom they expect all good
things, would fill them with all joy, and peace in believing, that through the
working of the Holy Ghost in them, they may abound in hope of having and
enjoying eternal life. From Ver. 1, to 14.

He begins now to conclude his Epistle, The Conclusion.
excusing himself that he had written somewhat boldly unto them. For though he
was persuaded that the Romans Per hanc laudem provocat ad meliora.
abounded in grace, and the knowledge of all things pertaining to Salvation, and
were able to instruct one another, yet he thought fit to write unto them, and
to stir them up to the practice of that which they knew already; this being a
branch of his Apostolical Office, (conferred on him by the grace of God), as
well as that of making known the Gospel. And so by real effects he should prove
v. 16. (...)] Esse pro conspici, q. d. ut factis probem me esse ministrum
Christi ad Gentes missum.
that he was a Minister of Christ, sent to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles,
that they being converted by his ministry, might be offered to God as a
Sacrifice, sanctified by the Spirit, and so acceptable to God. And seeing he
had brought so many Gentiles to the Faith by his ministry, he had great matter
of rejoicing, not in himself, but that through the assistance of Christ, he had
been enabled to be faithful in the matters that concerned the glory and service
of God. Neither durst he speak more than Christ had really effected by him, (in
the conversion of the Gentiles), namely, by his preaching, and ministry, and
the signs, and wonders which the Holy Ghost had enabled him to do, that the
Gentiles might be convinced thereby, of the truth of his Doctrine. So that from
Jerusalem and the Countries round about unto Illyricum, (now called Sclavonia
lying on the Adriatic Sea), he had spread the Gospel, his design being to
preach Christ in those places where he had not been preached before, that he
might not build on another man's foundation. So that in his ministry that
Prophecy, Isa. 52.15. was fulfilled, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall
see, (that is, believe Verba ipsa LXX apud Esaiam, cap. 52. sic se habent.
Videbunt res non ante nunciatas, and intelligent non antea audita. Quod primo
sensu dictum de iis qui videre eventum Vaticiniorum Jeremiae, mystico sensu
optime ad Evangelium refertur. Grot.
in him), and they that have not heard, shall understand. And he tells them,
that th^se his great employments elsewhere in planting the Gospel, had hindered
him from coming to them hitherto. But now finding no place in these parts where
the foundation was yet to be laid, and having no more occasion to detain him
here, (that he foresaw), he gives them hopes of his coming, and tarrying a
while with them in his journey, which he intended for Sp^in, after h^ had
satisfied himself with the pleasure of being among them, and been something
refreshed with their company. He tells them, he was now going to Jerusalem, to
carry thither the charitable contributions of the Greek Churche^, for the
r^li^f ^f the poor Saints in Judea, which office of love, he intimates, those
Churches were in some sort obliged to perform unto them, because the Gospel
came from the Jews to the Gentiles. And seeing the G^ntiles had been made
partakers of their spiritual things, it was but just they should minister to
them in carnal things. When therefore he had finished this journey and service,
and had sealed, that is, delivered to them at Jerusalem, safely without
diminution, (as a treasure under Seal), this fruit of the Faith, and L^ve of
the aforesaid Churches, he intended to visit them. In the mean time he suggests
to them hopes of great spiritual bl^ssings Veniam cum uberrimis Christi donis,
ad vos confirmandos, scil. veniam cum abundanti benedictione, i. e. plene vobis
Evangelium annunciabo ut si quid desit vobis ad absolutam Evangelii cognitionem
id totum a me accipiatis. Vatab.
to be conferred by his ministry upon them at his coming, that so they might
more earnestly desire it. Lastly, He beseech^s them for Christ's sake, and the
love of God wrought in their hearts by the Spirit, that they would be
importunate in their prayers to God for him, that he may be delivered from the
snares of the unb^li^ving Jews in Judea, who vehemently thirsted after his
blood: And that the relief he brought to the poor Saints in Judea might be
kindly accepted by them, though it came from the Gentile Churches. And lastly,
That he might come to them with joy, (if it be the will of God), and might
rejoice together with them, and be refreshed with their company and converse.
And so giving them his Apostolical benediction, he d^sires the God of peace,
unity, and concord, and Author of all blessings to be with them, to bless and
preserve them. From Ver. 14, to the end.

Chap. 16.
In the close of his Epistle, He commends to them Phoebe, who served the Church
at Cenchrea, (an Haven of Corinth), in receiving and harboring poor Christians
that were driven out of their own Country, and particularly had been a
succourer of the Apostle himself. He exhorts them, to receive her in the Lord,
(that is, with Christian affection for the Lords sake): And to assi^t her in
her outward affairs, and businesses at Rome as far as they were able. Then he
salutes Aquila and Priscilla, who, though private persons, yet keeping
themselves within their calling, had vigorously labored in propagating the
Gospel according to their knowledge, with singular zeal, (as appears, Act. 18.),
and it seems, they stood up in defense of the Apostle in some dangerous
persecution or tumult, and preserved his life with the hazard of their own
This might happen while Paul sojourned with Aquila and Priscilla in their
house, Act. 18.6, 7. when he had such an hot bout with the Jews that he was
constrained to leave them, and go unto the house of one Justus. It seems they
with hazard of their lives protected him while he was in their house.
Otherwise it were not probable that Priscilla being a woman should adventure
her life for Paul.
; upon which account, he tells them, that not only himself was bound to thank
them, but all the Churches of the Gentiles about Corinth, because the
preservation of his life redounded to the profit of them all. He salutes also
the Church in their house, that is, all the Christians in their family. He
salutes Epinetus, who was converted to the Faith among the first in Achaia,
[see 1 Cor. 16.15]. He salutes Mary, who had done many good offices for the
faithful, especially the Teachers of the Gospel. He salutes Andronicus, and
Junius his Kinsmen, who were highly accounted of among the Apopostles, and were
converted to the Faith before the Apostle himself, being p^ssibly among those
who were at first converted by Peter; and they had also been imprisoned for the
sake of the Gospel as well as He, [see Col. 4.10.]. He greets Amphias whom he
dearly loved for the grace of God that appeared in him, and for his holy
profession. He s^lutes Urbanus who seems to be one of the Pastors of the Church
at Rome, and so a fellow-lab^urer with the Apostle in the Gospel. He salutes
Apelles, who showed himself a faithful and sincere Christian. He salutes the
Christians that were in Aristobulus and Narcissus's house; but the Masters he
passes by, they (as it seems) not being Christians. He salutes those approved
Matrons Tryphena, and Tryphosa, and Persis, who contributed their labors
zealously for the promoting of the G^spel, and did many good offices in the
Church. He salutes Rufus a choice So John writes to the Elect Lady.
person for godliness and virtue, whose M^ther very much respected Paul, and
was as a Mother to him in love and affection. He salutes some more in
particular, and others in general, under the Titles of Brethren and Saints. He
bids them salute one another with a holy kiss, which was among them, (as
shaking of hands among us), a sign of mutual love, affection, and concord. He
tells them, The Churches among whom he was conversant, who understood his
purpose of writing to them, aluted them. From Ver. 1, to 17.

He warns to avoid those who by false Doctrine caused divisions, and by
scandalous Living, ^ffences among them. For these, he tells them, serve not the
Lord, but themselv^s, and the more simple are easily deceived by their cunning
words. And as f^r them, though he had already good experience of their
obedience to the G^spel, (which was manifest to the world and in which he
greatly rejoiced), yet he thought good to admonish them to continue constant,
and prudently to resist contrary Doctrines. For as it is not sufficient for a
Matron, to have been once chaste, except she so continue, so it is not sufficient
for them to have been once a pure Church, except they keep themselves from
false Doctrine and false Worship.

It s^ems, he f^resaw, that if the Roman Church were once infected with error,
it would be dangerous to other Churches. Therefore he would have them wise in
discerning true Doctrine from false, and in sticking to it, neither being
cunning Velim vos ita prudentes ut non fallamini, ita bonos ut non fallatis.
Velim vos esse simplices, i. e. sinceros, puros ab omni malo.
to sophisticate the truth, nor to propagate error. And though Satan and his
instruments will seek to seduce them, and disturb their Church; yet he tells
them, that G^d who is both the Lover and Author of peace, will through Christ,
give them victory, when they have a while combated against the Devil and his
Emissaries. Whereby he seems, either to prophecy of the conversion of the
Roman Empire to the Faith, or that the dissentions raised among them by the
subtilty and malice of the Devil and his Instruments shall be quenched; which
possibly was partly effected by this Epistle, and partly by the Apostles
after-labours among them. He subjoins the salutations of other Saints with him,
to the Christian Romans, particularly of Timothy the Evangelist, Tertius who
wrote this Epistle from his mouth, Gaius, (^f whom Act. 20.4.), Erastus, [see 2 Timothy 4.20.], and of Quartus.

He concludes this excellent Epistle, with a solemn doxology, or thanksgiving
to God, who is able to establish them in the Faith, according to the Gospel
which he had preached, (the great subject whereof is Christ), and according to
the Rev^lation of his secret Counsel concerning the Salvation of mankind, which
though it were in some sort made known in the Old Testament, yet not plainly
and fully until this present time; but now by the Commandment of God, and the
Spirits clearing the meaning of ancient prophesies, is made known to all
Nations, to bring them to submit th^mselves to the Doctrine and Directions of
the Gospel: To this only wise G^d he desires all glory and honor should, in
and through the mediation of Christ Jesus, be for ever ascribed. Amen. From
Ver. 17, to the end.

SECT. XVII.
THE Apostle intending to go directly from Corinth into Syria, to carry the
Alms of the Macedonian and Achaian Christians to Judea; he was advertised, that
the Jews (who hated his Doctrine and person, and knew of his purpose) laid wait
for him, to intercept the moneys he carried, and possibly to take away his
life. Whereupon he thought it best, to return into Macedonia, (from whence he
came), and from thence to pass into Asia. Sopater of Beroea went along with him
as far as Asia, never parting from him; but Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius,
Tychicus, Trophimus, and Timothy, (who it seems upon some occasion or other was
come unto him from Ephesus), went with him through Macedonia, and then leaving
him, went before to Asia, and expected him and his company at Troas; who
accordingly came thither, with Luke and Sopater, not long after from Philippi,
and stayed there seven days. On the eighth day, which was the first day Ex hoc
loco, item ex 1 Cor. 16.2, demonstratur quod translatio Sabbathi, quarto legis
moralis praecepto sanciti, ex ultimo in primum diem hebdomadis, non solum
fundata sit in consuetudine Christianae Ecclesiae, sed etiam in expressa
ordinatione Apostolica; unde and ille dies vocatur (...) Apoc. 1.10. i. e. in
honorem Domini celebratus. Quartum praeceptun legis Moralis non est abrogatum,
sed etiam Christianos ad ^bservandum Sabb^thum hebdomadarium obligat. Authore^
hujus mutationis ^uisse ipsos Apostolo^ Christi (qui Spiritum infallibilitatis
habuerunt) p^ter ex h^c loco, and locis mox, alleg^tis* Habuit Sabbathum, and
etiamnum habet, duplices fines. 1. Morales, ut esset tempus Deo sacrum, quod
negotiis mundanis substractum, impenderetur Deo laudando, cognoscendo,
invocando, etc. 2. Ceremoniales; sic Sabbathum Judaicum fuit rememoratio istius
quietis divinae, qu^ ab operibus Cre^tionis cessavit; sic fuit signum foederis
quod cum Israelitis pepigit, Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel. 20.12, 20. Item signum quietae
possessionis terrae Canaan, post liberationem ex servili labor Aegypti, Deuteronomy.
5.15. sic etiam typus aeternae quietis in coelo, Isa. 66.22, 23. ut explicatur,
Heb. 4.9. Sic etiam monitorium quiescendi and cessandi a peccatis, Isa 56.2 and
^8.13. Praesertim autem erat typus istius quietis, qua Christus septimo die
hebdomadis quievit in sepulchro a laboribus Passionis. Quo^^am autem istae
ceremoniales praefiguration^s per adventum Christi aliqua ex part impletae
sunt, post adventum Christi Sabbathum caret sinibus Sacramentalibus, quos in
Veteri Test^mento habuit, and praecipue non est Typus Christi and mortis
ipsiu^, and propter hanc caus^m a septimo die hebdomadis in primum transl^tum
est, ut sciremus Christum non exspectari, sed venisse, non amplius moriturum,
sed mortuum esse, and ex morte resurrexisse. Etsi ergo Sabbatum non ampliu^ est
figura, and Typus quietis Christi in sepulchro, vel quietis in terra Canaan
post exitum ex Aegypto, nec amplius est jugum legis ad acuendum Spiritum
servitutis, tamen etiamnum est tempus honori Dei, curandae ac nutriendae
animae, resiciendo corpori, exercendae miserecordiae s cratum. Vide plura super
hac re apud Stresionem in loc.
of the week the Disciples being gathered together to break bread, and receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Paul preached unto them, and being to go
away next day continued his exhortation till midnight. Eutichus, a young who
sat in a window, being surprised with sleep, fell down from the third loft,
and was taken up dead Sic Christus, Mat 9.24. Filiola non est mortua sed
dormit, i. e. ad tempus tantum recessit anima, and mox re^ibit. At ubi^erat
anim^? In manu Dei vel Angelorum qui morientium animas dicuntur portare, Luke
16.22. etsi non fuit in coelum asportata, tamen fuit in manu Angeli custodita.
Vid. Act. 37. historiam de Tabi^ha.
; Paul falling on him, (in imitation of the Prophets, Elijah and Elisha, 1
Kings 17.21. and 2 Kings 4.34.), quickly perceived his Soul (which was
departed) through the power of God (on which he believed) restored to him
again, and therefore bad them not trouble themselves. The Disciples seeing this
Miracle, were not a little comforted; because not only life was restored to the
Youth again, but the Doctrine of the Gospel which Paul preached, was
exceedingly confirmed thereby.

Act. 20.3. And there abode three months: and when the Jews laid wait for him,
as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia.

v. 4. And there accompanied him into Asia, Sopater of Berea: and of the
Thessalonians, Aristarchus, and Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus:
and of Asia, Tychicus, and Trophimus.

v. 5. These going before, tarried for us at Troas:

v. 6. And we sailed away from Philippi, after the days of unleavened bread,
and came unto them to Troas in five days, where we abode seven days.

v. 7. And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to
break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and
continued his speech until midnight.

v. 8. And there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were
gathered together.

v. 9. And there sat in a window a certain young man, named Eutychus, being
fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with
sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.

v. 10. And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him, said, Trouble
not your selves, for his life is in him.

v. 11. When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten,
and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed.

v. 12. And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.

v. 6. Post dies Azymorum] Paulus vocatorum ex Gentibus libertatem tuebatur;
ipse tamen, dies Judaeorum festos observabant. Vide Act. 18.21. 1 Cor. 16.8.
v. 7. (...) pro* (...), and Sabbatorum pro Sabbati. Enallage numeri. Vnus
Sabbatorum, est primus hebdomadae dies a Sabbato proximus, qui nobis Dominicus
dicitur. Is dies conventus, Christianis proprius, 1 Cor. 16.2. dies (...),
Apoc. 1.10. Justinus de eadem die Apolog. 2. (...).
SECT. XVIII.
FRom Troas Paul went on foot to Assos, a Sea-port-Town in Asia, sending his
companions by ship thither before him, who when he came thither took him in.
Thence they all sailed together to Mitylene, and the next day arrived at Samos,
and having tarried a little at Trogyllium, the day following they came to
Miletus, passing by, and not touching at Ephesus. For the Apostle being
desirous to be at Jerusalem, at the Feast of Pentecost, (that he might in that
concourse have a larger opportunity of spreading the Gospel), would not now
call at Ephe^us, lest he should be detained too long by the Brethren there.
Wherefore he sent for the Elders of that Church to come to him to Miletus. They
being come, He in a very grave and serious discourse sets before them, in the
first place, The uprightness of his Conversation, and the faithfulness of his
Ministry among them, and how he had behaved himself with all humility of mind,
and had expressed much tenderness of affection to them, and that amidst many
hazzards and dangers from the Jews, who conspired against his life; that he
kept nothing back from them, that he thought useful for them to know; but had
both publicly and privately preached, both to Jews and Gentiles the necessity
of Repentance, and Conversion to God, and of Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. He
tells them, he was now going to Jerusalem, not undertaking that Journey rashly
or inconsiderately, but being incited to it by the strong impulse of the Spirit
of God Vinctus Spiritu] i. e. Ductu, and impulsu Spiritus Sancti ad hoc iter
tam efficaciter impulsus, ac si vinculis istuc traheretur. Vid. Act. 16.6, 7,
etc. 19.21, etc. 13.4. Mat. 4.1.
. Neither knew he what particular sufferings the Lord would there call him to
undergo, or what would be the issue of them, whether life or death. Only this
he found, that in every City (through which he passed), those that had the gift
of Prophecy, (as many in the Churches had at that time), foretold him, that
bonds and afflictions did wait for him, and attend him. But none of these
things moved him, no not loss of life it self, if he might serve Christ
faithfully in the office which he had entrusted him with, and publish his
Gospel, wherein the free grace of God is so eminently manifested. And as for
them, his dear friends, (among whom he had so long conversed, and to whom he
had preached the Gospel, by which the Kingdom of God is set up in the hearts of
men), he tells them, they were never like to see his face again. And seeing he
had faithfully showed to them the way to salvation, the fault was not in him if
any of them perished, see Act. 18.6. Ezekiel. 3.18. He then exhorts them, to have
a great regard to their Pastoral charge, and to take heed to themselves, (that
their life and conversation be holy and unblameable), and to the whole flock
over which the Holy Ghost Spiritus Sanctus est vicarius Christi in terris, qui
Christi nomine Ecclesiam docet, and regit, Joh. 16.13, 14. Et ex hac potestate
vicariatus Ecclesiae ministros vocat, dotat, mittit, praeficit. Ergo Christus
est Rex Ecclesiae, Spiritus Sanctus vicarius hujus Regis, Pastores, servi,
visibilia ac audibilia instrumenta hujus vicarii. Est argumentum quo and
personalitas, and divinitas Spiritus Sancti lucide demonstratur. Streso.
, (from whom all faithful Ministers have principally their call and authority
See Act. 13.2, 3.
), had made them Overseers, that they feed the Church of God with sound
Doctrine, and give them a good example. Which exhortation he inforceth by two
arguments. 1. Because of the inestimable price with which this flock was
bought; Christ, God-man having purchased it with his own blood. 2. Because of
the danger that the flock was like to be in, after his departure, partly from
Wolves (that is, false Teachers, or professed persecuting enemies), partly from
subtle crafty Heretics, who should arise from among themselves. He exhorts
them therefore, to be careful, remembering, how for the space of three years he
had taken much pains in preaching the Gospel among them, and had with tears,
night and day, (as occasion offered it self See 2 Timothy 1.3. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.9.
), warned them to take heed of such seducers, and to cleave to the truth.
Lastly, He takes his solemn leave of them, commending them to the protection
and guidance of God, and to the directions delivered in his Gospel, which if
they adhered to, he tells them, will be able to instruct and build them up, and
bring them to that glorious inheritance which God has provided for all his
Saints; the promises whereof may abundantly encourage them in their work In
conclusion, he professes his innocence from that sordid sin of Covetousness,
and appeals to them, whether by his own manual labor he had not maintained
himself, and those that were with him, ( see Act. 18.3.). And thereby he had
taught them, that by so laboring as he did, (when the case required it), they
should be so far from being chargeable or burdensome to others, that they should
support, and relieve the poor and weak in estate; and this much rather, than by
exacting wages drive any, that were tenacious, from embracing the Gospel. For
according to that saying of our Savior, (not recorded in the Gospels, though
possibly it may be gathered from Luke 6.38. and 16.9.), It is more blessed to
give than to receive. When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with
them, and when he had so done, they with great expressions of sorrow
accompanied him to the ship, being more especially grieved at those words of
his, That they should see his face no more. From Ver. 13, to the end.

Act. 20. v. 13. And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there
intending to take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot.

v. 14. And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene.

v. 15. And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios, and the
next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium: and the next day we
came to Miletus.

v. 16. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend
the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at
Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.

v. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the
Church.

v. 18. And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know from the
first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all
seasons.

v. 19. Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and
temptations, which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews:

v. 20. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have
showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house.

v. 21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

v. 22. And now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing
the things that shall befall me there:

v. 23. Save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, That bonds
and afflictions abide me.

v. 24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

v. 25. And now behold, I know that ye all among whom I have gone preaching the
kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

v. 26. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood
of all men.

v. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

v. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over the
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood.

v. 29. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the flock.

v. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away disciples after them.

v. 31. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I
ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.

v. 32. And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

v. 33. I have covered no man silver, or gold, or apparel.

v. 34. Yea, you your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto my
necessities, and to them that were with me.

v. 35. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye ought to
support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It
is more blessed to give, than to receive.

v. 36. And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down and prayed with them all.

v. 37. And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him,

v. 38. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should
see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.

v. 14. Assos Urbs Troadis. Mitylene, Lesbi insulae urbs praecipua.
v 15. Chios insula inter Lesbum and Samum. Samus, insulae Joniae. Trogyllium
est Joniae promontorium non long a Samo. Miletus, Joniae urbs.
21. Graecorum nomine Scriptores Novi Testamenti intelligunt quasvis Ethnicorum
nationes, quomodo Onkelos, and Syrus interpres, omnes Gentiles vocant Aramaeos
aut Syras.
v. 30. Ex vobis ipsis exsurgent viri loquentes perversa] h. e. Nicolaitae,
Apoc 2.6. docentes ea quae a recto deflectunt. Nam docebant, Matrimonium
institutum esse mere humanum, and tale quod conscientias non obligaret,
Immolatitiis sine distinctione licere vesci. Vide Irenaeum. 1.27.
Ideo docent carni placentia, ut eos quos Ecclesiae disciplina offendit, ab
Ecclesia abductos sibi faciant sectatores. Grot.
v. 33. Praeclarior de se praedicatio quam illa Samuelis, 1 Samuel 12.5. Samuel
testificabatur nihil se judicandi causa accepisse. Paulus nec laboris in
docendo assidu^ repensationem ullam accipere voluerat. Gracchus apud Gellium
Provincia discessurus, Ita versatus sum in Provinciu ut nemo posset vere
dicere, assem, aut eo plus in muneribus me accepisse. Pricaeus.
v. 35. (...)] Descriptio comparativi per particulam (...) Hoc est inter illa
quae Paulus didicerat non ex sc^ipto sed relatu eorum, qui Dominum noverant.
SECT. XIX.
FRom Miletus they came to Coos, and the day following to Rhodes, and from
thence to Patara, a Port Town, and the chief City of Lycia, and from thence in
a ship bound for Phoenicia, passing by Cyprus, they came to Tire, where finding
some Disciples, they tarried with them seven days. Here Paul was warned by some
of the Christians in this place, (who had the Spirit of Prophecy), of the great
dangers and perils that attended him, if he went up to Jerusalem. Wherefore
through humane affection, and zeal for his temporal preservation, (see a like
example in Peter, Mat. 16.22.), they dissuaded him from going thither. But
their counsel nothing prevailing with him, and they seeing he was resolved to
go on, they all of them, with their Wives and Children Non tantum ipsi deducunt
Paulum, sed and ipsos liberos tempestive adsuefaciunt honorandis Evangelii
ministris. Probe hinc discamus liberis nostris ingenerare aestimium Evangelii
and S. ministerii, ne contemptores ejus evadant.
, (to testify their great respect and affection to him), accompany him out of
the City; and he at his departure from them, kneeled down on the shore and
prayed with them, Then taking ship from Tire, they came to Ptolemais, (a Sea
Town of Palestine in the Tribe of Aser, formerly called Acco, Judge 1.31. but
now thus named from a King in Egypt), where having saluted the Brethren, the
next day they came to Cesarea-Stratonis, (on foot as it is probable), where they
stayed many days with Philip the Evangelist That is, one of them who were sent
forth here and there by the Apostles to preach the Gospel, and to confirm the
Churches, Ephesians. 4.11. 2 Timothy 4.5. Munus Evangelistae inter Apostolos and
Pastores erat medium. Evangelium praedicabant nulli certae Ecclesiae affixi.
, who was one of the Seven Deacons, [Act. 6.5.], and had four Virgin Daughters
who had the gift of foretelling Hoc donum non tantum viris sed and foeminis
dabatur, ut patet in exemplis Deborae and Huldae, Jud. 5.2 Reg. 22.14. Et
Mariae matris Domini, Luc. 1.46. Et Annae, Luc. 2.36. Adeoque and his filiabus
potuit esse datum.
things to come. During their stay here, a certain Prophet called Agabus, (the
same probably who, chap. 11.27, 28. foretold the famine that happened in the
time of Claudius), came hither from Judea; and after the manner of the old
Prophets, (who often prophesied by Symbols See Isa. 20.2, 3. Jer. 13.1. and
27.2. Ezekiel. 12. 5. Imitati hoc and falsi Prophetae. Ut apparet, Jer. 38. Mos
Dei est, non tantum per verba audibilia sed etiam per signa visibilia homines
docere suam voluntatem, quia homo habet duos disciplinares sensus, and quia
quod non tantum auditur sed etiam videtur efficacius movet. Sic etiam doctrinam
foederis per Sacramenta quasi visibilem facit, ut Christus quasi ante oculos
nobis crucifigatur, Gal. 3.1.
, and significant expressions, that they might the better imprint their
predictions on the hearts of men), took Paul's girdle; and bound his own hands
and feet with it, declaring, that after that manner the Jews would bind Paul at
Jerusalem, and deliver him to the Gentiles; viz. first to the Roman Governor
of Judea, and afterward to Nero the Roman Emperor. Hereupon both Paul's
Companions, and the Christians of that place; out of their great affection to
him, importuned him with tears not to go to Jerusalem. But the Apostle
resolving, come life or come death, to be obedient to the Call of Gods Spirit,
would not be diverted from his intended journey. When they perceived his
resolution to be fixed, they desisted from importuning him any further, and
submitted to the will of God. Then lading Mules with the goods they had with
them, they began their journey from Ca sarea toward Jerusalem. And some of the
Disciples also of Caesarea accompanied them, who brought them to one Mnason of
Cyprus an old Disciple, (who had long ago received the Faith and now lived as
it seems at Jerusalem), with whom they should lodge.

Act. 21. v. 1. And it came to pass that after we were gotten from them, and
had lanched, we came with a straight course unto Choos, and the day following
unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara.

v. 2. And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set
forth.

v. 3. Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and
sailed into Syria, and landed at Tire: for there the ship was to unlade her
burden.

v. 4. And finding disciples, we tarried there seven days: who said to Paul
through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.

v. 5. And when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our way;
and they all brought us on our way, with wives, and children, till we were out
of the City: and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed.

v. 6. And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship, and they
returned home again.

v. 7. And when we had finished our course from Tire, we came to Ptolemais, and
saluted the Brethren, and abode with them one day.

v. 8. And the next day, we that were of Paul's company departed, and came unto
Cesarea, and we went into the house of Philip the Evangelist, (which was one of
the Seven), and abode with him.

v. 9. And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophecy.

v. 10. And as we tarried there many days, there came down from Judea, a
certain Prophet named Agabus.

v. 11. And when he was come unto us, he took Paul's girdle, and bound his own
hands and feet, and said, Thus says the holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at
Jerusalem bind the man that owes this girdle, and shall deliver him into the
hands of the Gentiles.

v. 12. And when we heard these things, both we and they of that place besought
him not to go up to Jerusalem.

v. 13. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? for
I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of
the Lord Jesus.

v. 14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the
Lord be done.

v. 15. And after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to Jerusalem.

v. 16. There went up with us also certain of the disciples of Cesarea, and
brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should
lodge.

v. 1. Cous, insula est inter Cycladas celeberrima, tum Esculapii cultu, tum
Junonis aede. Rhodus, solis cultu, and Colosso nobilis.
v^ 13. (...)] Parate habeo, i. e. paratum me habeo: eadem locutio, 2 Cor.
12.14. 1 Pet. 4.5.
v. 16. (...)] Brevis locutio pro (...), ducentes, (i. e. ducturi, praesens pro
futuro), nos ad eum apud quem diverteremur. Nam Mnason ille ex Cypro videtur
habitatum ivisse Hierosolyma. Antiquum discipulum] ex eo tempore quo Paulus and
Barnabas in Cypro fuerant. Vid. cap. 13.4.
SECT. XX.
When they were come to Jerusalem, they were very kindly received by the
Church there. And the next day, the Elders being met together in the house of
James the Apostle, the Son of Alpheus, (See Mat. 15.40. Gal. 1.19. Act.
15.13.), Paul relates to them, what great things the Lord had wrought by his
ministry among the Gentiles. When they heard that, they glorified God for the
great success of the Gospel. But then they acquainted him, that several of the
converted Jews, (of whom there were many thousands, who, though they had
received the Gospel, yet thought the Ceremonial Law must still be observed),
were informed concerning him, that he not only permitted the Gentile-converts
to remain uncircumcised, but persuaded the Jews living among the Gentiles,
(whom he had converted to the Faith), to leave off Circumcision, and the other
Ceremonies of Moses's Law. This therefore they tell him, in all probability,
will be the event of this business. The Jewish Christians will hear of his
being come thither, and so will come in multitudes, to see how he behaves
himself in that matter, and will expect some satisfaction from him therein.
Therefore they advised him, that seeing there were four men there present, who
having had a Nazarites Vow upon them, which being now accomplished, ( see Act.
18.18.), were to perform the Ceremonies prescribed, Numb. 6.13, to 22. that he
on this occasion would join himself to them, and perform those Ceremonies and
Rites with them, and make provision of such Sacrifices for them as the Law
injoins, that so being now freed from their Vow, they may shave their heads;
and by this means the believing Jews will be persuaded that they had heard
false reports of him, and that he did still observe the Mosaical Rites. As for
the believing Gentiles Vtrumque consilium fuit ex Spiritu Sancto, ut Gentiles
conversi non cogerentur observare Ceremonias, and ut Judaei conversi ad tempus
sinerentur uti Ceremoniis impletis, donec inutilitatem, and non-necessitatem
earum cum tempore comprehenderent. Vid. cap. 14. ad Romans Etsi enim Ceremoniae
legis Mosaicae, isto tempore, non amplius erant necessariae, tamen erant
licitae Judaeis, si quando usus earum conduceret ad alios Judaeos lucrandos.
Synagoga debuit cum honor sepeliri, nec turpiter, and praecipitanter ex
Ecclesia ejici, sicut superstitiones Ethnicae, sed sensim in desuetudinem
venire. Ante Christum Ceremoniae erant mortales, post Christi ascensionem
mortuae, post confirmatum Evangelium mortiferae.
, (they tell him), they had made a decree, (which they had sent to Antioch by
him and Barnabas, Act. 15.), by which they declared that they are not required
to observe any such Rites, or any more than those four Precepts, viz. To
abstain from things offered to Idols, from Blood, from things strangled, and
from Fornication. Paul hearing this, took their advice, and thought fit thus
far to comply with the Judaizing Christians; and accordingly performing all
things belonging to the purifying of the Nazarites. He went into the Temple
Disputant hic viri docti utrum Paulus ipse Naziraeatus votum vel antea in se
habuerit, Act. 18.18. vel nunc susceperit, and cum his viris deposuerit; an
vero tantum interfuerit, and prae^uerit tanquam Patronus, and Adjutor horum
quatuor virorum sacris, ut ita aliquam modo communionem haberet cum Judaicis
Ceremoniis, quod ad scopum sufficiebat. Nos litem hanc non decidimus. Stres.
with those four men, and declared unto the Priests, that the time of their Vow
was expired, and therefore according to the Law, they were to offer an offering
for each person, as in that case is prescribed. And when the seven days wherein
those Sacrifices were to be offered, were almost at an end, diverse unbelieving
Jews, that dwelt in Asia, being now come to Jerusalem; as soon as they saw Paul
in the Temple, they brought in the multitude tumultuously upon him, and
apprehended him, crying out of him, as a person that taught Doctrines
derogatory to the prerogative of the Jewish Nation, namely, in that he taught,
that the partition wall between Jew and Gentile was broken down; also, that the
Ceremonial Law must be abolished, and that a sinner is not justified by the
works of the Law; and that the typical Ceremonies which pre-figured Christ were
not to be continued now Christ was come in the flesh; and further, that he did
inculcate the predictions of Christ concerning the destruction of the City and
Temple of Jerusalem, according to Mat. 23.37, 38. and Luke 19.43, 44. And
because they saw Trophimus with him in the City, who was a Gentile-Christian),
they confidently, but untruly averred, that he carried him into the Temple:
which they held a pollution and profanation of it. The people being hereupon
exasperated, they laid hands on him, and haled him violently out of the Court
of the Temple; and the Priests seeing this, presently shut the doors of the
Temple, lest possibly he should run into it again, and lay hold on the Horns of
the Altar, and so take Sanctuary, (from which they could not take him, as we
read Adonijah and Joab once did, 1 King. 1.50. and 2.28. Then they fell a
beating of him, and had like to have killed him, had he not been rescued by the
chief Officer of the Roman Soldiers, (who kept Garrison there to prevent
Tumults), who taking him out of their hands, and supposing him to be some great
Malefactor, commanded him to be bound with two Chains, possibly putting one on
his hands, the other on his feet, as Agabus had foretold, v. 11, Judaei
praedicuntur vincturi, v. 11, quia ipsi Paulo manus injece runt, eum
comprehenderunt, and sic occasionem dederunt quod ab Ethnicis militibus vinctus
est.
. And not being able to understand from the confused multitude, what his
particular crime was, (some saying one thing, some another), he commanded he
should be brought into the Fort or Castle, called Arx Antonia, which was their
Garrison. And as they were going up the stairs to the Castle, the rage of the
multitude was so great, that the Soldiers were fain to carry Paul in their
arms, to secure him from violence. When he was come to the Castle gate, he
desired the Colonel that he would please to permit him to speak unto him. The
Colonel wondered he spak^ Greek, and thereupon thought he had been that Egyptian
false Prophet, that had raised a Sedition in Judea about Three years before,
under the government of Faelix, and had gotten to him about four thousand
followers in the wilderness, vid. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 20. chapter 6, 7. Paul tells
him, he was a Jew, born at Tarsus, the Metroplis of Cilicia, and therefore
desired liberty to speak to the people; which the Colonel permitting, Paul
standing on the stairs, near the gate of the Castle, made a sign to the people
to hold their peace, and give audience; and then began to make his Apology to
them in the Hebrew The Jews after the Babylonish Captivity by their converse
with the Syrians and Assyrians, had very much mingled the purity of the Hebrew
with those Tongues, so that the Syriack having so great an agreement with the
Hebrew was reckoned for one Tongue.
tongue, which procured him the more ready attention from them.

Act. 21. v. 17. And when we were come to Jerusalem, the Brethren received us
gladly.

v. 18. And the day following Paul went in with us unto James, and all the
elders were present.

v. 19. And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God
had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry.

v. 20. And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him,
Thou see, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe, and
they are all zealous of the Law.

v. 21. And they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which
are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, That they ought not to
circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs.

v. 22. What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together: for they
will hear that thou art come.

v. 23. Do therefore this that we say unto thee: We have four men which have a
vow on them;

v. 24. Them take, and purify thy self with them, and be at charges with them,
that they may shave their heads; and all may know that those things, whereof
they were informed concerning him thee, are nothing, but that thou thy self
walk orderly, and keep the Law.

v. 25. As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded,
that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves from
things offered to Idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from
fornication.

v. 26. Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them,
entered into the Temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.

v. 27. And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia,
when they saw him in the Temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on
him,

v. 28. Crying out, Men of Israel, help: this is the man that teaches all men
every where against the people, and the Law, and this place: and farther
brought Greeks also into the Temple, and has polluted this holy place.

v. 29. (For they had seen before with him in the City, Trophimus an Ephesian,
whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the Temple.)

v. 30. And all the City was moved, and the people ran together: and they took
Paul, and drew him out of the Temple: and forthwith the doors were shut.

v* 31. And as they went about to kill him, tidings came to the chief Captain
of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.

v. 32. Who immediately took Soldiers, and Centurions, and ran down unto them:
and when they saw the chief Captain and the Soldiers, they left beating of
Paul.

v. 33. Then the chief Captain came near, and took him, and commanded him to be
bound with two chains, and demanded who he was, and what he had done.

v. 34. And some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude: and when
he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried
into the Castle.

v. 35. And when he came upon the stairs, so it was that he was born of the
Soldiers for the violence of the people.

v. 36. For the multitude of the people followed after, crying, Away with him.

v. 37. And as Paul was to be led into the Castle, he said unto the chief
Captain, May I speak unto thee? who said, Can thou speak Greek?

v. 38. Art not thou that Egyptian which before those days made an uproar,
and leddest in the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?

v. 39. But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew, of Tarsus, a City in Cilicia,
a Citizen of no mean City: and I beseech thee suffer me to speak unto the
people.

v. 40. And when he had given him license, Paul stood on the stairs, and
beckned with his hand unto the people: and when there was made a great silence,
he spoke unto them in the Hebrew tongue, saying.

v. 20. Vides quot sint millia Judaeorum] Vide Quomodo auctum fuit granum illud
Sinapis intra annos 25. Grot.
Accensi zelo legis] Intra Judaeam qui erant Judaei (...), hi ante dispersionem
illam, quae per Adrianum evenit, libertatem ab legis onere non percepere. Et ad
tales scripta est Epistola ad Hebraeos.
v. 23. Votum habentes] non perpetuum, sed temporarium; and tales Nazaraei
dierum vocantur, de quibus Numb. 26. Joseph. lib. 2. de bello Judaico, c. 15.
Erant ^alii Nazaraei qui faciebant votum perpetuum, ut Samuel, and Samson, hi
dicebantur Nazaraei seculi, i. e. perpetui. Vid. Drus. annot. in Number.
v. 24. Idem valet (...), ac esto Nazaraeus cum illis, and abstine a vino
rebusque aliis, quae interdictae sunt Nazaraeis. Sane Nazaraeatus (...)
vocatur, Number. 6.21.
(...)] Sumptus facito propter illos. Non Paulus Nazaraeatus votum concepit,
sed quatuor alii viri, comam, quam aluerant e Nazaraeatus voto, deposuerant.
Paulus vero sumtus fecit in hanc rem, scil. ad victimas a Nazaraeis offerendas
(peractis voti diebus) quas offerre Deo debebant quatuor isti viri, scil.
agnum, vel agnam, arietem, placentas, and lagana An vero Paulus integros
sumptus fecerit, necne, dicere non possumus: and hinc dicitur (...), quia quasi
in partem Nazaraeatus venerat, sumptus hos faciendo. Petitus.
Vult autem hoc Paulum facere Jacobus quo plebi abundantius satisfaciat, and ut
illi quatuor raderent caput, h. e. voti liberentur eo facilius. Est Metonym.
signi pro signato. Nam sicut obligatio votiva exprimebatur demisso capillo, ita
liberatio coma abrasa, Number. 6.18. quae coma supponebatur urenda ollis in quibus
coquebantur carnes de sacro Eucharistico.
v. 25. (...)] Infinitivus pro Gerundio, nihil tale servandum illis, nempe
eorum quae Moses praescripsit.
v. 26. Denuncians expletionem dierum, etc.] Hoc est, omnibus edicens se
castimonium suscipere in dies septem, ita ut dies ipsius pariter exirent cum
diebus aliorum qui aliquanto ante ac in majus tempus se obligaverant. Licebat
enim cuique, eum quem vellet votivae obligationi praestituere terminum, Number.
6.5. sic Paulus in dierum hebdomada se obligavit (illi alii in duas, tres aut
quatuor hebdomadas) usque dum offerenda esset pro unoquoque (scil. eorum qui se
obligaverant) oblatio. Ita tempus sumpsit ut pariter cum illorum tempore
desineret. Aoristus hic significat rem quae fieri debebat.
v. 28. Qui adversus populum and legem, etc.] eadem accusatio quae in Stephanum
intenta supra, cap. 6.14. Graecos introduxit] Quod plane non licebat, nempe
intra septum illud lapideum quod in tres cubitos attollebatur, and inscriptum
columnis habebat, (...) Joseph. belli Jud. 5.14. Si quis alienigena, etiam
Romanus, id septum transgrederetur, is occidi poterat, test eodem Joseph.
belli Jud. 6.
v. 31. (...)] Praefecto ejus cohortis, quae temporibus festis, ac proinde
etiam in Pentecoste praesidium habebat in porticibus Templi ad prohibendos
tumultus si qui orerentur: quam cohortem etiam (...) Johannes dixit, c. 18.3.
v. 35. Evenit ut portaretur a militibus] Levabatur a militibus ne vim ei
multitudo inferret, cui expositioni favent quae infra c. 23.10. extant.
v. 37. Graece nosti] Graeca lingua post Macedonum imperium facta erat quasi
communis populorum Asiae and Aegypti.
v. 39. Loquutus est lingua Hebraea] i. e. Hierosolymitana, magna ex part
Syriaca, qua tum Judaei utebantur.
SECT. XXI.
THE Apostle now beginning to make his defense to the people, He first sets
before them what manner of person he was before his conversion. He was a Jew by
extraction, born in the noble City of Tarsus, educated at Jerusalem, under that
famous Doctor of the Law Gamaliel, (a man of great esteem among them; see Act.
5.34.), being perfectly instructed by him in the Law of the Fathers Per patriam
legem non intelligitur lex quam Patres a Deo per Mosen acceperant, sed (...)
quam ipsi a patribus acceperant. Pharisaeorum religionem notat, quae (...)
magnam partem constabat, quarum (...) se fuisse olim, ait Gal. 1.14. Cumque
(...) ei religioni attribuit, idem dicit quod infra, c. 26.5. scil. se
institutum esse in Pharisaismo, quae est accuratissima Patriae legis forma. De
Dieu.

Intelligit se in Traditionibus, and Cabalis Judaicis, nec non in glossis
falsis supra legem Mosis (quarum tum major inter Judaeos erat authoritas quam
ipsius Mosis Math 5.21.) probe fuisse institutum, praecipue in praecisis
observatiunculis and regulis Pharisaeoram, c. 26.5.


, and imbued with the strictest Judaical Principles, and was a great Zelot for
that way, and a bitter enemy to Christianity. And he tells them, that all the
Senate, or Sanhedrim, especially the high Priest, could attest the truth of
what he said; for, from them he received commission to apprehend all such
Christians, as he could find in Syria, and to bring them bound to them to
Jerusalem to be scourged, or otherwise punished. 2ly, He declares to them the
manner of his conversion Paulus non fuit regenitus ante conversionem suam in
itinere Damasceno. Fuit enim acerbissimus hostis, and persecutor Christi, and
Ecclesiae Christianae ut de se fatetur, Phil. 3.6. and 1 Timothy 1.13. Gal. 1.13.
Simeon, Cornelius, etc. carebant quidem cognitione very Messiae, sed non in
cord gerebant acerbum odium ac amarum hostilitatem contra Christum sicut
Paulus. Quod se ait in justitia legis fuisse irreprehensibilem non
intelligendum est de vera sanctimonia vitae sed de superstitiosa and rigida
observatione ceremoniarum, and traditionum patriarum, ut nemo Pharisaeorum
haberet quod reprehenderet, Gal. 1.14. Streso.
, [ see Chap. 2. Sect. 1.], how traveling to Damascus to pursue his
persecuting design, when he was come nigh to that City, a great light from
Heaven shon round about him; upon which he fell to the ground, and heard these
words articulately spoken to him by Christ Probabile est, Paulum ipsis
corporalibus suis oculis vidisse ipsum Christi corpus splendore suo in oculis
Pauli coruscans. Vidit fulgur corporale ex nubibus; circumfulsus est radiis
Spiritus Sancti intus in conscientia, sed simul potuit ipsum Christi corpus
gloriosum videre. Sicut enim vox quam audivit fuit ex ipsius ore, v. 14. ita
probabile est lucem quam vidit fuisse ex ipsius Christi corpore. Et loca
superius allegata ex Act. 9.27. and 22.14. and 26.16. and 1 Cor. 9.1. and 1
Cor. 15.8. omnino videntur postulare hanc fidem, quod Paulus ipsum Christum
hominem viderit corporaliter. Post resurrectionem est visus Dominus a multis,
post ascensionem a nemine, praeterquam a Stephano and Paulo. Sed inde non
sequitur; Christi corpus fuisse in terra. Potuit enim virtute Christi,
corporalis visus Pauli ita roborari, ut quod in coelis erat in terris
conspiceret. Sic Stephanus, sublatis in coelum oculis, Jesum vidit stantem ad
dextram Dei, Act. 7.55.
, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And they that were with him heard a
voice indeed [ chapter 9.7.], (as the people did, Joh. 12.19. when some said it
thundered, others said an Angel spoke), but understood not distinctly what was
said. He further declares how Christ told him, he had provided one Ananias to
come unto him, and to show him what he had designed for him to do, and suffer,
for his Name sake. And thus being blinded by the brightness of the glory that
shone about him, he was led by those that were with him to Damascus, and there
by the Ministry of Ananias he recovered his sight. Ananias also showed him, how
God had chosen him, that he should know his will, and have the Gospel revealed
to him, and should see Jesus, and hear him speak to him from heaven, and should
make known to all men Ut esset testis and praeco quod Jesus Christus, quem
Judaei crucifixerant, vivat and in coelis sedeat ad dextram Patris in gloria.
Hujus rei (...) testis, est Apostolus, qua in re excellit caeteros Apostolos
qui Christum quidem ideo in carne viderunt, Act. 10 41. 1 John 1.1, 2. ut
idonei Christi testes essent, sed Paulus vidit ipsum in gloria, and ex coelo
audivit loquentem, and sese manifestantem. Ergo ait 1 Cor. 9.1. Annon sum
Apostolus, annon vidi Dominum Jesum? Non tantum vidit Christum exstatice, and
in visione nocturna, Act. 18.9. and 22.9. and 23.11. 2 Cor 12. sed and, hoc
loco, corporaliter, non minus quam caeteri Apostoli.
, the things which Jesus had already and should further make known to him.
Ananias also having further instructed him, exhorted him to be baptized, and by
Faith in Christ's blood to wash away the guilt of all his sins, (of which
Baptism is a sign and seal), and earnestly to implore grace from Christ, to
sanctify his nature more and more. Paul having thus opened to them the manner
of his Conversion and Call, to be an Apostle; he now further shows them, how at
his first coming to Jerusalem after this, ( see chapter 9.26.), as he was in the
Temple Paulus Christianus precatur in Templo Judaico. Faciebant id tum temporis
adhuc etiam caeteri Apostoli and Christiani, Act. 3.1. Non religione and
observantia praecepti ceremonialis, Deuteronomy. 12.5. 2 Chronicles. 7.12, 13. sed quia
intempestivum adhuc, and cursui Evangelii noxium erat, abrumpere communionem
cum Judaeis in externis cultus exercitiis. Paulus igitur ascendit Templum
ardenterque petiit (ut probabile est) ut sibi apud Judaeos liceret praedicare
Evangelium, populum suum Christo lucrifacere, and Ecclesiam quam vastaverat
iterum aedificare: Inter precandum raptus est in Paradisum seu tertium coelum,
audivitque verba* ineffabilia and summas accepit revelationes, 2 Cor 12.3, 4.
praying, he fell into an Exstasie or Trance, and in that Exstatical Vision saw
Christ, who commanded him to get him speedily out of that City, because his
former zeal against the Gospel, would hinder his preaching of it now from being
successful. Against this, he humbly argued, that his former zeal against
Christianity, (which was so remarkable and notorious, by his imprisoning the
Professors thereof, and causing them to be scourged in the Consistories of many
Cities, and by his assisting in the stoning of Steven, and keeping the Garments
of his accusers whilst they slew him) might be an argument to the Jews, that
they were very great and cogent reasons, that had wrought such a strange change
in him; and so he might in all likelihood, be a fitter person to publish the
Doctrine of Christ now, by how much the more he had opposed it formerly, [ see
Sect. 3. of Chap. 2.]. But this did not prevail for his staying at Jerusalem,
but Christ commanded him to depart from thence, telling him he would send him
to preach to the Gentiles, who had not that exception against him, and would
more readily receive his Doctrine. Hitherto the Jews had patience to hear him,
but when he mentioned the Gentiles, and that he was appointed to preach to
them, they cried out, he was a Villain, and unworthy to live, and expressing
their fury by throwing dust into the air, and casting off their Clothes as if
they would presently stone him, the chief Commander of the Guard, bid the
Soldiers carry him into the Castle, and commanded, that he should be scourged
till he should confess what he had done, that had so enraged the Jews against
him. As they were going about to bind him, in order to the scourging of him,
the Apostle declares himself a freeborn Denizon of Rome, whom the Roman Laws
would not permit to be so dealt with, before any sentence was legally passed
upon him. When they heard this, they ceased from their design of scourging him;
and the Colonel (who had himself purchased the freedom of a Citizen of Rome at
a great rate) was afraid he had already done more than he could well answer, in
binding him, and putting Chains upon him.

Act. 22. v. 1. Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defense which I make now
unto you.

v. 2. (And when they heard that he spoke in the Hebrew tongue to them, they
kept the more silence; and he says)

v. 3. I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a City in Cilicia, yet
brought up in this City at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the
perfect manner of the Law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye
all are this day.

v. 4. And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into
prison both men and women,

v. 5. As also the high Priest does bear me witness, and all the estate of the
elders: from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to
Damascus to bring them which were there, bound unto Jerusalem, for to be
punished.

v. 6. And it came to pass, that as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto
Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about
me.

v. 7. And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me?

v. 8. And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? and he said unto me, I am Jesus of
Nazareth whom thou persecutest.

v. 9. And they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but
they heard not the voice of him that spoke to me.

v. 10. And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise,
and go into Damascus, and there it shall be told thee of all things which are
appointed for thee to do.

v. 11. And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the
hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus:

v. 12. And one Ananias, a devout man according to the Law, having a good
report of all the Jews, which dwelt there,

v. 13. Came unto me, and stood, and said unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy
sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him.

v. 14. And he said, The God of our fathers has chosen thee, that thou
should know his will, and see that just One, and should hear the voice of
his mouth.

v. 15. For thou shall be his witness unto all men of what thou have seen and
heard.

v. 16. And now, why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
sins, calling on the name of the Lord.

v. 17. And it came to pass, that when I was come again to Jerusalem, even
while I prayed in the Temple, I was in a trance,

v. 18. And saw him saying unto me, Make haste and get thee quickly out of
Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.

v. 19. And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every
synagogue them that believed on thee.

v. 20. And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing
by and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

v. 21. And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the
Gentiles.

v. 22. And they gave him audience unto this word, and then lift up their
voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit
that he should live.

v. 23. And as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into
the air.

v. 24. The chief Captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bade
that he should be examined by scourging: that he might know wherefore they
cried so against him.

v. 25. And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that
stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and
uncondemned?

v. 26. When the centurion heard that, he went and told the chief Captain,
saying, Take heed what thou do, for this man is a Roman.

v. 27. Then the chief Captain came, and said unto him, Tell me, art thou a
Roman? He said, Yea.

v. 28. And the chief Captain answered, With a great sum obtained I this
freedom. And Paul said, But I was freeborn.

v. 29. Then straitway they departed from him which should have examined him:
and the chief Captain also was afraid after he knew that he was a Roman: and
because he had bound him.

v. 3. Natus Tarsi] Tarsus illa, est Ciliciae Metropolis; quam Romanae
civitatis jure donavit Antonius Triumvir. Et hic, celeberrimam Scholam fuisse
Strabo testatur, lib. 14. Ex hac progressus Paulus venit Hierosolymas; ita
Graecam literaturam simul, and Hebraicam perfect didicit, quam multis locis in
scriptis suis manifestat. Nutritus ad pedes] Docentes altiori loco positi
erant, and Auditores inferiori loco per subsellia.
v. 4. Hanc sectam persecutus sum usque ad mortem] quantum scil. in me erat,
Hanc viam funditus deletum and extinctum ivi.
v. 5. (...)] i. e. Synedrium magnum.
v. 10. Deus jusserat Ananiae, quae ipse jussurus esset Paulo. Et haec jussa
erant facienda Paulo.
v. 14. (...)] Sir. Ar. and Aethiop. Constituit. te Non gravate ^verto, sumpsit
te ut cognoscas voluntatem ejus. Proprie enim (...) est, prae manibus sumere id
quo uti velis, sive ad rem sive ad personam referatur.
v. 22. audiverunt usque ad verbum hoc] ut qui pati non possent, Gentes fieri
participes communis salutis.
SECT. XXII.
THE next day Claudius Lysias the Colonel, being desirous to know the bottom of
the business, called the Sanhedrim or Senate of the Jews, and brought out Paul
to them, to see what they could object against him. The Apostle beginning to
speak for himself, declares that both during his continuance in the Jewish
religion, and since his conversion to Christianity, he had walked uprightly
according to his knowledge, and the light of his Conscience Conscientia, est
judicium hominis de seipso, quo per comparationem sui ipsius cum Lege, and
Evangelio, observat, and agnoscit quid in se Legi, and Evangelio sit conform,
vel contrarium; and ex his vel cum gaudio concludit quod Deum amicum, vel cum
dolor, quod Deum inimicum habeat.
. Ananias the high Priest being impatient to hear this, commanded those that
stood nigh him to smite him on the mouth. Paul hereupon freely reproves him for
his injustice, calling him whited wall These words of Paul must not be taken
for reviling words, Mat. 5.22, 39. or words of revenge or recompencing evil
with evil, but for a serious reproving this man, and a bold denunciation of
Gods judgment upon him. Loquitur Christus de vindicta privata non de vindicta
prophetica, and judiciali. Praeterea, privatae vindictae interdictum non adimit
nobis licentiam aliorum erga nos injurias detestandi, reprehendendi, and ob
oculos ponendi auctorum, sine ira and odio personae, and hoc sensu probabilius
sumitur haec invectiva scil. ut justa reprehensio injuriantis.
, or Hypocrite, who sitting there as a Magistrate to judge according to Law, yet
openly transgressed the Law himself, by commanding an innocent person, unheard,
and uncondemned to be smitten. See Deuteronomy. 25.1, 2. He also boldly denounces Gods
judgments Id mihi verisimilius est, audivisse Paulum vocem emissam ab aliquo ex
his, qui ad judicandum sederant (venisse enim sacerdotes and omne concilium
constat ex cap. 22.) neque tamen scivisse a quonam illorum vox profecta fuerat.
A Pontifice autem profectam non putavit, cum propter ejus authoritatem, a qua
indignum erat tam praecipitem offensionis significationem edi, tum propter
simulatam sanctitatem, a qua tam iniqua vox non videbatur eruptura. Audivit
ergo Paulus vocem in turba, and illi a quo emissa est, denunciavit paratam esse
a Domino paenam. Qui autem cum Pontifice venerant, omnes ad judicandum
sedebant. Rivetus in Isagog. ad Script. Sacr. cap. 21. Sect. 8.
against him for it, [ see 2 Timothy 4.14.]. The standers by reprove Paul for
this, as one that spoke contumelious words against Gods high Priest. The
Apostle replies, he did not know him, nor acknowledge him to be a lawful high
Priest or an High Priest of Gods appointing, but looked upon him as an usurper,
and one brought in by the sinister practices, and corruptions of that time; and
therefore he might be reprehended for his faults without breaking Gods command,
Exodus 22.28. Besides he could not own any man, to be a lawful high Priest now,
seeing that Function was disannulled, by the coming of the great High Priest
Jesus, who had accomplished all that was typifyed thereby. However though he
had spoken nothing but what was just, yet because to the standers by, it had a
show of reviling, therefore he declares, he should have avoided this also, had
he known him to be, or could have acknowledged him to be, a lawful High Priest.
The Apostle now discerning the Sanhedrim to consist partly of Pharisees (who
believe the resurrection of the body, and another life after this, and the real
subsistence of Angels, and the Souls and Spirits of men separated from their
bodies See Heb. 11.13, 14. 1 Cor. 15.19.
, etc.) and partly of Sadduces, (who deny all this), out of a prudent policy
declares himself, (as to those points) to adhere to the Sect of the Pharisees,
and to be fully of their opinion. And though there were more points in
question, yet he shows, that for holding of these, the Sadduces chiefly hated
and persecuted him. Hereupon there grew a heat and division between these two
parties, the Doctors of the Law, (which were generally Pharisees), taking his
part, and pleading, that 'twas possible he might have had some extraordinary
revelation by an Angel or Spirit, and therefore 'twould not become them to
resist his Doctrine, lest, if it were truly revealed to him from God, they
should by opposing it, fight against God himself. These two parties growing
thus hot one against another, the Colonel to prevent further violence and
tumult, commanded the Soldiers to take Paul away from among them, and to bring
him into the Castle. The night following, the Lord appeared to the Apostle in a
Vision to comfort and encourage him, and told him, that as he had preached his
Gospel, and defended it at Jerusalem, so he should do at Rome also.

Act. 22. v. 30. On the morrow, because he would have known the certainty
wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him from his bands, and
commanded the chief priests and all their Council to appear; and brought Paul
down, and set him before them.

Act. 23. v. 1. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, said, Men and
brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this day.

v. 2. And the high Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite
him on the mouth.

v. 3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for
sit thou to judge me after the Law, and command me to be smitten contrary
to the Law.

v. 4. And they that stood by, said, Revilest thou Gods high Priest?

v. 5. Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high Priest? For
it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.

v. 6. But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadduces, and the other
Pharisees, he cried out in the Council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the
son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in
question.

v. 7. And when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees
and the Sadduces: and the multitude was divided.

v. 8. For the Sadduces say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor
spirit; but the Pharisees confess both.

v. 9. And there arose a great cry: and the Scribes that were of the Pharisees
part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil in this man: but if a spirit,
or an angel has spoken to him, let us not fight against God.

v. 10. And when there arose a great dissension, the chief Captain, fearing
lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded the Soldiers to
go down, and to take him by force from among them, and to bring him into the
Castle.

v. 11 And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good
cheer, Paul: for as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear
witness also at Rome.

v. 1. Ego omni conscientia bona servivi Deo ad hunc usque diem] Nunc quidem
secundum Christum, ante vero quantum ex Pharisaeis Magistris haurire poteram.
Non quasi omni peccato sit vacuus, sed studium recti profitetur se semper
habuisse, quicquid alii de se dicant ac sentiant. Nam (...) magis re^ertur ad*
publicam functionem, aut certe ad actiones in communi ad omnes pertinentes: ut
magis hic suam publicam functionem, and actiones, quam privatos mores, contra
accusatores tueatur.
v. 3. Percutiet te Deus] Utitur jure Prophetae. Simile illud Esaiae 50.11. and
22.17, 18. and Jer. 22.30. Paries dealbate] Egregia Similitudo ad exprimendos
homines impios qui honoris aut commodi causa pios se simulant. Introrsum
turpes, speciosi pelle decora. Pari comparatione utitur Seneca. Miseri sunt
sordidi, turpes, and ad similitudinem parietum suorum extrinsecus culti. Sic
Christus vocat hypocritam sepulchrum dealbatum, Mat. 23.28 vid. Ezekiel. 13.10.
v. 5. (...)] Ex calculatione Bezae tum praeerat Ananias, homo supra modum
improbus, qui per vim Pontificatum invaserat nec melius gessit. Vide Antiquit.
Joseph. lib 20. c. 6, 7.
Sensus ergo est: Ego non agnosco in hoc homine Pontificem Dei, sed hypocritam,
seductorem, and veritatis persecutorem. Alioquin been scio, Principi
maledicendum non esse, Exodus 22.28. Flac. Illyr.
Non agnovit eum esse Sacerdotem aut Principem Senatus qui eas dignitates
pretio comparasset. Didice^at enim hoc a Gamaliele Paulus, Judicem, qui honoris
consequendi causa pecunias dederit revera neque judicem esse neque honorandum,
sed Asini habendum loco, ut est in titulo Thalmudico de Synedrio. Grot.
v. 6. De sp^ and resurrectione] i. e. ob spem resurrectionis in judicium
vocor; (...). Quia totius religionis caput quam Paulus prositebatur and scopus,
erat resurrectio mortuorum. Recte de ea se judicari dicit: nam and Christum
docebat ex morte excitatum and ejus beneficio omnes fideles aliquando ex morte
resuscitandos esse.
v. 10. (...)] milites. Abstractum nimirum singular, pro concreto plurali.
v. 11. Dominus ei apparuit per Angelum, ut supra aliquoties.
SECT. XXIII.
THE Apostle had soon a notable experience of Gods gracious protection over
him, promised unto him in that forementioned Vision. For early the very next
morning above Forty Jews combined together, and bound themselves by an Oath,
and by a Curse and execration on themselves that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had killed him. And they came to the chief Priests and Elders
being confident of their assistance, and acquainted them with what they had
resolved on, and persuaded them to entreat the Colonel, that he would bring
Paul down on the morrow to them, that they might further examine him, and by
the way, before he could come at the Council, they resolved to kill him. This
conspiracy, by the wonderful providence of God, coming to the knowledge of a
Nephew of Paul's, he is by him acquainted therewith, who thereupon desired one
of the Captains of the Guard, to bring that young man to Lysias their chief
Commander: which being done he acquainted him with this wicked conspiracy
against the life of his Uncle. Hereupon the Colonel presently gave order that a
Guard both of Horse and Foot should be made ready against Nine of the Clock
that night, and a Horse or Mule provided for Paul to ride on, and that they
should convey him safe to Felix the Procurator or Governor of Judea, under the
Roman Emperor, who had his ordinary residence at Caesarea. And he wrote a
Letter to the Governor concerning the Prisoner, to this sense, viz. That he
found nothing brought against him, that was punishable either with death or
bonds by the Roman Laws, and Imperial Constitutions; (for the Romans had not as
yet set out any decrees against the Christians) and therefore he had rescued
him out of the hands of the Jews, who had treacherously conspired against his
life, and had given order to his accusers to appear before his Excellency, and
there to implead him. Felix when he had read the Letter, commanded Paul should
be secured in the Hall called Herod's Hall, and wen his Accusers were come, he
said, he would hear him.

Act. 23. v. 12. And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and
bounded themselves under a curse, saying, That they would neither eat nor drink
till they had killed Paul.

v. 13. And they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy.

v. 14. And they came to the chief Priests, and Elders, and said, We have bound
our selves under a great curse, that we will eat nothing until we have slain
Paul.

v. 15. Now therefore ye, with the Council, signify to the chief Captain, that
he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though ye would enquire something more
perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come near, are ready to kill him.

v. 16. And when Paul's sisters son heard of their laying in wait, he went and
entered into the Castle, and told Paul.

v. 17. Then Paul called one of the Centurions unto him, and said, Bring this
young man unto the chief Captain: for he has a certain thing to tell him.

v. 18. So he took him, and brought him to the chief Captain, and said, Paul
the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to bring this young man unto
thee, who has something to say unto thee.

v. 19. Then the chief Captain took him by the hand, and went with him aside
privately, and asked him, What is that thou have to tell me?

v. 20. And he said, The Jews have agreed to desire thee, that thou would
bring down Paul to morrow into the Council, as though they would enquire
somewhat of him more perfectly.

v. 21. But do not thou yield unto them, for there lie in wait for him of them
more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath, that they will
neither eat nor drink till they have killed him: and now are they ready,
looking for a promise from thee.

v. 22. So the chief Captain let the young man depart, and charged him, See
thou tell no man, that thou have showed these things to me.

v. 23. And he called unto him two Centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred
Soldiers to go to Cesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two
hundred, at the third hour of the night:

v. 24. And provide them beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe
to Felix the Governor.

v. 25. And he wrote a Letter after this manner,

v. 26. Claudius Lysias, unto the most excellent Governor Felix, sends
greeting.

v. 27. This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them:
Then came I with an army, and rescued him, having understood that he was a
Roman.

v. 28. And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I
brought him forth into their Council.

v. 29. Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their Law, but to have
nothing laid to his charge worthy of death, or of bonds.

v. 30. And when it was told me, how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I
sent straitway to thee, and gave commandment to his accusers also to say before
thee what they had against him. Farewell.

v. 31. Then the Soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought him
by night to Antipatris.

v. 32. On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the
Castle.

v. 33. Who when they came to Cesarea, and delivered the epistle to the
Governor, presented Paul also before him.

v. 34. And when the Governor had read the letter, he asked of what province
he was. And when he understood that he was of Cilicia:

v. 35. I will hear thee, said he, when thine accusers are also come. And he
commanded him to be kept in Herod's judgment hall.

SECT. XXIV.
FIve days after, the High Priest and the Elders appear, Christ. Nero. 59. 3.
with Tertullus Tertullus est nomen Italicum; and arguit hunc hominem non esse
Judaeum sed Italum. Vocatur Rhetor, sive Orator, quia eloquentiae, and juri
Romano studuerat ad causas in foro pro pretio dicendas, and, ut videtur,
linguam suam elocavit ad suscipiendum quarumvis causarum patrocinum. His
hominibus quadrat illud, Isa. 5.20.
their Advocate, before Felix Historici tum Ethnici, tum Judaicus Josephus, nos
docent hunc Faelicem fuisse pessimum praesidem, qui potentia fatris Pallantis
qui erat in flagranti Caesaris gratia, subnixus sibi, omnia malefacta
impuneratus est, ut ait Tacitus Annal. lib. 12. Et Josephus testatur quod
promiscue insontes cum sontibus vexaverit, crudeles! patraverit lanienas, and
summum sacerdotem Jonathanem per sicarios opprimi curaverit.
at Cesarea; who sitting in judgment to hear the matter, their said Advocate
after an insinuating preface to propitiate the Governor, (wherein he magnified
his prudence and care for the good of their Nation), accuses Paul of three
things, namely, of Sedition, Heresy, and Profanation of the Temple, [see Act.
21.28.]; acquainting him, that they intended to have proceeded against him in
their own Court, and to have judged him there according to their Law, but were
prevented by Colonel Lysias, who took him out of their hands, and forced them,
(who ought to have been his Judges), to come and implead him before his
Excellency. And those Jews whom they had brought with them for witnesses,
attested this charge, saying, That those things were so.

Paul having now liberty given him to make his defense, he in the first place
declares, how much it comforted him, that he was to answer before a Person
whose long experience in governing the Jewish Nation, had furnished him with
skill and ability to judge the more equally of such things as were now brought
before him. Then he answers particularly to the three pretended Crimes laid to
his charge. 1. For that of Sedition, he clears himself from it, by showing,
that there were but Twelve days since he came up to Jerusalem; and one end,
among others, of his coming thither was, to declare himself a sincere
worshipper of the true God. Now these Twelve days were thus spent. The day
after he came thither, he visited James, and the Brethren, who persuaded him to
purify himself with those four men who had a Vow on them, [as we have seen
Sect. 20. of this Chapter], which he consenting to do, and the day following, (
viz. on the third day, which was toward the end of the Feast, see chapter 21. v.
27.), entering into the Temple to perform those, the Jews there took him, but he
was rescued out of their hands by Colonel Lysi^s. The day after being the
fourth day, he pleaded his cause before the Council, [ Act. 23.]. On the fifth
day, the Jews conspired to take away his life, Act. 23.12. That night the
Colonel sent him to Antipatris, whither he came on the sixth day in the
evening. The next day being the seventh, he came to Caesarea, where he had been
now a Prisoner five days. So that having been so many of those days in the
hands of the Romans, it was not imaginable he could raise (if he had had a mind
to it) any such Sedition, or tumult at Jerusalem as the Jews pretended, and
charged him with. Nay the contrary was very evident; for he had behaved himself
very quietly, neither could any of them prove that he had raised any
disturbance, either in the Temple, or in any of the Synagogues, or in the City
whilst he was there. As to their second charge, viz. that of Heresy, he
plainly confesses* that after the way which they called Heresy, so he
worshipped the God of his Fathers. For that way of worshipping the God of
Abraham which Christ had taught, and the Christians now practiced, was the way
that he did use: yet therein neither he nor they set up any new Religion quite
contrary to what was before owned and professed, but had the same Faith for
substance, that the Patriarchs and Prophets had before them. And in particular,
he declares, that he believed the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which the more
prudent part of his Adversaries, viz. those of the Pharisees, professed to
believe also. And this firm belief of a resurrection, and a day of judgment
engaged him to endeavor always to keep a good Conscience toward God and man.
For the ^hird thing charged against him, viz. the Profanation of the Temple; he
shows, he had not been of a long time at Jerusalem, before this, and now he
came to bring Alms to the poor Jews there, that were converted to Christianity.
He acknowledges indeed, that he went into the Temple at this time, but with no
intent to profane it, but to perform t^^se Rites therein, which the Law of the
Jews required of such as had the Vow of the Nazarites upon them; which some
Asian Jews not understanding, but misapprehending his intent, affi^^ed, that he
carried Trophimus a Gentile of Ephesus into the Temple. But this was utterly
false, neither was there any the least ground for it, but only this, that
Trophimus had been seen with him in the City, see Act. 21.29. As for his being
in the Temple, he acknowledges, he was there, but not with any such company as
could be thought to profane it, or that could bring him under suspicion of any
intent to raise a Sedition. And for the truth of these things he appeals to
those t^^re present of their own Sanhedrim; and desires them to ^^s^^fie,
whether w^^n ^e was brought before them, he was not dismissed with this
testimony from themselves See Chap. 23.9.
, that there was nothing of moment charged against him, except (which only the
Sadduces will charge him with) that he professed to believe the Resurrection of
the dead, and Another life after this.

When Felix discerned how things went, he would not pass any sentence for the
present in this case, but put them off saying, When I know more exactly the
things that belong to this way, (viz. whether the Christian Religion be
derogatory to the Law of the Jews), and when Lysias the Commander comes down
(whose testimony will decide that matter concerning the tumult), I will
determine the business between you. But for the present he commanded the
Captain of the Guard to keep Paul safe, though in free custody, so that any of
his friends or acquaintants might have liberty to visit him.

Act. 24. v. 1. And after five days Ananias the high Priest descended with the
elders, and with a certain Orator named Tertullus, who informed the Governor
against Paul.

v. 2. And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying,
Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are
done unto this Nation by thy providence:

v. 3. We accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all
thankfulness.

v. 4. Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thee, I pray thee,
that thou would hear us of thy clemency a few words.

v. 5. For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition
among all the Jews thorowout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the
Nazarens.

v. 6. Who also has gone about to profane the Temple: whom we took, and would
have judged according to our Law.

v. 7. But the chief Captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took
him away out of our hands:

v. 8. Commanding his accusers to come unto thee, by examining of whom thy self
may take knowledge of all these things, whereof we accuse him.

v. 9. And the Jews also assented, saying, That these things were so.

v. 10. Then Paul, after that the Governor had beckned unto him to speak,
answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou have been of many years a Judge unto
this Nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for my self:

v. 11. Because that thou may understand, that there are but yet twelve
days, since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship.

v 12. And they neither found me in the Temple disputing with any man, neither
raising up the people neither in the synagogues, nor in the City.

v. 13. Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me.

v. 14. But this confess I unto thee, that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets.

v. 15. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.

v. 16. And herein do I ex^rcise my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward men.

v. 17. Now after many years, I came to bring alms to my Nation, and offerings:

v. 18. Whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the Temple,
neither with multitude, nor with tumult.

v. 19. Who ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had ought
against me.

v. 20. Or else let these same here say, if they have found any evil doing in
me, while I stood before the Council,

v. 21. Except it be for this one voice, that I cried standing among them,
Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question by you this day.

22. And when Felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledge of that
way, he deferred them, and said, When Lysias the chief Captain shall come down,
I will know the uttermost of your matter.

v. 23. And he commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have liberty,
and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister, or come unto
him.

v. 5. (...)] Sic Cicero dixit pestem civitatis, pro Rabirio; pestem patriae,
pro Sestio.
v. 16. (...)] Hebraismus, ubi: Saepe valet propter, i. e. Propter hanc
fiduciam exerceo meipsum, etc. i. e. omni, in id, studio incumbo; hoc unum prae
omnibus meditor, ut conscientiam habeam sine offendiculo, ut conscientiam
servem eam, quae nec Deum nec homines offendat, vid. 2 Cor. 6.3. and 2 Cor.
4.2. Haec (...), illa de qua mentio est, 2 Cor. 11.2. Haec (...), illa de qua
supra, cap 23.1. Haec (...), illa de qua ad Hebraeos, 13.18.
v. 18. (...)] in casto: Abstinentem scil. a vino aliisque rebus a quibus
Nazaraei abstinent.
SECT. XXV.
SOME time after, Felix and his Wife Drusilla, (who was a Jewesse, and Sister
of that Herod Agrippa who killed James, and imprisoned Peter, Act. 12.), sent
for Paul, and were willing to hear him discourse concerning the Doctrine of
Christ. He applying himself to speak pertinently to Felix, insisted on those
great duties which Christ injoins all men to observe, if they intend to be
saved, viz. Justice between* man and man, Temperance, and Chastity; Virtues
that were contrary to those Vices, that Felix was particularly guilty of. And
withal, he discourses of the last Judgment, at which all impenitent persons
shall be punished for all their crimes and offenses, either in these or other
kinds. As the Apostle was pressing this Doctrine, Felix finding himself so much
concerned, fell a trembling, and not liking to hear such close and rousing
Doctrine, he dismissed Paul for the present, and told him he would take some
other time to hear him again. But being a corrupt Governor, and a taker of
bribes, he hoped the Apostle would have given him some considerable bribe, to
set him at liberty; and in expectation thereof sent for him, and talked with
him the oftener. But after he had kept him Prisoner for the space of two years,
he himself was by Nero removed from his place, and Portius Festus was sent to
succeed him in the Government. And though Felix had nothing to charge Paul
with, yet to gratify the Jews, after so many injuries which he had done them,
and to pacify them, that they might not follow him with complaints to the
Emperor, he left Paul in prison.

Act. 24. v. 24. And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife
Drusilla, which was a Jew, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith
in Christ.

v. 25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come,
Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee.

v. 26. He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he
might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.

v. 27. But after two years Portius Festus came into Felix room: and Felix,
willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.

v. 25. (...)] Ut nunc se res habent, abeas; sub audiendum sort (...). Beza ad
praesens abi. In quo sensu eandem dictionem usurpat Aelianus de anim. lib. 2.
c. 11. (...), ad praesens statui dicere.
SECT. XXVI.
FEstus being come to the Government, Christi Neronis 60 4
and going up to Jerusalem, the High Priest and Rulers of the Jews quickly
began to inform him against Paul, and besought him that he might be sent for
thither, to answer for himself before his Excellency there, intending to lay
some Villains by the way to kill him as he came. But Festus (the divine
providence so overruling him) would not consent to that, but ordered that the
chief Priests, and the rest in authority among them, should come to Cesarea,
and accuse him, whither he intended after a short stay at Jerusalem to go. And
accordingly after a few days he went down to Cesarea; whither being come, soon
after his arrival there, he sat on his Judgment Seat, and commanded Paul to be
brought before him. The Jews now bring in such a kind of charge against him as
they did before, namely, that he had offended against the Mosaical Law; that he
had profaned the Temple; and that he had raised Sedition against the Roman
government. But none of these things could they prove against him, so that Paul
easily cleared himself of them all. However, Festus being willing to gratify
the Jews, asked Paul if he would go to Jerusalem, and be tried there in the
Jewish Court about these matters. The Apostle perceiving that the Governor
inclined to send him to Jerusalem, (which course might have exposed him to
extreme hazzards), he tells him, that he was his prisoner, and that his
Excellency was his proper Judge; under the Roman Emperor, and not the Jews,
(whom he had not wronged), and therefore it would be a piece of high injustice,
to deliver him up to his enemies to be his Judges. Moreover, he tells him, that
he was a Roman, and therefore might claim the privilege of a Roman, which
accordingly he now did, and appealed unto Caesar Caesares legem fecerant, ut
Civibus Romany ab omnibus tribunalibus inferiorum Magistratuum liceret
apellare ad ipsum Caesaris tribunal.
. Festus hearing this, (after he had consulted with his Council), admitted his
appeal, and told him he should accordingly go to Caesar.

Act. 25. v. 1. Now when Festus was come into the Province, after three days he
ascended from Cesarea to Jerusalem.

v. 2. Then the high Priest, and the chief of the Jews informed him against
Paul, and besought him.

v. 3. And desired favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem,
laying wait in the way to kill him.

v. 4. But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Cesarea, and that he
himself would depart shortly thither.

v. 5. Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down with me,
and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him.

v. 6. And when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went down unto
Cesarea, and the next day sitting in the judgment seat, commanded Paul to be
brought.

v. 7. And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem, stood
round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they
could not prove.

v. 8. While he answered for himself, neither against the Law of the Jews,
neither against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing at
all.

v. 9. But Festus willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said,
Will thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?

v. 10. Then said Paul, I stand at Cesars judgment seat, where I ought to be
judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well know.

v. 11. For if I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I
refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse
me, no man may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Caesar.

v. 12. Then Festus, when he had conferred with the Council, answered, Have
thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shall thou go.

SECT. XXVII.
SOME days after, King Agrippa, (Son of that Herod who slew James, Act. 12. who
was King, not of Judea, but some neighboring Province which the Romans had
given him), and Bernice his Sister, came to Cesarea, to salute the new
Governor. Festus relates to them Paul's case, and acquaints them, how
vehemently the Jews accused him, and how earnestly they desired to have had
judgment against him. But he told them, he could not do it by the Roman Laws,
without first hearing the cause, and bringing the accusers and accused face to
face. This therefore he had done, and upon hearing of both parties, He found
Paul absolutely free from all capital Crimes; and the differences between him,
and the Jews, he saw, were about matters appertaining to their Religion, (which
he contemptuously calls Superstition), in which he acknowledges, he himself h^d
little skill, and therefore had a mind to have referred him to the Jewish
Sanhedrim, to be judged there. But the Prisoner declined their judgment, and
appealed to Caesar. Whereupon he had remanded him to Prison, till he could
conveniently send him to the Emperor at Rome. Agrippa (who was born and bred
among the Jews, and in probability understood something concerning the
Christian Religion) hearing this, desired that he himself might see Paul, and
hear him speak for himself. Festus readily agrees hereunto. On the morrow
therefore, the Governor, with Agrippa, and Bernice, and several other persons
of quality, entered the Court and place of hearing with great pomp; and Paul was
brought forth before them. Festus having made a short speech, wherein he showed
the occasion of their meeting, and wherefore he had brought forth the Prisoner
before that illustrious Assembly. Agrippa told him he was permitted to speak
for himself. Then Paul beckning with his hand to the standers by to hold their
peace, and give Audience, he particularly addresses his speech to Agrippa Quis
non delectetur concionator, concionem habere propter spem lucrandi Magnates
mundi, quorum conversio multum potest ad lucrandos caeteros. Et tamen quando
unquam pauciore cum fructu concionatus est Paulus quam coram hoc illustri
auditorio? Ratio datur, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. Joh. 7.48, 49. Jacob. 2.5.
Sicut pluvia cadens in montes and colles defluit, sed quae in valles cadit
manet and penetrat, ita verbum quod in cor mundanum cadit, and superbum,
profluit. Pomposi Phantastae non sunt discipuli Christi.
.

And first, he declares how happy he accounted himself, that he was allowed to
speak for himself before King Agrippa, whom he knew to be well skilled in the
Law, and in the Scriptures, and in all the Questions and Customs of the Jewish
Religion. Then he shows, that however the Jews reproached him, neither in his
Life, nor in his Doctrine, was there any thing repugnant to the truth of the
Jewish Religion. For the manner of his Life, he appeals to his Accusers own
Consciences, (to whom his Conversation from his Youth was well known); who were
able to testify, that he not only had lived honestly, but religiously Vide
Phil. 3.4, 5, 6. Non erat irreprehensibilis coram Deo sed coram Judaeis and
Pharisaeis. Vivebat enim ita ut caeci Pharisaei, qui legem Dei suis glossis
corruperant, judicabant esse vivendum, adeoque Judaei and Pharisaei nihil
habebant, quod in illo carperent aut quod accusare possent: sed ubi vitam suam
coepit comparare cum vero sensu legis and expositione illius, quam Christus
dat, Mat. 5. tum ipsemet vidit, vitam suam non esse irreprehensibilem coram Deo.
, and was of that Sect, which is accounted the strictest of all the rest in the
Jewish Religion, to wit, a Pharisee. For his Doctrine which he asserted, viz.
the resurrection of the dead, he shows, it was a Doctrine acknowledged by the
Pharisees, and a fundamental Promise made by God of old unto their Fathers, and
generally depended on by the most pious among all the twelve Tribes Non dubium
est quin post factum schisma duorum regnorum, plurimi ex december tribubus
habitatum concesserint in Judaeam ubi purus erat Dei cultus atque ita cum
Judaeis sensim coaluerint, and cum iis in Babyloniam deportati sunt and cum
iisdem in Judaeam vel Samariam redierunt. Vid. 2 Chronicles. 31.5. Vide de hac re
annals Usserii ad annum mundi 3327. and 3468.
of the Jews, not only that dwell in Judea, but that are scattered upon the
face of the whole Earth, ( see Jam. 1.1.): And in contemplation, and intuition
thereof, they desire continually and fervently to serve the Lord, hoping to
attain that blessed Resurrection, and Eternal Life, through the mediation of
the blessed Messiah, of old promised to them. And yet for believing, and
expecting, and preaching this, he tells the King, he was accused of the Jews.

Then he removes an Objection which might be made against him, viz. If he were
brought up a Pharisee, how came he to believe in Jesus of Nazareth, and to hope
for a Resurrection by him. Surely the Pharisees never taught him so. To this he
answers, He was once as great and sharp an Adversary to Christ, and all that
believed in him, as any man whatsoever; and thought himself bound in Conscience
to endeavor the suppression of all those that owned him; which accordingly he
did, being a principal Actor in the imprisoning of several of them at
Jerusalem. And when some of them were by the Jews, tumultuously condemned to
die, (as particularly Steven, Act. chapter 7.57, 58.), he was an approver of the
sentence, Act. 8.1. And in other Cities besides Jerusalem, he brought them into
the Jewish Courts, and Consistories, (which were kept in their Synagogues), and
with threatenings and tortures compelled them to deny Christ, and (being
exceedingly fierce against them) he forced some of them to fly to heathen
Cities, and then pursued them thither also. He further declares, that as he was
going to Damascus, with authority from the Sanhedrim on this persecuting
design, at midday a light from Heaven, above the brightness of the Sun, shone
round about him, and those that were with him; and when they were all fallen
prostrate on the Earth, he heard a voice speaking to him in the Hebrew tongue;
Saul, Saul, why do thou thus persecute me? It Is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks. But arise, stand upon thy feet, for thou art chosen by me to be a
Preacher of the Gospel, and to proclaim unto others, what thou have now, and
shall hereafter see and know. And for thy comfort, be assured, that I will
deliver thee from the persecutions both of Jews and Gentiles* to whom I shall
send thee; and will bless thy endeavors to the opening their understandings,
and to the turning of them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, that they may receive, by Faith in me, remission of sins, and a
portion of the heavenly inheritance, among my faithful ones, regenerated by my
Spirit Paulus hic non tantum refert quae Christus sibi dixerit in via extra
urbem cum immediate ipsum ex coelo alloqueretur; sed etiam quae postea
nunciaverit in urbe per ministerium Ananiae.
. He further tells the King, that having had so glorious a Vision, and having
heard those words from the mouth of Christ, from Heaven, he could not but yield
obedience thereto, and accordingly had preached at Damascus first, and then at
Jerusalem, and then through all Judea, and at last among the Gentiles Natio
superba Judaeorum far non potuit, quod beneficia foederis ad Gentes quoque
extenderentur.
themselves, the Doctrine of Repentance, and had showed them their misery by
sin, and how they should turn to God, and lay hold on his mercy offered in his
Son, and should bring forth such fruits of holiness and righteousness in their
lives, as are the genuine fruits of true Repentance, and Faith in Christ. And
for these things (he shows) it was, that he had like to have been killed by the
Jews in the Temple. But being rescued by the merciful providence of God from
their fury, he went on still with his work, declaring no other thing concerning
Christ, but what Moses and the Prophets did of old foretell of him, namely,
that he should be put to death, and should be the first that should rise again,
by his own power, and thereby be eminently declared to be the Son of God See
Romans 1.1.
, and should be the Author of our resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20. Col. 1.18. and
should send out the light of his Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles. Festus sat
still hitherto, but being a Heathen, and not understanding these things, he
interrupted the Apostle and told him, he talked like a man that had overstudied
himself. But Paul with a great respect replied, that he was not mad, but spoke
the words of truth and soberness; which he was confident King Agrippa very well
perceived; for these things he had been speaking of, viz. the Life, Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, were things of very public fame, and cognizance, and
could not be unknown to him who was a Jew born. Then humbly applying himself to
Agrippa again, he said, King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? doubtless, I
am persuaded thou do believe them, and if so, I pray thee consider, whether
those very Prophecies be not exactly fulfilled in the Person of Christ? Agrippa
hearing him thus speak, said, Paul, thou do almost persuade me to be a
Christian. The Apostle answered, I heartily wish that both thou, and all here
present were as through Christians as I my self am Non requirit similitudinem
secum in officio sed in conversione and pietate. Non requirit aequalitatem in
gradibus sed similitudinem in essentialibus pietatis.
, only I would not wish any of you in that condition of captivity in which I am
at present. When he had thus spoken, the King, and the Governor, and the whole
company rose up, and departed, acquitting Paul in their judgments, from
deserving either death or bonds; yet 'twas not thought fit he should be
released, because he had appealed to Caesar.

Act. 25. v. 13. And after certain days, King Agrippa, and Bernice came unto
Cesarea, to salute Festus.

v. 14. And when they had been there many days, Festus declared Paul's cause
unto the King, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix:

v. 15. About whom when I was at Jerusalem, the chief Priests and the Elders of
the Jews informed me, desiring to have judgment against him.

v. 16. To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any
man to die, before that he which is accused, have the accusers face to face,
and have license to answer for himself concerning the crimes laid against him.

v. 17. Therefore when they were come hither, without any delay, on the morrow
I sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought forth.

v. 18. Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation
of such things as I supposed:

v. 19. But had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of
one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.

v. 20. And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him, whether
he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters.

v. 21. But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus,
I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Caesar.

v. 22. Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the man my self. To
morrow, said he, thou shall hear him.

v. 23. And on the morrow, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice with great pomp,
and was entered into the place of hearing, with the chief Captains, and
principal men of the City; at Festus commandment Paul was brought forth.

v. 24. And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men which are here present with
us, ye see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with
me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying, that he ought not to live any
longer.

v. 25. But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and
that he himself has appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him.

v. 26. Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my Lord: Wherefore I have
brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O King Agrippa, that
after examination had, I might have somewhat to write.

v. 27. For it seems to me unreasonable, to send a prisoner, and not withal
to signify the crimes laid against him.

Act. 26. v. 1. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for
thy self. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself:

v. 2. I think my self happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my self
this day before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews:

v. 3. Especially, because I know thee to be expert in all customs and
questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear me
patiently.

v. 4. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own
Nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews,

v. 5. Which knew me from the beginning, (if they would testify), that after
the most straitest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee.

v. 6. And now I stand, and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God
unto our fathers:

v. 7. Unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and
night, hope to come: for which hope sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the
Jews.

v. 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should
raise the dead?

v. 9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary
to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth:

v. 10. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the saints did I shut
up in prison; having received authority from the chief priests: and when they
were put to death, I gave my voice against them:

v. 11. And I punished them often in every synagogue, and compelled them to
blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto
strange Cities.

v. 12. Whereupon, as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the
chief priests,

v. 13. At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the
brightness of the sun, shining round about me, and them which journeyed with me.

v. 14. And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto
me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

v. 15. And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest.

v. 16. But arise, and stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee for
this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness, both of these things which
thou have seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee.

v. 17. Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee,

v. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me.

v. 19. Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly
vision:

v. 20. But showed first unto them of Damascus, and Jerusalem, and thorowout
all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and
turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.

v. 21. For these causes the Jews caught me in the Temple, and went about to
kill me.

v. 22. Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day,
witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which
the prophets and Moses did say should come:

v. 23. That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should
rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.

v 24. And as he thus spoke for himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul,
thou art beside thy self, much learning does make thee mad.

v. 25. But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words
of truth and soberness.

v. 26. For the king knows of these things, before whom also I speak freely:
for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him, for this
thing was not done in a corner.

v. 27. King Agrippa, believe thou the prophets? I know that thou believe.

v. 28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to be a
Christian.

v. 29. And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that
hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except th^s^
bonds.

v. 30. And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor, and
Bernice, and they that sat with them.

v. 31. And when they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying,
This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.

v. 32. Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty,
if he had not appealed unto Caesar.

v. 13. Et Berenice] Fuit haec faemina infamis in fratre, ut nos docet
Josephus, 20.5: eoque referendum illud Juvenalis, -- Deinde adamas notissimus,
and Berenices
In digito factus pretiosior: hunc dedit olim
Barbarus incestae, dedit hunc Agrippa Sorori.

Chapter 26. v. 3. (...)] Attici pro Genitivis absolute positis usurpant
accusativos.
v. 5. (...)] a superiori tempore, a multis hinc retro elapsis annis: Secundum
exquisitissimam illam haeresin] Loquitur Paulus non ex sua mente, sed ex
Adversatiorum hypothesi, qui Pharisaicam habebant pro sanctissima and
religiosissima.
v. 10. (...) Calculum apponere simpliciter accipitur pro assentiri and
comprobare Hoc dicit: se Stephani interfectionem toto animo, verbis, gestisque
approbasse. Atque ex historia apparet nullum alium quam Stephanum fuisse a
Judaeis ne per tumultum quidem caesum ante Pauli conversionem. Orato^ice autem
hic utitur numero plurali pro singulari.
v. 11. (...)] Non enim simplici abnegatione Christianismi contenti fuerunt
plerique Tyranni, ut ex his Plinii Minoris verbis ad Trajanum constat, Omnes
and imaginem tuam and Deorum simulacra venerati sunt, and Christo maledixerunt.
v. 18. (...)] i. e. Jus ad vitam aeternam cum piis caeteris.
v. 23. (...) pro (...), and hic and v. 8. Christus primus ex resurrectione
mortuorum, non temporis respectu, cum multi ante eum resuscitati fuisse
leguntur, sed dignitate and virtute, tanquam resurrectionis and vitae author.
Ideo dicitur (...).
v. 28. (...)] parum abest quin mihi persuadeas ut fiam Christianus.
v. 29. (...)] Et aliquatenus and valde, and propemodum and admodum, exceptis
his vinculis] Vincula vocat custodias sibi circundatas.
CHAP. VII. Containing Paul's Fifth and Last Journey, from Cesarea to Rome;
which we call, Iter Romanum. Iter Romanum.

SECT. I.
FEstus and his Council determining now to send Paul to Rome, and therein
(though acting unjustly, considering the innocence of the Prisoner, who ought
to have been acquitted) fulfilling Gods Counsel, [ see Act. 23.11.]. He is
delivered to Julius a Centurion, (of the Imperial Band), with some other
Prisoners, (who possibly were great Malefactors), to be conveyed thither.
Julius having received this charge; put him, and the other Prisoners into a
ship of Adramyttium, (a Port-Town of Mysia), which (being as it is probable a
trading ship) was to sail along by the Coasts of Asia. Aristarchus a
Macedonian, as also Luke and Timothy freely accompanied the Apostle in this
Voyage. As they sailed along, they touched at Sidon, where Julius was very
civil to Paul, and permitted him to go on shore, and visit his friends there,
and refresh himself. Loosing from thence, they were forced to sail under
Cyprus, because the winds were contrary; and when they had coasted by Cilicia,
and Pamphylia, they came to Myra, a City of Lysia, where this Ship finished its
Voyage. Thence in a Ship of Alexandria bound for Italy, they passed between
those Promontories of Gnidus, and Salmone, and came at last, with some
difficulty, to a part of Crete, called the Fair Havens. This Port being
something incommodious to winter in, most of the passengers advise to put out
from thence, and to endeavor to gain Phoenice, another Haven of Crete; but
they having been thus long at Sea, (the Summer being now gone, yea the great
Fast of expiation, which was on the tenth day of the seventh Month, being past,
after which the Sea was not sailed in by the Ancients until the beginning of
March, because of the shortness of the d^ys, and the tempests which often arise
between those two times), Paul not only contemplating the danger of the season,
but being inspired by the Spirit of God, admonished them of the danger of the
Voyage, if they should now put out to Sea again; showing them, it would be
hazzardous, not only to the Ship, and the goods in it, but even to the lives of
the men also. Therefore he advised them, to stay and winter where they now
were. But his words prevailed nothing, because the Master of the ship (who was
thought better skilled in his own Art) advised otherwise. The Southwind
therefore blowing at first, softly, and seeming to favor their design, they
loosed from thence, and sailed along by Crete; but a little after, there arose
a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon Fuit hic ventus conjunctus (ut etiam v.
20.) cum densissimis tenebris adeo ut nec sol interdiu, nec noctu ullum sidus,
appareret; id quod tanto gravius fuit navigantibus illo tempore, quo artificium
pixidis nauticae nondum erat inventum, sed navis ex solo syderum conspectu erat
dirigenda. Accessit hyemalis pluvia cum nive and grandine, ut solet in hyeme:
duravit denique haec tempestas complures dies, perpetuoque sine interruptione
incubuit usque in noctem decimam-quartam.
, by which they were carried to a little Island called Clauda, and then being
caught and tossed by that great tempest they had much ado to save the Boat, and
draw it into the Ship. Which done, they undergirt the Ship, and (fearing lest
they should fall into the Quicksands), they struck sail, and so were driven.
Then they ligh^ned the Ship, by casting some of the goods overbord; and on the
third day they were forced to cast into the Sea the furniture of the Ship: And
neither Sun nor Stars for many days appearing, and the weather being so
exceeding tempestuous, they utterly despaired of escaping. Now they having been
for fourteen days together thus tossed with tempests, and under such fear of
death, that they had not observed ordinary meals, Paul at last spoke unto them,
telling them, they should have harkened unto him, and so they might have
prevented, and avoided this hazard. However he bids them be of good cheer; for
no man among them should perish, only the Ship would be lost. For God (whose
Servant he is, and who is pleased to own him, and protect him) had sent him a
message by a holy Angel, that he must be brought before Nero the Roman Emperor,
and that he would, for his sake Hoc Deo solenne ut propter paucos pios pareat
impiis in temporalibus judiciis, Genesis 18.32. 2 Reg. 7.14. Jer 5.1. Imo propter
paucos pios Deus saepe procrastinat judicia publica vel etiam au^ert.
, preserve the lives of all those that were with him in the Ship. The Apostle
further declares, how confident he was, that this that was revealed to him from
the Lord, should be made good. Yet he tells them, that for all this, they
must expect to be cast upon an Island.

They having therefore for fourteen days together been thus tossed in the
Adriatic Sea, (not strictly so called, but in a large sense), at last the
Mariners thought they drew near some Country, and by letting down their
plummet, and sounding, they found it at first twenty fathoms, and trying again,
they found it fifteen fathoms, which was an argument to them they were near a
shore. But it being night, and they apprehending danger, lest they should fall
upon shelves for want of light to guide them, they durst go no further, but
cast four anchors out of the Stern of the Ship, and so earnestly expected the
day. But in the mean time, the Mariners let down the Boat into the Sea, (which
before they had haled up into the Ship), under color, as if they would have
brought Anchors out of the Prow, or foremost part of the Ship, but intended
therein to make their escape, fearing a Shipwreck, and to leave all the rest
to shift for themselves. Paul perceiving this, he told the Centurion and the
Soldiers, that though God had promised to preserve them, yet they must not
expect it, without using due means for their own preservation, which was to
stay the Mariners in the Ship, whose help and diligence was especially needful
to them on such an occasion. Hereupon the Soldiers, to prevent the Mariners
design, cut the Ropes of the Boat, and let it fall into the Sea. Then Paul
while the day was coming on, considering that the company in the Ship having
been in so perpetual danger, and fear of being cast away, for so many days
together, had eat no set meals, or so little, that it was in a manner a
continual fasting, he exhorted them now to refresh themselves by taking some
food, which would the better enable them to bear the difficulties they were to
grapple with, and (through the help of God) there should not one hair Modus est
loquendi petitus ex V.T. 1 Samuel 14.45. 2 Samuel 14.11. 1 Reg. 1.52. Per quem in
N. Testamento Scriptura solet exprimere arctam Dei vigilantiam and custodiam
circa pios. Mat. 10.28, 29, 30. Luc. 12.7. and 21.17, 18.
fall from the head of any of them. Having thus spoken, he took bread, and
praising God for it, and desiring his blessing upon it, in the presence of them
all, he began to eat, and refresh himself; and the rest (being encouraged by
his words and example) did the like; so great a comfort and blessing was this
poor despised Prisoner to the whole company. Then taking an account of their
number thy found they were two hundred seventy six souls in all, in the Ship.
Which possibly was done upon the motion of Paul, that so after their
deliverance, it might appear, how exactly his prediction [men^ioned v. 22. and
34] was verified and fulfilled. And when they had eaten what was sufficient for
them, they cast out the lading of the Ship which yet remained, ( see v.
18.19.), yea and the wheat it self, which hitherto they had spared, being so
needful for their sustentation. In the morning they discovered Land, but knew
not where they were. However they discovered a certain Creek, into which they
resolved, if it were possible, to run the Ship. Therefore taking up the
Anchors, and loosing the Bands wherewith before they had made fast the Rudder,
they committed themselves to Sea, and made toward shore. But falling into a
place where two Seas met, they ran the Ship a-ground, so that the fore part
sticking fast, the hinder-part was broken with the violence of the waves;
nothing now remaining, but that every one should shift for his life, and swim
to shore, if he could, the Soldiers (showing a cruel ingratitude to Paul, who
had been so great a comfort to them, and for whose sake their life's were
spared) advize, that the Prisoners should be put to death, lest any of them
should by swimming out make his escape from them. But the Centurion being
willing to save Paul, (for whose sake he himself was preserved), diverted them
from that barbarous purpose, and commanded that those that could swim should
first cast themselves into the Sea, and get to land, that they might be the
more helpful to others; and those that could not swim, should make use of bords
or planks, or other broken pieces of the Ship. Which they accordingly doing, it
pleased God that they came all safe to land. And when they were come thither,
they found the Island upon which they were cast was Malta.

Act. 27. v. 1. And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they
delivered Paul, and certain other prisoners, unto one named Julius, a centurion
of Augustus band.

v. 2. And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, we lanched, meaning to sail by
the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

v. 3. And the next day we touched at Sidon: And Julius courteously entreated
Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself.

v. 4. And when we had lanched from thence, we sailed under Cyprus, because the
winds were contrary.

v. 5. And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to
Myra a City of Lysia.

v. 6. And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria, sailing into Italy,
and he put us therein.

v. 7. And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over
against Gnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Creet, over against
Salmone,

v. 8. And hardly passing it, came unto a place, which is called the
Fairhavens, nigh whereunto was the city of Lacea.

v. 9. Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous,
because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them.

v. 10. And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt
and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives.

v. 11. N^vertheless, the centurion believed the master and the owner of the
ship, more than those things which were spoken by Paul.

v. 12. And because the haven was not commodious to winter in, the more part
advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might attain to Phenice,
and there to winter, which is an haven of Creet, and lies towand the
south-west, and north-west.

v. 13. And when the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained
their purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close by Creet.

v. 14. But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called
Euroclydon.

v. 15. And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we
let her drive.

v. 16. And running under a certain Island, which is called Clauda, we had much
work to come by the boat:

v. 17. Which when they had taken up, they used helps, under-girding the ship:
and fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, struck sail, and so
were driven.

v. 18. And being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day they lighted
the ship:

v. 19. And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the
ship:

v. 20. And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small
tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be saved, was then taken away.

v. 21. But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and
said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Creet,
and to have gained this harm and loss.

v. 22. And now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of
any man's life among you, but of the ship.

v. 23. For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom
I serve.

v. 24. Saying, Fear not Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo, God
has given thee all them that sail with thee.

v. 25. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I believe God, that it shall be
even as it was told me.

v. 26. Howbeit, we must be cast upon a certain island.

v. 27. But when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and down
in Adria about midnight, the ship-men deemed that they drew near to some
Country:

v. 28. And sounded, and found it twenty fathoms: and when they had gone a
little further, they sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms.

v. 29. Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four
ancres out of the stern, and wished for the day.

v. 30 And as the ship-men were about to flee out of the ship, when they had
let down the boat into the sea, under color as though they would have cast
ancres out of the fore-ship.

v. 31. Paul said to the centurion, and to the soldiers, Except these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be saved.

v. 32. Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.

v. 33. And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them all to take meat,
saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued
fasting, having taken nothing.

v. 34. Wherefore, I pray you to take some meat, for this is for your health:
for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you.

v. 35. And when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in
presence of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to eat.

v. 36. Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat.

v. 37. And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.

v. 38. And when they had eaten enough, they lighted the ship, and cast out the
wheat into the sea.

v. 39. And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered a
certain creek, with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were
possible, to thrust in the ship.

v. 40. And when they had taken up the ancres, they committed themselves unto
the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the main sail to the wind,
and made toward shore.

v. 41. And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship
a-ground, and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmovable, but the hinder
part was broken with the violence of the waves.

v. 42. And the soldiers counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them
should swim out, and escape.

v. 43. But the Centurion willing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose,
and commanded that they which could swim, should cast themselves first into the
sea, and get to land:

v. 44. And the rest, some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship,
and so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land.

Act. 28. v. 1. And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was
called Melita.

v. 1. (...)] suum erat cuique cohorti Romanae nomen, quo ab aliis
discerneretur. Haec dicta fuit Augusta, forte quod primaria esset, quae ante
Caesariam Monarchiam praetoria dicebatur.
v. 2. Adramyttium est urbs Troadis maritima ad montis Idae radices. Ferrarius.
2. Aristarchus] Hic Aristarchus Christianus factus, Paulum ex Macedonia in
Judaeam usque comitatus fuerat. Act. 19.29. Idem Paulum jam custodiae datum ex
amore in ipsum, and veritatem comitari sponte voluit, Romaeque primum adjutor
ejus, deinde vinculorum particeps fuit, Col. 4.10.
v. 9 (...)] Tempus designat Lucas ex more Judaici populi. De festo expiationis
videntur haec intelligi debere, cujus fit mentio, Lev. 23.27*
v. 14. (...) est quaevis violentior procella.
v. 25. Credo enim Deo] Fidem Deus^ ad consequenda hujus vitae beneficia saepe
requirit, ut ostendat eam multo magis ad consequendam aeternam esse necessariam.
v. 33. (...)] Non quasi toto illo tempore omni cibo abstinuerint, sed quod
justis, and ordinariis conviviis non vacarent; ut sic jejunii nomen improprie
accipiatur de insolita cibi abstinentia. Non quod tam diu prorsus impasti
manserint, sed quod per curas, and negotia non licuerit illis toto illo tempore
justum prandium aut justam caenam sumere, aut tantum cibi comedere, quantum
naturae necessitas posceret. Nihil cibi sumentes] scil. quod satiaret aut
naturae satisfaceret.
SECT. II.
IN this Island they were very courteously received by the Islanders, who made
a great fire for them to warm and refresh them, coming wet, and cold out of the
sea. Paul having gathered a bundle of sticks, and laying them on the fire, a
Viper that was in the wood, feeling the heat of the fire, leaped out upon him,
and fastened on his hand; which the Islanders seeing, they presently concluded
that he was certainly some notorious Malefactor, whom divine vengeance
followed, though he had now escaped at sea. Thus the very light of nature
suggested even to Barbarians themselves, that wickedness would not go
unpunished; see Romans 1.32. But the Apostle shaking off the venomous beast into
the fire, and receiving no harm at all from it, ( see Mark 16.18.), they
presently changed their opinion, and took him for a God See the like judgment
of the men of Lystra concerning Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14.11, 19.
, come to them in the shape of a man. Thus it pleased God by a new miracle to
confirm the Apostles authority, and thereby to prepare the hearts of of these
Islanders to receive the Gospel. The landing of these shipwrack'd persons being
made known to Publius the Governor, or chief man of the Island; he out of his
great compassion and humanity entertained them all three days at his own
charge. It so happened, that the Father of Publius was at this time sick of a
Fever, and bloody Flux; which being made known to Paul, he went to him, and
praying with him, and laying his hands on him, he perfectly healed See Jam.
5.14, 15.
him. This being noised in the Island, several other diseased people were
brought to him, and were also healed by him; upon which, Paul and his Christian
associates were much honored by the Islanders. Having stayed there three
months, (in which time it is like Paul made many Converts, and planted a Church
in the Island, as Ecclesiastical History informs us), at their departure they
were furnished by the Inhabitants of the Island with all necessaries for their
journey. From hence therefore they set sail for Italy, in a ship of Alexandria,
whose sign was Castor and Pollux, and sailed first to Syracuse in Sicily,
thence to Rhegium in Italy, and thence to Puteoli a Port near Naples; where
they found some Christian Adeo jam dilatata erat Christiana religio, ut in
Italiae urbibus invenirentur Ecclesiae Christianae. A quo fuerint plantatae non
constat, nisi quod ex Act. 2.10 certum est inter eos qui Hierosolymae, per
Petri praedicationem fuerunt conversi, etiam fuisse Romanos, qui in patriam
reversi, sermonem Domini secum tulerunt, and in patria seminaverunt
Professors, who were very glad of them, and importuned them to stay a week
with them. Thence on foot they travailed toward Rome Puteoli^ per septiduum
commorati, terrestri itinere Romam profecti sunt. Streso.
, and when they were come as far as Appii forum, several Christians that dwelt
in Rome, hearing of their approach, came thither to meet and welcome them; and
others met them at a place called the three Taverns. When Paul saw these
Christians, he praised God exceedingly. He knew, there was a famous Church
there (long ago planted See Romans 1.8.
), to whom about three years before, he had written a large Epistle, and had of
a long time desired to see them; therefore could not but now rejoice, that God
had vouchsafed to him such an opportunity. The sight of these Christian- Romans
did much revive and comfort him. He was glad they had so much liberty at Rome,
that they durst come forth, and thus publicly own him, who was in bonds; and
he hoped for much comfort and succor from them, against the troubles and
dangers he expected at Rome.

When they were come to Rome, the Centurion delivered the Prisoners to the
Captain of the Guard who suffered Paul (moved thereto possibly by the good
testimony given of him by Julius) to dwell in a private house which he hired,
only with a Soldier to guard him, carrying on his right hand an Iron-Chain See
v. 20. Act. 12.6. Ephesians. 6.20. 2 Timothy 2.9.

Custodia Militaris talis erat, ut is qui in noxa esset catenam manui dextrae
alligatam haberet, quae eadem militis sinistram vinciret. Eadem catena tam
reum, quam militem tenet. Seneca lib. 1. de tranquil. animae.


, which probably he girded about him when he was in the house; but going abroad
he was bound with the same to the left hand of the Soldier. After they had been
there three days, Paul desired to speak with the chief of the Jews in that
City; (his constant love to his own Nation engaging him always to desire to
gain them in the first place), and when they came to him, he spoke to them to
this purpose, Country men, I have done nothing against my own Nation, or
contrary to the Laws or Customs of the Jews Recipiendo enim Christianismum
nihil fecit contra mores patrios, i. e. contra Mosis legem. Christianismus
enim, and lex Mosis, non pugnant: sed lex Mosis est umbratica repraesentatio
futuri Christianismi, quae Christianismo cedit nec se opponit. Corruptelae
legis mosaicae pugnant cum Christianismo, sed non ipsa lex Mosis.
; yet was I by the Jews at Jerusalem apprehended and accused before the Roman
Governor, who found no capital Crime laid to my charge, and therefore would
have dismissed me, had not the importunity of the Jews inclined him to deliver
me into their power; which that I might avoid, I was necessitated to Appeal
unto Caesar, only to clear my self, not intending to lay any thing to the
charge of any of my Countrymen, or to exasperate the Emperor against them,
though I have been so ill used by them. And for this cause I was sent hither,
and now have sent for you to acquaint you, that for the sake of Jesus Christ,
the true Messiah, (whom all true Israelites long looked for, who is now come in
the flesh, to be their Redeemer, and in whom all the true Israel of God repose
all their hope and confidence of salvation, and by whom they expect a joyful
resurrection from the dead), I am bound with this chain.

The Jews replied that they for their part were not possessed with any
prejudice against his person; for they had not received any letters out of
Judea concerning him, neither had any of their Brethren that came from thence
spoken any evil of him. But as for this Profession and Doctrine of
Christianity, they acknowledged, the Jews their Brethren, as also the Gentiles,
did generally oppose it, and spoke hardly of it; yet they desired to hear what
he had to say for it. Hereupon a day being appointed for that purpose, many of
the Jews came to his lodging, to whom he opened at large these two points, 1.
That the Kingdom of the Messiah promised by God to the Fathers was to be a
spiritual, not an earthly Kingdom. 2. That Jesus of Nazareth was the true
Messiah, in whom all that desire to be saved, ought to trust and believe. Both
these he confirmed by testimonies, out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets; continuing his discourse from morning till night. Est primum signum
and pars essentialis Orthodoxae Ecclesiae, and doctrinae, Scrip^uram habere pro
unica regula doctrinae, cujus judicio standum, and cadendum: and, qui ab hac
regula, ab hoc judice recedit, ad aliud tribunal provoc^t, and in alia
authoritate suam fidem fundat, is ab orthodoxa Ecclesia discessisse ju^icandus,
and pro haeretico habendus, non Catholico. Stres.
The effect of which discourse was this, some believed, and embraced the
Gospel; others remained altogether unmoved and unperswaded; and so they parted
in some difference and disagreement among themselves. Paul at their departure,
told those that would not be persuaded, that this unbelief of theirs was a
thing which the Prophet Isaiah had long ago punctually foretold, viz. chapter 6.9.
wherein he shows, that God had bidden him go and tell that people, that hearing
they will hear and not understand, and seeing they will see and not perceive;
for their heart was waxed gross, and they heard heavily with their ears, that
is, they had contracted a wilful hardness, deafness, and blindness; upon which
it follows, that they will not convert, nor hearken to any counsel, that should
make them capable of mercy. This being their case, he tells them, upon this
refusal and obduration of theirs, he was to preach the Gospel (the word of
salvation), to the Gentiles, who would gladly embrace it. See Romans 15.9, 10,
11, 12.

After this, Paul dwelt two years in his own hired house at Rome, preaching the
Gospel, (the doctrine of Christ that tends to the setting up the kingdom of God
in the souls of men, see Mat. 4.23. and 13.19.), to all that came to him,
without any disturbance, he having, as it seems, some Christian friends even in
Nero's family, Phil. 4.22.

Act. 28. v. 2. And the barbarous people showed us no little kindness; for they
kindled a fire, and received us every one because of the present rain, and
because of the cold.

v. 3. And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the
fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand.

v. 4. And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they
said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though he has
escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live.

v. 5. And he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm.

v. 6. Howbeit, they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead
suddenly: but after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him,
they changed their minds, and said that he was a God.

v. 7. In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island,
whose name was Publius, who received us, and lodged us three days courteously.

v. 8. And it came to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever, and
of a bloody flix, to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on
him, and healed him.

v. 9. So when this was done, others also which had diseases in the island,
came, and were healed:

v. 10. Who also honored us with many honors, and when we departed, they
laded us with such things as were necessary.

v. 11. And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had
wintred in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.

v. 12. And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days.

v. 13. And from thence we set a compass, and came to Rhegium, and after one
day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli:

v. 14. Where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven
days: and so we went toward Rome.

v. 15. And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as
far as Appii-Forum, and the three Taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God,
and took courage.

v. 16. And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the
captain of the guard: but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself, with a soldier
that kept him.

v. 17. And it came to pass that after three days Paul called the chief of the
Jews together. And when they were come together, he said unto them, Men and
brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people, or customs of our
fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the
Romans.

v. 18. Who when they had examined me, would have let me go, because there was
no cause of death in me.

v. 19. But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal unto
Caesar, not that I had ought to accuse my nation of.

v. 20. For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see you, and to
speak with you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.

v. 21. And they said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judea,
concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came, showed or spoke any
harm of thee.

v. 22. But we desire to hear of thee what thou think: for as concerning
this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.

v. 23. And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his
lodging, to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, p^rswading,
them concerning Jesus, b^th out of the law of Moses, and out of the Prophets,
from morning till evening.

v. 24. And some believed the things which were spoken, and some believ^d not.

v. 25. And when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that
Paul had spoken one word, Well spoke the holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto
our fathers.

v. 26. Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall
not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive.

v. 27. For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes have they closed, lest they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

v. 28. Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto
the Gentiles, and that they will hear it.

v. 29. And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great
reasoning among themselves.

v. 30. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all
that came in unto him.

v. 31. Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern
the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence; no man forbidding him.

Chapter 28. v. 6. (...)] Nihil incommodi ei accidere] (...) de malo Morali sive
culpae usitate dicitur, ut Luc. 23.41. 2 These. 3.2. raro de malo Physico sive
poenae. Syrus vertit nihil odibile ipsi factum esse. i. e. Nullum incommodum
turpe and ignominiosum, scil. nihil novum insolitum and admirandum, unde
criminis alicujus, prout suspicati fuerant, reus haberi posset.

Mutata sententia dicebant Deum esse] Herculem forsan (...), qui in Melit^
colebatur.

v. 11. Cujus insigne erant Dioscuri] Solebant olim, naves hujusmodi insignibus
ornare, and inde appellare, quomodo etiam hodie-num usitatum est. Virgilius
dixit, Centauro invehitur magna.

Dioscuri, sunt Castor and Pollux, Jovis ex Laeda filii qui mari imperabant:
unde horum praesidio and tutelae navis haec erat commissa atque dicata ab iis,
qui eam possidebant. Et invaluit apud Nautas haec superstitio, exhalationes
^gneas quae in tempestatibus conspiciuntur, esse hos ipsos Deos scil. Castorem
and Pollucem. Et si ^xhalatio solitaria appareat, trisle esse praesagium; si
autem gemina, prosperae navigationis praenuncium, ut testis est Plinius. Ovid.
1 Trist. Fleg. 3. and pictos verberat unda Deos.

v. 15. Alii obvium venerunt ad sorum Appii, alii ad tres Tabernas; illi prius,
hi serius. Nam tres Tabernae propriores erant Romae.

v. 16. (...), seorsim sine aliis. Cum milite qui ipsum custodiret] Intellige
ita ut eadem catena and mili^em constringeret. Sen. Epist. 5. quemadmodum eadem
catena and militem and custodiam copulat, sic ista quae tam dissimilia sunt,
pariter incedunt. Haec est catena cujus mox meminit eam monstrans Paulus v. 20.
and Ephesians. 6.20. Col. 4.18. Phil. 1.7. 2 Timothy 2.9. Philem. 10.13.

v. 20. Propter spem Israelis ^h^e. Propter Messiam ab Israele speratum ac
des^d^ratum, vel propter bona a Messia spe^^ta. vid. 1 ^im. 1.1.

SECT. III.
ONesiphorus a Citizen of Ephesus, coming to Rome at this time, very diligently
sought out Paul there, and often refreshed him, and was not ashamed to own him
notwithstanding his bonds, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17.

SECT. IV.
THis year, it is probable, Paul was brought to his trial at Rome, though Luke
makes no mention of it. For that his trial was something early, may appear by
his own words in his Second Epistle to Timothy, written some time after, where
he speaks of his first answer, (at which all his friends forsook him, through
fear of suffering), that is, possibly, all such of his friends as had power at
Rome, or might by their Testimonies have stood him instead; which he prays God
may not be laid to their charge, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18.

SECT. V.
FEstus, the Roman Procurator dying in Judea, Nero sends Albinus to succeed him
in that Province. Christ's. Neronis 66 6
In the mean time the High Priesthood, by the means of King Agrippa, being
taken away from Joseph, and given to Ananias a Saducee, (the Son of Annas),
this new High Priest taking his opportunity, before the arrival of Albinus,
called a Council of the Jews, and brought James Brother of Joses, Mat. 13.55.
surnamed the less, Mark 15.40. called the Brother, that is, the Kinsman of the
Lord, Gal. 1.9. being the Son of Mary, the Sister of the Lords Mother, see Act.
15.13.
Son of Alpheus, before them, and caused him to be condemned to be stoned; see
Joseph. lib. 20. chapter 8.. Eusebius in his Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. chapter 22. says, he
was thrown down from a Pinnacle of the Temple, and then his brains were knocked
out with a Fullers Club. Vide Annals Vsserii.

This James, the Son of Alpheus and Mary She is called Mary of Cleophas, Joh.
19.25. either because her Husband had two Names, Alpheus and Cleophas, (as was
usual with the Hebrews), or else because she had had two Husbands, first
Alpheus, by whom she had had James and Joses, and after his death Cleophas, by
whom she had Judas and Simon.
, (Sister to the blessed Virgin), called James the less, [Mark 15.40.], and the
Lords Brother, [Gal. 1.19.], that is, (after the Jewish manner of speaking),
his Cousin-German, being an Apostle, and so of an unlimited Commission, thought
it suitable to his office, to take care of all converted to the Faith among the
Twelve Tribes, scattered abroad in diverse Countries, and accordingly he
addresses this Epistle to them. It Is probable, he wrote it not long before his
martyrdom, because he seems to intimates, that the vengeance that was to fall
on Jerusalem was drawing nigh; see Jam. 5.8, 9. The general occasion of which,
seems to be, the great degeneracy, both as to Faith, and Manners, and the
growth of Libertinism, which he understood to be among them. Which evils that
he might obviate, he writes this Epistle to them, wherein he gives them many
serious Admonitions.

^istle of James.
1. COncerning the right bearing of afflictions, or outward temptations; He
tells them, they are to account it matter of great and solid joy, when they
meet with diverse troubles and afflictions for the profession of the Gospel; by
which afflictions, they may be proved, whether they will, even in adversity,
stick close to Christ, or no. For they should consider, that those temptations
are trials of their Faith; and the trial of their Faith works patience,
through the operation of the Spirit of God. And they should learn to be patient
to the end, (Mat. 10.22.), that so nothing may be wanting to them, for the
perfecting and making up all the parts of holiness in them And because it is a
hard matter to bear afflictions aright, and a great deal of heavenly wisdom is
requisite thereunto, he advises, that when any of them, in such times of
pressure as those were, do find themselves to want this wisdom and skill to
manage themselves aright, that then they should humbly beg it of God, who
gives liberally, and upbraideth not. But then (he tells them) they must ask in
Faith, and with a fixed dependence on God, not wavering, or doubting either
concerning his power, goodness, or faithfulness. For doubting or wavering keeps
men in a perpetual disquiet, and agitation of mind, not knowing what to depend
on. Besid^s, this is the way to have their prayers blasted, God not being wont
to hear them, that do not sincerely depend on him. And he further tells them,
that it is not only in prayer, that this fluctuation, or wavering of spirit,
produces such ill effects; but he shows them, that such a person has the
infelicity of never knowing in other occasions, where to fix or what course to
take. And having given them this caution concerning prayer, he returns to his
purpose again, of comforting the afflicted under their trials. And in order
hereunto, he counsels the poor Christian, who is through afflictions or the
Cross, humbled by the Lord, and brought low, to comfort himself, yea to glory
in this, that he is exalted to the high dignity of being an adopted Child of
God. And the rich man he counsels, not to rejoice in his riches; but if God
have given him an humble frame of mind, and a preparedness to bear the Cross,
and to be brought low, to rejoice in that frame of spirit. For all his glory
(as he is a rich man) is very fading. As the Sun when it is risen scorcheth the
green grass, and makes the florid part of it presently to wither; so a rich
man (when God permits it) soon fades in his estate, and comes to nothing,
notwithstanding all his counsels and endeavors to the contrary. He concludes
this admonition, declaring that Christian to be blessed, who patiently endures
the afflictions which he shall meet with in the way of his duty; for when he
shall be tried, and found faithful, he shall at length obtain the crown of
eternal life, which the Lord has graciously promised to them that love him,
and that testify their love to him, by a patient enduring tribulations for his
sake. From Ver. 1, to 13.

2. Having thus spoken of outward temptations, (or afflictions), he comes now,
to speak of inward, namely, such as solicit to sin, and which consist in evil
inclinations. And he advises them, to take heed of that Blasphemy that casts
the blame of these temptations upon God. For God is of so pure and holy a
nature that he cannot be tempted or stirred up to sin by any means whatever;
neither does he solicit or stir up any one to it. But a man is tempted, or
stirred up to evil, by the inward lust, or original corruption of his own
heart; the gradual motions whereof are these. 1. By the instigation of this
inward lust, or concupiscence, a man is drawn aside from true good, and allured
to evil. 2. This inward lust soliciting, and enticing, gets at length the
consent of the will, and so is said to conceive. 3. Then a man actually sins,
and so sin brings forth. 4. Sin being committed, by its desert brings forth
or procures death. Therefore they should take heed of permitting themselves so
far to be deceived, as to ascribe the cause of their impiety unto God. For He
is immutably the Author of all good, and from him d^scends every good gift. God
is the Father of lights, and spiritual illumination, and (says he), of his own
free mercy and good will, he has regenerated and converted us (who are
believers among the Jews) by the word of his Gospel, that as the first fruits
(...) dicuntur qui ante alios vocati sunt, 1 Cor. 16.15.
were under the Law consecrated to God, so we might be consecrated to him
before any other people, and so he has allowed us the favor of being the
first that have been called to this dignity, [see Ephesians. 1.12.], therefore we
ought to be far from admitting any such blasphemous thought concerning God, as
if we were moved at any time by him to sin or evil. From Ver. 13, to 19.

3. Having mentioned their regeneration by the preaching of the Gospel, he
takes occasion to show them, how the Word ought to be heard and received. In
particular, that they should be swift and ready to hear it, but slow to speak
or cavil against it, and slow to wrath, not being soon offended, and angry at
the convictions or reproofs of it. For man's sinful anger does not put men upon
doing those things, that are just and righteous in Gods account. And because
wrath is such a hindrance to the righteousness which God requires, he
advises, that all filthy, and evil speaking, and overflowing of malice, all
scoffs, and railing, etc. should be laid aside, and that with meekness they
should receive the word, which God by his Spirit does, as it were, graff and
implant in the soul, that it may bring forth fruits acceptable unto Him, and
which being accompanied by his divine grace, is his power unto salvation. He
further shows, how they should not only be hearers of the Word, but doers of
it. And he declares the vanity and unprofitableness of bare hearing, by a
similitude taken from a man looking his face in a Glass, who soon forgets
the fashion of his own countenance, having only a slight view thereof: So the
preaching of the Word usually makes but slight impressions on careless
hearers. But they that look narrowly, and diligently inquire into the whole
Doctrine of the Gospel, (which is a perfect Law, teaching the way to true
liberty, and freedom from sin, wrath, and eternal death, and brings us into a
free state, a state of Sonship) and abide, and remain in the knowledge and
belief thereof, and obedience thereto, not being forgetful hearers, but mindful
of the duties, and work Faith is our work, Repentance our business, the life of
love and praise our duty. Dr. Manton in loc.
the Gospel prescribes, such persons shall be blessed in this course. And l^st
any should challenge a share in this blessedness to whom it does not belong, he
shows, who are hearers only, and not doers of the Word, namely, such as allow
themselves in any known sin, and particularly in the sins of the tongue. For he
tells them, that that man miserably deceives his own heart, who thinks
himself truly religious, yet bridleth not his tongue Audi multa, loquer^
opportuna.
. Such a man's profession of the Christian Faith, he assures them, is but vain.
But they that would manifest their profession to be sincere, and immaculate,
and such as God (who is the Father of Christ, and of all true Believers in him)
approves, must manifest it by works of Charity, and Purity, keeping themselves
from the wickedness and defilements that prevail in the World, wherewith so
many are polluted. From Ver. 19, to the end.

He comes now to admonish them of another Evil, Chap. 2.
that it seems was too common amongst them, which was this, They over-esteemed
the rich Jacobus cum intellexit morem invalescere dandi (...) ex opibus, non ex
virtutibus, huic malo, multa post se mala tracturo, occurrit. Grot.
, giving them all the respect and observance they could devise, in their
Synagogues, and Courts of Judicature; yea they went so far, as to esteem the
Wicked-rich above the Godly-poor, honoring and observing those that were apt
to hale them to the Judgment Seats, despising and disesteeming the poor, and
not regarding them according to their excellency in grace: Yea they were prone
to favor the cause of the rich against the poor in judgment. The Apostle shows
them the evil of this practice, by putting this case to them. Says he, If there
come into your Synagogues The Jews used to keep Courts in their Synagogues.
Therefore Mat. 10.17. We read, They shall scourge you in their Synagogues. Act.
22.19. Beat in every Synagogue: Because where Sentence was given, there
Judgment was executed. And it is probable, that being now converted to
Christianity they still held the same course.
, or Ecclesiastical Courts, a Rich man, with a Gold Ring, and goodly Apparel,
and there be a difference to be decided between him and a Poor man, who is in
poor Clothes; and you show great respect to the Rich man, and favor him in his
cause, but contemn the Poor man Maimonides Saned. cap. 21. says, It is expressly
provided by the constitutions o^ the Jews, that when a poor man and a rich
plead together, the rich shall not be bidden to sit down, and the poor to
stand, or sit in a worse place, but both to sit, or both to stand. See
Thorndick, of the right of the Church in a Christian state. page 38, 32.
; are ye not then partial, and perverse Judges, whose thoughts and
determinations are evil, and perverse? That therefore he may restrain them from
this undue proceeding, he shows, that God has put a threefold dignity upon
the Godly-poor. They are Elected of God, Rich in Faith and the graces of the
Spirit, and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven. And that he might further show them
their practice herein, not only to be vain and evil, but senseless and
irrational, he uses a new Argument to this purpose. D^ not rich men (says he)
oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? It seems, many of the rich
men among whom they lived were bitter enemies, and reproachers of Christianity;
and therefore he intimates, that wealth was not to be such a motive to them to
favor the cause of the rich, when it came to be tried before them. Indeed, if
they did dispense their respects aright, giving the rich men only, what is
just, and meet, and did not deprive their poorer Brethren, of what is due to
them, and in all things carried themselves according to that Royal Law of the
King of kings, contained in the Scripture, (which enjoins us to love our
Neighbor as our selves, and to do to others what we would judge fit to be done
to us), then they did well; but this partial respecting of the rich, with
contempt of the poor, plainly showed them to be transgressors, and not
fulfillers of this Law. For the Law, Lev. 19.15. (to which place it is probable
he points), says, Thou shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: Thou shall
not respect the person of the poor, nor the person of the mighty; but in
righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. But here they might object this,
that which he reproved in them was a small offense, and might be easily
excused, and their obedience in other things might make amends for such a small
failing as this was. To this he answers, that, Suppose a man should be an exact
observer of all other points of the Law (which yet is impossible) and willingly
offend in one particular, he is guilty of breaking the whole Law. Not that all
sins concur in one, but because a contempt of the same Law and Lawgiver is
manifested in the breach of one Command as well as of all. For obedience to
Gods will is required universally to all that he commands, and he that offends
in one command, though he keep all the rest, fails of the obedience which is
due from him, and so is punishable as well as if he had offended in all. And
that he may make this matter the more clear, he instances in the Sixth and
Seventh Commandments, showing that in the violation of either, the authority of
the Lawgiver, and of him that commanded both, is violated. But they might again
object, that they shall not ultimately be judged by the Law, as given by Moses,
(which requires perfect obedience in every respect, and pronounces a Curse upon
every one that in the least transgresses), but by the Gospel, [see chapter 1.25.].
He answers, that he would have them so speak, and act, and carry themselves in
those matters, as those that shall be judged by the Gospel, which is a Law of
Liberty indeed, but not of licentiousness; of liberty from sin, but not of
liberty to sin. And if they would not come under the rigor of the Law of
Moses, they must not be cruel and injurious to their poor Brethren. For the
equity of that Law requires, that those persons should find no mercy, who will
show none. Therefore mercy is not to be hoped for, by those that only honor
rich men, but by those that are full of Bow^ls, and bounty to the poor. For as
the mercy of God rejoiceth over his justice; so mercy exercised by man, gives
him occasion to hope, yea to rejoice in the mercy of God, and exceedingly
supports him against the fear of his justice and judgment. From Ver. 1, to 14.

5. Having spoken of the Gospel, as a Law of Liberty, v. 12. lest this
expr^ssi^n should encourage some Hypocrites to live as they list, provided they
did but profess Faith in Christ, he admonishes them to take he^d of such a
vain, unprofitable Faith Faith does save in that way of concurrence in which
any act of the creature can be said to save; see Ephesians. 2.8. But Faith which is
only in the tongue and lips, which is alone, and by it self, such a Faith as
the Devils may have, such a Faith is dead, and can no more be accounted Faith
than a dead man can be accounted a man; such a Faith does not save.

Sola sides justificat, sed non fides quae est sola.


, because such a Faith, as is void of good works, cannot save. So that in this
whole discourse, the Apostles intent and drift is, to show, not what
justifies, but who is justified; not what Faith does, but what Faith is. He
that has a true Faith, is sure of Salvation; but not always he that says he
has Faith. His drift therefore is, not to show, that Faith without works does
not justify, but that a bare Assent to the truths of the Gospel, which is not
accompanied with good works, is not Faith; and the Justification he here
speaks of, is not so much of the Person, as of the Faith. For as professions
of love to those that are indigent, and in want, without performance, are vain;
so such a Faith, which is but a naked assent to the Gospel, or a bare
profession of it, without producing good fruits, is unprofitable and dead. He
further urges his present Argument, by framing a Dialogue, between a true
Believer, that can manifest his Faith by his works, and a boasting Hyprocrite,
that can produce no works to evidence or demonstrate the truth of his Faith.
The true Believer may say to such a person thus; Thou boastest with thy tongue,
and say, thou have Faith. I shall not boast, but humbly produce the real
testimony of my works, (see Mat. 11.4, 5.), as an evidence of my Faith. Thy
Faith is not productive of good works. Now show me thy Faith without works, and
make it appear to me by any Scripture-ground, (if thou can), to be a sincere
and true Faith; and if thou can not, I will show thee my Faith, accompanied
with good works, and demonstrate it to be sincere by my works, seeing they are
a real evidence and proof of it. But thou will say, thou have a true Faith, for
thou believe there is one God. Thou do well in so believing; yet if this
Faith of thine consist in a bare knowledge, or ass^nt of thy mind, and do not
produce in thee a real love to God, and affiance in him, and a serious
endeavor to please him, what advantage have thou thereby above the Devils? For
they believe this truth as well as thou, but are far enough from having any
true Faith; for instead of conceiving any hope thereby of salvation, they are
filled with unceivable horror, upon the apprehension of his justice. All
knowledge of God, out of Christ, is very uncomfortable to sinners. But will thou
rightly understand and consider, (O vain Professor The Apostle does not direct
this to any one person, but to such an order or sort of men. Hypocrites must be
roused with some asperity and sharpness.
!), what may be said against thy Faith, and to prove to thee, that Faith
without works is dead? seeing good works are a proper and insep^rable effect of
true and saving Faith? I say, they are such effects, as do not give life to it,
but declare it, and manifest it, as Apples do not give life to the tree, but
show and demonstrate life to be in it. I shall further prove this point to
thee, by the examples of persons justified of old, and shall show, that they
were not justified by a dead and fruitless Faith, but by a Faith bringing forth
good works. And I shall instance only in two, Abraham and R^hab. As for
Abraham, I demand, whether he were not justified by works, (particularly, that
eminent work, when he really purposed, and had God continued the command, would
actually have offered up his Son Isaac on the Altar Heb. 11.17.
), I demand, Whether by that, and his other works, he did not show, that he had
a true and lively Faith So that James does not take Justification here in that
sense, that Paul does when he speaks of man's Justification before God; but for
a showing forth of his justification before men. Paul speaks of the
justification of a sinn^r, from the curse of his natural condition, and the
accusations of the Law. James, of the justification and approbation of that
Faith by which we are thus accepted with God. Paul shows how a sinner is
absolved; James how a Believer is approved. Also by the word Faith, when he
denies that we are justified thereby only, v. 24. he understands a naked
assent and profession of the Christian Faith, which is not accompanied with
good works, as the true saving Faith is. Paul disputes how we are justified,
and James how we shall evidence our selves to be justified. The one takes
justification for acquittance from sin, and the other for acquittance from
hypocrisy. The one for the imputation of righteousness, the other for the
declaration of righteousness Paul speaks of the office of Faith: James of the
quality of Faith. Paul pleads for saving Faith, James pleads against naked
assent. The one speaks of the justifying of the person; the other of the
Faith. Paul having to do with Pharisaical Justiciaries proves invincibly,
Justification by Faith, without works. James having to deal with carnal
Professors, proves as strongly, That a Profession of Faith, without Works, is
dead.
? Thou see therefore, that his Faith rested not in a bare knowledge, or
profession, but was operative; it had efficacy and influence upon his works; it
did not exert it self in acts of believing only, but also in working; so that
his Faith, by producing good works, was declared to be a perfect and true
Faith, and such as had all the parts belonging to it. And his Faith was
improved, and strengthened, and perfected by works, as the inward vigor of the
spirits is increased by motion and exercise. Yet this must not be so
understood, as if works did perfect Faith, by communicating of perfection to
it, but only that they do stir up, exercise, and excite the vigor of it. This
therefore being an evident discovery of Abraham's Faith; it plainly appeared,
how truly it was said of him before, Genesis 15. that he believed, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness. So that the first testimony, and solemn
approbation which Abraham had from God, was because of his Faith. And by his
readiness to sacrifice his Son, he declared he had a true justifying-Faith; and
accordingly the Lord says after this trial, Now I know that thou fear me,
Genesis 22.12. And hereupon he was called, the Friend of God. You see then, that
by Works (that is; by the parts, and offices of a holy life) a man is
justified, that is, acquitted from hypocrisy, and his Faith is manifested to
be good, and right, and he himself just and righteous. You see also, that he is
not justified by Faith only, that is, by a bare, and naked profession, or dead
and vain Faith, such as consists in a mere assent, or empty knowledge and
speculation, which is so far from justifying, that it is not properly Faith. I
come now to my other instance, viz. that of Rahab, which I the rather make use
of, because some might say, that indeed Abraham's Faith (the great pattern of
Believers) might produce good works, but every Believers Faith cannot arise to
the strength of Abraham's. For answer to this, I shall show, that the weakest
Faith, that is true, and saving must produce good works. And for the proof of
this, I shall instance in Rahab an Harlot (...) meretrix] Videtur vox etiam
cauponam significare: plerunque cauponae talem etiam quaestum laciebant.
Dicitur meretrix, scil. quae talis suerat antequam ad verum Deum (ab hospitibus
Hebraeis edocta) se converteret. Sic Mat. 21.31. Meretrices dicuntur intrare in
regnum coeleste. Optime Rahab figuram gerit eorum, qui ex gentibus extraneis in
Christum credidere: Nam and horum saluti vita prior flagitiosa nihil obstitit.
, and an Heathen, when God first wrought upon her, yet after she was converted,
her Faith, how weak soever, expressed it self in a very self-denying act. Had
she said to the Messengers of the Children of Israel, I believe the God of
Heaven and Earth has given you this whole Land for a Possession, yet I dare
not show you any kindness in this City; it had been such a dead barren Faith,
as we have been speaking of: but her Faith prevailed so far with her, that she
performed a grateful office to them, though she ran a great hazard thereby,
and exposed her self to the rage of the people of her City, for harboring
spies, and sending them out by another way, to escape the great danger they
were in. See Josh. 2.

He concludes this whole dispute, showing, how little is to be ascribed to an
empty profession of Faith without works: such a Faith, he tells them, it is but
as the body without the vital spirit, which every body knows to be no more than
a mere carcass. From Ver. 14, to the end.

6. He re-assumes the discourse he had been upon before in the end of the first
Chapter, admonishing them to take heed of offending with their tongues, Chap. 3.
and particularly, not to arrogate to themselves a supercilious Mastership over
others, (taking upon them to censure them at pleasure), because such heavy
censures draw down upon themselves very great and heavy judgments; see 1 Cor.
11.31. Mat. 7.2.

And he disswades there from, 1. Upon consideration of the common frailty,
incident to all men; telling them, that In many things we offend all. And 2ly,
Because bridling the tongue is a sign of some good progress and growth in
grace. He that can govern his tongue Prove. 13.3. He that keeps his mouth,
keeps his life.

Prove. 22.23. Whosoever keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from
troubles.


aright does thereby manifest himself to be a sincere, and grown, and well
improved Christian, and able to bridle the whole body, that is, able to govern
all his other actions aright, which are acted by the members of the body. This
he further illustrates, by two Similitudes. 1. Of a Bridle-bit. 2. Of a Rudder,
or Helm of a Ship. If we guide the Bridle well, we rule the Horse; if we rule
the Stern aright, we guide the Ship: So the Tongue, though but a small member,
yet well ordered, and governed, effects (...) de magnis se jactat i. e. res
magnas efficit.
great things. But great inconveniences arise where this small member is not
well-governed. For as a little fire kindles much wood, so an evil Tongue is a
fire, (there is a world Mundus iniquitatis, id est, res plenissima iniquitatis.
of sin in it), it is a powerful means to kindle great strifes and divisions. An
evil Tongue is of so cursed an influence, that it often defiles the whole body,
that is, involves the other members in guilt, and defiles them, by drawing them
to act, and commit sin, [see Eccles. 5.6.]. It sets on fire the whole World
Quidam circulum seu orbem conditum, (ut sit (...), and (...) pro (...)),
redduni, ut significetur, linguam perversam totum orbem mundi, velut infernali
igne inflammare. Glass.
, or, (as some render it), the whole course and revolution of our life Accendi
a lingua rotam nativitatis nostrae] Humanae vitae cursum rotae comparat. Quum
alia vitia vel aetate vel temporis successu corriguntur, vel saltem non
occupant totum hominem, vitium linguae spargi ac grassari per omnes vitae
parts asserit. Calv.

(...)] Rota nativitatis] vitae cursum aut revolutionem significat.


from youth to manhood, from manhood to old age. The evils of the tongue
diffuse themselves into all the parts of man's life, and it sets on fire, with
its wickedness, the wheel and course of all our natural faculties, being it
self set on fire by the Devil, and kindled with that fire that comes from Hell.
And having thus showed the cursed influence of the Tongue, he comes now to
show, how difficult the cure is. He tells them, there are no kind of Beasts but
may be tamed by humane art and skill; nothing in nature so violent and hurtful,
but humane art and industry, has made it serviceable to the use of men. But
the Tongue is harder to be tamed than any of these. It Is such an
indisciplinable member, that no man's reason, or skill, can tame another v. 8.
Linguam; nempe alienam, nemo domare potest, sicut animalia sera mansuefacimus.
Grot.
man's unruly tongue; nor can he tame his own of himself, without the assistance
of divine grace. An evil Tongue is an unrestrainable evil, full of deadly
poison, spitting forth the venom of reviling, backbiting, reproaching,
cursing, and many other evils.

But some might here object, With our tongues we praise God, therefore the
Tongue is not so full of venom as you suggest.

For answer, he shows, What a foul sin it is in any Christian to use this
member to so distant offices as some do, namely, therewith in the public
congregation to bless God, and afterward to judge and rail at their Christian
Brethren, who, for that Image of God they bear upon them, are to be regarded,
and used with kindness: What, says he, shall two such contrary things, as
blessing and cursing, proceed out of the same mouth? This, he tells them, ought
not to be. And if they would further understand the monstrousness of this
practice, he will represent it unto them, by three Similitudes. Can a fountain
(says he) send forth two sorts of waters, of so different a nature, as bitter
and sweet? or can the Sea send out salt water and fresh? Can a Fig Tree bear
Figs and Olive-berries too? Can a Vine bear Gr^pes and Figs, the the fruit that
belongs to another Tree? And as these things are impossible in the ordinary
course of Nature; so he shows them, it is absurd in manners, that the same
Tongue should bring forth good and evil, should bless and curse, pray and
revile. Therefore the tongue should be employed to those good uses to which God
has appointed it, and not to the contrary. From Ver. 1, to 13.

7. He comes now to show, what is one of the prime causes of the unruliness,
and intemperance of the Tongue, namely, A false persuasion, which is in some,
of their own wisdom and knowledge, whereas there is no true wisdom in them. He
tells them, that if any will approve himself to be a truly wise and
understanding man, he must by the goodness of his conversation and works,
testify that there is in him, such a wisdom as is accompanied with meekness.
But if he nourish bitter envying, and strife in his heart, and vent it by his
Tongue, he has no reason to glory and boast of his wisdom; for he does plainly
lie against the truth in such vain brags and boastings. Such wisd^m as that, he
may assure himself, descends not from heaven, but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For the effects of envy and strife, are confusion and all manner of
evil. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, it will not allow or
brook any filthiness, either of sin or error; then peaceable, not rigid, but
gentle, mild, equitable, receding from its own strict right in order to peace;
It Is also gentle, and moderate, and persuasible, full of compassions, and
mercy, being fruitful in good works, without judging (...), sine
dijudicatione]. Jacobus hic dijudicationis verbo nimis anxiam, ac scrupulosam
inquisitionem notat, qualem sere in hypocritis cernere licet, qui dum nimis
exact inquirunt in fratrum dicta, and facta, nihil non in sinistram partem
rapiunt. Calv.
, or too severely censuring the actions of others, and without hypocrisy. He
concludes this wh^le discourse, showing the happiness of those that have this
wisdom, that disposes to peace; for the fruit of righteousness, which consists
in peace (...)] Ut sensus sit. Pax (h. e. vera selicitas) quae quasi fructus e
justitia nascitur, seritur iis qui operam dant paci. Pisc.
, (comprehending in it, all true blessedness) is sown for them that have that
meek wisdom, and are of a peaceable disposition themselves, and endeavor to
make peace among others. From Ver. 13, to the end.

Chap. 4.
8. Having showed, in the foregoing Chapter, that a false persuasion of their
own wisdom and knowledge, was one great cause of the dissentions among them,
(which were so violent, that they resembled, as it were, wars and sightings) he
comes now to show other causes of their contentions and quarrellings, which
were their carnal and pleasing lusts, viz. their covetousness, envy, and pride,
which warred in their members, (that is, in their wills and affections, see
Romans 7.23.), against the motions of the Spirit of God. He tells them, they
eagerly and passionately coveted the honors and riches of this world; but yet
could not obtain what they desired. They envyed (...)] ye envy, non (...) Ye
skill. Sic Calv. Beza, Cajetan, etc. Vous ports envy and jalousie l'un a
l'autre, etc. Amtraut.
and grudged their Neighbors the good things God had given them, yet could not
attain to their happiness. They coveted them eagerly, but it nothing availed
them: They strove and quarreled with one another about them, yet obtained them
not, because they sought them not of G^d by prayer, who is the alone Author and
Giver of all blessings. Or if they did sometimes seek to the Lord for them, yet
they sought them not in a right manner, nor for a right end, namely, that they
might serve him with them; but they sought them, that they might consume and
waste them upon their lusts. Hereupon, he calls them, Adulterers Adulteros
apellat metaphorice, quia a Deo ^ornicatur, asque adulteratur, quisquis amorem,
quem Deo debet, ad mundum transfert. Estius.
, and Adulteresses, in a spiritual sense; because, the love of the world had
alienated and estranged their hearts from the Lord [Mat. 12.39.] He tells them,
that to give up, or engage their affections to the pleasures, profits, and
honors of the World, or to seek to gratify worldly men, or worldly lusts, is
reckoned by God as hostility against himself. For friendship with the World See
1 John 2.15, 16.
, and conformity to the vices which reign in it, is that which renders a man
hateful to God, it being a plain siding with his Adversaries. From Ver. 1, to
5.

9. He dehorts from Pride and Envy. He shows them, that it is not for nothing
that the Scripture speaks to this sense and purpose, though not in express
words. The Holy Spirit By Spirit, we understand here the Spirit of God, because
that phrase, The Spirit which dwells in us, is most properly, and most
usually applied to the Spirit of God, who is given to us, that he may dwell in
us, Romans 8.9, 11 1 Cor. 3.16.

An putatis quod inaniter Scriptura dicat, Ad invidiam concupiscit Spiritus,
qui habitat in nobis! Quae verba quidam deducta esse arbitrantur ex Number. 11.29.
Dixit autem Moses illi, An invides mea causa? O si daretur, totum populum
Jehovae prophetas esse! q. d. communis est ille Spiritus, qui in utroque
nostrum, and in aliis Dei servis habitat. Immerito igitur illis prophetantibus,
(Eldad and Medad), invides; quia sine omni invidentia ego expecto, ut omnes and
singuli in populo, Spiritu Dei instructi, prophetare possint Ab hypothesi ergo
ad thesin progreditur Apostolus, and erotematice ait, Ad in vidiam concupiscit
^piritus qui habitat in nobis? Qua interrogatione idem sensu exprimitur, quod
in paraphrasi verborum Mosis dictum modo est Glass.

Cap. 4. v. 5. Ego de spiritu Dei accipio, and interrogative lego hanc
sententiam. Probare vult Apostolus, ex quo invident non regi eos Dei Spiritu,
quoniam ipse aliter fideles instituat. Negat Jacobus regnare Dei Spiritum ubi
vigent pravae cupiditates, quae nos ad mutuam contentionem irritant. Calv.


that dwells in us, does it incite or move to envy? No, that is impossible;
for he, is liberal in his communications of Grace, which forms men's hearts to
Humility and Charity, that are contrary thereunto. Therefore the Scripture
says, [ Prove. 3.34. according to the Septuagint], God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble. He advises them therefore, to submit themselves to
the guidance and direction of the Spirit of God, and to resist the Devil when
he tempts them to any of those sinful lusts, and he shall flee from them. He
advises them, to seek unto the Lord, and to emplore his aid against these lusts
by fervent prayer, and to draw nigh to him by true Repentance and Faith; and he
will draw nigh to them by his grace, blessing, and help; see Zach. 1.3. Mal.
3.7. He advises them, to cleanse their hands, which were full of violence, and
extortion; and to purify their hearts, which were filled with malice, and
envy; that is, to look to the reforming both of their inward and outward man.
And those of them especially should take care of this, who have hitherto been
so double-minded, and have had their hearts as it were divided between God and
the world. L^stly, he exhorts these envious, proud, ambitious, covetous
persons, to exercise a deep penitential mourning before the Lord for their
sins; and to turn their carnal rejoicing in their possessions, into weeping,
and mourning at the sad apprehension of the approaching judgments, and to
humble themselves in the sight of God, deprecating his displeasure, and
earnestly imploring his pardon in Christ's name, that so he may, by giving them
a sense of his pardoning mercy, raise up their hearts again, and revive and
comfort them. From Ver, 5. to 11.

10. He comes now to dissuade them from another sin, and that is detraction, or
speaking evil of one another. For he tells them, he that detracts from, or
censures his Brother, detracts from the Law, and judges, or condemns the Law,
which commands us to love our Brother, and condemns rash judging, Lev. 19.16.
M^t. 7.1. He therefore that judges his Brother, is not an ob^dient observer of
the Law, but foolishly arrogates to himself, as it were, a power to judge and
control the Law, as if it had forbidden some things without just cause. But
they are to know, there is but one Lawgiver, who can give Laws to the
Conscience, who is God the Lord, (Isa. 33.22.); into whose place, they
arrogantly put themselves, who rashly judge their Neighbor, and consequently
condemn his Law, that forbids it. Now he tells them, this Lawgiver is the only
Judge, who has power to save those that obey him, and to destroy those that
resist him. What is man therefore, that he should dare to usurp his office by
judging his Brother.

11. Having reprehended those that contemned the Law, he now comes to reprove
those that contemned providence, promising to themselves a long time in this
world, and an happy accomplishment of their carnal projects, without any sense
or apprehension of their own frailty, or the sudden strokes of God. He
therefore here person^tes them, and gives an accurate representation of their
thoughts, showing how vain their peremptory carnal confidence of success in
their affairs, is, seeing no man can foresee, what will be on the morrow; our
life being like a vapor appearing for a little time, and often times on the
sudden vanishing away. Therefore there should be a continual acknowledgment of
divine providence in their hearts, and such an outward profession of it in
their words, as may distinguish them from profane men, who have no sense
thereof. But you, says he, glory in th^se your insolent boa^tings, and
presumptions, by which you openly publish the wicked stupidity of your hearts.
And for you, that are Christians, to be guilty of this, (who have received so
much light, and knowledge, to the contrary), this will render you the more
inexcusable, and make you more liable to punishment on that account. From Ver.
12, to the end.

12. He now sharply reprehends the carnal rich men among them, and denounces
the judgment of God against them, for their Injustice, Intemperance, and
Cruelty. He bids them, weep and howl in contemplation of the calamities that
hung over their heads, which they could not escape, except they seriously
repented. He tells them they had hoarded up riches, viz. Corn, Wine, and Oil,
and such like perishable commodities, till they were corrupted; and had laid up
Garments, that is, Silks, wearing Clothes, and Linen, and such kind of Wares
till they were moth-eaten. Their Gold and Silver, they let lie useless by them,
and as it were, canker and rust in their Chests; and their Garments they
suffered to be m^th-eaten, rather than they would employ those their riches to
good uses. And he tells them, this moth, and this rust will at the day of
Judgment be witnesses against them, and of their avarice and covetuousness. And
these witnesses shall be turned into tortures, after the last Judgment, when
they shall be punished in Hell, wherein their miserable souls, and bodies,
shall be preyed on by torments, as by fire; and those cutting reflections upon
the rust and moth, will be bitter and terrible, and gnaw upon their Consciences
with a sharp and bitter anguish. And that he may further intimate their folly,
he tells them, they had hoarded and heaped up wealth against the last days,
viz. those scattering and fatal days to the Jewish C^mmonwealth, which were now
approaching. All that treasure which with so much wrong to others, and
violation of their Consciences, they had heaped together, was but heaped up for
the Spoiler, and the violence of the Romans. And that he may further aggravate
their heinous guiltiness, he tells them, that they were not only uncharitable
to the poor, and backward to help them, but they were oppressors of them, and
that oppression of their poor servants, and laborers in defrauding them of
their wages, cried for vengeance against them, in the ears of the Lord of
Hosts; see Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. But this was not all, he tells them, of another
crime they were guilty of, viz. their sensuality, charging them for living like
luxurious Gluttons Enutrire corda, significat indulgere sibi, non modo ad
naturae satietatem, sed quantum fert cupiditas.
, making every day a Festival Ita vos pavistis quotidie sicut fieri soleb^t in
diebus solenniorum conviviorum post victimas (...). Grot.

Ut in die festo in quo s^lent mactari victimae in epulum. Vatabl.


, or a day of sl^ughter, wherein many Beasts were killed for Sacrifice and
Food, and a great part of which was reserved for the use of the worshipper,
which he was to carry home, and eat with his friends; see Prove. 17.1. Prove.
7.14. Lastly, He reproves them, for their tyrannical and oppressing cruelty, in
procuring, by their power and authority, the condemnation and destruction of
the Just Taxatur hic crudelitas divitum in pauperes, quod eos in judicio inique
opprimerent. Quae oppressio Metaphorice mors dicitur, quod ut iis vitam
acerbissimam redderent. Justum autem vocat non Christum (justum (...)) ut
aliqui exponunt, sed pauperes innocents, justitiae addictos, per Enallagen
numeri usitatam, Isa. 3.11. 1 Timothy 1.9. ut in il o exemplo: Romanus praelio
victor. Gomar.
, they not resisting them, nor having any means to defend themselves against
their violence v. 6. Non resistitur vobis] i. e. lecistis pro arbitrio nec
quisquam vobis resistit.
. From Ver. 1, to 7.

13. Having thus showed, how the wicked rich men shall be punished for their
wickedness, and oppr^ssi^n; he c^mes now to comfort the poor faithful Brethren
that were oppressed by them, and to exhort them to exercise patience under
their sufferings, till Christ should come to execute vengeance on the obdurate
Jews in the destruction of their City J^h. 21.22. This he presses from the
examples of the husbandmans waiting for the fruit of the earth, and from his
patient expecting, in order to that, both the showers that come in the Seedtime
to fit the ground, and for those that come before Harvest, or Reaping, to plump
the Corn. So, he tells them, they should be patient, and encourage their
hearts, because that Coming of Christ before mentioned, was near at hand. He
further exhorts them, not ^nly to bear those injuries patiently, which they
received from wicked rich men, but those also which they suffered from diverse
of their Brethren, who together with them did profess the holy Faith. He
advises them, that they should not in a groaning (...).
manner require vengeance against them from the hand of God, but forgive them;
otherwise they had great reason to expect to be judged, and punished by Christ
the Judge, whose coming was so nigh, that they might as it were say, He was at
the gate. And that he may yet further persuade them to patience, he sets before
them, the example of the Prophets, who, though dear to God, and employed to
speak to the people from him, (and so might seem sheltred under the Buckler of
their special Commission), yet were exercised with many and sharp afflictions;
and therefore, why should they promise themselves freedom and exemption? He
assures them, that himself, and the other Apostles, did esteem and look upon
those, as blessed persons, who did patiently bear those trials and afflictions,
the Lord was pleas^d to exercise them with. And to confirm what he had said, he
sets before them the instance of Job, who having patiently endured very sore
afflictions, at last God mad^ a very gracious end with him, giving him double
to all that he had lost, Job 42.10. From whence it appears, that God is far
from despising us in our ^fflictions, and that he is a God of tender bowels and
compassions. From Ver. 7, to 12.

14. In the next place, he seriously dehorts them from rash and unnecessary
swearing, or swearing by Creatures, v. 12. (...)] Quae valde caveri volumus, ea
dicere solemus cavenda ante omnia.
which (it seems) was too common among the Jews at that time. He forbids them
to use any unlawful or unnecessary Oath; but in their ordinary converse, barely
to affirm, or deny, without adding any Oath thereto, l^st they bring upon
themselves the judgment (...). Alia exemplaria habent (...). Ne in simulationem
incidatis; quia multum utentes juramentis, multa mentiuntur. Receptissima
lectio est, (...), i. e. (...), ne in condemnationem incidatis. Treidl.
of God. Ver. 12.

15. He comes now to direct them, how to behave themselves, both in an
afflicted and in a prosperous condition, and especially in time of sickness. In
affliction, he tells them, their duty is prayer; in prosperity, their duty is
giving of thanks v. 13. (...)? is any merry? the effect is put for the state,
gladness for prosperity, which is wont to make the heart glad and merry.
, or singing to Gods praise. And when any of them are sick, he advises them, to
send for the Elders The term Elder is given to all the Offices and
Administrations in the Church, from the Apostle to the Deacon.
of the Church to pray over them, and if they have the gift of healing Hoc
intelligendum est de iis Senioribus, qui temporario illo sancto dono e^ant
praediti, sicut praecipit Christus, Mat. 10.8. infirmos curate; and Apostoli
paruerunt, Mar. 6 13. and unxerunt oleo multos infirmos, and curarunt, and 1
^or. 12.18. Posuit Deus in Ecclesia, primum Apostolos, etc. dona sanationum,
and v 30. Number omnes habent donum sanationum? q. d. minime. Gomar.
, (which at that time, was given to some Teachers and Elders, see 1 Cor.
12.9.), that they should anoint them with Oil Oleam apud Hebraeos divinam
gratiam significabat.
, calling upon the Name of Christ, who is the Author of all such miraculous
healing, see Act. 3.16. This gift our Savior was pleased should accompany the
preaching of his Gospel in those primitive times, for the confirmation of it;
but now it is ceased since the Gospel is sufficiently confirmed. He further
tells them, that the prayer thus made to the Lord, by the Elders, and by the
sick person, proceeding out of a true Faith, shall be a means of saving, and
recovering the sick person from that distemper, except when it pleases God
otherwise to order it, for his own glory, and the good of the sick person. He
further adds, that if any special sin has drawn down this disease upon this
sick person, it shall, upon the earnest prayers of the Elders, and the
Repentance, and Faith of the sick person, be remitted; so that his disease
shall be removed. Therefore he advises them, in such cases, to confess their
sins one to another, that they might more particularly, and pertin^ntly pray
one for another, mutually succouring one another by their counsel, and prayers,
under the wounds and burdens of Conscience, that so both the wounds of their
Consciences, and the maladies of their bodies may be healed. And for their
encouragement, he tells them, that the effectual fervent (...).
prayer of a righteous man avails much, that is, the prayer wrought, and
excited in him by the Spirit of God, and which proceeds from the vehemence of
an earnest spirit, and fervent affections. This he further proves to them, by
instancing in Elias, who was a man subject to like passions with us; and if he
obtained so much of God by prayer, that he shut and opened the Heavens It Is
true we have no such thing in the History (which we have at large, 1 King. 17.
and 18. ch.) that he prayed it might not rain. The Scripture only expresses,
that he foretold a drought. But it seems, the worship of Baal being every where
received in that kingdom, extorted from that good man, (so full of zeal for
God), an earnest prayer to the Lord for drought, as a punishment upon that
wicked people: by which judgment the people being corrected, he prayed again
^or rain, and obtained it, 1 King. 18.42. For it is usual in Scripture to give
us the substance of an history in one place, and in another the circumstances
of it. See 2 Timothy 3.8. Psalm. 105:11. Heb. 12, 21.
, that is, the Clouds, [see Luc. 4.25. Deuteronomy. 11.17.], surely our fervent
prayers shall not be in vain. From Ver. 13, to 19.

Lastly, From Prayer, he passes to another Christian office, viz. Admonition,
exhorting them, to do what they can to reduce and convert an erring Brother,
viz that errs either in Faith or Manners; whereby they will be instruments in
Gods hand of saving a soul from eternal death; and procure that God may cover
and hide his sins, that is, remove them out of the sight of his justice Peccata
sic velantur ut in judicio non revelentur.
, and not impute them to his condemnation. From Ver. 19, to the end.

SECT. VI.
THE Philippians about this time, send Epaphroditus, one of their Teachers, to
Rome, to visit Paul, and to carry him some moneys which they had gathered for
his maintenance. He being come, joined himself to the Apostle, both as an
Helper, and a fellow-Soldier in the cause of Christ. Whilst he was there, he
fell into a grievous sickness, so that he was nigh unto death. See Philip.
2.25, 26, 27, 30. and Philip. 4.10, 14, 18.

SECT. VII.
PAVL being now aged, and still a Prisoner, converts, and gains to Christ,
Onesimus, a Servant that had run away from his Master Philemon, at Colosse. By
which Onesimus, he writes an Epistle to Philemon at Colosse, a City not far
from Laodicea in Phrygia.

The occasion of the Epistle was this. Philemon, one of the Colossian Pastors,
had a Servant, ( Onesimus by name), who not abiding his Masters service any
longer, watched his time, and ran away; and as it seems, did not run away
empty, but also purloined something. Having run up and down from place to
place, at last, by the special providence of God, he comes to Rome, where now
Paul was a Prisoner for Christ, and preached the Gospel in bonds. Among other
Fish, that that great Fisher of men caught, with the spreading Net of the
Gospel, this poor fugitive was one; who being converted, and brought to a
saving-knowledg of Christ, he for some time ministered to Paul in Prison. But
the Apostle, because he was another man's servant, (and particularly, his dear
friend Philemon's), and of right belonged to him, being his lawful possession,
and as it were his money, (as the Law speaks, Exodus 21.21.), he would not detain
him from him, without his free consent. He therefore sends him back to his
Master, earnestly desiring him to pardon him, and to receive him into favor
again. And because the Holy Ghost in this matter gives a remarkable instance of
Gods free grace to sinners; and intimates our duty toward those that are
penitent, therefore, for the perpetual edification of the Church, he would have
this be received among the other Canonical Epistles.

In the Epistle there are three parts, The Epistle to Philemon.


1. The Preface. 2. The Matter of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. IN the Preface, the Apostle joins his Brother Timothy with him, as one He
that concurred with him in his request to Philemon.

He also salutes Apphia, (probably the Wife of Philemon); and Archippus, one of
the Pastors of the Church, [Col. 4.17.], whom he calls, his fellow-Soldier in
the spiritual warfare of the Gospel. He salutes also the Saints in Philemon's
Family. To all these, he wishes abundance of grace and peace from God the
Father, the Fountain of all Blessings; and from Jesus the Mediator, who is the
Conduit-pipe, by whom they are conveyed. And in the first place, he tells them,
how he rejoiced and blessed God for the report he heard of his Faith in Christ,
and love to all his Saints; and he daily prayed for him, that his liberality,
and readiness to communicate to such as are in want, being a fruit of his
Faith, and springing from it, might be an effectual means to induce others to
take notice of, and acknowledge (to the praise of God) those good things that
were in him, and his Family; namely, their kindness and love toward Christ
(...).
, and his Members. And he assures him, he was much comforted by the report of
that great Love and Charity of his, whereby the bowels of the poor Saints were
refreshed. From Ver. 1, to 8.

2. He comes to the Matter of the Epistle, in which he requests Philemon to
take Onesimus his fugitive. Servant into savor again; whom he had, during his
imprisonment, through the assistance of grace, converted to Christ. He tells
him, that though he might by virtue of his Apostleship received from Christ,
injoin him, and other Christians, what he judged convenient; yet he rather
chose to request this of him, upon the score of love; and be doubted not, but
that he would do that for Paul now aged, and in bonds for Christ, which he
underst^od would be acceptable unto him. He entreats him therefore, to receive
Onesimus again, whom (since his conversion) he loved as if he were his own Son.
I acknowledge, says he, that formerly, Onesimus was not Onesimus, that is,
profitable to thee, as his name signifies; but now he will approve himself a
useful and diligent servant to thee, as he has been to me. Therefore I have
sent him back again to thee, and entreat thee to receive him, as my own bowels,
that is, to entertain him with all kindness, as one very dearly beloved by me.
Indeed I would gladly have kept him here still with me, that he might have done
all those good offices and services for me, (while I am here in Prison for the
cause of Christ), which I know thou would willingly do, if thou were here.
But without thy consent I would not do it, that thy kindness in aff^rding him
to me, may be perfectly free, and not, as it were, extorted from thee. And for
his leaving of thee so injuriously, thou ought to pass that over, because
there may come great advantage to thee thereby. For it seems, he was by the
speci^l providence of God permitted thus to run away from thee, for a little
while that by the conversion wrought on him, (to which his flight gave
occasion), he might be an useful Servant to thee afterward, all his life along
(...) ita hic dictum quomodo apud Horatium serviet aeternum.
. Receive him therefore now, not as a Servant only, but more than so, receive
him as a faithful Brother in Christ, and as one that is very dear to me, and
therefore he ought to be much more so to thee, and that not only in respect of
those outward and bodily services which he may perform for thee, but because he
believes in Christ. If therefore thou account me thy companion in the Faith,
and in the ministry of the Word; deny me not this request, but receive Onesimus
as thou w^uldst do my self, if I should come unto thee. If thou have sustained
any loss by him, or if he owes thee any thing, put that on my account. I
hereby engage to th^e, under my own hand, that I will satisfy thee for it. Yet
I may tell thee, th u ow^st more to me (being converted by my Ministry) than
all this amounts to; I say, thou owe to me (under God) thy conversion, and so
ought to look upon me as a prime instrument of thy eternal well-being, and
salvation. Therefore (dear Brother) let me obtain this kindness from thee (for
the Lords sake), which will much rejoice me; yea indeed, in a matter so
agreeable to the mind of the Lord, refuse not to refresh my bowels, and comfort
me. I have written to thee, being confident thou will hearken to me, and grant
me my request, yea that thou will show more favor to Onesimus than I have
desired of thee.

To Conclude, I am in hope Spes Pauli hoc loco non niti^^ revelatione divina,
sed precibu^ ^idelium; quarum exauditionis, eventus probabilis quidem erat, sed
incertus. vi^. Phil. 2.24. Gomarus.
, that through your prayers, and the intercessi^ns of other Christians for me,
I shall be d^livered out of these bonds, and shall be giv^n t^ y^u again.
Therefore prepare me a lodging against that time. My Companions here salute
thee. The grace of Jesus Christ (both as to the effects, and sense of it)
reside in your souls and spirits See Gal. 6.16.
. Amen. From Ver. 18, to the end.

SECT. VIII.
EPaphroditus having now recovered his health, and being to return to the
Philippians, by him Paul in his own and Timothy's name writes an Epistle to
them. For having understood by Epaphroditus their spiritual state and
condition, he thought fit to write to them, (which he does in a most
affectionate manner).

1. To confirm them in the Faith, and to prevent their being offended at his
sufferings for the Gospel.

2. To encourage them to walk worthy of the Gospel, especially in unity, and
lowliness of mind.

3. To warn them against Seducers who mingled works with Faith in the matter of
Justification.

4. To quicken them to diverse Christian duties.

And Lastly, To Testify his exceeding thankfulness to them for the relief they
had now sent him.

In the Epistle there are there three parts, ^he Epistle to the Philippians.


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. IN the Preface, He joins Timothy with him in this his address, because he
was his Companion, when he came formerly to them, and had assisted in the
instructing of them, and was a person much valued by them. He tells them, that
they both sent this Epistle to all the Saints that composed the Church at
Philippi, (who were called to believe in Christ, and by their union with him
derived grace and holiness from him), and in particular to the Pastors and
Overseers of their Church, and to the Deacons Potest bifariam accipi hoc nomen
vel pro Ministris and curatoribus Pauperum, vel pro Senioribus qui
constituebantur ad mores regendos. Calv in loc.
, that is, such who being joined to the Pastors were to inspect the manners of
the Church Members, and to serve the Church in taking care of the poor. To all
these he wishes abundance of grace and peace, from God the Father, who is the
Fountain and Source of all grace and spiritual blessings, and from Jesus Christ
the Mediator, by whose merits and intercession we obtain them. Ver. 1, 2.

2. He comes to the body of the Epistle, wherein in the first place, that he
might show, how dear they were unto him, he informs them, that when ever they
came to his remembrance, especially in prayer, he could not but bless God for
them, and make mention of them with joy. The reasons of which were,

1. That they had been brought to a participation of the Gospel, (whereby they
were brought into fellowship with Christ and his Church), and they had been
constant in the profession of it from the first day of their vocation even
until now. 2. Because he was confident, that God who had begun a work ^f grace
in them would carry it on, and perfect it more and more until the day Usque in
diem mortis vestrae, qua a Christo visitabimini, and particulare judicium
sus^inebitis. Dionys. Carthusianus in loc.
wherein Christ shall come, and take them to himself out of this world. 3. He
shows, that it was but reasonable, that he should have this good opinion and
hope of them, for he had them in his heart, and remembered ^abere in cord hoc
loco significat habere in memoria. A Lap.
them both in his bonds, and all his suffering, for the defense and maintenance
of the Gospel, as those that were partakers of the same grace bestowed on
himself, and as those that were ready to suffer fore Christ as he was Ego
opinor sensum esse, Eum ipsos ubique etiam in vinc^lis suis, totaque illa
confessione, in animo insculptos habere, ut pote suos consortes gratiae
Christi, aut confratres in Christo. Flac. Illyr.
: And therefore he solemnly protests, that he bears a most entire love (...)
Phavorin. Sic 2 Cor. 9.14. (...) Beza vertit, maximo am^re vos complecten^ium.

Vis^era vocat affectum animi: addid^ J^su Christi ut declaret hunc affectum
esse pietatis, non humanum. Erasm.

In i e. instar viscerum h. e. amoris visceralis Jesu Christi.


and affection to them, wrought in him by Christ, and such as is like unto that
(as to its fervency and sincerity) which Christ Jesus himself bears to those
that are his members. And he earnestly prays that their love to God, and to one
another, may more and more abound, together with a more full knowledge of
spiritual things, and a sense (...) est experientia interior animae, se^
interius Spiritus Sancti testimonium de gratia and adoptionem ad salutem, de
quo Romans 5.1, 5. etc. 8.16, 17. Glass.
and taste of Gods love in Christ toward themselves. And that they may be
endued with a spirit of discerning, and be able to try things that differ, and
discern truth from error, good from evil, and may choose and approve that which
is most excellent; and further, that they may be sincere and walk
inoffensively, till the day of Christ, in which he shall take them to himself
out of this world. And Lastly, that they may be full of good works, and may
bring forth all those fruits of righteousness, which spring from Faith in
Christ, and tend to the glory of God, as their main aim and end. From Ver. 3,
to Ver. 12.

3. He removes the scandal they might take at his present sufferings, which he
shows, tended rather to the furtherance than the hinderance of the Gospel.

For first, his bonds for Christ were famous in Nero's Court, and several other
places in and near Rome, and people inquiring into the cause of his sufferings
did learn somewhat of Christ and the Gospel by that means.

2. Many of the Brethren in the Ministry of Christ, having heard of his
constancy under his sufferings, were encouraged to shake off all fear, and to
preach Christ more boldly than ever. It Is true, he acknowledges, that some did
preach Christ out of a spirit of envy P obabile est, hos contentiosos
praedicatores fuisse Christi^nos oriundos ex Judaeis, sed ambitiosos
mercenarios, improbos, utpote qui Pauli aemuli ex evangelio non illud quam suam
gloriam and lucrum quaerebant. ^ales suerunt illi contra quos agit Paulus, 2
Cor. 11.
against him, envying the success God gave to his ministry, and endeavored to
get that glory to themselves, and to draw people from approving him, to applaud
them; supposing to gall and grieve him thereby. And some preached Christ out of
a pious in^ent, desi^ing sincerely to maintain, and confirm what he had
preached, and out of true love to Christ, and to himself his prisoner, knowing
that Christ had appointed him an Apostle, and that for the defense of the
Gospel he now lay in prison. Yet notwithstanding by both ways, Christ was
preached and made known; by some in pretense, by others in truth, and that was
it which comforted him and made him rejoice.

3. These afflictions he met with, he was confident would tend to the
furtherance of his salvation, through the help of their prayers, and the supply
of grace from the Spirit of Christ. And (he tells them) he trusts, that
according to his former expectation and hope, no terror should ever make him
ashamed to own the truth of Christ, but with all boldness he should avow it,
and that Christ should be magnified by him in the body, whether his life be
further prolonged, or ended by martyrdom. For the case stood thus with him, If
he lived, Christ should be the scope of his life, and he intended to live to
his service; if he dyed, death would be an unspeakable advantage t^ him Mihi
enim Christus est, and in vita and in morte, lucrum: ut sit ellipsis vocis
(...) pro (...), and (...).
but if he lived longer in this mortal body, he foresaw this would be the fruit
of his labors, viz. The gaining of Souls to Christ. Yet what to choose he knew
not. For he was in a straight, whether he should desire to dye (...) pro (...),
seu (...), dissolvi, ut vulg. vertit. Sed potest activa significatio commode
retineri. Cupio (...) migrare ad Christum.
, and be with Christ, which was b^tter for him; or to live longer, which was
more needful for them. And being satisfied of the great need they had of him,
and the benefit they might reap from his life, he tells them, that this is the
thing that he is sure he desires; and hopes, and upon probable conjecture was
confident (...). Scio me hoc sperare.
of, that he should yet be permitted to live, and to pass some part of his life
among them, for the furtherance of their Faith, and augmentation of their joy
and comfort, that they might have more abundant matter of rejoicing in Christ,
having received a new proof of his power, and good will toward them, in
delivering him, their Apopostle, from death, and sending him to them again.
From Verse. 12, to 27.

4. He exhorts them, that whatever should befall him, they would mind their
duty, and behave themselves as becomes the Gospel, ordering their conversation
according to the Precepts of Christ, and jointly contending the best they can,
with p^rf^ct unity, and joint stedfastness of mind, to maintain and defend the
Faith of Christ, which would be matter of great joy to him, whether he came and
saw it, (as he hoped he should), or only heard of it, being absent. And
whatever opposition or persecutions they met with in this course, he bids them
not suffer themselves to be discouraged or affrighted at them, seeing they were
great signs that their adversaries (who brought them upon them) were in the way
of perditi^n, and that they who suffered such things patiently for Christ's
sake, and the G^spel, were in the way of salvation; they portended destruction
to their adversaries, but through Gods gracious disposing, they should promote
their salvation.

And this should further encourage them, that as grace to believe in Christ, so
also grace to suffer courageously for him and his truth, was a part of Christ's
purchase for them, and for his sake given unto them: And hereby they had
communion and co-partnership with him (their Apostle) in afflictions, who
suffered many hard things at Philippi, and elsewhere, as they themselves had
seen, and at this present suffered bonds at Rome. From Ver. 27, to the end.

5. He comes now to exhort these Philippians to unity and concord among
themselves; and that he might more effectually persuade them thereunto, he
conjures them that if ever they had found any consolation in Christ, if any
comf^rt of mutual love, if any fellowship with God by the communication of the
graces of his Spirit, if they had any pity or compassion on him, a Prisoner for
Christ; He ^ntreats and obtests them by all these, and as they would give proof
of all th^se, that to all the other matter of rejoicing which he had concerning
them, they would add this also, (and so make his joy complete), namely, to live
in unity among themselves, having as it were the same mind and judgment, the
same will and affections, and minding and carrying on the same designs. He
exh^rts them, not to do any thing out of opposition or contention one against
another, nor out of vain glory or ambition; but to carry themselves with all
humility and lowliness of mind, as if they had every one a better opinion of
another wisdom, and goodness than of his own; and to this end they should not
look so intently on those gifts and abilities which they discern in themselves,
but withal, and much rather, should consider the gifts and abilities of others
more eminent than themselves. And if they would but esteem others more, and
themselves less; this would tend to frame their minds to humility. And that he
might press them effectually to the practice of this virtue, he sets before
them the^ example of Christ, who being from all eternity true God, and being in
the form, that is, having the form or essence of God, and the natural
properties of the Deity, so that he thought it no encroachment or usurpation to
reckon himself in equality with his Father, (the same glory and majesty justly
belonging to him), yet did He empty himself of that divine glory, which before
he had, not by ceasing to be what he was, but by assuming som^thing to himself
which before he had not, to wit, the humane Nature. In which respect, being n^w
God m^n and M^diator, he is less than the Father, Joh. 14.28. And therefore on
this account he emptied himself, and divested himself of the Robes of his
Majesty, and from being Lord of all, he l^ssened and humbled himself to the
c^nditi^n of an ordinary man, yea of a servant; and He was made in the likeness
of men, that is, like to one of us in the essential parts of humane Nature, to
wit, of Soul and Body; and was found in fashion as a man, the truth and reality
of his humane Nature being evidently known unto those who did converse with
him, by the fashion and proportion of his body, and the whole strain of his
carriage and actions. And besides the humbling himself thus l^w in his
incarnation, he humbled himself yet lower afterward, even to suffer the vilest
and most c^u^l death, (which was in use among the Romans, and inflicted only on
their Slaves), to wit, the death of the Cross. And because he humbled himself
so low, G^d has highly exalted him in his Resurrection, Ascension, and placing
^im at his right hand in Heaven; and has given him a Name, that is, has
exalted him to a Dignity which is above all other Names and Dignities, to wit,
he has made him King and Head of his Church, and given him all power in Heaven
and Earth, and installed him in the possessi^n and administr^tion of his
heavenly Kingdom, (wherein his divine Majesty, which had been eclips^d before,
does now shine forth in full glory), and has appointed that the divine honor,
due to God only, should be given to him, (compare Isa 45.23 with Romans 14.10,
11.), and that all reasonable Creatures, in whatsoever place of the created
World they be, whether in Heaven, E^rth Ut per terrestres homines in terra,
vivi; sic per subterraneos, mortui, qui in terra conditi sunt, intelliguntur.
Alii per subterraneos, Daemones intelligunt, quod Infernus illis potissimum
puniendis sit destinatus. Mat. 25.41. unde ab ejus ingressu adeo abhorrent,
Luc. 8.31. Gomar.
, or Hell; yea and all men which are dead and in the graves, should at the
Resurrection, and day of Judgment, worship him as the true God, and express and
testify their subjection to him, (some willingly, others by constraint), when
they come to stand at his Tribunal, to receive their doom; and that all Nations
and people should confess Christ crucified to be Lord and Judge of the World,
acknowledging his dominion and sovereignty, and that to the honor of the
Father, who has sent him, and who will be glorified in the glory of his Son.
Therefore seeing Christ thus humbled himself, to make peace for lost man with
God, and afterward was highly exalted by God, and crowned with glory; so
proportionably may they expect to be exalted and rewarded by God, if they
humble themselves, that they may maintain and preserve the Churches peace and
concord. From Ver. 1, to 12.

6. He exhorts them, that they would still show themselves obedient to his
Precepts and not only as they had done v. 12. Sicut semper obedistis] semper
scil. a conversione
when he was present with them, but now much more in his absence, that it may
appear, that love to the truths of Christ swayed them, and not any other
respect. And particularly, he exhorts them, to work out their own salvation
with fear and tremb^ing, that is, carefully and diligently to practice all
those means that God has appointed for the accomplishing their salvation,
shaking off security, and carnal confidence, and not trusting in their own
strength and power, but humbly imploring the assistance of Gods grace. For it is
he alone who works in us both to will that which is good, and enabl^s us to
perform it. And because the nature of man, (as it is now corrupt) is prone t^
murmur against the providence of God, and to dispute his will and command, H^
advises t^^m, to do all their actions so as those that do acquiesce in the
good will of G^d, and to take heed of h^t and eager disputings among themselves
concerning things that do not concern the vitals of Religion. And they should
be the more careful to carry themselves thus, that they may approve themselves
blameless and harmless, walking as the Children of God in a corrupt age, among
whom they should shine as lights in the World; holding forth, in their
profession and practice, the way to eternal life revealed in the Gospel, that
those Pagans among whom they lived, might fall in love with it; and that he
himself may have cause of r^joicing in their salvation, at the day of Judgment,
because his labors under God had so much promoted it. And he assures them,
that their eternal Salvation was a thing so earnestly, and so affectionately
desired by him, that if, as in the Law the Wine was poured out on the
Sacrifice, so his Blood (like Wine) should be poured out as an additional
offering to confirm their Faith, (whom he had by his preaching and ministry
brought to consecrate and offer up themselves as a living Sacrifice to God); he
would rejoice therein for their sakes, and of all the faithful to whom the
fruit of his death should redound; and he desires them to rejoice with him,
that he was so minded. From Ver. 12, to 19.

7. He declares his purpose of sending Timothy to them to know their state, as
soon as he shall see how it will go with himself. For he expected a comfortable
account of them by him, at his return. He tells them, he had no man with him,
who might be compared with him in affection to them, or who did more sincerely
regard their spiritual good. For others (as it seems) that were at this present
at Rome, refused to undertake so long and tedious a journey; but Timothy was
willing to undertake it, and whilst others v. 21. Vox Omnes non generatim, and
simpliciter de singulis, sed synecdochice de plerisque; and studium illud sua
quaerendi non absolute sed comparate cum Timothei sinceritate and Zelo,
accipiendum est.
minded their own private concerns, He minded the advancement of the Interest
of Christ. And he tells them, that they themselves have had great proofs of his
sincerity when he was with them, and know how in the preaching of the Gospel he
had rendered to him (their Apostle) all the service and assistance he could, and
that with like affection as a good Son renders to his Father. And he tells
them, that he not only intended to send Timothy to them, but hoped (through the
goodness of God) to be at liberty shortly, and to come to them himself. However
in the mean time he thought it needful to return unto them Epaphroditus their
Pastor who has been his partner in lab^ur and danger, since they had sent him
to him, to relieve him in his necessities. And one reason why he sent him back
was, because of his great pastoral affection unto them. He being exceedingly
disquieted to think, what sorrow the report of his sickness had brought unto
them: and he sent him the rather, that they might be comforted in seeing him
recovered, who had been so nigh unto death. But he tells them, God showed much
mercy to Epaphroditus in recovering of him, and not to him only, but to himself
(their Apostle) also, in not adding one grief to another, viz. Epaphroditus's
death, to his imprisonment. He sent him also the more readily, that his own
trouble might be somewhat removed, which accrued to him on consideration, that
their Minister, (whose company they so much desired) had been so long detained
from them on his account. He exhorts them therefore to receive him with such an
affection as they ought to express toward the faithful Servants of the Lord v.
29. In Domino] i. e. Propter Dominum, ac secundum Domini verbum, cum omni
gaudio.
, and to give all due honor and respect unto him, and to all such Ministers as
he was, because he had hazzarded his life for the service of Christ, being less
careful of himself, than of the Apostles welfare, and because he had done what
lay in him that nothing necessary should be wanting to him; and so did that,
which they themselves by reason of their absence, and far distance, were not
able to do. From Ver. 19, to the end.

8. Intending now to warn them to beware of those false Teachers, who in the
point of justification mingled the righteousness of works with that which is by
Faith in Christ; he first exhorts them, to rejoice in Christ Jesus as the only
Author and Purchaser of our Peace; and that they would joyfully rely upon his
Righteousness, Merit, and Intercession, and not seek for any other way of
Salvation out of him. He excuses himself for inculcating the same instructions
so often, seeing it was safe and convenient for them that he should so do; for
he could not too often press them to close with Christ, and the Doctrine of his
all sufficient Righteousness and Merit. He comes then directly to warn them to
beware of these false Apostles, whom he calls Dogs, (for their barking against
the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, and the faithful Preachers of it), and
evil-Workers, (because under pretense of building up the Church, they did what
in them lay to destroy it, and were besides (as it seems) men of wicked lives).
He calls them also the Concision, alluding to Circumcision, whereof they gave
out themselves to be Patrons and Defenders, and called themselves by it; but he
takes that name from them, and calls them, the Concision; as if he should say,
the D^stroyers and Renters of the Church. He shows, that not they, but himself,
and other true Believers, had right to that Title of Circumcision, they only
having the thing signified thereby. For first, They worshipped God with the
inward spiritual affections of a renewed heart. 2. They trusted in Christ Jesus
alone, as the Substance of all the Types and Shaddows in the Old Testament, and
rejoiced in him, as the only and all-sufficient Savior of mankind. 3. They
renounced confidence in any outward Privilege, (such as the Circumcision of the
flesh was), or in any thing else besides Christ. From Ver. 1, to 4.

9. Intending to demonstrate the vanity of relying upon any thing besides
Christ for Justification; he shows, he had as much to boast of upon the
account of outward Privileges (such as the Circumcision of the flesh), as any
of those false Teachers had, if he had found it safe to venture his Salvation
on such a bottom. He was circumcised the eighth day after his birth, as Isaac
and his posterity were. He was of the Stock of Israel, and so no Proselyte, or
Convert from among the Gentiles. He was of the Tribe of Benjamin, and so came
of that Tribe which with the Tribe of Judah clave to the house of David, and
the true worship of God at Jerusalem, after the revolt of the Ten Tribes; and
if he had a mind to speak of the ancientness and nobility of his Stock; he
might say, he was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, descended by both his Parents of
Abraham's Race, (called the Hebrew, Genesis 14.13), and from Eb^r, of whom the Jews
were called Ebrews, who lived before the confusion of Tongues at Babel, Genesis 14
13, 20, 21, 25. And he was not an ordinary Ebrew or Jew neither, but of the
strictest Sect among them, even a Pharisee, which Sect were for a severer
interpretation, and stricter observation of the Law than the rest of the Jews,
Act. 26.5. And as a signal Testimony of his great zeal to the Law, and the
Jewish Religion, he had been a violent Persecutor of the Christian Church, whom
he looked upon as enemies thereto. And lastly, As to his personal obedience and
observance of the Law, he was able to say as much as another, his Conversation
having been so blameless before men, that it could not be justly taxed by them.
But however when he was in his unconverted state, he had relied on these things
for Salvation, and counted them great advantages in order thereunto, yet now
being savingly enlightened, he saw that nothing could redound to him by trusting
in them, but real hurt and damage, and therefore he had taken his confidence
off from them, and wholly placed it on Christ; yea he did not only esteem them
so when he was first converted, but did so still. For he could not but account
all such things by which men seek salvation out of Christ, detrimental and
hurtful, so far as they keep them from closing with him. He could not but
account them l^ss, not only because they can not effect that, for which men do
rely upon them; but because their high esteem of them, and confidence in them,
hinders them from embracing Christ. He tells them, therefore that he
undervalued and disesteem'd them all, in comparison of that excellent knowledge
of Christ, which draws the heart effectually to close with him, and by a lively
Faith and affiance to rely on him, and to take him for its Lord and Savior.
And for this blessed Saviors sake, he tells them, it was, that he had forsak^n
Friends, Country, and all things that could be dear to him in this World, when
he first betook himself to the preaching of the Gospel, and still counted them
as dung, in comparison of gaining the favor of Christ, and of being found at
the day of Judgment ingrafted into him by Faith, and a real member of him, and
one that did not rely on his own righteousness, (such as m^n endeavor to
acquire by the observation of the Commandments of the Law), but on that
righteousness which men are made partakers of by Faith, when they believe in
Christ, and which results from his active and passive obedience, and which God
freely and graciously imputes to all true Believers for their Justification.
And he intimates, how easily he could bear those forementioned l sses for an
experimental knowledge and sense of Christ's grace working in him; particularly,
that he might feel in himself, that power whereby Christ was raised from death
to life; raising him daily more and more to newness of life, and that he might
taste the comfort that arises from fellowship with him in his sufferings,
suffering for him and with him in his mystical Body, (Col. 1 24.), being made
thereby conformable to his death, by mortifying inward corruptions, and bearing
the Cross for him. And he tells them, he shall not grudg at that, if he may by
any means (though with some difficulty), attain unto the resurrection of the
dead a Metonymy of the Subject for the Adjunct.
, that is, unto that perfection of holiness, which accompanies and attends the
resurrection of the just, 1 These. 4.14. He acknowledges he had not as yet
attained to that degree of holiness, nor looked upon himself as already
perfect, or as one that had already won the prize and rich reward, which is
given at the end of the race. But he was in his Christian race, and pursued
after that prize with great desire and diligence, and hoped assuredly to obtain
it, not by his own strength, but by the assistance of Christ, who for that end
laid hold on him, (as he was in the way going to Damascus to persecute the
Christians), and effectually called and converted him, and brought him into the
way of Salvation. He says again, that he dare not affirm, that he had attained
to the state of perfection, but he was as the Racer running his race, not
casting his eye back, or being satisfied with what he had done, or with so much
of the way as he had overcome, but stretching as hard as he could to get the
goal, or end of the race, that so he may obtain the prize, viz. the prize of
eternal Glory, which shall be given to them to whom God vouchsafes that high
favor effectually to call them to a participation of the merits and
righteousness of his Son Jesus Christ. From Ver. 4; to 15.

10. He exhorts those who were more grown Christians, (and being compared with
others less knowing, might be called perfect (...)] appellat in rebus divinis
optime versatos, ut 1 Cor. 2.6. and 14.20.
), to agree, and be alike minded in his proposed Doctrine, namely, to renounce
all carnal confidences, and to rest in Christ's Righteousness alone, and by
virtue derived from him, to labor to grow daily more and more in grace and
holiness. And if any among them, being seduced by false Teachers, were of a
contrary mind in some things, (as namely, that the Ceremonial Law was not
wholly abr^gated, etc.), he gives ground of hope Loquitur pro spe quam ex
priore ipsorum pietate conceperat. Sic and Gal. 5.10.
, that God (who had brought them to the knowledge of the Gospel) would reclaim
them from this their error, and discover unto them the danger of it. However he
exhorts all lovers of truth and peace among them to an orderly walking,
according to the rule of the Scriptures, in those things wherein they were
agreed, preserving mutual love, and avoiding further rents and divisions. He
exhorts them also, to be followers of him, and to observe those that did so,
taking them for their patterns and examples. For he tells them, there were many
false Teachers who walked otherwise, whose example was not to be followed; of
whom he had often warned them, and could not but now again (though with grief
of heart) acquaint them, that by their pressing, besides Faith in Christ, the
observation of the Levitical Ceremonies, and the works of the Law, as necessary
to Salvation, they undermined the Doctrine of the Cross, and really opposed the
virtue, power, and merit of Christ's passion, [see Gal. 5.2.]. But the end of
those Impostors, without repentance, he shows, will be very sad, who minded
nothing so much as pleasing their sensual appetites Quorum Deus venter] Id pro
Deo habemus cujus causa omnia facimus. Vid. Ephesians. 5.5.
, boasting of those things whereof they ought to be ashamed, ( viz. their
corrupting the Gospel), and savouring only earthly things. But as for himself,
and those that followed his example, their carriage was far different. For our
conversation (says he) is in Heaven, where Christ our Lord and Head is; whom we
expect to come one day from thence, to our unspeakable comfort; and who will
change our vile Bodies v. 21. Corpus per corpora sing. per plur.
, and make them like to his own glorious Body; which change he will effect by
that divine and almighty power of his, whereby he will destroy death, and the
grave, and can do all things possible to divine omnipotency; and theref^re can
and will bring about the resurrection and glorious change of our Bodies. From
Ver. 15, to the end.

11. He comes now, toward the close of his Epistle, to exhort them to the
practice 1. having testified how affectionately he loved them, and how much he
desired and longed after their spiritual welfare, (and how their Faith and
Conversion was matter of great joy and comfort unto him, yea the crown and
honor of his Ministry); he exhorts them, (in the general), to continue and
stand fast in the Doctrine of Christ, according as he had taught them.

2. He particularly exhorts Euodias and Syntyche, two eminent women in that
Church, (who, as it seems, in some matters relating to Religion disagreed), to
concord and agreement between themselves, it being a thing very agreeable to
the will of the Lord. And he entreats one that was sometime his fellow laborer
in that Church, to help those forementioned women to accord their difference,
and to agree; and the rather because they had been useful to him, (in their
places), whilst he was preaching the Gospel, and planting a Church there See
Act. 18.26. Romans 16.3.
; as Clement, and some other private Christians had also been, whom he judged
to be truly gracious persons, and such as were to be reckoned in the number of
Gods Elect Quod dicit nomina illorum esse Scripta in libro vitae, metaphora est
a rebus humanis ad Deum translata qua significatur illos computari inter filios
Dei, and haeredes vitae aeternae.
, they giving such evident signs and testimonies thereof.

3. He exhorts them, To rejoice in Christ at all times, and in all conditions,
raising up their hearts to a due consideration of his excellencies and
benefits, and feeding upon the sense and sweetness of them. For a Believer has
always ground of rejoicing in Christ, though not in the world, nor in himself.

4. He exhorts them, To exercise moderation, equity, and mildness, in their
dealings with all men, because the Lord is nigh and present to judge all our
actions, and his coming to judgment is not far off, at which time he will
render to every one according to their works.

5. He exhorts them, To beware of anxious, heart-cutting, distrustful care
about worldly things, or the success of what they undertake in their lawful
callings; and for prevention of that, to disburden all their cares and troubles
into the bosom of the Lord, by humble prayer, not forgetting also to praise him
for all his benefits. And that, he tells them, is the way to have that sweet
peace, which is wrought by the Spirit of God, to dwell in their hearts, (which
none can conceive who have not experienced and felt, and those who have, cannot
sufficiently express it), which will (through the assistance of Christ) guard
and keep them from being overcome with inordinate cares, or such passions as
the apprehe^sion of l^sses and injuries usually stir up in men.

6. He exhorts them, that whatever things had truth, candor, and sincerity
shining in them; whatever things were honest, just, pure, and of good report;
whatever virtues, or praiseworthy qualities they observed among those, with
whom they conversed: they should seriously think of them, and propose them to
themselves, for their imitation.

And lastly, That all those things which he himself had by his Doctrine and
Life commended unto them, they should carefully observe and imitate, and so
they might expect, that the God of peace would be with them with his gracious
blessing. From Ver* 1, to 10.

12. He d^clares, how much he rejoiced, even with a motion of spiritual j^y
wrought in him by Christ, that their liberality toward him (which seemed to
have been for some time in the decay) had now revived and flourished again. But
he readily excuses their delay herein, which he assures himself proceeded, not
from want of love to him, but of an opportunity of sending to him. Yet he would
not have them think, that he rejoiced so much in their bounty toward him,
because he could not bear want, or a straight condition. For he had learned,
(being instructed by the Spirit of God), in whatever state he was therewith to
be content. He could contentedly bear a l^w condition: Yet the plenty their
liberality had furnished him with, he could mak^ use of to the glory of God. He
could do all those things, which consist in the exercise of Christian
moderation under a prosperous condition, and of patience and contentation under
an adverse condition, through Christ enabling of him. However they had done
well in sending him that supply by Epaphroditus, when he was in some straits,
and thereby testifying by their Christian c^mmiseration, that they shared with
him in his afflictions and sufferings for Christ. And he acknowledges, that
this was no new thing in them: For after he had finished his first preaching of
the Gospel among them, and was departing out of their Country, they were so
mindful of him as to send him contributions; and having received of him
spiritual things, they were willing to communicate to him some of their
temporals, which no other Church but they had th^n done. Nay, when he was at
Thessalonica, and since he came thence, more than once, they made a Collection,
and sent it to him Yet he would not have them think, that he thus commended
them, because he designed to draw something more from them, but he desired that
their Faith might he still more and more productive of such good fruits, as
liberality was; which God would recompense at the day of judgment, and the
benefit whereof would redound to themselves, though not of merit, yet of grace.
He tells them, that he had received all that they had sent him by Epaphroditus,
and the sum he acknowledges was large, and made him full and to abound, and
hereby they had done an acceptable service to God, and which under the Gospel
he accepts, and receives in the place both of Incense, and Sacrifice, which
were offered under the Law. And they will have no reason to repent of this
their liberality. For G^d who looks on it as given to him, is able and willing
to supply all their wants, and that not for any merit of theirs, but out of his
own rich and glorious grace, which he dispenses through the merits and
intercession of his Son Christ Jesus. Now unto this glorious God, who is the
Father of all true Believers in Christ, he desires all honor and glory may be
ascribed for ever and ever, Amen. From V^r. 10, to 21,

He concludes with Salutations, and particularly sends Salutations to them from
the Saints in Nero's house, some of his Servants, and Courtiers (it s^ems)
being Converts, and Christians. He shuts up all with his Apostolical
Benediction. From Ver. 21, to the end.

SECT. IX.
ABout this time, the Apostle, by Onesimus and Tychicus, sent also an Epistle
to the Colossions, whom he had never seen, [ Col. 2.1.], they having been
instructed in the Doctrine of Christ by Epaphras [Col. 1.7, 8.], whom they had
now sent to visit and comfort Paul, (as the Philippians had sent Epaphroditus),
who it seems was now become Paul's fellow-prisoner; see Philem. v. 23. The
Apostle understanding by Epaphras, how things went with them, and what was the
present state and condition of their Church, and how they were infested with
false Teachers of two sorts, viz. with some, who being converted out of Judaism
to embrace the Faith of Christ, sought to impose upon them Circumcision, and
certain Rites of the Ceremonial Law, abolished by Christ. And, 2ly, with
others, who being converted from Gentilism, yet obtruded upon them their
Philosophical Speculations with some of their Heathenish Practices, as
worshipping Angels, and other superstitious Observances, grounded only upon
humane Authority and Tradition: The Apostle therefore being desirous to
establish them in the true Doctrine of the Gospel, taught them by Epaphras,
against all impostures of false Teachers whatsoever, and to incite them to the
study and practice of Holiness, both in the general, and in the special duties
that concern the particular conditions of men, he writes this Epistle to them.

In the Epistle there are these three parts, The Epistle to (...) Colossians.


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface in which joining Timothy with him, (whom he calls his Brother
in the ministry of Christ), he directs this Epistle to the Saints and faithful,
who being implanted into Christ by Fiath), composed the Church at Colosse:
wishing them abundance of grace and peace from God the Father, the Fountain of
all blessings; and from Jesus Christ the Conduit-pipe, through whom they are
conveyed. And in the first place, he tells them, that himself and Timothy,
since they heard of their conversion, did give solemn thanks to God for it, and
for their Faith in Christ, and sincere love to all the Saints, and did remember
them continually in their prayers. And they rejoic^d that they persever'd in
that course, being thereunto moved by the h^ped-for reward v. 5. Spes hic
ponitur pro rebus speratis, quemadmodum Fides saepe capitur pro ipsis rebus
quae creduntur. Davenant.
of glory preserved for them in heaven, which was first made known unto them,
and the hope thereof wrought in them by the word of truth, that is, the Gospel.
Which Gospel was come unto them, (being preached to them by Epaphr^s), as the
same was preached by the Apostles in the most eminent plac^s of the World Totus
mundus, per Synecd. pro m^gn^ mundi part, pro celebe^timis provincii^ and
urbibus mundi.
, [see Romans 1.8 Mat. 24.14.], and it brought forth the good fruits of a holy
life among others, as it had done among them, ever since they came to have a
true and effectual sense and knowledge of the good will and grace of God, which
he has manifested and revealed therein And they ought to remember, that they
were brought to the knowledge of this G spel by Epaphras, who had faithfully
discharged his duty toward them, and also had given him an account of their
truly spiritual v. 8. Charitatem cujus author est Spiritus anctus, and quae
manat a cord Spirituali, i. e. renovato and regenerato. Dav.
, and Christian love, and affection unto h^mself. Having thus showed, how he
praised God for them, he mentions now how he prayed for them, viz that they
might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, and furnished with all wisdom
requisite for a clear discerning, and knowledge of all the mysteri^s of
Christianity, and with spiritual und^rst^nding or prudence, wrought in them by
the Spirit of G d, to order, and regulate their lives according to the rules of
it, Phil. 1.9. That their conversation might be such as is worthy of the Lord,
aiming in all things to please him Ut per omnia Deo pl^ceatis, verbis,
operibus, eti^m and opinionibus.
, being fruitful in good works, and growing more and more in the saving
knowl^dg of God. Lastly, he prays, that such a measure of heavenly strength may
be vouchsafed to them, out of the rich treasury of Gods glorious power, that
they may be able to bear any afflictions, or persecutions they shall meet with
in their Christian course, and that not only patiently, but cheerfully. From
Ver. 1, to 12.

2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle, and b i^g to enter upon a summary
declaration of the D ctrine of Salvation, he b gins with a solemn thanksgiving
to God the Father, who by regeneration, and savi g conversion, does make all
true Believers meet and fit to partake of Heaven, the bright, and glorious, and
joyful inheritance of the Saints. He fu^ther explains, How God does this,
namely, by drawing them (by effectual vocati^n) out of the corrupt state of
nature, and fr m under the rule of Satan the Prince of d^^kness (who rules by
sin in the Children of disobedience), and transl^ting them into a state of
grace, under the government of Christ. In whom they have redemption from sin,
Satan, and wrath, by virtue of a price paid by him to the Fathers justice, when
he suffered on the Cross; one principal part of which redemption, is the
remission of all their sins. And intending more fully to describe Christ, and
to show, That he is true God, and so a m^^t perfect, and an all-sufficient
Redeemer. He first, speaks of the dignity of his person, declaring, that he is
the Image of the invisible God, b^th as he is his eternal Son, of the same
Essence with the Father [Heb. 1.3.], and also is he is God mani ested in the fl
sh [1 Timothy 3.16.], by whom the invisible God does manifest his glorious wisdom,
power, and mercy. In the next place, he shows, that he is the first born
Primogenitus omnis creaturae] h. e. Princeps, and D^minus praecipuus omnium
creaturarum. Desumpta est appellatio ex d scriptione Leg^^^ d gnitatis
primogeniturae, Genesis 4^.3. Aliqui ad ate^nam ex Patre genera ionem referunt.
Primogeni tus omnis creatur^e, h e. Priu^ a ^^atre g^nitus quam ul^a creatura
^^e ret ^uod ante omnem cre^tur^m fuisse dicitur, simpliciter ae^ernum est.
Psalm 90 2. Prove. 8 22. Glass.
of every Creature, as being from all eternity begotten of the Father, before
any Creature was made or created, and s^ Lord and Heir of all the Creatures, as
the first b^rn was among his Brethren, Genesis 49.3. 2. He sh^ws, that he is the
Creator of all things, as co-working with the Father, and that whether they be
v^sib^e or invisible; particularly, whether they be Thrones* or Dominions, or
Princip^lities, or Powers, whereby pr^bably are meant several degrees and
dignities of Ang^ls, th^u^h what those are, is not revealed to us. And h^
further sh^ws that not only all Creatures were made v 16. (...) idem vult quod
(...)
by him, but for him. viz. for his service, and the manifestation of his divine
power and glory. And he is not only before all Creatures, and their Creator,
but also (together with the Father and the Holy Ghost) their Upholder, and
powerful Preserver. 3. He comes n w to describe Christ in relation to his
Church, declaring that he is the H ad of that spiritual Body, and by him the
Church being called, it has its beginning and original from him. And further,
to set out the dignity of his person, he declares, that he is the firstborn
Primogenitus ex mortuis] h. e praestant stimus inter omnes qui resu^gunt ex
mortuis. Ut primogenitus in V. T. erat princeps fratrum suorum.
of the dead, that is, the most excellent person that ever rose from the dead,
and the first and only one who rose by his ^wn power, and the first who rose
from death to immortal life, and who by virtue of his resurrection, will raise
again to life all his members. So that justly he has the pre-eminence above
all, and (by all Titles) the right of Dominion and Rule over all, [see Romans
14.9.]. And further, that he may prove that Christ is an all suffi ient
Savior, he shows, that it was the Fathers will, that this our Redeemer should
be a person filled with all ^u ness, both of the Godhead dw^lling in him (see
chapter 2.9.), and of grace and merit [Joh. 1.14 16. Joh. 3.34], that he might be
perfectly furnished to perform that great work of mediation, and to reconcile
all things both in Heaven and Earth unto a provoked G^d, (which he has
app^inted to be reconciled), by the merit of his death and passion, whither
they be blessed men's Spirits already gathered into heavenly glory, or believers
here yet living upon the Earth. Yea* seeing by sin, Heaven and E^rth were set
at variance, it was the Fathers will, by him, to make peace, not only betw en
G^d and man, but also betwixt the Angels ^e^ Ephesians. 1.10.
in Heaven, a^^ Believers on Earth. And what he had sp^k n in the general,
concerning Christ's work of reconciliation; he now applies particularly to the
believing C^l^ssi^ns, telling them, that though before their conversion they
were a^ Strangers unto God, yea as Enemies, such as did hate God, and were
hated of him (^^ ^e^son their minds were set on evil works), yet now Christ had
rec nc^led them unto God, by taking on him a true humane Body of Flesh and
Blood, like unto ours in all things, sin only excepted and by suffering death
in it; and all this that they might be presented pure and holy The word Holy
does here signify pure, clean, from all spot or sin.
b^f^re God, and free from all guilt and sin, at the last day. From Ver. 12, to
23.

3. He tells them, if they expected to be thus presented holy and unblameable
before God at the last day, they must constantly and st dfa tly adhere to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, not quitting their hope of eternal life and glory,
which was begotten in them by it; which Gospel they had he^rd preached unto
them by Epaphras, and was no other than that which at Chri^ts command was
taught through the World v. 23. To every Creature] that is, to some of all
^orts of men, not in Judea only, but among the Gentiles. compare Mar. 16.15.
with Mat. 28.19.

Est Synecdoche generis hyperbolica.


by the Apostles, and which he himself was called by God to preach am ng the
Gentiles. And as for his sufferings, he shows, they had no reason to be
scandalized at them, for he himself underwent them joyful^y, considering that
they tended t^ the good and benefit of the Colossi^^s, namely, to confirm them
in the Doctrine of the G^spel, and to encourage them to suffer for it, if
called to it, and also because thereby he filled up the measure and share of
those sufferings allotted to be suffered by him in his Body, (as a member of
Christ and in conformity to him), which are appointed by the dispensation of
God, and remain to b^ suffered and undergone by Christ mystical, namely, the
Church; which sufferings and afflictions of particular members redound to the
great benefit of the whole Church, and tend to edify them in patience, and to
confirm them in the truth; of which Church, he tells them, he was called to be
a Minister by the appointment of God, and chiefly among the Gentiles, (of wh m
th^se Col ssians were a part and so his commission to extended them), that God
by his mini^try might fulfill his word of prophecy, and promise of calling
the Ge^ti ^s in the days of the Gospel, [see Isa. 65.1. Zach. 2.11.]. N^w the
subject matter of this Gospel, (whereof he was appointed a Minister), he shows,
was in tim^s past a mystery, and in all former ages and generations hid, (from
the Gentiles simply, from the Jews comparatively), being k^pt under dark
shadows, and mystical representations [Rom. 16.26.], but now was clearly
manifested and revealed to the holy Apostles, and by them to the faithful. And
to them God is pleased to manifest the exceeding great and glorious excellency
of this mystery, which is, Christ preached among (...), inter vos. Ingens
arcanum Dei patuit, cum Christus, i. e. Doctrina Christi, Gentibus sonuit in
spem vitae aeternae Est ergo hic duplex metonymia. Christus pro Doctrina
Christi: Et spes pro causa spei. Gr.
the Gentiles, in and through whom, hope of pardon and bliss is vouchsafed to
them. And this Christ, says he, we preach; exhorting and teaching every man
that will hear, whether he be Jew or Gentile, (with all the spiritual wisdom
afforded to us) to believe in Him, that being pardoned through his merits, and
renewed by his Spirit, we may present them before the Judgment Seat of God
perfectly righteous in him. And in this work, he tells them, he faithfully
labored and traveled, having found great and corroborating strength from God,
carrying him on in it. From Ver. 23, to the end.

4. Having thus declared the Doctrine delivered to them to be true, and
persuaded them to continue steadfast in it; he now comes to show them, that they
ought to avoid all corrupt Doctrines contrary thereunto, which false Teachers
would obtrude upon them. And in the first place, he desires they should know
what great care and solicitude he had for them in his mind, and how he strove
in his prayers with God, not only for those Churches which he himself had
planted, and among whom he had familiarly conversed, but for them also, though
not converted by him, and their neighbor Church of Laodicea, (to whom he
wills this Epistle should he read, chapter 4 16.), and for all other Churches who
had never seen his face. And his great desire and endeavor was, that their
hearts might be comforted, and encouraged against all the troubles they met
with, and that they might be knit together by the bond of love, as the members
of the natural body are by the nerves and sinews, that so instructing and
edifying one another, they might attain to a large measure of certain and
assured knowledge and understanding, in the mystery of the Gospel, which may
justly be called the mystery of God, being hid from the eye of natural reason,
and made known only by him, and in which God is revealed and manifested to be
the Father of Christ, and Christ to be the eternal Son of God. In which mystery
v. 3. (...) in quo mysterio.
, or divine revelation concerning God the Father and Christ, all the treasures
of wisdom, and knowledge (to wit, that are necessary to salvation) are hidden
and wrapped up. And this he testified unto them, to prevent their seducement by
false Teachers, who by false arguments, and ensnaring persuasions sought to
beguile them. And he was the more sollicitous concerning them, because though
he was absent from them in the body, yet he was present with them in Spirit,
that is, not in bare conceit or fantasy or affection only, but so as he was
well acquainted with their state, and had knowledge of their affairs (either
through the information of Epaphras, or through extraordinary revelation, see 2
King. 5.26.), and rejoiced exceedingly to see and behold, in the apprehension
and vision of his mind, the good order and government of their Church, and the
stedfastness of their Faith in Christ, which he would gladly have them continue
in. He exhorts them, therefore, that as they had received the true Doctrine of
Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, taught them by Epaphras, and had embraced
him by Faith, so they would constantly adhere to that Doctrine In hac Doctrina
permanendum, quia hac recepta, Ipse Christus Dominus recipiebatur. Daven.
, conforming their lives thereunto, and endeavoring to walk worthy of Christ,
being like trees well and deeply rooted in him, or like a house firmly built on
him, as the only sure foundation, that being established and settled in the
Faith, (as they had been taught), they might grow in that grace with
thanksgiving to God for so great and wonderful mercy of revealing his Son to
them. From Ver. 1, to 8.

5. He comes now to caution them against those things whereby seducers sought
to draw them away from Christ: and those he reduces to three heads. 1. The
Speculations of the Gentilish Philosophy. 2. The Traditions of Men. 3. The
Rudiments of the World. 1. He cautions them, to take heed lest any make a prey
of them, and seduce them from the sound Doctrine of Christ, by amuzing them
with the sublime speculations of their mysterious Philosophy, which flies as
high as Angels and Intelligences; and teaches (though very fallaciously) that
they are Mediators between God and man See Mr. Medes Apostasy of the latter
times.
, and so ought to be the objects of humane adoration, see v. 18. 2ly, He
cautions them against walking after the Traditions of Men, that is, the
superstitious Rites invented by men, and obtruded as parts of Divine Worship,
having no authority from the Word of God, nor other warrant than Antiquity,
Custom, or Humane Institution. 3. He warns them, to take heed of them, who
would persuade them, to observe Circumcision, and the Levitical Rites, which
were Rudiments, or Elements Sic Davenant. in loc. Elementa mundi, v. 8. h. e.
rudimenta priscae Ecclesiae Judaicae.
fitted for the infancy of the Church, and by which God thought fit to instruct
the former Ages of the World [Gal. 4 3.], and his people under the Old
Testament; the following of which things, he tells them, was not according to
the Institution or Injunction of Christ, but did draw away the heart from him.
He shows them, that Christ alone is a most perfect Savior; for in his person
the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, that is, personally, and
subtantially, in opposition to the Shaddows and Types of the Old Testament. For
God is said, in the Old Testament, to dwell in the Tabernacle, Ark of the
Covenant, and Temple, as in the Shaddows and Figures of Christ's humane Nature,
which he was to take on him, in the fullness of time; which he having now taken
on him, God now dwells in the same, really, personally, and substantially, with
all his fullness; so that it is folly to seek salvation any where else but in him
alone. 2. He acquaints them, that all that are united to him by Faith, are
complete in him, as having from him all things necessary to Salvation. 3. He
declares, that He is above all Principalities and Powers, that is, all the holy
Angels, (by whom God does execute many great and mighty works, as it were, by
Princes and Potentates), as being their Head and Lord, and upholding and ruling
them as his Creatures. And they being his Servants, and so our fellow servants,
ought not to be worshipped by us, [see Rev. 22.8, 9.], nor are they Mediators
between God and us; that being an honor due to him only who is their Head, [1 Timothy 2.5.]. From Ver. 8, to 11.

6. He begins here by a Figure called Hysterosis, to oppose himself against the
third sort of errors, which he had cautioned them against, v. 8. namely, urging
the Mosaical Rites, and Elements of the former Ages of the World, as necessary
to salvation.

And first, He answers an Objection which he foresaw the Colossians might make
against what he had before said. He had said, v. 10. Believers were complete in
Christ. But possibly they might say, That some Teachers among them taught them,
That they, being Gentiles, and wanting Circumcision, were unclean, and so not
perfect in Christ.

The Apostle answers, that they, being Believers, and united to Christ, need
not be outwardly Circumcised; for they had by him, the thing signified by
Circumcision, namely, the spiritual Circumcision of the heart, which consists
in cutting off, and putting away the body of manifold sins, formed, and
compacted of our innate corruption, whereof particular sins are the members.
And the means of this their renovation is Baptism, (which succeeds in the place
of Circumcision), and which (as it was anciently administered to adult and grown
persons) was a clear representation of the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ, and by proportion represented also how Christians ought to dye unto
sin, and rise unto newness of life. Which new life they live by Faith in
Christ, and that Faith, God who raised Jesus Christ from the dead, works in
them by his own Spirit. He uses also another Argument against the necessity of
Circumcision, namely, that when they, in the time of their natural state and
condition, were dead in sins, and without Circumcision in their Flesh, (as
being Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.11.), God had quickened them, as he did Christ, infusing
into them the new life of grace, and giving them a right to the life of Glory,
having pardoned all their sins, both original and actual, freely for his sake,
upon their believing in him. Yea Christ has by his death, blotted out, and
abolished the handwriting of the Ordinances, and those Legal Ceremonial
Injunctions, touching Circumcision, and the observation of Days, and several
Washings, and Sacrifices, Ephesians. 2.15. in the observance of which, the Jews
testified against themselves, their own guiltiness and liableness to
punishment. For, by killing a Beast they testified they deserved to dye
themselves. But now Christ, having by his death satisfied the Justice of God
for our sins, has thereby cancelled those Ordinances Chirographum (...) pro
(...) quod in decretis positum erat. Nonnulli referunt ad praescripta Judaica
(quorum caput erat Circumcisio) seu ad Legales Ceremonias, cum continua illarum
repetitio nihil aliud fuerit, quam perpetua peccatorum confessio, Heb. 10.1, 2,
3, 4.
which testified our guiltiness, and bound us over, and declared us liable to
wrath and vengeance. Now seeing the debt is paid, and the obligation to wrath
which we were under, (by reason of our sins), cancelled, to revoke this
handwriting of ordinances, (which testified so much against us), and to seek
to bring it in force again, as false Teachers labored to do, (by urging
Circumcision, and the Legal Observances), must needs be, not only a great
folly, but very pernicious. Nay further, Christ by his death has not only
cancelled this handwriting that was against us, and taken it out of the way,
and nailed to his Cross, but thereby also has vanquished, and disarmed his and
our enemies, the Devil, and all the powers of Hell, and has carried them, as
it were, in triumph, and made a show of them openly, making them a spectacle of
shame and scorn in the eyes of God and good Angels, as the Roman Generals used
in their Triumphs to have their Captives carried disarmed, and bound, after
their Triumphal Charriots. From Ver. 8, to 16.

He draws now a Conclusion from the former Argument, namely, That seeing the
Ceremonial Law was abolished, therefore none should presume to condemn them, or
lay sin to their charge, for using any of the Meats or Drinks prohibited by
that Law, or for not observing the Jewish Festivals, whither anniversary, or
monthly, or weekly, to wit, the Seventh-day Sabbath. If any did so, they should
not regard their censures. For these things were but shaddows Ceremoniae
fuerunt umbra rerum futurarum, cujus umbrae corpus, h. e. complementum
adumbratum, est Christus.
of good things to come, and were to remain only until the coming of Christ,
who is the truth, body, and substance of them. Some of them pointed at Moral
Sanctity, this Christ in his own person clearly taught and perfectly fulfilled;
some pointed at the expiation of sin, and this Christ truly wrought by his
active and passive obedience; some presignified that eternal Rest which true
Believers shall partake of hereafter. It Is not imaginable, that those Seducers,
the Apostle here bends himself against, ever pleaded for or strove to maintain
the Christian-Sabbath, the first day of the week. Therefore it is not probable,
that in opposing them, he should implead that day. Besides, the Sabbaths, here
mentioned, were a shadow of things to come, whereas the Lords day is a memorial
of some thing past, namely, the glorious Resurrection of Christ. The old
Seventh day Sabbath might shadow out something of Christ; and the Ancients
generally understood it, to shadow out his Rest that day in the grave
Concerning the morality of the Christian-Sabbath, see Knowl. and Practice, page
256.
. So that the Apostles Argument runs thus, Seeing the Ceremonial Ordinances
were but shaddows and representations of good things to come, and to last only
till Christ came; to observe them now under the Gospel, is in effect to say,
That Christ the body, or substance is not yet come. Ver. 16, 16.

7. He comes now to argue against the first sort of those errors he mentioned,
v. 8. namely, worshipping of Angels, which tended to make Christians lose the
reward (...).

Nemo velit vos culpabiles reddere.

Let no man arrogate to himself an imperious power over you, to determine what
he pleases, as the Brabeutae were wont in the Olympic Games. Nemo vos (...)
pro libidine.


provided for them in Heaven, by departing out of the way leading thither,
though they that persuaded them unto it, covered their error with a plausible
show of humility, pretending, it was presumption to go to God without the
mediation of those excellent Creatures. But thereby they boldly intruded
Penetrans in ea quae non vidit, i. e. quae non novit, jus sibi faciens loquendi
de incognitis.
into things they knew nothing of, being vainly puffed up with a conceit of their
own corrupt minds. He shows, that these Angel-worshippers do not acknowledge
Christ for the Head of the Church while they apply themselves to Angels to be
their Mediators to God; whereas He alone does discharge the office of the Head,
completely giving life, and growth to his whole Church, and to every member
thereof. Which members being furnished with spiritual life from him, and knit
to him, and to one another by the nerves and sinews of one common Spirit, they
grow and increase with such an increase of grace, and holiness, as is from God
and tends to his glory. From Ver. 18, to 20.

8. He argues now against the second sort of errors which he mentioned, v. 8.
namely, superstitious Rites, humane Traditions, and Doctrines of men. His
Argument against them is to this purpose, that seeing they professed in their
Baptism to be spiritually dead with Christ, and to be freed by his death from
the Levitical O^dinances, [those Rudiments or Elements appointed by God to
instruct the former World], why should they submit to superstitious Rites and
Ordinances (of the like kind) invented by men? Could they think, that God would
abrogate the Ceremonies of his own Institution, that men might appoint theirs?
Why as if they lived in the Old World, should they be under the Decrees and
Traditions of men, which draw them to the Observation of things of the like
nature? And he particularly instances, in one of those Traditions, or
injunctions, namely, concerning abstinence from meats. Touch not, taste not,
handle not, that is, such or such meats; whereas all kind of meats are
appointed by God for the use of men, and are to perish in the using. These
observances, he acknowledges, were set off with a specious show of wisdom, as
if they were voluntary services, and free will offerings to God, giving him
more than he required. They had also a show of Humility, and submissive
obedience to the Injunctions of Superiors. Lastly, they had a show of
Mortification, and Austerity to the body; they that practiced them, not seeming
to have those things in any esteem, which God has made for the necessary
satisfying of nature, Capellus, sic (...).

Culpat Apostolus quod honorem Corpori nullum habeant, ad carnis expletionem,
h. e. ad satietatem necessariam, quemadmodum cum jejuniis, and aliis modis,
superstitiosi se affligunt. Gomar.


but rather despising them. From Ver. 20, to the end.

9. Having thus dispatched the Doctrinal part of his Epistle, he comes now
Practical. And in the first place, he gives some general exhortations, such as
concern all Believers, and then some special, which belong to certain and
particular conditions of men.

And first, Seeing they were risen with Christ, as he had intimated, v. 12, 13.
of chapter 2. he exhorts them, that they should set their affections on things
above, and that, because Christ their Head was above. And further, they had in
their Baptism professed themselves dead to Sin and the World, and therefore
ought really so to be, and to have their thoughts often upon their eternal life
and bliss, which though it was hid from the eyes of the World, yet it was
reserved for them in Heaven, (where Christ was), in the safe keeping of God,
[see 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.]. And when Christ, who is the Author and Procurer of this
blissful and eternal life for them, shall appear to judge the World, then they
shall appear also with him in glory. Next, he presses them, particularly, To
mortify their corrupt lusts, such as Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil
Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which he calls Idolatry, because it draws
away our Love, Trust, and Joy from God, and places them upon Wealth and
Riches. These Lusts, he shows, are the several Members Those Lusts may be
called Members, because the Reason and Will of corrupt man does produce
Operations by them as the Body does by the Member^.
of the Body of Sin; and are said to be upon the earth, because they draw the
Soul down toward the earth, and are exercised upon earthly things as their
proper Objects. Now that he might further pr^ss them to a serious endeavor to
mortify these Lusts, he tells them, that the wrath of God, with its dreadful
effects, comes upon those who go on contumaciously and impenitently in such
ways. And they should remember how they themselves formerly lived in those
sinful courses when they were moved and acted by such vile affections, and
therefore now they ought more careful^y to mortify them. 2. He exhorts them,
to put away from them, that is, to mortify their more spiritual Corruptions,
instancing in anger, wrath, malice, (sins of the heart), and disgraceful
contumelious speaking against their Neighbors, as also all filthy
communication, and lying, or saying, or suggesting any false thing, to the
injury of others, which are sins of the Tongue. This he urges from the present
spiritual estate of all true Believers among them, who had (as they professed
in their Baptism) begun to put off There were many Ceremonies in Baptism, used
in the Primitive Church, viz. Putting off old Clothes, drenching in water so as
to seem to be buried in it, putting on new Clothes at their coming out, to
which Paul alludes in several places, as chapter 2.11, ^2. Col. 3.9, 10. Rom 6.4,
5. Thorndike of the Rights of the Church, chapter 4.
the old man, that is, the corruption of Nature, with manifold actual
transgressions proceeding therefrom; and put on the new m^^, that is, new and
spiritual qualities, whereby their corrupt Nature is renewed, being illuminated
with a saving and tranforming knowledge, and so conformed to the Image of God,
in such a manner, that in this new man, as in a Glass, Gods Wisdom,
Righteousness, and Holiness may be clearly seen and discovered. And lest any
should think that God regards not this inward spiritual renovation, but accepts
men according to their external privileges and conditions, he tells them, that
now under the Gospel, neither the having of those things helps, nor does the
want of them hinder any man, but whosoever believes in Christ, and is renewed
by his Spirit, is accepted of God; He being an All sufficient Savior to all
such, and that in all respects whatsoever. From Ver. 1, to 12.

10. Having ended his exhortation to mortification, and putting off the old
man, he comes now to exhort them. That as they had begin to put on the new, so
they would put on all the parts and particular virtues belonging thereunto, as
became such as were selected from the World, and effectually called to the
knowledge of Christ, and to believe in him. And the excellent virtues, he
exhorts them to put on, are these, namely, bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing, and freely forgiving
one another, (if any of them have just cause of complaint against another),
even as Christ has freely forgiven them. And above all those graces
beforementioned, he exhorts them, especially to put on Charity, which is the
most perfect bond Charitas, vinculum perfectissimum, animos scil. conjungens.
, binding, and knitting all the faithful, and members of the Church together.
And that the love Et que cet amor de la paix que Dieu recommande, etc. Amiraut.
of peace, (which God so effectually recommends to his Children), should rule
in their hearts, and bear sway in them, against all contrary motions; unto the
entertaining of which they were called, and strongly obliged, being all members
of one body, under one head, Christ Jesus. And that they may the better
entertain and continue this peace among themselves, he exhorts them, to be
thankful one to another for the benefits they received one from another; and to
cherish inclinations in themselves, not only of requiting, but of conferring
benefits. And seeing it is the word of Christ, or the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, that teaches them all these divine L^ssons; he advises them to read
it diligently, and frequently to meditate on it, that it may dwell in them
richly and copiously, and that they may be furnished thereby with all true and
sound wisdom; so that their minds and hearts being filled with those divine
documents, they may be able to instruct and admonish one another, and stir up
one another affections, by singing of these holy Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, ther^in contained; or composed agreeably thereunto, by the direction of
the Spirit of God. Yet they must be careful they sing with affections rightly
composed (according to the measure of grace given them) that they may praise
and glorify God, not with their mouths only, but with their hearts. Lastly, He
shuts up this Discourse with giving them one general Rule, viz. That whatever
busin^ss they enterprise or enter upon, whether it be by way of speech, or
action, they should do it with invocation and calling upon God in the Name of
Christ; through whose mediation also they should render praises to God (our
gracious Father in Christ) for any success afforded to them in any of their
businesses, and for all his other mercies also. From Ver. 12, to 18.

10. He comes now to exhort them to the duties that concern particular
Relations: 1. He exhorts Wives willingly to submit themselves to their own
Husbands (as is comely and decent) in all things lawful and agreeable to the
will of the Lord. 2. He enjoins Husbands to love their Wives, and not to be
harsh and rigorous toward them in word or deed. 3. He exhorts Childr^^ to obey
their Parents in all honest and lawful things, agreeable to the word of God
(see Ephesians. 6.1.); for such obedience is highly pleasing to the Lord. 4. He
enjoins Parents to use their authority moderately over their Children, not
irritating or exasperating them by too much severity and rigorous dealing. 5.
That Servants be obedient in all lawful things to their own Masters (who
according to the Laws of men, and in things temporal, belonging to the flesh,
or body, have the rule over them, though not over their Consciences); and that
they should not do their duties only when their Masters are present (as if they
only took care to please them, and looked no further); but with singleness of
heart should show all fidelity and diligence in their absence also, as those
that fear the all-seeing eye of God. And whatever service they do for their
Masters, they should do it heartily, and with good will (Ephesians. 6.7.), as aiming
to please God, and serve him therein, and not only and merely to please and
serve their Masters. And if they do so, they may assure themselves, that this
their fidelity (being in conjunction with other graces) shall be rewarded with
the inheritance of eternal life; because in thus serving their Masters, they
serve their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and he takes their service as done
to him, and accordingly will give them the reward which he has promised to all
his faithful servants. And if any of them do meet with wrongs, and injuries,
and hard usage from their Masters, he tells them (for their comfort) that there
is a day coming when their wrongs shall be considered, and they righted; and
the Lord will punish the wrong doer, and give him his just desert. For God is a
righteous Judge, and there is no respect of persons with him. From Ver. 18, to
the end.

Lastly, He exhorts Masters to give to their Servants that which is just and
equal, either by strict Law or Contract, or by the Law of Charity; remembering
that they have a Master above them in Heaven, to whom they must give an account
of their dealings with their Servants. Ver. 1.

11. Having thus finished his Precepts concerning particular Duties, in the
close of his Epistle he judged it meet to add a few more general Directions
that concern all Christians. And, 1. He exhorts them to perseverance, and
holding on to prayer, and to watchfulness and fervency therein, and to join
thanksgiving thereunto. And in particular, he desires them to pray for him, and
Timothy, That God would afford them opportunities, and endue them with a spirit
of holy boldness and freedom in preaching the mystery of the Gospel, whereof
Christ is the subject matter, and the substance; for the publishing of which,
he now suffered imprisonment. And more especially he desires them to pray for
himself, that whilst he suffered for the Gospel, he might be enabled to make
manifest and discover the deep and mysterious doctrine thereof, in such a
manner, as was meet and fit, both in respect of the excellency of the Gospel it
self; as also in respect of that great trust of the Apostleship committed unto
him. 2. He exhorts them to carry themselves wisely toward the Heathen and
Infidels, among whom they lived (who were without the visible Church), and to
improve every opportunity of doing them good, and of gaining them to embrace
the faith. And particularly, that they labor to order their speech and
ordinary conference so, as it may be always gracious, that is, may express some
grace that is in the heart of the speaker, and may be apt to work some grace in
the hearts of the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29, and that it be seasoned with the salt of
holy and divine wisdom, that they may speak fitly V. 6. (...)] Hic infinitivus
est vice gerundii: Sciendo quomodo respondere cuique debeatis, nempe de fide
interrogati, 1 Pet. 3.15. Gr.
and to good purpose upon every occasion, and especially when they shall be
questioned concerning the grounds of Christianity. From Ver. 1, to 7.

Beginning now to conclude his Epistle, he tells them, that he had sent
Tychicus, his fellow servants in the Lords work; and Onesimus (one of their own
Country or City) to acquaint them with his present condition, and with the
state of things in the place where he was, and to inform him of theirs, and to
strengthen and comfort them under all their trials. He sends them salutations
from Aristarchus This Aristarchus being descended of Jewish Parents, and being
converted by the Apostle's Ministry, had accompanied him in the most of his
journeys, and was taken with him in the tumult at Ephesus; and after that, he
accompanied him going into Asia, and was carried Prisoner with him to Rome, and
therefore he called him his fellow-prisoner. See of him Acts 19.29. Acts 20.4.
and 27.2.
a Macedonian, and John Mark, Nephew to Barnabas, touching whom they had
received commandments (that is, had been written to), that if he came unto
them, they should receive him, and entertain him kindly and respectfully, as a
true and faithful servant of Christ. He sends them also salutations from
another eminent person with him, namely, Jesus surnamed Justus: These three
being descended of Jewish Parents, had been converted to the faith; and being
now believing-Christians, and companions of the Apostle in his afflictions,
were the only persons of the Jews who assisted him there at Rome in preaching
the Gospel (whereby the Kingdom of Christ is set up in the hearts of men), and
thereby they did much comfort him. He sends them also salutations from
Epaphras, one of their City and Church, who in his prayers did always strive
See Romans 15.30. 2 Cor. 1.11.
earnestly and fervently for them, that being fully and perfectly instructed in
the knowledge of the will of God, they might continue firm in their obedience
thereunto. For he could not but bear him this testimony, That he had a very
great zeal for them, and for their neighbour-Churches of Laodicea and
Hierapolis. He salutes them also from Luke and Demas. He desires these
Colossians to salute from him their neighbors of Laodicea, and particularly
one Nymphas, an eminent person for piety among them, and his Christian Family,
who were so piously instructly, and so orderly governed, that they deserved the
name of a little Church. He gives order, That after they have read this Epistle
themselves, they should cause it to be sent and read in the Church of the
Laodiceans; and that another Epistle written from Laodicea (either from the
whole Church, or from their Ministers) unto him, informing him of their case
(of which he sent them a Copy) should be read by these Colossians, for the
better clearing of some passages in this his Epistle to them; and that they
might the better understand upon what occasion he had written some things
contained therein. He directs them to admonish their Minister Archippus (who in
the absence of his Colleague Epaphras, had, as it seems, been somewhat slack),
to consider the nature and weight of the Ministerial charge with which he was
entrusted by Christ (...), i. e. (...). A Christi authoritate
, and that he would labor faithfully to discharge all the parts of it. He
shuts up this Epistle, telling them, That he sends his salutation to them
written with his own hand, that they may be assured that the rest of the
Epistle was dictated by himself, though written by his Scribe. He desires them
to remember his bonds and imprisonment for the Gospel of Christ; and to
encourage themselves to bear the like troubles, for the same cause, if they
should be called to it. Lastly, He wishes, the free and undeserved love and
favor of God in Christ, with all the fruits and tokens of it, may be their
portion. Amen. From Ver. 7, to the end.

SECT. X.
BY Tychicus also, at the same time, as it is probable, He sent an Epistle to
the Ephesians. For, having planted a Church at Ephesus, the chief City of Asia
the less [ Acts 18.19.], and afterward for three years together preached and
spread abroad the Gospel in that City, and thereabouts [ Acts 19.]; and having
in his last journey to Jerusalem called together the Elders and Teachers of
that Church, and warned them concerning the arising of Seducers among them; He
thought it needful at this time to write to them, to confirm them in the truth
they had received, and to arm them against such Doctrines as derogated from the
Grace of Christ.

In the Epistle there are these three parts, The Epistle to the Ephesians.


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. IN the Preface he declares he was an Apostle of Christ; thereunto
appointed, not by the will of man, but of God. His Epistle he directs to all
the faithful at Ephesus, who were effectually called to believe in Christ, and
sanctified by his Spirit; heartily wishing unto them abundance of Grace and
Peace from God the Father (who is the source and fountain of spiritual
blessings); and from Jesus Christ, who is the Conduit-pipe by whom they are
conveyed, Ver. 1.2.

2. He comes to the Body of the Epistle: and his scope being to establish these
Ephesians in the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel already received, and to unfold
to them the grounds and causes of their salvation, together with the freedom of
God's grace in Christ manifested therein; in the first place he falls into a
high admiration of the free mercy of God (who is the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ), and solemnly blesses his holy Name for bestowing on Believers all
sorts of spiritual blessings and graces, which descend from Heaven, (...) in
coelest^bus nempe rebus. Sunt enim res coelestes, eligi ut simus sancti and
adoptari in filios. Knatchb.
and which he communicates to them in and through his Son. And the first of
these he shows, is this; That he has in his eternal election, even before the
foundation of the world, separated them from other men, and designed to
communicate these blessings to them, in and through Christ, to the intent that
they should be holy and blameless before men, and sincere as in his sight,
living in the exercise of love to God, and one another. Yea, in and through
Christ, he has predestined them to the adoption of sons, that is, to be his
adopted Children, not for any foreseen merit, or preparations of grace in them,
but according to his own gratuitous mercy, and the good pleasure of his own
will. And all this to the praise of his glorious grace, which is not only the
End of his electing them before time, but the Cause also that in time he makes
them lovely, and fit to be accepted of himself, in and through his beloved Son,
in whom they have redemption through his blood shed on the Cross; and the
satisfaction he has made for them to his Father, has acquired for them the
remission of all their sins. And he has caused the riches of his grace to
abound toward them, in not only sending his Son to make atonement for them,
but in revealing the Gospel to them, and thereby imparting that true wisdom
(the right knowledge of Himself and his Son unto them) and that spiritual
prudence which is requisite to direct them to order their Christian
conversation aright. And he has made known unto them that great mystery and
secret of his will (which could not be known, either by Angels or men, before
it was revealed) whereby is discovered and manifested what he has resolved in
his eternal Purpose, concerning the way of saving sinners, according to his own
good pleasure and free grace. Which secret was then only clearly to be
manifested, when that time arrived, unto which (according to his wise and
admirable dispensation) he has reserved the fullness of his revelations, and
the accomplishment of his promises, which he before made. Now one part of this
glorious mystery, is this, That sin having made a division between the glorious
Angels in heaven, and corrupted men on earth, he has found out a way to
reconcile them by his Son; even as if a Prince that has sovereignty over two
Kingdoms, between which there is war, because one of them is fallen into
rebellion whilst the other continues in their obedience, should by pardoning
the one, reconcile them, and compose the difference between them, and so form
them into one Empire. And having hitherto spoken of Believers in general, he
now comes to make application of this his Doctrine, first, to the Jews, and
next to the Gentiles. And first he shows, That the Jewish Believers (whereof
himself was one) had, in and through Christ, and by virtue of his merit and
intercession (not for any merit in themselves) obtained a right to a glorious
inheritance in Heaven, being predestined thereunto according to the gracious
purp^se of God, who works all things according to the counsel of his own
will, that so his glorious Attributes, ( viz. His infinite Wisdom, Goodness,
and Mercy) manifested in that work, might be acknowledged and highly praised by
them to whom the Gospel was first preached [Mat. 10.6. Acts 13.46.], and who
were first called, and were the first who trusted or hoped in Christ for
salvation, before there were any considerable number of Converts among the
Gentiles. 2dly, He shows, that not only believers among the Jews, but the
believing Ephesians also, who were Gentiles, had in and through Christ obtained
a right to this Heavenly Inheritance, having been brought to believe in Him
after the Gospel had been once preached to them. And then they were sealed for
the Children of God, not by such an outward seal as Circumcision, but by the
renewing and sanctifying work of the Spirit (whom God had graciously promised
Spiritu promissionis, qui promissionem Evangelii cordibus obsignat; vel spiritu
promisso, quem scil. Deus per prophetas promisit ut per Ezekiel c. 36.26. Joel
2.28.
to give) wrought in their hearts, whereby he imprinteth his image upon them,
which is holiness. And the bestowing this his holy Spirit on them, was an
earnest of that heavenly inheritance, the full enjoyment whereof was not to be
expected till the last day; at which time, all that are the purchased (...) est
comparare, acquirere.
possession, acquisition, and peculiar people of Christ, shall obtain complete
redemption, and their bodies shall be raised up, and united to their souls, and
so both soul and body made for ever happy. And Gods end in all this is (as was
before mentioned, v. 12.), the praise of his own free and glorious grace. From
Ver. 3, to 15.

3. He tells them, That having heard so good a report of their faith in Christ,
and love to all the Saints, he could not but give solemn thanks to God on their
behalf, and earnestly pray for them; beseeching him who is now known to us by a
more glorious title than that of The God of Abraham, even The God of our Lord
Jesus Christ (as he is Man and Mediator, and sent by him, John 20.17.), and the
Father of glory; that is, who is in his own nature infinitely glorious, and the
Author of all the glory communicated to any of the Creatures (and to whom all
honor and glory ought to be ascribed), that he would please to impart unto
them that Wisdom, and Revelation of divine mysteries (whereof his Spirit is the
Author), that they may attain to a more full and exact (...) proprie est, major
exactiorque cognitio
knowledge of Christ, and his benefits; and that he would so illuminate their
understandings, that they may be capable clearly to discern and apprehend what
he has called them to a participation of, and which is as yet only the object
of their hope and expectation, viz. the rich and gloririous inheritance, which
he has prepared for his Saints V. 18. Ut sciatis quam copiosa sit gloria
haereditatis illius quam paravit Sanctis.
in Heaven, and which only they shall be possessors of. And further, that they
may be sensible of the greatness of God's Power, which he exerteth in and
toward believers, in regenerating of them by his Spirit* and carrying on a
work of grace in them (in despite of men and devils) from one degree to
another, till grace be swallowed up in glory: which power, he shows, was no
other than that by which he raised Christ from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand, in the highest degree of glory next to himself, in heaven, far
above all principalities Nomina sunt Ordinum Angelicorum, Deo ministrantium in
coelestibus. Estius. Col. 1.16. Et, quod infra est Ephesians. 8.10. evincit, agi
hic de eximiis Angelorum classibus. Grot. Every name] i. e. Every creature
however named.
and powers, and all things excellent, and famous, and worthy to be named
either in this world, or the world to come; the Father having placed all
creatures in a state of subjection unto him, even under his feet, to be
disposed of as he sees fit. And over and above all, he has given him in a
special manner to be Head of his Church, which is his body, and his fullness
Christus in omnibus credentibus implet omnia; mentem luce, voluntatem piis
affectibus, corpus ipsum obsequendi facultate, Grot. Christus datus est
Ecclesiae caput, and in omnibus membris, omnia bona, and felicia operatur, and
omnia very Capitis officia perficit.
, as he is the mystical Head thereof; see 1 Cor. 12.12. So that he does not
judge himself (in that sense) to be perfected and completed, till he has all
his members. Lastly, He shows, That this Savior, animating and enlivening
all the members of his body by his Spirit, perfecteth and compleateth all
things in them (gradually) which appertain to their spiritual life,
sanctification, and salvation. From Ver. 15, to the end.

4. The Apostle now intending to set forth unto these Ephesians the happiness
former Heathen-state before their conversion, they being then spiritually dead
in sins and trespasses (without any life of grace in them) and walking
according to the common course and customs of the Nations and Gentile-world,
and according to the instigation of Satan, who being cast out of the higher
Heaven of glory, wanders about now; and exercises the power which God permits
unto him, in the lower regions of the air, and powerfully works in the children
of disobedience. And he shows, that the Jews Dicit (...), quanquam ipse talis
non fuerat (vixerat enim vitam non quidem ullo modo comparandam cum ea, quam
duxit postea Christianus, sed tamen prooiorem quam sui temporis Judaei, Phil.
3.6. utens figura (...) per quam, ea quae sunt odiosa, facimus nobis communia.
Grot.
before their conversion, were equally miserable, having their conversation
among these children of disobedience, and were no less obstinately rebellious
against God, than the disobedient Gentiles; fulfilling those lusts which their
sensual appetites and phant'sies were pleased with, and were by nature Non ea
natura qua primum a Deo conditi sed qua sumus per peccatum A^ae depravati; vel
juxta Augustinum in Joh. 12. Ideo natura filii irae, quia peccante primo homine
vitium pro natura inolevit. Zeger.
children of wrath, even as others; that is, were born, and lived, and
continued in a damning-condition, as other Heathens did. But God, who is
infinitely rich in mercy, without any desert in us in invite him to it, when we
were dead in sins, by that power by which he raised Christ from the grave, has
quickened us, and bestowed a new spiritual life upon us, yea has (in assured
hope) raised us up from the dead, in Christ our Head, and has set us with him
in Heaven: For He sitting there who is our Head, we are at present not unfitly
said to sit there also, and shall infallibly come thither in due time. And
God's end in thus graciously working upon the first converted among the Jews,
and those since-converted Ephesians; he shows, was, that to all succeeding ages
he might give an evident proof and example of the exceeding riches of his
grace, and that not only for his own glory but for the encouragement of all
vile sinners to the end of the world, to seek to him for merry in and through
his Son. He tells these Ephesians therefore, that they ought to be sensible,
that their salvation, from the first step to the last, depends on God's free
favor and grace in Christ, and not on any des^rt in themselves. Yet they are
so saved by grace, that faith is not excluded; this b^ing the hand or
instrument whereby we lay hold upon the righteousn^ss and benefits of Christ
offered to us in the Gospel. And this faith is also the gift of God, as
salvation is. Works therefore have no meritorious or causal influence upon our
salvation (which all men naturally have a propension to rely upon), but even
our best works are excluded (being effects, not causes of that grace by which
we are saved), that all ground of boasting and gloriation may be taken away
from men, and all the glory ascribed entirely unto God, in and through Jesus
Christ. Yet lest any should think that the Ap^stle, by extolling free grace,
and excluding works from being the cause of our salvation, should seem to
depreciate and vilify works, and an holy life, as altogether unnecessary; he
shows, they are absolutely required of those that shall be saved; because all
true Converts, whether Jews or Gentiles, are God's workmanship, that is, formed
to a new life, and renewed through the intervening mediation of Christ, that
they may make conscience of bringing forth good works, to which God has before
prepared them (that they should walk in the practice of them), by giving them
his holy Spirit, and thereby disposing and fitting their understandings and
wills to produce them, and giving them the Rule of good works in his word to
guide them. So that, though good works be necessary as fruits, and as the end
of regeneration; though they be the way which leads to Heaven, and are
evidences of our right to salvation; though they are necessary in reference to
the peace of our own consciences, and for the edification of others, yet they
are not meritorious of salvation. From Ver. 1, to 11.

5. For the further establishment of these Ephesians in the Doctrine of
Free Grace in Christ, he remembers them of their former miserable condition
before their conversion, when they were in the flesh, that is in the corruption
of Nature, not having so much as Circumcision the sign of God's Covenant [Gen.
17.11.] which the Jews (who were circumcised in their flesh by the hands of
men) made use of as a matter of reproach unto them. He remembers them also,
That at that time they were so far from having any saving-interest in Christ,
that they had not so much as any offer of Christ made to them by the Gospel;
they were then aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, having no union or
communion either with the invisible Church of true believers, or with the
visible Church of Professors, which was in those times among the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.9. They were strangers to the Covenants of promise, that is,
to God's Covenant and promise of Christ in due time to be exhibited, and of
eternal life promised to sinners through faith in him; they were strangers to
the Covenant of Grace made with Adam after the fall [Gen. 3.15.], and
afterward frequently renewed with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; with Israel upon
Mount Sinai, and with David: therefore called Covenants in the plural number,
though it was always one and the same Covenant for substance, though it had
various discoveries and manifestations, and was various as to circumstance and
manner of Administration. He tells them, they were so far from having any
actual interest in the saving-blessings which were promised in this Covenant,
that they had not this Covenant at all revealed to them, nor any right to the
external privileges of it; yea, further, they were such persons as had no
hope, that is, no true ground to hope for the forgiveness of their sins, or
salvation, they being without God in the world, that is, without any clear
knowledge of the true God. But, now, they who were before afar off from Christ,
his Church, his Covenant, any saving-hope, and from a true knowledge of God,
were now brought nigh to God, and united to his Church, through faith in
Christ, who by his death and bloody sacrifice had purchased that great blessing
for them. For he is the only author and procurer of our peace with God. And
whereas before, Jews and Gentiles were so much separated by reason of their
Religion and religious rites, he has now united them into one and the same
Church. For he has taken away the Ceremonial Law, which was the middle-wall He
seems to allude to that sept or wall in the Temple, that separated the Court of
the Jews from that of the Gentiles.
of partition between them, and the occasion of a perpetual standing-strife,
while the Jews reproached the Gentiles for want of Circumcision, and the
Gentiles reproached the Jews for having of it, and for observing other of the
Mosaical-rites, which they judged absurd. Now Christ has abolished this enmity
by his death which he suffered in the flesh, and taken away the ground of it,
having removed the law of commandments, consisting in institutions and
ordinations concerning certain ceremonial rites belonging to the external
worship of God (which were prescribed as so many types and shadows of Christ to
come, Heb. 9.10.), that so he might form all the converted among Jews and
Gentiles (who believe in him) into one people or Church under himself their
Head (called here one new man, because renewed by the Holy Ghost), and so make
peace between them. And, being thus united into one Body or Church, he has
reconciled them to God by the sacrifice, of himself on the Cross* having
removed the enmity which was before between God and them by reason of their
sins; and the enmity that was between thems lves, by reas^n of the diversity of
their Religions. And he further shows That Christ had published the glad
tidings of this peace and reconciliation (which was purchased by himself on the
Cross) both to the Jews who were within the visible Church, and to the Gentiles
who were without the bounds of it; though to the later he preached not
immediately in his own person ( Mat. 15.24. except to some few, who were the
first fruits of the rest), but mediately by his Apostles, and their Successors,
Mat. 28.19. And through this Savior, he tells them, that both believing-Jews
and Gentiles have equal liberty of access to God, as to a reconciled Father, by
the assistance of that one Spirit, who quickens and actuates the graces of all
the people of God. Wherefore, by way of conclusion, he sets before these
Ephesians the excellency and blessedness of their present state, they being now
no more strangers and foreigners, but freemen and fellow-citizens with the
Saints and Members of the Family of God, the Catholic Church, and added to
that spiritual building which is built upon the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, Christ himself being the personal foundation, and chief cornerstone
thereof [Joh. 28.16. Psalm. 118.22.] binding the two walls of this building
together, viz. Jews and Gentiles. And all the parts of this building being
firmly joined to him by faith, and among themselves by love, the whole Edifice
daily grows, not only by the addition of new Converts and Members, but every
Member thereof in particular grows in grace (through the virtue and power of
Christ, they being living stones, 1 Pet. 2.8.), and so the whole building
grows Sic apud Claudianum, strages dicuntur crescere in cumulum, ita ut
tandem magnus cumulus fiat. Pisc. Est Translatio in Allegoria. Nam Augeri est
proprie corporis naturalis. Surgere, de aedificiis dici solet.
to be a holy Temple unto God, wherein he manifests his presence, and is
constantly served and glorified, as he was in Solomon's Temple. And what he
spoke of this spiritual building in the general, he now applies to these
Ephesians in particular; showing, that they were built (together with all other
sincere believers) upon Jesus Christ the foundation, and that for this end,
that they might be a fit habitation for God to dwell and manifest his special
presence in, by the saving-operations of his holy Spirit. From Ver. 11, to the
end.

Chap- 3.
6. Lest the Ephesians should be offended at the Apostle's present captivity
and bonds at Rome, he sets before them the cause of them, which was his
preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles (of whom these Ephesians were a part) for
which he was accused of the Jews, and so given over into the hands of Infidels.
And they might easily be convinced, that these things happened for their good,
if they had heard and understood his (...) est assignatio partium quualem in
familia facere solent dispensatores, 1 Cor. 9.17. and supra c. 1. 10. (...)
vocat ipsum Apostolatum, summum in Ecclesiis honorem. Gal. 2.9. Romans 1.5.
calling of grace to be an Apostle, with relation chiefly to the Gentiles, and
particularly to them. He shows he was sufficiently furnished by God with
knowledge and insight into the Doctrine he was to preach: for he had by
extraordinary revelation from God [Gal. 1.12.], that sacred secret or mystery
of the calling of the Gentiles, made known unto him (as he had briefly written
of it before in the two former Chapters); which mystery was not so clearly made
known in the former ages Nam quae sunt apud Esaiam and alios veterum
Prophetarum, valde generalia sunt, and ante adventum perobscura. Vid. Romans
16.25.
of the world, as it was now revealed by the Spirit of God unto the holy
Apostles Patuit Paulo apertius quam ipsi Petro, rituum Judaicorum opera non
modo non imponenda Gentibus, sed ne a Judaeis quidem observanda posthac, quasi
ex praecepti necessitate: vid. Romans 7. and Gal. 4. Merito mysterium vocat, quod
etiam Apostolorum praecipuis non satis patuerat antea. Grot.
and Prophets of the New Testament; namely, That the believing-Gentiles should
be fellow-heirs of the heavenly inheritance with the believing- Jews, and
should be incorporated into that one mystical body whereof Christ is the Head,
and be copartners and partakers of the promise made by God of the forgiveness
of sins, and adoption in and through Christ; and they were to be brought to
this happy estate by the preaching of the Gospel, and by faith in Christ,
without the observation of the Ceremonial Law, or Circumcision. And he shows,
that God of his free grace to him, was pleased to call him to the office of the
Apostleship, and so employ him in preaching the Gospel, furnishing him with
gifts ordinary and extraordinary, for the discharge of it; and powerfully
assisting and blessing his Ministry with admirable success both far and near,
Romans 15.19, 20. And he could not but look upon himself as more unworthy, and
less to be esteemed of, than the (...), Comparativum, factum ex superlatiuo.
Minimissimus, non simpliciter, sed secundum aliquam considerationem, scil.
quantum ad id quod fecit adversus Ecclesiam.
meanest of God's Saints and Children, by reason of his former enmity to Christ
and his Church. Yet the Apostolical Office (called here grace, because given of
God's free grace and favor) was bestowed on him; and his office was, To preach
and set forth unto the Gentiles the incomparable and incomprehensible riches of
the mercy of Christ toward them, in receiving them freely into covenant,
without laying those impositions of Circumcision, and other Rites, upon them,
which were required of the Jews; and to make known unto all men what is the
communion or fellowship of this mystery, viz. That the Gentiles, with the Jews,
should have one Faith, one Lord, one Hope, and one common Salvation, which
thing was hid (as it were) from the ages before, in the counsel of God, being
not so fully and clearly revealed till these times. And he intimates, that none
had reason to wonder why God should save the Gentiles as well as the Jews by
Christ, seeing he has created them both by him (not as an instrument) but as
one co-working with him, Heb. 1.2. Joh. 1.3. He shows also another effect of
his preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, which was, That the glorious Angels
See Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.16. 1 Pet. 1.12.
(who have their ordinary residence in Heaven, though sometimes they are
employed on Earth) may by what is done in the Church (that is, by the gathering
of Jews and Gentiles into one Church by the Gospel) behold, as in a glass, the
manifold wisdom of God, and his diverse ways of dispensing grace and salvation
in several ages, and that according to his decree long before made, which he
purposed to execute in and by his Son. Through whose Merits and Mediation all
that believe in him have boldness and liberty given them to approach and make
their addresses to God with confidence of acceptance. And therefore seeing he
was persecuted for this reason especially, because he preached the Gospel to
the Gentiles, and asserted their interest in Christ, and through him, in all
the blessings of the Covenant of Grace, he desires they would not be
discouraged or disheartened at any thing that shall befall him in this cause,
and he tells them it would be their glory if they were not. From Ver. 1, to 14.

7. That they may not be discouraged, he tells them, He daily bows his knees to
the Father of our Lord Jesus (and in him the Father of all the regenerate,
whether triumphant in Heaven, or militant here on Earth; and that whether Jews
or Gentiles, whom he will have named his Children, counting them for his
Family) that he would according to his rich and glorious mercy furnish them by
his Spirit with a daily increase of spiritual strength in their minds and
hearts, whereby they may be enabled to resist the Devil, and all the Enemies
and Adversaries of their souls, which they shall meet with in their Christian
course; that being firmly united to Christ by faith, he may constantly dwell in
their hearts by the gracious operations of his holy Spirit, quickening, ruling,
and fashioning them daily more and more to his own will. And further, that they
may be rooted and firmly settled in an experimental knowledge and sense of the
greatness of God's love Agit de Charitate Dei erga nos, non Contra, ut ex mox
sequentibus patebit. Sic initio Epistolae fundamentum salutis nostrae saepius
collocavit in ipsa charitate, misericordia and beneplacito Dei. Eodem modo
fecit, etiam capite secundo v. 4. Tunc vero dicimur in ea firmiter radices
egisse, cum viva fide tenacissime in benignitate Dei haeremus and perseveramus.
Flac. Illyr.
and free grace in Christ; and may be able, with all true believers, to
understand (in some measure) the vast dimensions of the love of the Father and
the Son to lost sinners; which is so large, so free, so wonderful, that it is
beyond the reach of any created Understanding fully to comprehend it. And
lastly, that they may be filled with all the fullness of God; that is, with all
the graces of his Spirit, which he usually imparts to his Children in this
life; and so made more and more partakers of the Divine Nature. He concludes
his prayer with an heavenly Doxology or Thanksgiving unto God, who has begun a
good work in them, and is able to carry it on, and to bestow more and greater
good things upon them, than they can ask or imagine, according to that Almighty
Power which he has hitherto evidenced, in converting and quickening of them to
a new life. To this All-wise, most Powerful, and most Gracious God, he desires
all glory may be ascribed in the true Church, and among the visible Professors
and Members thereof, in and through the mediation of Christ Jesus; and that in
all ages and generations, as long as the world shall stand, and to all Eternity
after time shall be ended. From Ver. 14, to the end.

Having thus dispatched the doctrinal part of this Epistle, Chap. 4.
he comes now to the practical, wherein he exhorts the Ephesians to diverse
Christian duties, in testimony of their gratitude to God for all those benefits
beforementioned. And first, to general duties, common to all Christians; and
then to more special and peculiar, to some particular Relations. The more
general duties he exhorts to, are these contained in this Chap. and to the 22
verse of Chap. 5. And in the first place, as an Apostle that was at that time a
prisoner for the Cause of Christ, he exhorts them to walk worthy of their
heavenly vocation; expressing the worthiness and answerableness of their
walking, in these particulars: 1. In lowliness of mind, and meekness. 2. In
long-suffering, and a loving-forbearance one of another. 3. That they would
endeavor to maintain an union of heart and spirit, of judgment and affection,
among the members of the Church; even such an union whereof the Spirit of God
is the Author: which union is maintained by a peaceable disposition and
deportment, that being the bond V. 3. In vinculo] per vinculum, i. e. per pacem
quae animos conjungit. Vatab.
or ligament that binds Christians together; whereas discord and division cuts
that bond asunder. And he inforces this exhortation to peace and unity, by an
argument taken from those many things wherein the Church and all the true
members thereof agree. He instances in seven, which are as so many bonds and
engagements to this union. 1. The whole invisible Church of real Believers, is
but one mystical body, knit by faith to Christ their Head, and by the bond of
love among themselves; and the Catholic Church made up of all Christians, and
true Churches in the world, is also one; because they have the same King, Laws,
Word, Sacraments of admission and nutrition, which they visibly subject
themselves unto. 2. There is one Spirit, who by his gifts and graces animates,
moves, and governs this Body or Society of true believers. 3. The hope
following upon their effectual vocation is one, that is, there is but one
object of their hope, viz. Heaven and Eternal Glory. There is but one Heaven
prepared for all the Saints; and their hoping to meet and live for ever in that
one and the same Heaven, should be an argument to them to live in peace and
concord here. 4. There is one Lord Jesus, who by his work of redemption has
obtained a right to rule over his people as Mediator, Lord-Deputy, and
Administrator, under his Father, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. And Christ being not
divided [1 Cor. 1.13.], there ought not to be any divisions in the Church. 5.
There is one Faith, that is, one true and saving-faith by which both Jews and
Gentiles are saved, namely, faith in the Messiah. 6. One Baptism, by which we
own Christ, and profess our selves his followers, and take on us his Livery.
There were indeed diverse washings among the Jews; but now one Baptism only
among Christians. 7. One God, who is the Father of Christ, and in him of all
true believers [see Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1 Cor. 8.6.], who has a sovereignty over all
his creatures, whose powerful Providence runs through them all, upholding
them in their being; directing, disposing, governing of them all, and all their
actions, and is in all the truly regenerate by the gracious operations of his
Spirit. From Ver. 1, to the 7.

Having pressed them to endeavor after unity, by an argument taken from those
many things wherein the Church and all the true members thereof agree; he now
answers an objection which he foresaw some would be apt to make against what he
had said. They would object, That though there be many things wherein the
Church and all the true members thereof agree; yet there are many things also
wherein they differ. To this he answers, that the diversity of gifts and
graces, and their diverse measures, bestowed by Christ upon the several members
of the Church, do all tend to unity, seeing they all come from one and the same
Author, and are all given for the promoting one and the same End. This he
proves out of Psalm. 62.18. where David by a prophetical spirit speaking of
things to come as already past, foretells that Christ should in a triumphant
manner, ascend up on high, that is, to the highest Heavens, and should lead
captivity captive; that is, as he had upon the Cross foiled all the spiritual
enemies of his Church and people, and begun to triumph over them; so in his
ascension he should continue the triumph [see Judge. 5.12.] as Conquerors used
to do. And as they used to scatter the spoils, and other rich gifts, among the
applauding-Citizens and Soldiers, so should Christ at his ascension pour forth
and distribute a large measure of the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit unto his
Church, and the several members thereof: which Prophecy the Apostle shows was
now fulfilled by Christ. He further declares, That Christ ascending to Heaven
by his own divine power, did presuppose his foregoing humiliation and
abasement, in all the degrees of it, even his descending to the lower parts of
the earth; which expression is to be understood, not by comparing the parts of
the earth among themselves, but by comparing Earth with Heaven, the Earth being
the lowest part of the World. And particularly, it either points out his
conception in the womb of the Virgin [see Psalm. 139.15.], or his burial
[expressed by a like phrase, Mat. 12.40.], with all the other steps of his
humiliation intervening. So that the Person who thus descended to take on him
our humane nature, with the senseless infirmities thereof, is the same also who
ascended to the highest Heavens, the seat of Majesty and Glory, far above all
the visible Heavens, and that for this end, That he might fulfill all prophecies
and predictions concerning himself (whereof this of David was one), and all
those parts of his Mediatory Office which were yet to be performed in Heaven;
and particularly, that he might fill and adorn all the members of his Church
with the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit. He further shows, This was the end
of Christ's appointing those extraordinary and ordinary Officers in his Church,
which he then reckons up. First, Apostles, whom he says Christ did give at his
ascension (though he sent forth some of them before, Mat. 10.1.), because some
were then added to the Apostles [ Acts 1.26. and 9.15. and all of them were
then solemnly installed and publicly confirmed by Christ in their Office, by
his visible pouring forth the gifts of the spirit in an extraordinary manner
upon them, Acts 2. v: 3, 4. 2. Prophets, see 1 Cor. 12.28. who foretold things
to come; and by the extraordinary assistance of the Spirit, and Divine
Revelation, expounded the writings of the old Prophets. 3. Evangelists, who
were the companions of the Apostles in their travels [Gal. 2.1, 3.], and sent
out by them as occasion offered it self, to water such Churches as they had
planted [1 Cor. 3.6. 1 Timothy 1, 3.] and the^e to remain until the Apostles
should recall them, 2 Timothy 4.9. Such were Timothy, Titus, Silvanus, Apollos,
Tychicus, etc. Lastly, Pastors and Teachers, which, according to some, are two
distinct Offices, and so they think they are distinguished Romans 12.7, 8. and 1
Cor. 12.8. In so much that by Pastors (as they conceive) are meant those, who
besides their ability to open the Text, are chiefly gifted with the word of
wisdom, wisely and powerfully to apply the word, for working upon the
affections as the matter requires. And the Teacher (to them) is the Catechist,
who is gifted with the word of knowledge or ability to open the Scripture, and
to establish Truth and confute Error. But there are others that take Pastors
and Teachers for one and the same Office. However, the Apostle shows, that all
these Gifts and Offices, though diverse in themselves, yet are an argument to
unity, because they are all given for the compacting and knitting together the
Saints by the work of the Ministry, In opus in ministerii] in opus
dispensationis, i. e. ad dispensandum and docendum verbum (...)] pro (...) vel
(...) Hebraice Pisc.
and for the edifying the body of Christ, and the particular members thereof,
in faith and holiness: which work of the Ministry in thus edifying the body of
Christ, is to last and continue to the day of judgment, till all that shall be
saved, come (one after another), by means of one and the same faith (for kind,
viz. faith in Christ) and the acknowledgment of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, that is, till Christ's mystical body shall be complete and perfect, and
attain its full stature. He shows also, that another end unto which the work of
preaching is subservient, is, To preserve from error, and that we should not be
like children, wavering and inconstant, tossed with every wind of doctrine, nor
be deceived with the cheating arts (...), id est, Aleatoria Fraud.
and treacherous seducings of corrupt men. And further, the Ministry was
ordained not only to preserve from error, but that believers cleaving to the
truth, and living in love, may grow up in Christ (...) pro (...). Grot.
; that is, by virtue and influence derived from him, may make progress in all
Christian Virtues. being united to him who is the Head. And that he might show
the communion that the members of the Church-Militant have with Christ their
Head, and with one another; and how all Gifts and Offices in the Church tend to
the edification of the whole body, he uses a similitude taken from a natural
body, which is wade up of several members joined together, and by certain
junctures (...).
of supply, viz. the Nerves and Arteries (by which the blood and spirits are
conveyed to the several parts, from the Head and Heart) the particular members
do not only receive nourishment to themselves, but convey it from one to
another, so that every member receives due increase in measure and proportion
to what it was to be, and to act; and so the whole body grows to maturity. Thus
it is with all sincere believers, viz. with all the true members of the Body of
Christ, the Church Militant: They are joined to Christ the Head by faith, and
to one another by love. And all the Offices and Functions of the Church are
junctures of supply and subministration; through which, as through so many
Channels, the knowledge of saving-truth, and matter of spiritual nourishment, is
conveyed from Christ the Head, to the particular Members. And by that spiritual
nourishment communicated to them from Christ (by the means of these
conveyances), they grow in grace, according to the effectual working of the
Holy Ghost, which he works in every member, imparting to it such a measure of
grace as he judges convenient, according to the place and function it holds
in the body, and the use which he intends to make of it for the good of the
Church: and so the whole body grows up in love to Christ the Head, and the
particular members in love and charity one toward another. From Ver. 7, to the
17.

2. He earnestly beseeches and obtests them in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and
as they would answer it to Him, Not to walk as other unconverted Gentiles walk,
following that which their unrenewed minds dictates unto them, having their
understandings darkened, so that they see not that which by the light of Nature
they might see, being utterly estranged from that spiritual life which Christ
communicates to those who believe in him. And all this, through the great
ignorance that is in them; the cause of which ignorance, is the great hardness
of heart which they have contracted through a long course and custom in sin;
insomuch that they wilfully refuse good, and are obstinately bent upon evil;
being hardened, not only naturally from their birth (Psalm. 51.5.), but
voluntarily by their own wilfulness, Exodus 8.15; and judicially by God, Exodus
9.12. Yea, in a kind of senslesness and fearlesness of God's judgments, he
shows, they give up themselves to all impurity, and to the committing of all
the unnatural sins of the flesh, and that with greediness. But he tells them,
the knowledge of Christ, and his Doctrine (wherein they had been instructed),
was utterly inconsistent with such dissoluteness and prodigious licentiousness;
and this they would make to appear, if they had learned Christ Si ita edocti
estis Evangelium, quo modo illud revera se habet, prout a Jesu ipso praedicatum
est. Grot.
(speaking to them by his Ministers) in such a manner as they ought, and had
been inwardly and effectually taught by his spirit, and had received the divine
truth as it was preached by himself, and is delivered in his Gospel. Which
Gospel or Doctrine of Christ, he shows, does injoin them, 1. That they daily
endeavor to put off and divest themselves of the old corrupt nature (which
bears a resemblance of the old Adam) by which they were led in the days of
their unregeneracy, and which daily grows worse and more corrupt, and more
corrupts and depraves a man by its deceitful lustings Per cupiditates
seducentes. Grot.
, and carries him on to destruction, if it be not resisted and subdued. 2, That
they seriously endeavor to have their understandings Alludit ad ritum Baptismi
in quo vestes deponebantur and resumebantur. Grot.
renewed, and to get a new quality of divine light in the supreme power of
their souls Hic, spiritus mentis, est ipsa men's; sic Hebraei dicunt lutum coeni.
[Col. 3.10.] and that they put on the new man, taking care that not only their
minds be renewed, but their wills and affections also, that they may indeed be
new creatures, and live in the exercise of righteusoness and true holiness;
which renewing-work is carried on by God's creating-power, who forms the new
man after his own image. From Ver. 17, to 15.

3. He gives now six particular precepts belonging to the second Table; 1. To
abstain from all lying (which is a sin prejudicial to humane society), and that
they labor always to speak the truth. For we are all members of the same body
of mankind. As therefore in the natural body, if one member should defraud and
circumvent another, it would be accounted monstrous; so it must needs be in
them, if they allowed themselves in lying, to the injuring of any man in the
world, much more of their Fellow Christians, between whom there is a straiter
union. 2. He advises them to take heed of sinful anger, which usually is rashly
kindled [Prov. 14.17], and upon very light cause; and ordinarily exceeds the
just bounds. If they find any such commotion or inflammation of mind in
themselves as this, he exhorts them to suppress it speedily, even before the
Sun go down; lest by giving way to it, and persevering in it, they should open
the door to Satan to enter into their hearts, who would be ready enough to
incite them, by his uncessant suggestions, to act some great evil or mischief.
3. He exhorts these among them, who in the time of their Paganism and
unregeneracy had made no conscience of Stealing, that now they should do so no
more; but to be laborious in a good and honest Calling, that they may be able
to spare something for the supplying the necessities of others. 4. He gives
directions for the right ordering of the tongue, and forbids all corrupt and
unsavory communication and discourse, such as argues a rotten and an
unrenewed heart [Mat. 12.35.] and which is contagious and infectious to the
hearers. He prescribes, That their speech should be seasoned with the salt of
divine wisdom, that it may be a means of conveying grace to others, and working
gracious effects upon them. And he inforces his exhortation with this reason,
Because by corrupt communication they would grieve the holy Spirit of God: Not
that he can properly be grieved; but he is said to be grieved, when we do that
which in it self is apt to grieve him, if he were capable thereof; and which
provokes him to do that, which grieved persons use to do, namely, to withdraw
his gracious and comforting-presence. And all true believers should especially
take heed, that they do not grieve this holy Spirit, because by his renewing
and sanctifying of their hearts, he imprints the draught and lineaments, as it
were, of his own image upon them, whereby they are not only set apart, and
marked, and sealed, as his peculiar goods; but themselves also may be thereby
assured that they are His, and shall be safely kept under that seal, until the
day of the redemption of their bodies, that is, the resurrection and day of
judgment, Romans 8.23. Lastly, He amplifies and enlarges his second precept
concerning the restraining of anger, by forbidding the several branches,
degrees, and effects of it, such as are, bitterness, wrath, and fierceness, and
such anger as carries with it desire of revenge. Also clamor, or ^^^^terous
words, and loud menaces, evil speaking, or disgraceful contumelies; and malice,
which is a rooted and settled anger. And as a proper remedy against all these,
he exhorts them to exercise mutual kindness; neither carrying it loftily, nor
morosely; and to be tenderhearted, having a sense of the miseries and
infirmities of others; freely pardoning wrongs and injuries, setting God s
ex^mple before their eyes, who freely pardons believers, in and through his
Son, all their offenses. From Ver. 25, to the end.

Seeing they did all profess themselves to be Children of God by adoption,
Chap. 5.
he exhorts them to imitate their heavenly Father in the exercise of kindness,
mercy, and forgiveness; and ^hereby to evidence themselves to be his Children
indeed. And that they should walk in love, that is, that all their actions
toward their Neighbors should be ordered by love: which exhortation he
enforces by an argument taken from Christ's example, who loved us, and
eminently evidenced his love, by giving himself freely, and of his own accord,
even unto death for us; yea, offering himself a Propitiatory-sacrifice unto
God, as was typified by the Levitical offerings and sacrifices; which
sacrifices was highly acceptable to God, and is said to be of a sweet savor
unto him [see Genesis 8.21.], because thereby he was satisfied and appeased. Next,
he enjoins them to take heed of Fornication, and all other sorts of
uncleanness, so usual among unconverted Gentiles in that City. As also, to
beware of Covetousness In talibus urbibus maxim regnabat perlas and nefas rem
augendi cupido. Nam non quaeritur unde habeas sed oportet habere.
, or injurious getting Estates. He would have them so free from those vices,
that none of them, being Christians, might be once named or suspected as guilty
of any of them; and that among themselves these vices might not be once named
without detestation; remembering, that they were Saints by profession, separated
from the world, and dedicated unto God. 3. That they would avoid all filthy
impure discourse (which is contrary to decency, Christian gravity, and modesty)
and all foolish talking (which only discovers the speakers folly and
indiscretion) and scurrilous jesting Cum testetur Aristoteles (...) saepa poni,
pro (...); non dubito si^ in hoc loco accipiendam esse vocem Casaub.

Deus ipse post labores resici animum voluit ut ad labores novos reddantur
homines alacriores. Et ad jocandum propensionem indidit mortal^um animis; quae
frustra foret nisi honest quis and ex virtute jocari posset. Habet ergo
Urbanus pro fi^e solam honestatem, ad quam dirigit omnem, quam ex ludis
joci^que percipit voluptatem.


; otherwise innocent facetiousness whereby the spirits may be refreshed, and
the mind more fitted for serious things, is not forbidden. And he intimates to
them. That Christians should be careful not only to avoid those things which
are palpably gross and evil, and cried out against by all; but also such things
which are inconvenient, and unbeseeming their Christian Profession. And
therefore he exhorts them, that instead of scurrilous jesting, they should
for their mutual cheering, rather recount the favors and mercies they had
received from God (and particularly that great and wonderful Mercy of redeeming
them by his Son) and accordingly excite and stir up one another to praise him
for them. And that they might give the more heed to what he now wrote, he tells
them, That this they might assure themselves of (and they could not be ignorant
of it, if they well understood the Gospel), that no whoremonger, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater (because he sets his prime
affections of love, delight, and confidence, upon riches in that measure which
is only due to God), V. 5. In Regno Christi and Dei, h^c. qui Deus est. Pro
relativo pronomine, quandoque usurpatur conjunctio. Glass.
has a^y right to the Kingdom of Heaven (which is the Kingdom both of the
Father and the Son), unto which we can have no access but by and through the
Son. And lest any should think within themselves, that these things he had now
reproved, were no such great matters, or at least not so dangerous as he
affirmed, he tells them, That all such suggestions were vain and deceiving; for
those sins would certainly draw down the wrath of God upon those children of
disobedience that went on in them, as they had done upon Sodom and Gomorrah. He
advises them therefore, Not to join with those that lived in those sins, lest
they should partake with them in their punishments. And he backs his advice
with an argument taken from that blessed change that was wrought in them since
they became Christians. They were formerly ignorant of God, and the way to
Heaven (having blind minds, unrenewed hearts, and living profane lives), and
were in a state of misery, liable to the wrath and curse of God [see chap.
4.18.]. But now they were light in the Lord, that is, enlightened by the Spirit
of God, and brought to the saving-knowledg of God and Christ, and into a state
of favor with God, and of joy and peace, and filial confidence flowing from
the s^nse thereof; so that there was as much difference between this their
present and former condition, as between darkness and light. And seeing they
were so changed, they should walk as the children of light. And he tells them,
That the fruits of the spirit, dwelling in the hearts of the children of light,
are all sorts of goodness, righteousness, truth, and fidelity. And they that
are children of the light, and acted by the holy Spirit, must labor to bring
forth those fruits, and must diligently search and enquire what is the good and
acceptable will of God, as it is revealed in his word, that they may conform
themselves unto it. And further, he advises them to take heed of being partners
or companions of wicked men in their sins (which are works of darkness, and
which bring those that live and dye in them, without repentance, unto utter
darkness; but instead thereof (as occasion offered it self, and Christian
prudence required, they should seriously reprove them: And if they could not
conveniently do it by words, yet they should be sure to do it by the holiness
of their conversation, which might possibly prove a more effectual way of
reclaiming them. For (he tells them) the wickedness of the unconverted Gentiles
was so abominable, that it was even a shame to mention what was done by them in
secret. But V. 13. But all things being discovered by the light, are made
manifest. Sic legit Hammondus.
if those wicked practices were reproved by the light of God's word in the
mouth of the Reprover, or by the light of his holy life, then they would be
made manifest in their black and ugly colors, unto the actors of them. For the
nature of light is to manifest and discover all things.

And hereby he shows, they would imitate God himself whose great design in his
word is, To convince men of their sins, and to call them to repentance, and
thereby to convey the light and knowledge of Jesus Christ unto them. For his
perpetual voice in the Gospel is, according to that saying of Isaiah, chap. 60.
v. 1. (to which he seems here to allude) Arise thou that sleep; and Arise
from the dead, and Christ shall shine (...) v. 14.] (...)] nimirum in Evangelii
perpetuo tenore. Forsan and haec Christus olim dixerat ut illud Act. 20.35
upon thee with his saving-light. In the next place he exhorts them to walk
circumspectly, and with all the prudence they possibly could; and then they
will be more fit to reprove sin in others: and they should be careful to redeem
the time, that is, improve it to the best advantage of glorifying God, and
doing good to their neighbors, because the days were evil, and full of
troubles, so that opportunities of doing good might in a short time be taken
from them. And further, that they labor to be acquainted with the will of God
revealed in his word, whereby they may be directed in all their particular
duties, and how to avoid the snares and temptations they may meet with. And
because they lived among people much given to drunkenness, he cautions them to
take heed of all excessive and immoderate drinking of wine, which transports
men to insolent and outrageous practices; and instead of filling themselves
with wine (as those Heathens used to do), they should labor to be replenished
with the gifts and graces of the Spirit, which will fill their souls with joy
and gladness, more than wine can fill drunkards with merriment. The wine, when
it mounts into the head with its fumes, it makes a man talk idly and foolishly,
and often transports him to sing lascivious and petulant songs. But when the
Holy Ghost fills the heart of any man, if it excite him (as it does sometimes)
to sing, it carries him to sing and set forth the praises of God. He exhorts
them therefore to converse together as becomes Christians; and if they sing,
that their spiritual joy should vent it self in a melodious singing the praises
of God in Psalms, and divine Hymns and spiritual Songs; their understandings,
hearts, and affections, going along with the matter sung; so as it may tend to
the glory of God, and their mutual edification: For they should be always that
is, upon all due occasions, ready to offer up praise to God for all his mercies
both spiritual and temporal, and that in and through the inter^ession of
Christ, by virtue of whose merits and s^tisf^ction only, our s^rvices of prayer
and praise find acceptance with God [see Ephesians. 1.6.]. From Ver. 1, to 21.

5. Having exhorted them to such duties as b^long to all Christians in general,
he comes now to th^se which belong to them, as they are members of Families.
And first, he premizes, that they should all observe that order which God had
placed them in, whether natural or civil, and accordingly submit themselves one
to another, in the fear of God; that is, so as they may evidence and testife,
that they truly fear God, who injoins that submission. This premized, He then
exhorts Wives to submit themselves to their own Husbands, having a due esteem
for them, which is a great root of love and submission. And the manner of this
submission must be as to the Lord; that is, it must be willing and sincere, as
resembling that submission they perform to Christ. It must flow from conscience
and respect to that duty which they owe to Christ, who accounts that subjection
flowing from respect to his Ordinance, as obedience to himself. The grounds of
this subjection, he shows, must be, 1. The Husband's headship and superiority,
by reason of his Sex; in which respect the Man is called the Image of God in a
sense peculiar to himself which agrees not to the woman, 1 Cor. 11.7. And God
would have some resemblance of Christ's headship over the Church, held forth in
the Husband's over the Wife. And as Christ is the Savior of his body, and his
dominion tends to the procuring and bringing about the Church's good and
salvation; so the Husband's superiority and authority is given him for the
procuring the good and welfare of his Wife; namely, that he may defend her from
injuries, provide comfortably for her, as he is able; and direct her in things
necessary, according to his power. And upon this account the Wife ought to
practice this duty of submission, because her Husband's power and authority
over her, is for her good. For his dominion is not to be tyrannical or
rigorous, but loving, gentle, and amiable; and such as the Wife may look upon
as a mercy to her self, as well as a dignity to her Husband. And as Christ is
the Head of the Church for its good, so the Husband is appointed the head of
the Wife for her good and benefit. As therefore all that are regenerate, and
true members of the Church, do willingly subject themselves to Christ; so he
shows it is fit that Wives should be subject to their own Husbands in every
thing that is lawful and honest. In the next place he comes to the duty of
Husbands; exhorting them, Not to abuse that superiority which God has given
them over their Wives, by a domineering, harsh, or bitter carriage [see Col.
3.18.]; but instead thereof, to love them with a special and conjugal love,
such as no other must share in. This he inforces from Christ's example, who
loved his Church not in words only, but in deeds; testifying the greatness of
his love, by giving himself for it [see v. 2. of this chap.], that he might
translate it from a state of sin and death, to a state of grace and life; that
he might regenerate and sanctify it, that he might cleanse it, and do away the
guilt of sin cleaving to believers, by justifying their persons [Rom. 8.1.];
and the filth, and power, and activity of sin, by the renovation of their
natures. And the external means by which be effects all this, are, 1.
Baptism, called here, the washing of water. And, 2. The Ministry of his word.
And his end in thus cleansing and sanctifying his Church in this life, is, That
it may be holy, not having blemish, spot, or deformity (that is, exempt from
blame and reprehension); when it shall be presented to himself, as the Bride to
the Bridegroom, for the solemn consummation of the begun-marriage, Rev. 19.7.
And according to this example, Husbands ought to love their Wives even as their
own bodies, For there is so near a union between them, that he that loves his
Wife, loves himself. It Is therefore as unnatural for a man, not to love his
Wife, as to hate his own flesh; which all men are so far from doing, that they
nourish and cherish it, and do all things imaginable for its preservation. And
after the same manner does Christ also nourish and cherish his Church, and
provide all things necessary for it, because his Church is as nearly joined to
him, as Eve was to Adam, of whom (being made of a rib taken out of his side
with flesh on it) he said, Genesis 2.23. This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of
my self. So all believers, by reason of the spiritual union betw^en Christ and
them, are members of his body, and as it were of his flesh and bones, as Eve
was said to be of Adam's. And because the Wife is so nearly conjoined to her
Husband, that she is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; therefore a man
is to leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife (that is, to love his
Wife more than them), and they two The Law says, A man shall be joined to his
Wife, and they two (not they three, or four) shall be one flesh. And this union
cannot be dissolved, except in the case of Adultery, Mat. 19.9. or wilful
desertion of the one party persisted in, and that out of hatred of the
Christian Profession of the other party, after all means used to the contrary,
1 Cor. 7.18. See page 99. of chap. 5. of the Harm. of the four Evang.
shall be one flesh; that is, as one flesh, or one body. And this union between
Man and Wife, he shows, resembles the union between Christ and his Church,
which he calls a great mystery, because Christ and Believers come thereby to be
not one flesh, but one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. But leaving this spiritual union of
Christ and his Church, he concludes the matter he was upon, exhorting the
Husband to love his Wife as himself, and the Wife to reverence her Husband.
From Ver. 21, to the end.

6. Chap. 6.
He enjoins Children to be obedient to their Parents in all things that are
pleasing to the Lord. 1. From the equity of it, Because the Law of God and
Nature requires it. 2. Because this is the first Commandment of the second
Table, which has a particular promise annexed to it, viz. length of days;
which promise is either actually fulfilled by God; or else by change of the
benefit he gives them a much better life in his own Kingdom for it. From Ver.
1, to 4.

7. He enjoins Fathers, that they be not too severe toward their Children, nor
abuse their fatherly power over them, by unjustly provoking them, or
imbittering their spirits, which is done by denying them what is fit, See Lam.
4.3.
or commanding them things in themselves unlawful, or inveighing against them
with bitter words See 1 Samuel 20. v. 30.
, or by immoderate correcting of them. But he tells them, their duty on the
contrary is, To bring them up in good nurture, and to give them such
admonitions and instructions as may teach them to live according to the
Doctrine of our Savior, and the Rule of the Gospel. Ver. 4.

8. He enjoins Servants, in all lawful things to be obedient to their own
Masters (who ac^ording to the Laws of m^n, and in things temporal belonging to
the flesh or body, have the rule over them, though not over their Consciences);
that they serve them with reverence, and fear Cum magna solicitudine. Estius.
of offending them; that they serve them faithfully and sincerely, and with
regard to Christ's command; and so in obeying them, they will s^rve Christ:
that they serve them not only with eye-service, when they are present to
overl^ok them, and that merely that they may please them, and avoid their
displeasure; but that they may approve themselves the faithful servants of
Christ (who sees the heart), and such as desire to do what God enjoins them,
cheerfully; and accordingly set themselves to serve their Masters with good
will, and a voluntary obedience; designing thereby not only to please them, but
God also; and to serve Him, in duly serving their Masters, according to his
command, remembering, that God will faithfully re^ompence either here (as he
does sometimes) or hereafter [see Col. 3.24.] all those who make conscience of
doing good, and performing their duty as service to him, and that whether they
be bondmen or free. From Ver. 5, to 9.

9. He exhorts Masters, in doing the duty of their places toward their
Servants, That they also do it as unto the Lord; that is, so as to endeavor to
please and approve themselves unto God therein Which seems to be the meaning of
that phrase Ye Ma^ters, do the same things unto them; which is to be understood
not of the duties themselves (which are much different from the duties of
servants) but as to the manner of doing them, viz. with singleness of heart as
to the Lord, and in obedience to his will and command.
. And particularly, that they exercise their authority over them, not
wrathfully and imperiously, but mildly and gently, remembering that they also
have a Master above them in Heaven, who will bring them to account, as for
other things, so for their carriage toward s^rvants; for there is no respect
of persons with him. Ver. 9.

10. In the conclusion of this Epistle, he encourages them to be strong in the
Lord, that is, to act their faith on his Almighty Power and Strength; and to
put on the whole armor of God, that is, all those divine and spiritual
defensatives and weapons which Christ has afforded them for the repelling of
all the subtle temptations and stratagems of Satan. For they are to remember*
that the Christians warfare is not only against flesh and blood, but the whole
Army of unclean spirits, the usurping Princes and Potentates of this world (the
greatest part whereof lies in darkness and ignorance) who r^ve about in the
regions of the air Hebraeorum sententia est omnia a terra ad coelum nempe
astrife rum plena esse talium spirituum. Grot.
. Their danger therefore being so great, they had need be harn^ss d with the
whole Armor of God, that they may be able to r s^st in the time of temptation,
and to hold out to the end against all the assaults of Satan, or the
allurements of the flesh and the world; that having done all required of them,
they may be able to stand in the day of batt^l. The particular pieces of
spiritual armor he advises them to put on, are th^se: 1. The Military Girdle
of Truth and Sincerity. 2. The Breast Plate of Righteousness, whereby we are
inclined, and do accordingly endeavor to give b^th to God and man their due
and right, Acts 24.16. 3. Seeing the way to Heaven is not smooth and eeven, but
has much trouble and temptation, many piercing briers and thorns, and much
ruggedness in it, they should prepare themselves with Christian courage and
resolution (by a frequent meditation on the Gospel which brings peace and
salvation) to pass through those difficulties and hardships, and thereby they
shall have their feet, as it were, shod and fenced against the inconvenience
and craggedness of the way* as knowing God to be their reconciled Father in
Christ, and that there is no wrath in their cup, and that their wearisom
journey shall have a happy close. 4. Above all the rest, they should be sure to
take the Shield of Faith, by which we believe the truth of God's word in
general, and in a special manner do receive and rest on Christ for pardon and
grace, as he is offered in the Gospel; which Faith, as a Shield, guardeth
against temptations of all sorts, helps to repel them; yea, if any of the
fiery darts of Satan, that is, his violent temptations, be shot into the soul,
this grace quenches the heat and horror of them, and the despair they are apt
to kindle. 5. He exhorts them to take the Helmet of salvation, that is, the
Hope of salvation [1 These. 5.8.], which is a grace whereby we patiently expect
salvation [Tit. 1.2.] according to the promise of God; which assured and
well-grounded hope of eternal salvation, supplies the place of an Helmet,
securing the head, and so fortifying and magnanimating the Christian in his
spiritual warfare. 6. They should take the word of God, which supplieth the
place of a Sword, to fight with against our spiritual Enemies, and is called
here the Sword of the Spirit, because the Spirit of God has revealed it [2
Pet. 1.21.], and does join his own power and efficacy with it, to enable us
thereby to resist and drive away the devil, to chase away temptations, and to
slay and kill the inward lusts and corruptions of our own hearts. 7. The
seventh piece of Armor, or rather a duty to be practiced, and a means to be
used for the obtaining of all those forementioned pieces of spiritual Armor,
from God, together with the right skill to make use of them against our
spiritual Enemies, is Prayer, whereby we present our desires to God for things
agreeable to his will [1 John 5.14.] in the name of Christ [Joh. 16.23.] with
conf^ssion of our sins, and a thankful acknowledgment of his mercies, Phil.
4.6. Which duty he show should be thus performed. 1. They must pray always,
that is* upon every occasion, in all their necessities, and in every business,
as the matter requires; yet not so as never to intermit, but so as not to give
quite over, but to return to it again. 2. They must use all kinds of prayer,
namely, not only prayer Vid. Grot. in loc.
strictly taken, whereby we seek those good things we want, from God; but also
Supplication, whereby we deprecate evils and judgments, whether felt or feared.
3. They must pray in the spirit, that is, with the heart and spirit, being
stirred up and assisted by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.26, 27. 4. To prayer they
must join watchfulness. And 5. Importunate perseverance, reiterating their
petitions for the same blessings, as often as occasion offers it self, until
they be granted. See 2 Cor. 12.8. Luke 18.5. And lastly, Their prayers must be
offered up not only for themselves, but for others; none are to be excluded,
who are in a capacity to be bettered by them [see 1 John 5.16.]; no, not our
very Enemies; but the Saints, as they are to have the chiefest room in our
hearts, so also the chiefe^t share in our prayers. And the Apostle desires,
that he himself in particular may be remembered in their prayers, desiring them
to beg of God on his behalf, That God would give him a gift and dexterity of
ready uttering, and expressing his conceptions in his public preaching,
together with boldn ss and courage, conjoined with gravity and prudence, to
deliver all his message as he ought to do, without fear or partiality; that he
might make known the mystery of the Gospel with which he was entrusted. For the
maintaining of which, though he was p^rsecuted, and at pr^sent in bonds That
is, in the custody of a Soldier, with whom he might go abroad, having (as the
custom of some Prisoners was) a Chain on his right arm, which was tied to the
Soldier's left arm.
, yet he did still continue to preach it, as an Ambassador of Christ. From Ver.
10, to 20.

He now concludes his Epistle, telling them, That he had sent Tychicus (whom he
highly commends as a faithful Minister in the word of the Lord) to inform them
particularly of his condition, and that he might comfort their hearts by his
presence, and by relating to them God's gracious dealing with him in his
sufferings. He shuts up all, wishing unto them, 1. Peace, that is, peace with
God with their own consciences, and with one another, and all sorts of
prosperity. 2. An increase of mutual love and charity, and of faith; all which
graces flow from God the Father as the Fountain, and from Jesus Christ as the
Conduit-pipe, through the virtue of whose merits and intercession, all
saving-benefits are conveyed unto us. He concludes all, wishing that the favor
of God, and his grace, may be daily more and more manifested toward all them
that love our Lord Jesus in sincerity, that is, that manifest the ardor and
sincerity of their love to Christ, by the purity and incorruptness of their
lives and conversations. From Ver. 20, to the end.

SECT. XI.
ABOUT this time, as it is probable, the Apostle wrote his Epistle to the
Hebrews The name [Hebrew] was common to all the Jews, the posterity of Heber
and Abraham, who were thereby put in mind of their Fathers separating
themselves from profane persons and idol ters. Eber withdrew h^mself from the
wicked world in his time, and retained the primary language in the confusion of
Tongue* (called from him the Hebrew tongue) and propagated it to his posterity,
see Genesis ^.21. Numb. 24.24. And so Abraham also withdrew himself from the
wicked world in his time* b^ing cal^ed of God, Gen 12.1. and so became another
Father of the Church. Whereupon, as he was called an Hebrew from Heber, Genesis
14.13. so all his posterity were called Hebrews from him.
(that is, the believing- Jews, the posterity of Abraham), and sent it by Mark;
who having delivered it where Paul appointed him. went away to Peter now at
Babylon; for Peter mentions Mark there with him, 1 Pet. 5.13; and seems to
speak directly of this Epistle in those words of his, 2 Pet. 3.15, And account
that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, even as our beloved Brother
Paul, according unto the wisdom given unto him, has written unto you. Now that
Paul Some think Paul did not express his name in the beginning of this Epistle,
as he used to do in others, lest some Jews (who were possessed with prejudice
against him) if they had seen his name in the beginning of it, might have been
hindered from duly weighing the matters he wrote of.
did write unto them while he was a Prisoner at Rome, those words Heb. 10.34,
do sufficiently intimate, For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, etc.

The occasion of this Epistle seems to be this. Many of the believing- Hebrews
had entertained the faith of Christ, and yet adhered too much to Moses and the
Levitical Priesthood and Ordinances, and possibly were something doubtful in
their minds whether Jesus of Nazareth were indeed the true Messiah or no. Yet
for their entertaining him so far as they did, they were not only reproached
and reviled by their Contrymen, as Apostates from the Law; but were greatly
persecuted by them. The Apostle understanding their state, wrote this Epistle,
partly to instruct them, and partly to support and encourage them.

The Parts of it are two: 1. Informatory. 2. Hortatory.


In the first he informs them of the transcendent excellency and dignity of
Christ's Person and Office; showing and declaring, (1.) That he was God, chapter 1.
(2.) More excellent than Angels, notwithstanding his Humanity and Humiliation,
the c^uses whereof are there assigned, chapter 2. (3.) A more excel-Prophet than
Moses. By Moses the people were led but only toward Canaan. By faith in Christ
believers enter into a better r^st chapter 3. and 4, to ver. 14. (4.) A more
excellent High Priest than Aaron, from v 14 of chapter 4, to v. 11 of chapter 5. (5.) A
more excellent King and Priest than Melchizedeck. In treating of whom he
prefaces something by way of reproof concerning their dullness and
improficiency, and exhorts them to make progress (and not to stick in their
first principles), and to be steadfast in the faith, representing to them the
horrible danger of relapsing after they have tasted the gifts of the Spirit.
From v. 11 of chapter 5, to v. 19 of chapter 10.

In the Second part, he practically exhorts them to sundry Christian duties.
From v. 19 of chapter 10, to the end.

THE Apostle intending now to represent to the Christian Hebrews the excellency
of the New Testament above the Old, he shows them, The Epistle to Hebrews.

Chap. 1.


That God in the former ages of the world spoke to their Fathers and Ancestors
by the Prophets, manifesting his will unto them by parts (...).
and piece-meals, now a part of it, and then another (as the capacity of the
people in sundry times did require), and in diverse manners (...)
, sometimes by lively voice, sometimes by visions and dreams, sometimes by
inspiration and immediate revelation, sometimes by Urim and Thummim, sometimes
by signs from Heaven, sometimes by Types and symbolical representations; but
now in these last days The last days are to be reckoned from the time Christ
began to execute his Ministerial Function, to the end of the world.
, that is, these Gospel-days, he has spoken to us (who are the children and
successors of the Fathers) by his Son: See Mat. 11.27. And having mentioned the
Son of God, the true Messiah, the Savior of the world; he sets before them the
transcendent excellency of his Person, declaring and asserting, 1. His Deity
and Godhead, and so pointing out his Kingly-office. This he proves by many
arguments. (1.) He is the Son of God, and so more excellent than all the
Prophets by whom God formerly spoke. (2.) As by nature he is truly and properly
the Son of God, and Heir and Lord-Proprietor of all creatures both in heaven
and earth; so he was ordained and appointed to be so, as he is Mediator, by the
External Counsel of God the Father, Psalm. 2.8. that as the Father is Lord over
all, so the Son might be also. And 'twas very fit it should be so, because (3.)
it was by him, as having his being from eternity, and being the Eternal Wisdom
of the Father that the Worlds were made, that is, all things above and below,
visible and invisible; by him (I say) not as a mere Instrument, but as a
primary and principal Agent therein with the Father, Joh. 5.19. Joh. 1.3. Col.
1.16. (4.) He is the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express Image of
his Person. As the brightness issuing from the Sun is of the same nature with
the Sun, and comes naturally and necessarily from the Sun, and is of the same
continuance with the Sun, and yet the Sun and the brightness are distinct each
from other, and the one is not the other; so the Father and the Son are of one
and the same essence, they are coeternal; the Son is from the Father by eternal
generation, and the Person of the one is distinct from the other, Joh. 5.17.
And lastly, The incomprehensible glory of the Father most brightly shines
forth in the Son, Joh. 17.5. And He is the express image of his person, that
is, as no one thing can be more like another, than the picture or image on the
thing stamped, as to the Seal or Instrument wherewith it was stamped, the one
carrying the very form of the other; so Christ is the express image of the
Person of the Father: First, As he is the second Person in the Sacred Trinity;
the whole Divine Essence, and all the Divine Properties being communicated to
him. 2. As he is Immanuel, God with us, his Humane Nature being hypostatically
united to the Divine Nature; and so he is visibly the Character or express
Image of God. For in Christ incarnate, the Divine Properties are most
conspicuous, as, Almighty Power, Infinite Wisdom, Truth, Justice, Mercy, and
the like. In Christ as God-man, dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
Col. 2.9. And in this respect Christ says of himself, Joh. 14.9. He that has
seen me, has seen the Father also. As he that sees the Character or Figure
which is on the thing stamped, sees therein the figure that is on the Seal
wherewith it was stamped. 5. He upholds, preserves, orders, and governs all
things made, by the word of his power Ut Reges verbo suo and mandato subdit^s
facile gubernant; ita filius Dei sine ulla difficultate, omnipotente sua
providentia ac voluntate, quasi verbo solo mundum sustinet, and regit
, that is, by his powerful Providence. As the Father supports and g^verns all
things made, so does the Son. 6. By offering up himself a Sacrifice on the
Cross From the Regal Office of Christ, he proceeds to his Priesthood, the first
part whereof is noted in these words. Faith applies the merit of Christ's
Sacrifice for our justification, and draws virtue from him for our
sanctification.
, he has done that which is sufficient to purge the soul from the guilt of
sin, and which actually does it, when it is rightly applied; so that his blood
does truly cleanse from all sin, 1 John 1.7. The Priest's Sacrifice was of
unreasonable beasts, but Christ's Sacrifice was of Himself. It Is true, only the
Humane Nature of Christ was offered up, 1 Pet. 3.18. and 1 Pet. 4.1. yet by
reason of the hypostatical union of his two Natures in one Person, He is said
to give himself, Ephesians. 5.2. and to offer up himself, Heb. 7.27. and to sacrifice
himself, Heb. 9.26. 7. Having by his death offered up a sufficient Sacrifice
for the expiation of our sins, he rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven,
and sat down on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty on high, there to
continue an High Priest for ever to make intercession for us: so that he was so
far from being vanquished and swallowed up by his sufferings for our sins, as
thereby way was made for his entrance into the highest degree of glory and
dignity that could be attained unto. 8. The Apostle shows, That Christ is above
Angels, having a more excellent name than they, by how much the name Son is
more excellent than the name Angel or Messenger. And the name of the Son of God
is by inheritance due to Him, being according to his Divine Nature the Son of
God by eternal generation; and as Man, being God's Son, because by assumption
of the Humane Nature into personal union with the Godhead, he is made so to be,
Luke 1.35. So that the same person who was the Son of God, and to be incarnate,
is now the Son of God in^arnated. Further, they might consider, that Christ's
Divine nature is infinitely more excellent than the Angelical: yea, his Humane
nature, by virtue of its hypostatical union with the Divine, has likewise a
dignity transcendently surpassing the Angelical nature; Christ having, as
Mediator between God and man a more eminent Function than belongs to any Angel.
This last argument the Ap stle confirms with eight reasons in this Chapter,
whereof the s^ven first are taken out of so many places of Scripture; 1. From
Psalm. 2.7. where God the Father speaking of his Son's incarnation (which was
first wrought in and by his conception, and then manifested to the world by his
birth), Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, that is, declared thee
to the world to be my only begotten Son. As if God the Father had thus said to
the Son: Thou, and thou alone, art truly and properly my Son, not by grace or
adoption, but by nature and eternal generation; and now I do in this last age
of the world declare thee so to be, by thine Incarnation, Doctrine, Works,
Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension into Heaven; whereby it manifestly
appears, that thou, infinitely surpassest all the Angels in Heaven. 2. From 2 Samuel 7.14. I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son. In which
place, in Solomon the Type, God promises the sending of the Messiah, whom he
would openly acknowledge for his Son, and so declare him to the world. 3. From
Psalm. 97.7. which contains a prophecy of Christ's Royalty. Now says the
Apostle, when God the Father speaks there of bringing in again his first
begotten Christ is the first begotten of God, in regard of the eternity of his
Sonship. He was begotten before any creature was made, therefore styled the
firstborn of every creature, Col. 1.15

Christus merito adorandus, ut pote qui sit primogenitus Dei filius, quia ante
eum nullus; and simul unigenitus quia solus est Proprius Dei filius Joh. 1.18.
Romans 8.32. and Col. 1.15. vocatur (...), h. e. (...) primo-genitus ante omnem
creaturam. Alivocem eam Metaphorice interpretantur, scil. Dominum ac
Principemper Metaphoram, a primogenitis Veteris Test. similitudine ducta, qui
post-genitorum erant Domini.

Cum inducit in orbem terrarum] h. e. cum de inductione loquitur per Metonym.
subjectae materiae pro adjuncto. Qualis vero inductio and adventus Christi hic
intelligitur? Quae ex Psalm. 97. (de quo hic agitur) ad Christi regnum
describandum ad^eruntur, illa illustriora sunt quam ut videantur statui ejus
humili posse convenire. Id circo alii de secundo Adventu ad judicium
interterpretantur, quo stipatus erit Angelorum adorantium ac servientium
satellitio: qui Angeli, per metaphoram ^ii appellantur, quod sint Deo similes
potestate, quemadmodum, and eadem ratione Magistratui id nomen tribuitur. Ps.
82.1, 6. Ps 138.1.


, in a glorious manner to judge the world, he says, Let the Angels of God
worship him. And therefore he that is to be worshipped, is greater than they
that are to worship him. 4. From Psalm. 104.4. where the Psalmist speaking of
God's glorious power in creating the heavens, and the waters, clouds and winds
under the heavens; before he descends lower to the earth, and the things
thereon, he mentions the Angels, whom he has made spiritual substances,
speedy and active, of a lively and swift nature (not flesh, which is lumpish
and heavy), and uses them as his Ministers, in executing his great works both
in heaven and earth; and shows, how they are ready to serve him at his beck,
as the Winds, and flashes of Lightning, and other Meteors are Some render it,
Who makes his Angels winds, and his Ministers a flame of fire, that is, who
uses them as Winds and Lightning.
. So that the argument from that place lies thus: They that are made Spirits
and Ministers, are inferior to him that made them so: but so the Angels were
made by Christ; therefore they are inferior to him. 5. From Psalm. 45.6, 7;
which Psalm declares, That Christ is true God; that, as Mediator, he has an
everlasting Kingdom That phrase of delivering up the Kingdom to his Father, 1
Cor. 15 24. must be understood of the manner of his government by his
Ministers, Ordinances, and other means. For all things being accomplished by
them for which they were ordained, they shall cease, etc.
, which began at his ascension, when he was actually set upon his Throne in
Heaven; that his government is a righteous government; that he orders all
things justly and righteously, loving righteousness, and hating iniquity. And
that he might be such a King, God (even his God and Father, who deputed and
sent him, and entered into Covenant with him, as he was Head of his mystical
Body, Isa. 42.6.49.8.) anointed his Human Nature (yet so as united to the
Divine Nature, both making one Person) with the Oil of gladness, that is, with
the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, which quickened and made him joyful in
all his undertakings for our redemption, and which rejoice the hearts of all
such as receive of these gifts and graces from him. Which anointing he
received, not in measure, but abundantly, above what was ever imparted either
to Angels, or any of the members Quoad officium Christus nullos habet (...);
solus est Mediator. Juxta naturam humanam Christus (...) habet omnes omnino
homines. Quia vero natura humana in Christo condita est ad imaginem Dei, (...)
habet omnes fideles, quos ideo pro fratribus agnoscit, ipse promogenitus inter
multos fratres. Camer. Vnxit te oleo laetitiae prae sodalibus tuis, h. e.
spiritualibus donis, and sapientiae thesauris, te locupletavit supra tam omnia
quam singula mystici corporis tui membra. Jacob. Capell.
of his mystical Body. 6. From Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. from whence he proves,
That the Son is Jehovah, one in essence with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
who in the beginning of time V. 10. Terra dicitur fundata, similitudine sumpta
ab aedificiis.
created both Heaven and Earth, and all the creatures therein; theref^re he was
before them all, and eternal, and so more excellent than any of them. And
further to prove this, he shows, That the heavens shall wax old like a garment;
that is, shall decay by degrees, or rather at last shall come to an end; and as
Vestures, when they are of no longer use, are folded Ubi usui amplius non sunt
solent complicari and abjici, sicut coeli, scil. aer, and ether auferentur.
Grot. Some think it should be read (...) mutabis, according to the Hebrew, and
not (...), according to the IXX. But it was ordinary for the Apostles to cite
Scriptures as they were found then in the Greek Bibles, though they varied from
the Hebrew; because those Greek Bibles, and not the Hebrew, were in use among
those to whom they wrote.
up, and thrown aside; so when these natural Heavens shall be of no longer use,
they shall as to their present condition be laid aside, and God shall change
them; for though their substance shall be the same, yet in respect of their
qualities they shall be changed, and shali be made now more glorious than
before, Isa. 34.4. Isa. 66.22. And in that they shall at length be changed,
they may be said to perish, Mar. 13.31. The Heavens may be said to wax old as
does a garment, in that they are appointed to an end; to an end, I say, of what
they are now, 2 Pet. 3.10. But Christ is Immutable Aeternitas Christi
explicatur ex comparatione cum rebus creatis, sive in praeteritum tempus, quo
Christus omnes res creatas praecessisse dicitur; sive in futurum, quo dicitur
permansurus illis pereuntibus.
, Mal. 3.6. For as he was before all time, and continues in all ages, so he
will beyond all time continue invariable. This Immutability attributed to
Christ, is properly to be understood of his Divine Nature, which was no ways
altered by assuming the Manhood, but remains the very same it was before. And
in regard of his Humane Nature, his years shall not fail, in that being raised
from the dead, he dies no more, Romans 6.9, but continues and lives for ever,
Heb. 7.24, 25. 7. From Psalm. 110.1, where God the Father in his eternal Decree
predestinating his Son to be the Messiah, and to execute in time the Office of
a Mediator, says unto him, Sit thou on my right hand This Dignity is not
ascribed to his Humanity, singly, in it self considered; but in supposito, as
it hypostatically subsists in the Person of the Son of God. It Is not the
Humanity in it self singly taken, that sits on the right hand of God; but the
Humanity of that Person that sits on the right hand of God. As in the
incarnation, the Humanity did not become God, but the Humanity then became the
Humanity of God. And Christ now sitting at the right hand of God, does reign
every where, even as Man also, though his Humanity be not every where; as a
King does in his Kingdom, though his Body be not every where.

By the particle [until], what is affirmed of the time past, is not denied for
the time to come.


(importing the super-eminent degree of Honor and Dignity he should be
advanced to after his Ascension, as a consequent and reward of his exinanition
and Passion) until I make thine enemies (viz. all that are enemies to thy
Kingdom, the Devil, Antichrist, all wicked men) thy footstool; that is, utterly
subdue them, and put them under thy feet. This Dignity is not ascribed to his
Humanity, singly, in it self considered; but in supposito, as it hypostatically
subsists in the Person of the Son of God. It Is not the Humanity in it self
singly taken, that sits on the right hand of God; but the Humanity of that
Person that sits on the right hand of God. As in the incarnation, the Humanity
did not become God, but the Humanity then became the Humanity of God. And
Christ now sitting at the right hand of God, does reign every where, even as
Man also, though his Humanity be not every where; as a King does in his
Kingdom, though his Body be not every where.

By the particle [until], what is affirmed of the time past, is not denied for
the time to come.


Not that the Son shall leave off all Rule and Reign; but that he shall then
leave off the administration of that Delegation which he had formerly
undertaken as Mediator; there being then no more need of it, or of his using
those means and actings which formerly he did, when his enemies are all fully
overcome, and his Church fully gathered. And thenceforth he shall reign
together with his Father to all eternity, and of his Kingdom there shall be no
end, Dan. 7.14. Luke 1.33. So that the Apostle's Argument lies thus: He that
sits at God's right hand in glory and dignity, is much more excellent than
those Creatures that are only Ministers; and such is the condition of Christ,
as he proves from this verse; and such is the condition of Angels, as he proves
from the next. For they are ministering spirits sent forth from God (having no
other Lord that has power to send them) to minister for the good of them who
shall inherit salvation, that is, that blessed and glorious estate which is in
Heaven reserved for the whole mystical body of Christ. For being the children
of God, they are joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.16, 17. and therefore God
appoints these his servants to attend them for their good. From v. 1, to the
end.

Chap. 2.
Wherefore seeing Christ was a Teacher so much superior to all that came before
him (yea, to the Angels themselves), he shows, they ought greatly to heed, and
regard, and faithfully retain the Doctrine of the Gospel, which had been
preached to them, lest they be like leaking-vessels, letting it slip out of
their minds and memories. For if the Law given by the ministry of Angels [Acts
7.38.] was firm, stable, and inviolable, and might not be neglected or
dis^beyed, and the transgressors Transgression, by a Metonymy of the effect, is
put for the transgressor.

Ephesians. 1.23. Tit. 2.11.


and disobeyers of it, were justly and severely punished; he asks, how could
they expect to escape who neglect the Gospel which reveals the great salvation
purchased by Christ. Which glorious Gospel was first published by Christ
himself, in the most clear and distinct manner that ever it was published, and
was confirmed by his Apostles, who heard his Sermons, and saw his works, God
bearing witness to their Doctrine by sundry glorious miracles, and the
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost poured out upon them, according to his
own good will and pleasure. From Ver. 1, to 5.

And that he may further persuade them, that more heed is to be given to the
word of Christ, than to the word spoken by Angels; he shows them, That God has
given a greater authority to Christ, than ever he did to Angels. For He has
not put the Church, or Kingdom of the Messiah, of which here he treats (called
here (...) the world to come, in reference to the Old-Testament-times, and to
those who lived before Christ was exhibited in the flesh, and longed to see
this new world, see Mat. 13.17.) in subjection to Angels, but unto his Son, and
that as He is God-man: and therefore in his Kingdom the Angels are to be in
subjection to him, and not to be adored with him. This he proves from Psalm. 8,
Hic Psalmus sensu primum obvio agit de Adamo, and semine ejus: sensu autem
mystico referri debet, and ab Hebraei sapientibus referebatur ad Messiam, and
semen ejus. Nam Adamum figuram gessisse Messiae recepta erat illis temporibus
sententia ut diximus, Romans 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.45. Grot.
wh^re what the Prophet spoke of Man in the general, the Apostle shows may in a
higher and sublimer sense be understood of Christ, who in the state of his
humiliation was (to outward appearance) an ordinary man) yet God was mindful of
him, and careful to afford him all needful succor; and though for a small
space of time, viz. about thirty three years, he subjected him to a condition
inferior to that of Angels (that he might perform all works of obedience and
suffering that were requisite for the accomplishing man's redemption^: yet
after he had suffered in the flesh, he highly exalted him, and advanced him to
Royal dignity (the most excellent that can be), crowning him with glory and
honor, and giving him authority and dominion over the works of his hands, and
putting all the creatures whatsoever (yea, the good Angels and wicked Spirits)
in subjection under his feet; so that all must yield obeisance to him, some as
his enemies perforce; others willingly. And in that the Father is said to have
put all the creatures whatsoever under him, it is manifest he has left nothing
unsubjected to him. And though we see not, says he, for the present all his
enemies perfectly subdued, yet they shall be in due time; so that there is a
further subduing of them still to be expected. However this we know, That
Jesus, who in the state of his humiliation (that he might suffer death, and be
a sacrifice to expiate the sins of men) was made, for a little time, lower than
the Angels, is now highly exalted: And the reason why he was thus humbled, was,
that he might through the free favor of God taste The ground of this phrase may
arise from the ancient custom of the Grecians in putting men to death by giving
them a Cup of Poison to drink. See Joh. 18.11. Mat. 20.22, 23.
death, that is, partake of it (though not be swallowed up by it) (...), for
the redeeming of all Mors Christi est sufficiens remedium pro omnibus, sed non
sufficiens medium sine fide, Mar. 16.16. Joh. 12.32. There is an indefinite
offer of the benefit of Christ's death to every one, none excepted, Isa. 55.1.
Rev. 22.17.
sorts of men, and of every particular person that shall repent and believe in
him, see Joh. 10.15. For God (who is the supreme Cause and untimate End of all
things) having a purpose to bring many sons to glory Whether this act of
bringing many sons to glory, be attributed to the Father or the Son, there is
no great incongruity. For the Father and the Son are one in essence, mind,
will, and work. Whatsoever things the Father does, these also does the Son,
Joh. 5.19. The sons of God and the sons of Christ are all one, even the
regenerate, and adopted.
saw it convenient to make Him (who was to be the Captain of their salvation,
and to guide and lead them to heaven) perfectly, and every way fit for that
office, by exposing Him to many sufferings, and a cruel death, and so to make
him a complete and perfect Redeemer; there needing nothing more to be added to
his sufferings for the satisfying of Divine Justice, and meriting remission of
sins and eternal salvation. For, though Christ was ever perfect in himself; yet
for bringing us to glory, much was wanting, till he had finished his
sufferings. But by his sufferings he made up whatsoever was requisite
thereunto. And if any should ask, How could Christ suffer and dye? he answers,
That Christ, who sanctifies us by his holy Spirit, took our humane nature upon
him (a humane soul and body) and so became of one nature with us, for which
cause he is not ashamed to call and acknowledge his sanctified ones for his
brethren, as he proves from Psalm. 22.22; where, though in the first sense the
words may be understood of David, who professes that he will declare the Name,
that is, the Attributes and Counsels of God in the midst of the Israelites, his
brethren [see Deuteronomy. 17.20.]; yet in a sublimer sense they ought to be
understood of Christ, who declared the Name, that is, whatsoever is meet to be
known of God, viz. his Divine Excellencies, Counsels, and Actions See Joh.
8.26.28. Joh. 17.6, 8. Joh. 15.15.
, and that unto his brethren, see Joh. 20.17. And as David sang praises to God
in the midst of the Church or Congregation and Assembly of God's people; so did
Christ pnblickly set forth God's praise among his Disciples, Mat. 26.30. And as
a further evidence of Christ's Humanity, the Apostle brings in two other
Testimonies; the first from Psalm. 18.2, where Christ, under the type of David,
professes to trust in God, and to rest on him, to be supported and carried
through all his sufferings and undertakings: And from Isa. 8.18. where the
Prophet Isaiah Many speeches of the Prophets concerning themselves, and many
prophecies concerning Cyrus and others (who were types of Christ), are in the
New Testament applied to Christ, being one way, and in one manner, verified of
them; and in another way, and in another manner, many times fulfilled in him.
Dr. Richardson.
declares, That himself, and the Children God had given him, were for signs, as
their names intimated, to foretell and fore-signifie the goodness of God to the
Jews, and that he would be with them, and help them against their enemies. Now
that which was historically true of Isaiah and his children, the Apostle shows
may be fitly applied to Christ. The Prophet and his Children were a type of
Christ, and of the faithful which believe in him (whom God has of his
free grace given unto him, to be fitted and brought to glory) who are his
children, begotten to him by his Spirit in the Ministry of his Gospel; whom (by
way of rejoicing for the good success of his Ministry) he presents with himself
unto his Father, as one who faithfully fulfilled the charge committed to him,
in fitting them for glory, and bringing them to it, though in the world they
were accounted Wonders and Monsters. The Apostle further shows, That Christ,
out of love to his Children, would partake of the same humane nature with them,
that he might by his own death on the Cross satisfy the Justice of God for
them, and so evacuate and destroy the power of the Devil, which he, as an
Executioner, has by the Law against sinners. And another end of his death,
was, That he might deliver his Children from the fear of death (both temporal
and eternal), to the bondage of which they were before subject. And being to
suffer death for those ends, certain it is, that he took not on him the nature
of Angels, but the humane nature, and was of the very substance of man, and was
born of the seed of Abraham, to whom the promise that the Messiah should come
of his seed, was often made [Gen. 12.3. and 18.18. and 22.18.]. Wherefore it
became him in all things to be like his brethren, sin only excepted [Heb.
4.15.], that he might be a compassionate High Priest, and faithful in all that
he was to transact and negotiate with God on the behalf of man, and that he
might make atonement and reconciliation for sinners by the Sacrifice of
Himself. And lastly, That having himself been exposed to so many sufferings and
temptations, he might more readily pity and succor his members when they are
tempted. From Ver. 5, to the end.

Chap. 3.
The Apostle having distinctly set forth the Divine Nature of Christ, and his
Kingly-office, in the first Chapter, and his Humanity in the Second; he now
comes to set forth his Prophetical-office in this, and part of the next
Chapter. And that he might set forth his Prophetical-function with greater
advantage, in the first place he exhorts the believing- Hebrews, to whom he
wrote (who were effectually called to embrace the faith of Christ, and thereby
raised to a hope and expectation of heavenly things) to consider and ponder in
their hearts the high dignity and excellency of Christ (that so they might
constantly adhere to him, and obey him) who was sent with Commission from his
Father to preach that Gospel to them which they professed to believe, and to be
their High Priest The Function of an Apostle and High Priest, were the greatest
Functions that ever God instituted in his Church. None greater than an Hi h
Priest under the Law. None greater than an Apo^^le under the Gospel. Both never
conjoined in one man, but here.
also, to make atonement for their sins. Of the first of these he treats in
this, and to the 14 verse of the next Chapter, and then proceeds to speak of
the other. For the setting forth of his Prophetical-office, he declares th^se
particulars: 1. Because the Jews had generally too high a conceit of Moses, and
were apt to profess themselves his Disciples in opposition to Christ [see Joh.
9.28.]; he tells them, That as Moses was faithful in delivering all things
committed to his charge, that either concerned the service of God, or the
welfare of the people of the Jews: So Christ was as faithful in delivering the
mind and will of his Father, who deputed and appointed him to this Office. He
was as faithful in his message for the changing the Levitical Ordinances and
Priesthood, as Moses was in appointing them. 2. He shows, that Christ was much
to be preferred before Moses, though Moses, compared with other men, was a
person very extraordinary. And for the proof of this, he makes use of two
Metaphors, the one taken from a Builder, and an House; the other from an Heir
and a Servant. 1. As the Builder of the House is justly accounted worthy of
more honor than the House; so Christ (who is the Builder 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians.
2.20. All that are brought into the Church, are built by Christ; that is, have
their gifts and graces, their functions and privileges, from Him.
of the House (his Church) is worthy of more honor than Moses, who is himself
but a part of that House. And as no house, nor part of an house, is built by it
self; so neither is the Church. But Christ, who is God, is the builder of the
Church, and every member of it, and also of all things else; and so more
excellent than Moses. 2. As a Son and Heir ruling over his own house, is more
excellent than any person that is only a Servant therein; So Christ is to be
looked upon as a Son, and Moses but as a Servant. Moses was faithful indeed, in
the Church, as a Servant, to testify and declare that which he had received,
and which was afterward more fully and openly to be spoken and declared
concerning Christ and his Kingdom: but Christ, as a Son and Heir, having rule
over his own house, gives precepts and commands by his own authority. And he
shows them, how they may approve themselves parts and members of this House or
Church, viz. if they hold fast their faith Faith is that grace whereby we are
united to Christ, receive spiritual life from him, are made lively stones,
whereby we grow up an holy Temple; yea, whereby Christ dwells in our hearts,
and so we become his house. Dr. Gouge in loc.
in Christ, and their resolute profession thereof, and their hope and
expectation of the heavenly reward (which rejoiceth the heart, and supports it
under afflictions), and if they persevere in the exercise of those graces with
stability and constancy to the end [see Col. 1.23]. From Ver. 1, to 7.

3. He shows them, that the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 95.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. admonishes
such as from time to time should live in the Church, to take heed of rebelling
against Christ, and disobeying this Prophet, during the day or time wherein he
speaks to them by his Gospel, lest they lose the eternal rest of Heaven, as
their forefathers lost the temporal Canaan for not harkening to Moses. As if he
should have said, If ye will hear Christ's voice calling to you in his Gospel,
then harden not your hearts in this time and season of grace, wherein he speaks
to you, as the Israelites did in the Wilderness when they tempted and provoked
God, and would not believe his power, though they had testimonies enough of it,
by the miracles which they saw he had wrought among them for the space of so
many years together. Which provocations were a grieving (as it were) of his
patience; insomuch that he said of them, They were a s^ttish and stubborn
people, whose heart was not upright before him: Neither had they seriously
minded or considered Noluerunt attente considerare, and opere exequi, rationem
vivendi, Deumque rite colendi, ipsis revelatam. Gejer.
his miraculous Mercies or Judgments, nor set their hearts to know and observe
his Commandments, and the ways wherein he would have them to walk: see Psalm.
119. v. 27, 32, 33, 35. Whereupon his irreversible Oath went out against them
[Numb. 14.23, 24, 28, 29, 30.], That they should never come into Canaan, but
leave (every one of them but Caleb and Joshua) their Carcasses in the
Wilderness. The Apostle also further admonishes them, to take heed lest they
imitate these Israelites, who by reason of their unbelief were ready, upon
every hardship they met with, to destruct God, and to turn back again unto
Egypt: so they should especially take heed, lest there be in any of them an
evil and an unbelieving heart, and so should fall away, and depart from Christ,
who, according to his Divine Nature, is the ever-living God, who has life in
himself originally [Joh. 1.4. and 5.26.] and gives life to others, Joh. 11.25.
Gal. 2.20. 1 John 5.20. And for prevention hereof, they should exhort and
encourage one another daily, to persevere in faith and holiness (whilst they
have time and opportunity to perform that duty, and to establish one another),
lest the manifold deceits and baits of sin prevail upon any of them, to harden
them. And he enforces his advice with this argument, They will hereby declare
themselves to be indeed partakers of Christ, and to be spiritually united to
him, if they persevere in that faith wherein they have been formerly
instructed, and whereof they have made profession. By which faith, and a settled
resting on Christ, Christians subsist, V. 14. The word translated [Confidence]
is (...).

V. 15. (...) valet cum audimus haec dici.


and are supported in their spiritual life. And he further tells them, That
forasmuch as it is said in that forecited Psalm, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the day Of provocation, etc. they ought to
remember, that that caveat belongs to them, as well as to their Ancestors (to
whom it was first given); and therefore so long as the opportunity of hearing
the voice of Christ sounding in his Gospel continued, they should carefully
listen to it, and by no means harden their hearts against it. And they should
remember, that some of the ancient Israelites, when they had heard and received
the Law from Heaven, and had heard God promising blessings to them that obeyed
him, and threatening curses to the disobedient, did notwithstanding rebel, and
fall off, and murmur against him. But Caleb and Joshua did not so, and
consequently not all that by the conduct of Moses came out of Egypt. Which
thing should be matter of admonition to them, that they should imitate those
few that adhered to God, and not the many that fell off from him. For it is
apparent, it was with those disobedient murmurers (that would have gone back to
Egypt) that God was so highly provoked, and, as it were, wearied md grieved for
so many years together; so that not a man of them came into Canaan, but they
all died in the Wilderness. And it is apparent, that those concerning whom God
swear, that they should not enter into his rest, were such as disbelieved his
Promises, and disobeyed his Precepts, and murmured against his Providence. So
that it is plain and evident to us, why they were excluded out of Canaan,
namely, Because of their unbelief and disobedience. From Ver. 1, to the end.

Chap. 4.
And seeing those ancient Israelites could not enter into the Rest promised to
them, viz. the Land of Canaan, because of their unbelief; therefore let us
(says he) who are Christian- Hebrews, fear, and be jealous over our selves,
lest a promise being made to us in the Gospel of a heavenly and glorious Mat.
25.34.
Rest, any of us (by neglecting the means which are appointed for the obtaining
of it) should seem deservedly (even in the judgment of men) to miss of it, and
to be excluded from it. For the abuse of the like privileges usually procures
the like Judgment. And we that are Christians, says he, have the same
privileges that the Israelites had, and therefore should fear the like
Judgments, if we abuse them. For unto us has the Gospel been preached, as well
as to them. Nay, we are advanced above them in that privilege. They had the
Gospel veiled, we have it unveiled. They had it darkly and obscurely, we have
it clearly and plainly. It was one and the same Gospel that they had under the
Old, and we have under the New Testament Joh. 5.46. and 39. But the word which
they heard preached unto them, did not profit them, because it was not mixed
with, or received by faith. But though they, by reason of their unbelief, were
excluded out of Canaan (which was a type of Heaven); yet we, says he, who
believe in Christ, do enter into it. We enter into the beginning of that
Heavenly Rest here on earth, by tranquillity of Conscience, and peace with God;
and shall enter into the full enjoyment of it hereafter, even as God himself
has spoken, though not in express words, yet by necessary consequence: For
whereas He by his Oath If they shall enter into my rest;] there is a reticentia
in the form of that Oath. To make up the full sense, such a phrase as this may
be understood, Let me not be accounted true. Haec verba proprie, and per se
sunt Comminatoria; sed, ex consequenti, Promissionem includunt. Quippe David
incredulis ingressum in requiem patere negans, docet, Nulli vere credenti
requiem illam occludi. Cappel.
excludes unbelievers out of his Rest, he does tacitly and implicitly promise,
that believers shall enter into it. Now lest any of these Hebrews should say,
We have always enjoyed the Lord's Sabbaths, and our predecess^rs have long
inhabited Canaan, Why then do you speak so much about entering into God's Rest?
The Apostle shows, that neither of these Rests could be meant by David Cum
ingressum in requiem Dei neget David infidelibus, Psalm. 95. tot annis post
obitum Josuae, tot seculis post sextiduum Creationis, qua peracta Deus ab
operibus suis dicitur quievisse; sequitur, Tertium aliquod quietis genus, a
Davide designari, quod a praecedentium utroque fuit figuratum. Idem.
, nor intended by himself in this discourse. And first he shows, that the Rest
meant by God's Oath, Psalm. 95.11. is not the Rest of the Seventh day. For
although the works of God were finished in six days, when he laid the
foundation of the world, and (as he himself testifies, Genesis 2. v. 3.) He rested
on the seventh day from all his works Quies qua Deus, opere Creationis absoluto
qui^visse dicitur, potest esse typus lllius quietis qua Christus absoluto
nostrae redemptionis opere, quietem laboribus fuis dignam nactus est. Idem.
; yet besides this, there is another Rest to be entered into, whereof the
Sabbath was but a resemblance. And again in that place before quoted, Psalm.
95.11. above three thousand years after that, there is mention made of another
Rest which God promises to them that believe and obey him; and excludes, by his
Oath, unbelievers and the disobedient from it. And this plainly appears to be a
Rest to come; so that it cannot be that Rest which was at the beginning of the
world. Therefore the first Rest is removed; and it is evident that there is
another Rest, besides that of the Sabbath, for believers to enter into. 2. He
shows by the Rest, intended by God's Oath and Promise (which they to whom it is
expressly made, shall assuredly partake of) cannot be meant Canaan. For the
Israelites that came out of Egypt with Moses (to whom the Gospel was first
preached, before it was preached to them whom Joshua brought into Canaan) did
not enter into Canaan by reason of their unbelief. And long after the other
Israelites had entered into Canaan, the Psalmist limits or designs a certain day
Designari ait in Psalmo, mystice, scil. tempora Messiae. Grot. (...), h. e. per
Davidem.
, saying, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts (that is,
in this Gospel-day, or time, hear the voice of Christ calling to you in the
preaching of his Gospel), and harden not your hearts against his Call, that so
you may enter into his Rest. And it is plain he speaks there of another Rest yet
to be entered into. For if that had been the Rest meant by the Psalmist which
Joshua (in the Syriac Dialect called Jesus) led the people into, then he would
not have spoken of any day or time future to that, for the entering into it,
which yet it is manifest he speaks of in that Psalm. From all these premises,
he shows, it clearly follows, That there is now for Christians a Rest still
behind, to be enjoyed, besides the typical Rest of the Land of Canaan (though
shadowed out by that, and by the Seventh-day Sabbath), namely, a spiritual,
heavenly, and eternal Rest or Sabbatism; the beginning of which is in this
life, and the perfection of it in the life to come. Into this Rest all true
believers enter, and so here rest from fulfilling the works of the flesh, and
shall hereafter fully rest from all their labors and troubles, as God rested
from his works. Let us all therefore (says he) look to it, that by a steadfast
faith we enter into that Rest, lest following the example of our Forefathers
disobedience in the Wilderness, we fall, and perish, as they did. And we ought
to take the more heed to our selves, because the Gospel which invites men to
enter into this Rest, is quick and powerful (through the operation of the
Spirit of God), and sharper than any two-edged sword (cutting which way soever
it is turned), and pierces to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, that is,
the actings of the understanding, and the motions of the will and affections.
It divides the joints These Metaphors taken from the Body, are applied to the
Soul.
, that is, cuts asunder the most resolute and compacted purposes of the will.
It pierces to the marrow, the secretest and innermost contrivances and designs
of the soul. It reaches the very secret thoughts and intents of the heart, and
tries and judges of them. This word shows, that nothing is hid from the eyes of
God, but all things are to him naked, and unveiled (so that he sees the
outside), and opened (...), a Metaphor taken from Beasts, which being
excoriated, were cut down from the neck to the rump, all along the backbone,
so that every part within might be clearly seen.
(so that their very inwards are discovered), and made conspicuous in his sight
with whom we have to do. And therefore if there be any secret unbelief,
hypocrisy, or backsliding-principle in any of us, we are to remember that he
sees, and takes notice of it. From Ver. 1, to 14.

The Apostle comes now to assert the Priesthood of Christ, and from thence he
encourages the believing-Hebrews to perseverance and stedfastness in the
profession of the faith. And (1.) he shows, That seeing we have a great
High Priest, whose word is lively and mighty in operation, and before whose
eyes all things are naked, and who has passed through these visible Heavens,
and gloriously ascended unto the right hand of the Father in the highest
Heaven; therefore they should be sure to hold fast their profession of faith in
Him. And this their High Priest, he tells them, is a merciful and compassionate
High Priest, who having sometimes felt those infirmities in his flesh which we
feel, and been exercised with such temptations as we are liable to (yet so as
they never drew him to sin), we have good cause to believe, that he will be
merciful to us, and ready to relieve us when we are tempted. Therefore let us
come boldly, in the name of this our High Priest, to the Throne of Grace, for
the obtaining all seasonable grace and assistance that we need in our passage
toward Heaven. From Ver. 14, to the end.

Chap. 5.
The Apostle goes on to set forth the excellency of Christ's Priestly Office,
showing him to be more excellent than any typical Priest, in all Priestly
requisites, yea than Aaron himself; therefore the believing-Hebrews had reason
to moderate their thoughts touching the Levitical Priesthood, which they were
apt too highly to esteem, to the prejudice of Christ. And in the first place he
considers the chief things observable in the Aaronical High Priest, and applies
them unto Christ. First, The Aaronical High Priest being taken from among men,
and severed and set apart from the common multitude, was appointed to act and
negotiate for the good of men, in the things wherein they have to do with God;
particularly, to offer gifts, oblations, and sacrifices for their sins. 2. He
was to execute this his Office with pity and compassion (...), is to have so
much compassion as is sufficient.
to the ignorant, and those that are out of the way, being himself compassed
with infirmities. 3. He was to offer for his own sins as well as for the
people's. 4. He must be called of God, as was Aaron. No man could legally The
principal honor of the High Priest was, That he was a kind of a Mediator
between God and man.
assume this honor to himself, but he that was of Aaron's line, and so called
to it by God, who assigned that high dignity to that line only. Now the Apostle
shows, that all these may well be applied to Christ. And first, he instances in
the last of them, That Christ did not intrude himself upon this Office, nor
assumed the honor and glory of it to himself, but the Father glorified him by
ordaining him thereunto. And this he proves from two places in the Psalms: 1.
Out of Psalm. 2, where God the Father says to him, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee; that is, in this day of thy resurrection I have bestowed
this special dignity upon thee, to be a King and High Priest; and thou shall
ascend into Heaven, as the High Priest did into the Holy of Holies; and then he
commands him, to ask of him the ends of the earth, or to intercede for the
salvation of many, which is a special part of his Priestly Function. His second
proof is out of Psalm. 110, where God's deputing Christ to that Function is
declared. For it is God the Father that says, Thou art such a Priest as
Melchisedec was; that is, a King and Priest together; and thy Priesthood shall
never cease, or be succeeded by any, till this Mediatory Kingdom of thine shall
be delivered up to me, See 2 Cor. 15.24. The Apostle having thus proved that
Christ was called to be a Priest, he proceeds to show, that the other things
which belonged to the High Priest, belonged unto him. For, 2. He was a Son of
man, of the same nature and He assumed our Humane nature, being like to us in
infirmities that were not sinful.
mould with us. 3. He offered a sacrifice for the sins of the people (but not
for his own, for he had none), and that sacrifice was, Himself on the Cross. 4.
He was a merciful High Priest, having had experience of our miseries. For in
the state of his humiliation, when he was here in the flesh In the days of his
flesh] i. e. his mortal and weak flesh, compassed with infirmities, Joh. 1.14
In Heaven he has flesh still, but immortal, and void of these natural
weaknesses.
, in his agony in the Garden, and on the Cross, feeling the weight of God's
wrath lying on him for our sins, he offered up ardent prayers Supplicatio
Christi ex intimo cordis dolor profecta, duplex enarratur: Vna in horto cum
dixit, Pater, si fieri potest, tollatur a me calix iste: quam precationem
supplicem non solum proposuit semel, sed etiam majori contentione (and, ut
videtur, non sine clamore) ter repetiit, Luc. 22.42, 44. Mat. 26.39. Mar.
14.36. Altera in cruce, cum clamore valido conjuncta: Deus mi, Deus mi, ut quid
dereliquisti me? Mat. 27.46. Mar. 15.34. Lacrymarum quidem Evangelistae non
express meminerunt, sed taraen in neutra supplicatione defuisse, ex
circumstantiis colligi potest. Gomar.
and supplications, with strong cries and tears unto his Father, who, he knew,
was able to save him from death, or could support him in suffering of it, and
restore him from it; not permitting him to lie under the power of it, or to be
swallowed up by it. And he was so heard, that he was delivered from that which
he feared Exauditus est. Nam liberationem primum a doloribus Inferni per
mortem, deinde a morte per resurrectionem consequutus est. Idem (...) a metu.
From the right taking or apprehending a thing, arises Fear.
. And though he were the beloved Son of God, and so more excellent than any
High Priest, yea, than any Creature; yet by his grievous sufferings he was
inured to submit to his Father's will; and experimentally knew what Obedience
meant, and how hard a lesson Patience under the Cross is (which is the highest
and chiefest point of a Christian's obedience); and thereby he became more fit
to compassionate us. Yet it is not to be wondered at, that so excellent a
Person, and so dear to God, should suffer as he did: for by his sufferings he
was made a full and perfect Redeemer Heb. 7.26.], so that nothing more need be
added unto what he has done and suffered for the redemption of man. And having
paid the full price of our redemption, he became the author of eternal
salvation to all Joh. 3.18, 36. and 6.47.
(of what rank or degree soever they be) that obey him, by believing in him,
and exercising the other graces and parts of obedience which he requires. So
that from the whole discourse he infers, that Christ must needs be a Priest of
a more excellent Order than was Aaron's (which was an exspiring Order, and not
to last for ever), and that he was called and openly declared of God, viz. in
that 110 Psalm, to be an High Priest after the order of Melchizedec. From Ver.
1, to 11.

The Apostle now intending to speak more largely of this great Mystery, he
thinks fit to preface something, (1.) By way of Reprehension, from v. 11 of
this Chapter, to the end. (2.) By way of Exhortation, chapter 6. from v. 1, to 4.
(3.) By way of Commination, from v. 4, to 9. (4.) By way of Consolation, from
v. 9, to the end. And first, He tells them, He had many things to write
concerning this Mystery; but if he should speak of them, many Haec reprehensio
non absolute de tota Hebraeorum Ecclesia, sed secundum quid, and ex part
tantum de multis intelligi debet. Est ergo haec Epistola ita attemperata, ut
simul lac habeat infantibus and solidum cibum adultioribus, omnibus tamen escam
salutarem.
among them would hardly understand them by reason of their great dullness and
carelessness; which was so gross, that when in respect of the time wherein they
had enjoyed the Gospel, they might have been able to teach others (as
particularly their own Families); they, by returning to an observation of the
Mosaical Ceremonies, and holding the observation of them necessary to salvation
(as it seems many of them did), showed themselves to stand in need to be
instructed in the very first principles (...) pro (...) Hebraismus. Prima
Elementa oraculorum Dei.
of the Gospel, in which the greatest and most necessary Oracles of God are
contained. So that instead of making progress in Christianity, they were gone
backward, and at present showed themselves like Babes, who needed milk, and not
strong meat, see 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. For as he, that is gotten no higher than Milk
Repuerascit, adeoque jam redit ad infantiam, eamque priore deteriorem. Hebraei
plerique licet Christianismum amplexi redibant ad typorum ceremonialium
observationem ut necessariam ad salutem. Hae vero Ceremoniae vocantur Elementa
Mundi, Col. 2.8, 20. Gal. 4.4. infirma and egena Elementa, Gal. 4.9. Cappel.
, will be hurt, and not fed, by having more solid food given him; so those
among them that stuck in the observation of the typical Ceremonies [those weak
and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4.3, 9. Col. 2.8, 20], and judged the observation
of them necessary under the Gospel, showed themselves to be very ignorant of
the word of Righteousness, or doctrine of salvation by faith in Christ, and to
be indeed very Babes. But the stronger Perfectos eos vocat non absolute sed
comparate cum rudioribus.
Christians among them, who by long use, and a diligent hearing, reading, and
meditating on the word, have their judgments and understandings exercised to
discern between true and false Doctrine, between good and evil; they can
relish sublimer mysteries, and feed on them as on stronger meats. From Ver.
11, to the end.

Chap. 6.
The Apostle having thus reprehended their dullness and improficiency, he now
comes to exhort them and stir them up to advance to a higher and perfecter
degree of knowledge in the Christian Religion, Perfectionem vocat quam prius
Sermonem justitiae, h. e. Doctrinae Christianae plenam and justam
intelligentiam.
than the first principles or groundwork. For as the foundation of a house
being once laid, we must not stay there, but proceed in raising up the
building; so it is absurd to advance no further in the Christian Religion than
the knowledge of the first principles of the Catechism; such as are, 1.
Repentance, or turning from sinful works, whereof the end is death. 2. Faith in
God, namely, in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3. The Doctrine of
Baptisms, that is, the Doctrine usually taught at their Baptizings, whereby the
people were informed of the difference betwixt the outward See page 2. of this
Apostolical History
Baptism by the Minister, and the inward Baptism by the Spirit; and possibly,
concerning the nature and use, not only of this Sacrament, but of the other
also; Baptism being here synecdochically put for both Sacraments. 4. Touching
the rite of laying on of hands Manus imponebantur and Baptizatis ad obtinendam
vim confirmantem Sp^sti; and ordinatis ad Presbyterium, and post peccata
reconciliatis and corpore infirmis, imo and novis conjugibus benedictionem ab
Ecclesia postulantibus. Grot.
upon Ministers in their Ordination, or Confirming Huic accedit impositio
manuum alia, quam prisc^ Ecclesia habuit in usu: Si quidem iis, qui in infantia
fuerant Baptizati, post professionem religionis Christianae, Ecclesiastica
consuetudine, non necessitate, manus adhibitis precibus imponebantur, ad
accepti Baptismi and fidei Confirmationem. Gom.
such as having been baptized in their infancy, and afterward well instructed
in the Principles of Christianity, were to make profession of their Faith, and
own their Baptismal Covenant, before they were admitted to the Lord's Table. 5.
Of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the last Judgment, which will doom and
decree to men everlasting rewards and punishments. Now that they may not stick
in these first Principles, he tells them, he desires to contribute his
endeavor to carry them on to a more perfect degree and measure of knowledge in
the mysteries of the Gospel; and hopes he shall (through the Lord's permission
and assistance) be enabled to do it Ad perfectionem feremur, ego docendo and
vos attendendo.
. And accordingly in the following Chapters he opens deeper mysteries, from v.
1, to 4. (3.) He comes now to show them the great danger of apostatizing from
Christ and his Doctrine, representing unto them, That if any have advanced so
far, that they have been enlightened, and have Have had a taste, and only a taste,
as taste is opposed to eating.
tasted of the heavenly gift (by the knowledge of Christ and his benefits, and
the heavenly things revealed in his Gospel) and h^ve had some of the
extraordinary (though common) gifts of the Spirit of God poured out upon them
(though not of his renewing-graces), and have tasted the good word of God, that
is, have heard the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the glad tidings thereof, with
some kind of joy [Mat. 13.20, 21.]; and lastly, have had some taste and
apprehension of the glorious privileges V. 5. Potentias, i. e. gloriam. Vatabl.
of the Saints, by some weak glances upon the glory of Heaven; and after all
this, shall fall away, making a total, voluntary, and malicious apostasy and
defection Apostasiam hic intellige total^m, malitiosam, ac eum odio ac
persecutione Christi, and Evangelii conjunctam; h. e. eorum qui toti, de toto,
in totum, decidunt. Intellige hoc loco peccatum illud singular quod
peculiariter peccatum in Christum, and peccatum ad mortem in Scripturis
appellatur, Mat. 12.31, 32. Mar. 3.28.29. Luc. 12.10, 11. 1 John 5.16.

Impossible, non simpliciter and absolute, sed ex hypothesi, and respectu
justi Dei judicii, and decreti, per filium patefacti, Mat. 12.31, 32.
Impossible ut tales ad veram adducantur poenitentiam, Deo nunquam it is qui in
talia peccata lapsi fuerint, salutarem poenitentiam inspirante. Vide Gomar.


from Christ and his Gospel; he show, it is impossible to renew them again unto
repentance, that is, to renew them so, that they shall repent; because God has
decreed never to give repentance to such persons. F^r they having wilfully cast
off God, God casts off them. And there being no renewing but in and through the
Mediation of Jesus Christ, these Apostates bar themselves from that; For by
their apostasy from Christ, they do in effect declare, That he was an Impostor,
and deserved to be crucified They crucify to themselves] (...), to their own
condemnation.
, and all the other indignities that were put upon him. Another sacrifice
therefore must be offered up, if such be redeemed. The Apostle also further
sets out the woeful estate of Apostates, and the equity of God's proceeding
against them, by an elegant comparison. As the fertile ground (says he),
which, drinking in the rain that comes often upon it, brings forth a plentiful
increase, to the joy and comfort of the Husbandman, does thereby testify that
it is blessed of God [see Genesis 27.27.]; but the barren earth (which after
tillage and irrigation bears nothing but thorns and briars) is given over
abandoned and disregarded by the Owner; and if it so continue, may expect ere
long to be cursed by him (as the fruitless fig tree was. Mat. 21.19.), and
finally doomed fit for nothing but to be burnt and destroyed, like the Land of
Sodom. So they who after illumination and the means of grace afforded to them,
do advance in Christianity, in Faith and Holiness, and go on toward
perfection, do thereby declare themselves to be blessed of God; but such as do
not make a right use of the means and helps God affords them; but instead of
making progress in Christianity, do fall off from Christ and their Christian
Profession, they show themselves to be in a cursed and miserable condition.

But he tells them, That though he said thus much to them by way of caution,
yet he was persuaded better things of the greatest part of them, than to think
they would thus fall away. He accounted them his beloved brethren, and really
believed the estate of most of them to be such, as would be so far from
bringing a curse upon them, that it would in the end bring them to eternal
salvation V. 9. Things that accompany salvation] or which necessarily have
salvation in them, and are the sure symptoms of a blessed estate. Fides,
pietas, sanctitas, licet non sint causa salutis nostrae, sunt tamen adeo cum
salute conjuncta ut ne disjungi quidem possint. Hujus irruptae copulae vis, non
est in operum nostrorum merito, sed in divini propositi firmitate. Capel.
. And the ground of this his hope and persuasion, (...) hic intellige quod
(...) dicitur, 1 These. 1.3. scil. apertam professionem Christianismi. Huic
addit, ut and dicto Thessal. loco, (...) dilectionem conjunctam cum laboribus
and molestus. Grot.
was their good work of faith, whereby they testified a courageous profession
of the Gospel, and that excellent Charity Officiosam Charitatem.
which they manifested by their past and present care, pains, and industry, to
relieve and supply the Saints Sanctos fideles vocat Scriptura, non blandientis,
sed cohortantis affectu; ut meminerint, ad sanctimoniam vocatos, operam dare
debere ut Elogio quo ipsos cohonestat Deus se reddant quam dignissimos. Capel.
that were in want; which tended so much to the glory of God, and the praise of
his Name. And this, he tells them, God will not forget to reward, who is
righteous and faithful in his promises. But, says he, though I conceive well of
many of you for the present, yet I would not hereupon have you to wax secure,
but to use all due care and diligence, even to the end of your life, for the
consummation of your hope, and the heightning it to a full assurance (...).
of attaining the salvation which I am persuaded is prepared for you. You must
not therefore grow sloathful nor sluggish, but imitate and follow their
example, who continuing in the exercise of faith and patience, did at last come
to enjoy their part in the promised V. 12. Promises] because eternal Life is
many times, and many ways promised; in which respect they may be counted many
Promises. Promise is put for the thing promised; see Heb. 9.15.

Complura erant Patribus promissa, diversis facta temporibus; per quae tamen
illud unum, and magnum Promissum de vita aeterna nobis factum, adumbrabatur,
and mystice in illis continebatur. Grot,


eternal Inheritance. Now among those Examples of Faith and Patience, he
particularly instances in Abraham, who was the Father of the faithful; to whom
God made a promise, In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
multiply thy seed; and confirmed it by an Oath, swearing by Himself, there
being none greater to swear by. And Abraham, after he had long patiently
expecetd the completion of it, saw the beginning and groundwork thereof, when
Isaac was born to him of Sarah, which was a pawn and pledge to him of the
accomplishment of the rest; and he lived to see Isaac have two s^ns, Esau and
Jacob. Now by that promise made to Abraham of blessing (...) multiplying him,
was meant the bringing his seed into Canaan, and all (...) believers to the
Rest signified thereby. Moreover, from the use of an Oath among men (which is
to assure and ascertain the thing sworn, and to take away all doubt about the
thing controverted, it being made by God, who is appealed to as Judge and
Avenger) the Apostle inferrs a reason why God confirmed his Promise by an Oath
V. 17. (...) in which matter, in which case; or (...), quod alias, (...) quare.
, viz. His superbundant goodness and willingness to declare unto the heirs of
promise [that is, the children of Abraham after the spirit, Gal. 3.19.] the
immutability of his Counsel, that what he had purposed, determined, and
promised to Abraham and his seed, should assuredly be accomplished. And it was
for man's sake, and man's good, that God thus bound himself by oath, viz. To
quiet and settle his mind in his Promise, that he might believe it without
wavering. For the Promise of God, and his Oath, are two immutable things
(wherein it is impossible God should fail) and may afford strong consolation to
th^se who under the sense and guilt of sin, fly to it (as to a City of Refuge)
and depend on it for the attaining eternal life and bliss V. 18. To lay hold
upon the Hope] Hope is here taken metonymically for the thing hoped for.
, which this Promise presents unto them, and gives them ground to hope for;
which Hope believers have as a sure anchor cast within Heaven it self (figured
by the Holy of Holies within the Veil), staying their souls from being tossed
in the tempestuous sea of this world, and fixing their hearts upon the
Omnipotency, Truth, and Faithfulness of God, and merit of Christ, who is entered
into Heaven for us (prefigured by the High-Priest's entering within the Veil) as
our Forerunner Christus eo priorivit, idque nostro bono, ut and nos eo
accerseret, sicut ipse dixit Joh. 14. Habemus, inquit, non Promissum tantum sed
and Exempium. Grot.
or Harbinger, there to prepare a place for us, and to intercede for us, being
appointed by his Father an High Priest for ever after the Order (...), ad modum
Melchisedeci. Hoc ideo quia Melchisedec non minus Rex fuit quam Sacerdo^^ neque
ex ortus lege id habuit, neque alii id jus reliquit; in quo multum differebat
ab Aaronis posteris. Similitudines tales non ad speculum respondent; nec premi
debent singulae circumstantiae; sed observandum, quo tetenderit divina tam
veterum temporum dispensatio. Id.
of Melchisedec. From Ver. 1, to the end.

The Apostle now returns to the Priesthood of Christ again, Chap. 7.
from which he had digressed from v. 11 of chapter 5, to this Chapter; and shows,
that Christ was a Priest of a much higher Order than the Aaronical Priests
were, as may appear by considering the nature of the Priesthood of Melchizedec
Some take this Melchizedec to be Sem, the Son of Noah; but his genealogy is
exactly set down in the Scripture; neither is it likely that Abraham would so
long have forborne his due respects and visits of Sem in Canaan, if Sem had
lived there. Therefore diverse learned men take this Melchizedec to be rather
some eminent man in Canaan, raised up by God in those corrupt times, both good
and godly, both King and Priest, living in Salem, after called Jerusalem, whose
King in Joshua's time was called Adonizedec, that is, Lord of Righteousness,
Josh. 10.1. as this man here is called Melchizedec, that is, King of
Righteousness. By which place, or near to it, Abraham in his return from this
War and Victory, was to pass. Dr. Richardson.
, after the manner of which, Christ's Priesthood was. For this Melchizedec, in
his Name [King of Righteousness], and in his Title [King of Salem or Peace] was
a Type of Christ; and being styled, Genesis 14.18, a Priest of the Most High God,
it appears he was both King and Priest. And accordingly when Abraham returned
from his victory over Kederlaomer, and the other neighboring Reguli or Kings,
he came out and treated him and his Army royally, like a King, bringing forth
bread and wine for them; and as a Priest blessed him, and received from him the
tenth of all he had there. He further shows, how this Melchizedec (that he
might more clearly represent Christ) stands in the History recorded of him in
Genesis, as a Priest; of whose Father, and Mother, and Pedigree, there is no
mention; neither of his birth or death, or that he had any successor in his
Priesthood The History which declares him to be a Priest, makes no mention
either of the beginning of his Priesthood, or of the ending thereof.
. In all which particulars he was a type of Christ (and so represented Psalm.
110) who is such a Priest as he, in respect of the conjunction of the Regal
Office, and Sacerdotal; in respect of his being King of Righteousness, and
Prince of Peace; in respect of his being without Father, as He is Man; and
without Mother, as he is God; and so He is without descent and genealogy;
without beginning of days, or end of life; and continues for ever in that
Office, that is, so long as there shall be any need of his mediation. So that
Melchizedec, though he were a true Man, yet in his singular Prerogatives he was
made like unto the Son of God; and was so set forth, as to hear a resemblance
of Him, being appointed by God a visible Type of Him before He was exhibited in
the flesh.

The Apostle having set forth Melchizedec's excellency in himself, proceeds
to amplify the same in reference to others. And first, shows how he ought to
be preferred before Abraham, and before all the Levites that descended from
Abraham. For that act of Abraham's in giving a tenth to Melchizedec, implies
an inferiority in himself who paid them, and a superiority in him that received
them; because the Tenth was an holy tribute due to God, and so it was paid by
Abraham, who paid it to Melchizedec as to God's Priest, standing in God's room,
and in that respect greater than himself. It Is true, he shows that the
Levitical Priests had commission by the Law to receive Tithes of all Jews that
defended from Abraham, and therein were counted greater than their Brethren.
But Melchizedec, who was no kin to Abraham (nor of that people), but a stranger
to him, received Tithes, not from the Progeny of Abraham, but from Abraham
himself; which is a greater dignity than to receive them only from his own
people. 2. The Apostle shows, that to bless authoritatively, is an act of
superiority; now Melchizedec blessed Abraham, who was so special a Favorite of
God, and received such excellent promises from him, and had them so often
repeated to him. And certainly, he that blesses one authoritatively, is
greater than he whom he blesses. Therefore Christ (whose Type and Shadow
Melchizedec was) is much more excellent than Abraham, and than all the
Levitical Priests which sprang from him. Further, to prove the excellency of
Melchizedec's Priesthood above the Levites, he tells them, in v. 8, That here,
that is, in the Levitical Priesthood, though those Priests be superior to the
people, yet they dye as well as the people do; but there, that is, in that
place of Genesis where Melchizedec is spoken of, there is no mention made of
his death; which the Holy Ghost seems purposely to have omitted, that he might
thereby witness, that he typically prefigured Christ, who does indeed and
properly live for ever Melchizedec ever lives secundum historiam, Christ
secundum verit^tem.
; and so he implicitly testifies, not only the everlastingness of Christ's
Person, but of his Priesthood also. He further shows, that the Levites paid
Tithes to Melchizedec (...). On the same ground it may well be inferred, that
all Adam's posterity did eat of the forbidden fruit in him, Romans 5.12. Si quis
excipiat; Christus decimas Melchizedeco dederit, eoque and minor eo fuit, ut
pote qui non minus quam Levi in lumbis Abrahami fuerit: Consequentiam negamus;
quoniam diversa omnino est ratio. Nam ante decimationem hanc, Christus, per
promissionem Abrahamo datam fuerat exceptus, and praelatus Melchizedeco, and
omnibus; ut pote in quo benedicendae essent omnes gentel terrae; Eoque and
Abrahamus and Melchizedecus, Deinde, suit in lumbis Abrahami secundum carnem
tantum, non secundum divinam naturam, cujus dignitate fit, ut humana natura ei
hypostatice unita, omnibus creaturis major sit. Denique fuit in lumbis Abrahami
ratione materiae, sed non ratione virtutis generantis; quia non fuit e semine
virili generatus, sed miraculo virtutis Spiritus sancti a virgin, and e
virgin conceptus. Gomar.
in Abraham, being in his loins when Melchizedec met him; therefore he is
greater than they; and Christ as to his Person, being typified by Melchizedec,
must needs be more excellent than they also. From Ver. 1, to 11.

Hitherto the Apostle has set forth the excellency of Christ's Priesthood, by
sh^wing how Melchizedec was a type of Him; and that all the Excellencies,
typically held forth in Melchizedec, were really and properly found in Him. And
therefore his Priesthood far excels Aaron's, which several of the Jews had
in so high esteem; and so much rested on it, that they little regarded
Christ's. This he proves by several particulars. 1. If a perfect See Heb. 9.9.
and 10.1.
expiation of sin, and furnishing men with all they have need of to eternal
life, could have been had by the Levitical (...): populus enim ad illud lege
adstrictus. Cl^^er in loc.

Super hoc Sacerdotio legem accepit populus ex tribu Levi, non autem ex alia
tribu aut familia. Gomar.


Priesthood (for unto that only the people were by the Ceremonial Law bound),
there would then have been no need (as it appears there was by David's
prophecy, Psalm. 110.4.) that God should institute a Priest of another and more
excellent Order, to wit, his own Son, to be such a Priest as Melchizedec was,
and not such an one as Aaron. And the change of the Levitical Priesthood
necessarily draws along with it a change of the Levitical Law, and the legal
dispensation of the Covenant of Grace; that under another Priesthood, another
Law, and another dispensation of that Covenant, may succeed. Therefore the
changeable Levitical Priesthood is not so excellent as the unchangeable
Melchizedechian Priesthood of Christ. Now that the Priesthood was changed, he
evidenceth by the translation of it to another tribe: Christ our High Priest
(of whom these things are said) springing from the Tribe of Judah; whereas God
had restrained the Priesthood under the Law, to the Tribe of Levi: For by
Moses's speaking nothing that the Priesthood should be executed by any other
Tribe, it appears that it was not God's mind that any that were of any other
Tribe should be of the Priesthood, or attend upon the Altar. From Ver. 11, to
the 15.

2. He gives a further proof of the change of the Priesthood, from the
different manner of Consecration Vid. Paraeum in loc.
. For Christ our High Priest (who is raised up after the similitude of
Melchizedec) was not made a Priest with such carnal rites and outward
solemnities as the Law prescribed to be used at the Consecration of Aaron and
his sons in their several successions; but he was made a Priest with the power
of endless life, consecrated a Priest that should ever continue, and ever live
to make intercession for us, and apply unto us the virtue ^f his sacrifice, for
the bringing us to everlasting life, according as the Psalmist testifies in the
forecited Psalm, where God the Father says to his Son, Thou art a Priest for
ever after the Order of Melchizedec. From Ver. 15, to 18.

3. He shows a reason why the Legal Covenant, with the Ceremonial Precepts, and
Levitical Priesthood belonging thereto, was changed, because of the weakness
and unprofitableness of it (in it self considered) for the expiation of sin;
therefore there was a necessity to introduce the Eternal Priesthood of Christ.
For the Legal Covenant could not by it self, or by the strict observance of the
Rites thereof, make the observers V. 19. Nothing, i. e. no man. The Neuter
gender is fi^test, ad universitatem designandam. Theophy.
thereof perfect. Nothing could be hoped for from that (considered in it self
Legis ceremoniae adumbrarunt non autem contulerunt peccatorum remissionem, and
reconciliationem cum Deo, per se. Causae quidem fuerunt adjuvantes quodammodo,
nempe tanquam instrumenta remota (quod fidem, quae propinquum est instrumentum,
excitarunt, ac confirmarunt) non vero causae principales. Gomar.
), but legal purifications, and outward privileges. It could not, of it self,
cleanse from sin, reconcile us to God, justify our persons, sanctify our
natures, and everlastingly save us; and therefore to pacify God, or purchase
salvation (as the mis-believing Jews used it) it was weak and unprofitable. But
the Priesthood of Christ (that better thing Under this phrase [the bringing in
of a better hope] Christ's Priesthood is comprised. For it is the ground of
hope. Dr. Gouge in loc.
hoped-for) being introduced, that has efficacy, power, and virtue, to do all
those things for us; and by it we have freedom of access to God. From Ver. 18,
to 20.

4. He shows, that the Levitical Priests were made without an Oath, by a Law
changeable at the will of the Lawgiver, God reserving to himself liberty to
change it when he pleased: but Christ (as appears from Psalm. 110.4.) was made a
Priest by an Oath; where the Psalmist intimates, that there should be an end of
the Aaronical Priesthood, but there should be no end of Christ's; for God has
confirmed it by an Oath, and will not change or retract what he has sworn. And
as far as a Priest established by an Oath to continue for ever in that Office,
is superior to a Priest made by a changeable Commandment, so much is the New
Covenant Foederis Evangelici duae erant Constitutiones, quas hic Apostolus
(...) vocat. Prior est typica, altera spiritualis. Capel.

(...) hic vocat totam Congeriem (...). Grot.


, or new dispensation of the Covenant of Grace (whereof Christ is Surety and
Mediator), better than the Old Covenant (or the old Dispensation of that
Covenant), which was under the Levitical Priesthood; For though this (in
substance) is the same with the former; yet as to the manner of its
dispensation, it is more clear, more free, more full, more surely ratified (viz.
by the death of Christ), and accompanied with a more mighty operation of the
Spirit, and is of larg^r extent. From Ver. 20, to 23.

5. The Levitical Priests were many, and mortal, and by reason of death were
forced to leave their Office to others; but Christ is but one, and immortal,
and ever Joh. 8.35 and 12.34. Romans 6.9. Rev. 1.18.
continues, and has no Partner or Successor, but executes an everlasting,
unchangeable Priesthood, which passes not to any other; and consequently, he
is able to save to the uttermost all that seek unto God for salvation, through
faith in him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for all true penitent
believers, manifesting his will and desire that such should partake of the
virtue and benefit of his Sacrifice. From Ver. 23, to 26.

6. He shows how much Christ is to be preferred before those Levitical Priests,
both in respect of purity and dignity. His perfect purity, he tells them,
appears in this, That he is (as 'twas fit and necessary he should be in respect
of procuring our pardon) holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from all
possibility of being of the number of sinners. His high and supereminent
dignity in this, that he is exalted, and advanced above all Creatures, and
raised up above all the visible Heavens, to the right hand of his Father. And
further, he is such an High Priest as needs not offer sacrifice, first for his
own sins, and then for the sins of the people, as the Aaronical Highpriests
often used to do, especially upon all appointed days; for he had no sins of his
own to offer for. And he offered no Cattle or bruit Beast, but Himself, in
sacrifice, and that but once, upon the Cross; which once-offered-Sacrifice was
abundantly sufficient for the expiation of sin. Moreover, the Levitical Law
appoints men to be Highpriests that labored with infirmities, and were
sinners, and subject to mortality; but the promise made to Christ (and
confirmed by God's Oath, and declared by David, Psalm. 110, some hundreds of
years after the Law was given) makes the Son, and none but the Son (who is
perfectly holy, and consecrated to this everlasting Office) a Priest for
evermore. From Ver. 26, to the end.

Chap. 8.
The Apostle having proved the excellency of Christ's Priesthood in the former
Chapter, he now proceeds to show his faithful execution thereof, for the good
and salvation of his Church, from the beginning of this Chapter to the 19 v. of
chapter 10. In this Chapter he proves, That His Ministry is far to be preferred
before the Levitical, by four Arguments. 1. From the Magnificence of it, v. 1.
2. From the Place where he ministers, viz. Heaven, v. 2. 3. From the Sacrifice
which he presents, viz. his Body and Humanity wherein he suffered, v. 3, 4, 5.
4. From the Covenant whereof he is Mediator, from v. 5, to the end.

In the first place, to excite their attention, he tells them, That this is the
sum of the things he had before spoken concerning Christ's Priesthood, viz. 1.
That the High Priest, who intercedes for us Christians, is one that is entered
into Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God, and has all power given
unto him both in heaven and earth. 2. He is a Minister of the Sanctuary of
Heaven Sanctuary, or the most holy place, is here metaphorically put for
Heaven, which it represented.
. And, 3. There he presents his own body, or humanity, wherein he suffered
(figured also by the typical Tabernacle), which the Holy Ghost miraculously
formed and prepared for him in the womb of the Virgin; and by the efficacy of
his passion still makes intercession for us. But the Levitical Priests are
only Ministers of the typical Tabernacle, which was made by the art and hands
of man, Exodus 36.1. For every High Priest must, according to his Office, have
some gifts and sacrifices to offer; and so must Christ also: and he had no
other to present in heaven but his own sacrificed body. And that he does
exercise his Priesthood in Heaven, it is evident. For having on earth offered up
himself a Sacrifice, if he should not have ascended into Heaven (the Sanctuary
above) he should not have performed all that belonged to his Office. Besides,
if he had executed his Office only here on the earth, he could not properly be
reckoned for a Priest, seeing He neither was of the Tribe of Levi, neither did,
nor would offer such typical, figurative Sacrifices as the Priests (appointed
by the Law) did offer; whose Ministry was only about types and shadows of
heavenly things; the Tabernacle, and all things pertaining thereunto (framed
and ordered by Moses according to the pattern showed him in the Mount, (Exodus
25.40.) being only Representations of them. V. 5. (...), obscura repraesentatio.
From v. 1, to 6. 4. He proves the excellency of Christ's Priesthood above the
Levitical, from the excellency of the New Covenant, or new dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace (whereof he is the Mediator) above the old. For this Covenant
is established upon better Promises, viz. more spiritual, more clear, more
extensive, and more universal: whereas the other was more carnal and earthly,
more obscure, and more restrained to that one Nation of the Jews. And if the
former Covenant, under the Levitical Priesthood, had been so perfect That first
Administration of the Covenant of Grace was said to be faulty, not in the
matter and substance of it, as it was ordained and instituted of God; but
because it was obscure, was not so surely ratified, and was not accompanied
with that virtue, power, and efficacy, which the New Covenant is accompanied
with.
, that there had been nothing wanting to it, and that it could not have been
improved and bettered; there would have been no need of a second The Sinai
Covenant, and the New Covenant, are the two most illustrious Covenants, and
made with the greatest solemnities, and tendered to the greatest number of
people; and these two were mananaged with peculiar Administrations, most
remark^bly distinct and opposite to each other. So that in these regards these
two Covenants may be called the first and second Covenant, because they are the
first and second most illustrious Covenants; though in regard of time, and
order of discovery, the Old Covenant was not the first (but the Covenant of
Works); nor this New, the second. Roberts of the Covenant.
Covenant, or new Dispensation. But it appears it was not so: Because, when God
speaks by the Prophet Jeremy (chapter 31. v. 31.), of making a New Covenant, he
does it by way of complaint or finding fault with the weakness and imperfection
of the former [see Heb. 7.18.], saying unto them, The Covenant which I will now
make with all true Israelites, is not after the rate of the Covenant which I
made with the Israelites by Moses, when I brought them out of Egypt; a Covenant
made up of external, carnal Commandments, the scope and drift of which the
people did not well discern; a Covenant that had the external form of a Legal
Covenant, and an express Condition of full obedience to be performed to all my
Commands; which Covenant they brake, so that I regarded The Hebrew is, And
should I be still an Husband to them? q. d. They have played the Harlot, and
broken the Covenant on their part, and shall I be a Husband to them, or regard
them? No, they may not expect it.
them not. But this is the Covenant I will make in the later days, or times of
the Gospel; 1. I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their
hearts, that is, will illuminate their minds and understandings with the
knowledge of my will and frame their hearts to yield obedience thereto, and so I
will be their God to protect and defend them, and provide all good things
necessary for them, either for this life, or that which is to come; and they
shall be my people, to depend on me by a lively faith, and to worship me
aright, and live in obedience unto me. 2. They shall have a more plentiful
knowledge than was in the time of the Law. There shall not now be so many
significant Ceremonies, as were in the time of the Law, the meaning whereof one
shall teach another. For the Holy Ghost shall now be poured forth in so
plentiful a measure, and the light of the Gospel shall now shine so brightly to
all estates and conditions of men (even the meanest as well as the greatest),
that the teaching of Friends and Neighbors (as 'twas used of old) shall be in
a manner superfluous V. 11. This is spoken not simply, but comparatively. There
shall not now be such need as under the Law, to stir up men to know God
. They shall not need in such a manner and sort as formerly, to instruct one
another in the meaning of the types, and shadows, and observances required of
them by the Law of Moses; which instruction was then necessary, that they might
know the true God aright, and worship him according to his own Prescriptions.
Neither shall they teach one another so darkly, so slenderly, and so
imperfectly, under the New Testament, as they did under the Old; nor shall they
need to take so much pains about teaching the knowledge of God, as they had been
constrained to take in the teaching of the Gentiles in former times. For now a
greater measure of light Hic statuitur aliud discrimen veteris and novi
Testamenti, nempe Deus qui obscurius se patefecerat sub lege, plenum fulgorem
emittet ita ut ejus cognitio futura sit familiaris. Sed hyperbolice extollit
hanc gratiam cum dicit, neminem opus habiturum Doctore vel magistro quia
quisque satis edoctus erit. Calv.
and knowledge should abound, and all estates and conditions of people should so
clearly understand the things of God, and the mysteries of salvation (God so
effectually teaching and enlightening them in the use of his own
Gospel-Institutions: see Jer. 31.34. Isa. 54.13.), that they should seem rather
to be taught by some immediate irradiation from God, than by any ordinary means
of instruction. 3. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins
and iniquities I will remember no more; that is, I will be merciful to their
persons in pardoning and removing their sins. Lastly, The Apostle from the
Prophet's words inferrs a twofold consectary, or consequence. 1. From the Name
the Lord gives this Covenant, calling it new, he inferrs the other to be old.
2. He shows, that that which waxes old (and is by God's appointment to be
disannulled) cannot long stand, but is near vanishing This the Apostle writ a
little before the last Temple was destroyed by the Romans.
away. From Ver. 6, to the end.

Chap. 9.
The Apostle roes on to set forth how Christ executes his Office, by comparing
him with the Legal Priests in the executing of theirs. And, 1. He shows the
Peiests manner of executing their Office, to v. 11. And then Christ's manner of
executing his, from v. 11 of this chap. to v. 19 of chapter the 10th.

1. He shows, the first Covenant (or first Administration of the Covenant of
Grace) had an outward Legal Service, and Rites and Ordinances (...),
justifications, because they represented the way of obtaining Justification.
of Divine Worship, and a Worldly Sanctuary, frail and brittle, as made by the
hands of men, of earthly Materials, and which was only a type and
representation of the Heavenly Sanctuary above. And being to speak of the
Ordinances and Services of Divine Worship that were performed in the
Tabernacle, he first speaks of the Tabernacle it self, which had two parts The
Court of the people, as not belonging to the Priests, is here omitted.
. In the first of which, viz. the Sanctuary or Holy-place, was, 1. The Golden
Candlestick [Exod. 25.31.], a type of the Church of Christ; the Shaft that
sustained the branches (whereon stood the Lamps), being a figure of Christ, who
sustaineth those Lights that be in the Church. 2. The Table whereon stood the
Shewbread (...) Hypallage pro (...).
, Exodus 25.23, 30, typifying the Saints communion with Christ [see Luke
22.30.]; which part of the Tabernacle had a veil which covered the entrance
thereinto, called the first veil Hoc velum erat oppansum primae parti
Tabernaculi, quae sanctum dicebatur; sicut prius velum, de quo v. 31. erat
oppansum Sancto Sanctorum. Hoc velum sacrarium sacerdotum ab atrio populi
separabat. Mas.
, Exodus 26.36, whereby it was severed from the Courts appertaining thereunto.
In the second part of the Tabernacle, he shows, was the Holy of Holies, being
divided from the Sanctuary by another veil made of blue, purple, scarlet, and
fine twined linen, Exodus 26.31, whereunto belonged, 1. A Golden This is noted
to distinguish it from other Cen^ers which were of brass, and were for the
ordinary Priests to carry Incense up and down the Tabernacle: with such as
these the two hundred and fifty which conspired with Korah, offered incense.
Numb. 16.17.
Conser, Levit. 16.12, 13, which the High Priest filled with burning-coals
taken from the Altar of Burnt-offering that stood in the Court Vide Pisc. in
loc.
(where the continual fire was), and made it f^nd forth a sweet savor of the
incense put upon it; that so a Cloud arising from it, might cover the
Mercy-seat. 2. The Ark of the Covenant overlaid with Gold, Exodus 25.10, in
which the Tables of the Covenant were kept, Exodus 34.1, 28. Deuteronomy. 10.1, 2. They
are called the Tables of the Covenant Tabulae foederis, i. e. Decalogi sic
dicti, quod eo conditionis foederis legalis continebantur. Gomar.
, because the Ten Commandments engraven upon them by the finger of God,
contained a testimony of the Covenant which God made with his people, and
testified what it was that God required of them. In which part of the
Tabernacle was also the The matter of the Pot is not set down in the History,
but expressed by the Apostle, who was guided by the Spirit of God.

Most Interpreters refer (...) wherein, not to (...) the Ark (last named); but
to (...), the Tabernacle, called the Holiest of all, in the precedent verse; it
being confessed by all, that the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod, were within the
compass of the Oracle, or most Holy place. It is not probable that Aaron's Rod
(being a long shepherds crook, or a long white staff, and sprouting forth with
Blossoms and Almonds) could lie in the Ark. Besides it is said, 1 King. 8.9 2.
Chron. 5.10, That there was nothing in the Ark save the two Tables of stone.
And it is said of the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod, that they were laid up
before the Testimony or Ark [Exod. 16.34. Numb. 17.10.] and not in the Ark.

Nos putamus Vrnam and Virgam potius extra quam intra, imo juxta aream fuisse
quod aliquando significat vox in ut Prove. 1.21. in ostiis pro juxta ostia.
Capellus. Hic est locus qui multis suspectam fecit hanc Epistolam. Ego, qui
hanc Epistolam maximi facio, nunquam adducar ut ejus authoritatem deseram. Et
p^to objectis hoc modo optime responderi, etc. Grotius in loc.


Golden Pot of Manna Erat id continuum miraculum quod tot seculae mansit
incorruptum Manna cum in deserto ne triduum quidem servari posset. Et
mirabilius fuit videre storem incorruptum per tot saecula manentem, quam virgam
avidam una nocte frondescentem.
, and Aaron's Rod that budded, Numb. 17.1, 2, and over the Ark, the Cherubims
of glory shadowing the Mercy-seat, Exodus 25.17, etc. from whence God manifested
his presence, and was wont to speak with Moses, and to give him answers, and to
show himself propitious to the people. But concerning these, he tells them, he
intended not to enlarge, because he hasted to the services performed in these
places. And he shows them, that when the Tabernacle was thus made, and the
parts thereof fitly distinguished, and all the Sacred Vtensils set in their due
places, the Priests went into the first and outward part of the Tabernacle, and
performed the daily service according to the Law. But into the inner part, or
Holy of Holies, none entered but the High Priest Under the Law there were two
sorts of Ministers, Pri^sts and Levites. Levites were all the Male children of
Levi except Aaron and his sons, who were Priests. Aaron, and the eldest son
descending, generation after generation, from him, was the High Priest; all the
other sons of Aaron, and his posterity, were Priests.
[Lev. 16.2, 17.], and he only one day in a year, viz. on the Fast, or great
day of Expiation, Lev. 16.29; and then always he carried with him the blood of
a Bullock in a Bas^n, which was a sin-offering for himself; and the blood of a
Goat, which was a sin-offering for the people By errors of the people, all
manner of sins may be understood, because there is an error of judgment in
every sin.
; and he was to sprinkle the one and the other blood upon and before the
Mercy-seat; thereby signifying, that there is no atonement with God, nor
expiation of sin, but by the blood of Christ. He further shows, that the Holy
Ghost (who was the institutor of all th^se Rites and Ordinances, and therefore
one true eternal God with the Father and the Son, and yet a distinct Person),
signified this thereby, that the true, right, proper means of entering into
Heaven (the true Holy of Holies) was not so fully and clearly manifested, as
long as the Church under the Old Testament was instructed only by these
Ceremonies and Rites of the first Tabernacle. For the first Tabernacle was but
a figure or typical representation of good things to come, serving only for
that present time of the Churches nonage; and the Gifts and Sacrifices then
offered, could not of themselves perfectly justify, sanctify, or save any
man; nor could they of themselves pacify or quiet the Conscience Conscience
cannot be satisfied till Gcd's wrath be pacified: but those Rites could not
pacify God's wrath; for they could not satisfy his Justice: nothing but
Christ's blood could do that.
, nor satisfy it, that God's Justice was satisfied, and sin forgiven for any
worthiness in them. The faithful therefore under the Old Testament, were not
perfected (as pertaining to the Conscience) by the legal rites they performed,
but by the Evangelical and Celestial Truths, which those Rites typified; and so
they were perfected as we Christians now are, though not so clearly and
manifestly. And the Apostle shows a reason why those legal rites could not make
perfect; namely, Because the nature of them was such, that they reached only to
the outward man, they consisting, for the most part, in meats and drinks, and
diverse washings and ordinances that concern the flesh or body of man, which did
not (separate from their signification, as many Jews took them) commend any man
to God [1 Cor. 8.8.], and were imposed upon them as a yoke [Acts 15.19.], until
the times of the New Testament should come, in which these Ceremonies should be
removed, and other more spiritual Institutions introduced The people of the
Jews being a gross people, and much addicted to Idolatry, it seemed good to the
wisdom of God to exercise them with a gross and bodily worship, that so he
might keep them from Idolatry.
, wherein the Holy Ghost would work more powerfully. From Ver. 1, to 11.

The Apostle having thus showed how the Levitical Priests executed their
Office, he comes now to show how Christ executed His. He shows, that Christ
being now actually exhibited, after a long expectation of him, and having
entered on his Priesthood (to procure for us all those blessings which were
promised and figured in the Old Testament), he executes his Office in a
greater and more perfect Tabernacle than that which was made with hands, viz.
the Tabernacle of his own body (formed in the womb of the Virgin by the Holy
Ghost, after an especial manner, without any spot of original sin; in which
Tabernacle the fullness of the Godhead dwells. And he differs from the Legal
High Priest in this; The Legal High Priest entered into the typical Holy of
Holies with the blood of Goats and Calves, only once a year. But Christ entered
into Heaven with his own blood This phrase [with his blood], implies the merit
of his death, that thereby expiation was made for our sins.
(presenting his body, out of which the blood was shed, and which was the
sacrifice it self that was offered up, which was more than the High Priest
did), and that but once for all; and has thereby purchased and obtained
eternal redemption for us, which the Levitical Priests could not do. Now that
eternal redemption is the fruit of Christ's sacrifice, he proves by arguing
from the lesser to the greater. For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the
water that was mixed with the ashes of the burnt-Heifer, or red-Cow [Numb.
19.2, etc.], purified from ceremonial uncleanness, and wrought that for which
they were ordained, viz. external sanctification, to the purifying of the flesh
or outward man; and he that used those rites, was sanctified and purified as to
the works of external worship, how much more shall the blood His blood was
effectual, not simply, as it was material blood; but as offered by the Eternal
Spirit, whose blood it was.
of Christ (who by the Eternal Spirit (that is, His Godhead) offered up himself
a sacrifice (without spot) to God the Father, be able to purge our Consciences
Conscience is the most quick, lively, and sensible part of the soul.
from all the spiritual uncleann ss of sin, which, makes us liable unto death;
that being thus justified by faith in his blood, we may be sanctified in soul
and body by his Spirit, and fitted to serve the ever-living God in a vital
Christian cours^. Now lest any should stumble at Christ's death, he shows there
was a necessity thereof. For upon this account Christ took on him the glorious
office, to be the Mediator of the New Covenant (or new Dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace), that he might by the intervention of his own death (as was
requis^t) make atonement and satisfaction for the sins of the faithful who
lived under the Old Testament, as well as for them who live under the New (the
merit of his death and passion extending it self to both); and that all such as
are effectually called to believe in him (whether they lived before his coming
in the flesh, or since) might by the virtue of his death, obtain the promised
eternal Inheritance. Another reason to prove the necessity of his death, he
shows may be taken from the force of the New Covenant, which signifies also a
Testament The New Covenant is of the nature of a Testament; and the benefits
promi^'d therein, to wit, remission of sin, reconciliation, sanctification, and
life eternal, are Legacies freely left to us by our d^funct Lord, who was dead,
and is alive, to execute his own will for evermore. The Scripture is the
Instrument, or Evidence; the Apostles the Notaries, the Sacraments the Seals.
. For as Christ was a Priest in reference to God, making an atonement for us by
the sacrifice of himself; so he is also a Testator in respect of us,
bequeathing those blessings to us, which he has purchased for us with his own
blood [see Luke 22.29.]. Now except Christ had dyed, his Testament or Will had
not been ratified. For even among men a Testament is not of force while the
Testator lives; but when his death can be proved, then it is firm and valid.
Moreover, the first Covenant Si prius foedus sanguine dedicandum fuit, multo
magis secundum, quod habet rationem Testamenti. Cap.
had not its sanction without typical blood. Much less can the second, which
has the nature of a Testament. Now that the first was so dedicated and
solemnized, may appear from the History of its solemnization, Exodus 24; where
Moses sprinkling with a sprinkling Instrument made of Cedar-wood, Scarlet-wool,
and Hyssop) the Book of the Covenant; and all Some think that all the people
are said to be sprinkled, because the tw^lve Pillars, representing the twelve
Tribes of Israel were sprinkled. Others, that the Elders were sprinkled instead
of the rest; or all may be put for a great part; that is, in a manner all of
them were sprinkled, viz. all that stood near.
the people, with the blood Quod sanguine consperserit populum, id solum Moses
refert, Exodus 24. v. 8. Quali aspergillo fuerit usus, tacet. Apostolus dicit,
ex lana and hyssopo fuisse conflatum: neque id tamen de suo confinxit, sed ex
alio historiae loco sumpsit, viz. Numb 19. v. 6. ubi simili aspergillo
sanguinem vaccae rufae spargere, jubetur sacerdos. De libro consperso nihil
etiam ibi Moses; tamen quia probabile est librum altari impositum fuisse, dum
fieret conspersio, recte dicit Apostolus altari consperso etiam librum
conspersum fuisse. Nihil igitur de suo addidit Apostolus Scripturae veteri.
Quod si omnino addidisset, non sequeretur tamen, vel scripturam imperfectam,
vel aliquid praeter scripturas credendum esse. Dictante enim spiritu sancto de
Mose ista in scripturas retulit. Paraeus in loc.
of Calves and Goats mixed with the purifying-water [see v. 13. This mixture of
blood and water was requisite, to keep the blood from clotting. The blood
typified the price of our redemption. The water, the virtue that issues from
Christ to cleanse away the filth of sin remaining in us. The mixture of blood
and water, typified, that a cleansing-virtue accompanies the merit of Christ's
Sacrifice.
], declared, that that blood was the blood of the Covenant Moses's words, Exodus
24.8. something differ from these of the Apostle. Moses wrote before the death
of the Testator, the Apostle after; so as the same thing which in Moses's time
was a Covenant in the Apostle's time was a Testament.
, that is, a sign Sacramentaliter dicitur esse sanguis foederis, quia erat
foederis symbolum, ratum ac certum id reddens fidelibus. Erat etiam figura
sanguinis Christi, quo foedus novum erat sanciendum. Par.
of it, and a seal confirming it, and the ceremony establishing it, which God
appointed for them, or enjoined unto them. Yea, the Tabernacle and holy
Vtensils, which were in themselves without pollution, were sprinkled with
blood, because to man (not purified by faith in the blood of the Messiah) all
things became polluted. Yea, generally, the course was under the Law, that all
things that were purified, should be ceremonially purified by blood; yea, and
without shedding of blood, there could be no remission of sin. And thus it is
in the New Covenant; there can be no remission of sin, but by the shedding of
the blood of Christ. As therefore the Law commanded, that the Tabernacle (which
as to the inmost part especially, is an image, or figure, or pattern of
Heaven), should be purified with the blood of Bullocks and Goats, so that the
High Priest should never enter in thither without such blood; so likewise it is
very agreeable and proportionable to these types V. 23. Corruptibilia
Tabernaculi vasa, corruptibili sanguine purgari necesse fuit, necessitate, 1
praecepti, 2. decori vel ordinis, 3. typi seu signifi^ationis. Incorruptibile
vero coelum, and immortalem hominis animam incorruptibili Christi sanguine
sanctificari necesse fuit, necessitate medii, quia nobis opus erat tali
piaculo, quia nullum aliud medium instituit Deus ad coelum nobis patefaciendum,
ad expurgandas a peccatorum sordibus animas nostras, praeter immaculatum
Christi sanguinem, quem pro nobis in cruce prosudit. Jac. Cappellus in loc.

Cum dicit Apostolus (...) est metonymia qualem saepe usurpari necesse est ubi
inter se comparantur res partim similes partim dissimiles. Nam quia per legalem
(...) aditus dabatur in sanctuarium; ideo (effectum sumendo pro causa) (...)
dixit coelum summum, pro eo quod est aditum per ista in illud coelum dari. Grot.

Per exemplaria coelestium intelligit Apostolus Mosaicum Tabernaculum ac
populum ipsum, i. e. Judaeos, omniaque quae in ipso Tabernaculo erant; quae
omnia pecudum sanguine, aqua, lana, hyssopo (v. 19.) ex Dei mandato lustrari
debebant. Per coelestia, intelligit fideles and filios Christi, ex quibus
Ecclesia coalescit. Vide Corn. Alap. in loc.


, that Christ should shed his blood (which is a better Potiores victimas dixit
pro victima; quia tantum una est, sed propter antithesin, plurali numero libere
abusus est. Calv.
sacrifice than any of the Levitical), and so enter therewith (not into the
holy places made with hands, viz. the first and inmost Tabernacle, but) into
Heaven it self, to make way for our entrance in thither, and there to be our
High Priest, and to appear in the presence of God for us, as our Advocate. Yet
the similitude betwixt Him and the High Priest was not to hold in this, That as
the High Priest entered into the Holy of Holies once very year, with the blood
of Bullocks and Goats; so Christ should often offer up himself, and often enter
into Heaven. For then he should, since the beginning of the world, have dyed
many times; which would have argued, That one Oblation of himself had not been
sufficient. Therefore the case is far otherwise as to him. For now in the
fullness of time has he appeared, and that but once for all; and that now in
this last age, this close, or shutting up of the Jewish State [see Mat. 24.3. 1
Cor. 10.11.], and that on purpose to redeem and rescue us from the guilt and
power of our sins, by that one oblation of himself on the Cross, 1 John 3.5.
And as it is appointed by God, by a common law, Romans 5.12, that all men should
That some men died not, as Enoch and Elias; and that some died twice, as they
that were miraculously raised up into this life again, was a special privilege
and exception from this general Rule.
once dye, and then be judged as to their eternal state; so it is appointed of
God, that Christ should only once offer us himself to bear the sins of many,
that is, of all that shall believe in him; and that he should come the second
time to judge the quick and dead in a glorious manner, when he shall have no sin
imputed to him (as he had at his first coming), and to accomplish the salvation
of those who look for, and expect this his glorious appearing, that their
bodies may be glorified and united to their souls, and so the bliss and
happiness of both may be perfected and completed. From Ver. 11, to the end.

Chap. 10.
In this Chapter the Apostle proceeds to show the weakness and imperfection of
the Levitical Sacrifices (considered in themselves, and separate from what they
typified), and the power and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice. From Ver. 1, to 11.

The weakness of the Levitical Sacrifices he proves by four Arguments. First,
From the nature of the things enjoined by the Ceremonial Law, which were only
types, shadows, and darker draughts and delineaments (as it were) of th^se
spiritual and heavenly good things which were to be purchased and imparted by
Christ. So that the Levitical Ordinances did not present the things themselves
in their full proportion, lively image and shape, as the Gospel does. 2. Those
Sacrifices which were often repeated year by year, could not (of themselves)
make a satisfaction for sin, or justify, or purge from the guilt and power of
it, those who came to worship God by them. For if they could, they would have
ceased to be offered; whereas the frequent reiteration and repeating of them,
argued their weakness and imperfection. Could they once have taken away sin, or
purged the Conscience from the guilt of it, there would have been no need to
repeat them, seeing the worshippers once purged and cleared of the guilt of
their sins by one of those Oblations and Sacrifices, would have been quieted in
their Consciences, and not had them accusing and condemning them for them. But
the case was far otherwise. For in those most solemn Sacrifices offered upon
their annual day of humiliation [Lev. 16.21.], they were to make a solemn
acknowledgment and confession We Christians also make a commemoration of our
sins year by year, yea, remember the sins of our youth, and deprecate the wrath
they deserve, but not by offering a new Sacrifice, as they did, whereby they
professed, that no sacrifice formerly offered was sufficient to expiate sin, or
cleanse the conscience. The Sacrifices are said only to be a commemoration of
sin, unable to expiate it, and so left them in an estate of damnation, unless
the Worshippers advanced further to Christ, signified by those Sacrifices.
of their sins, and not only of the sins committed that year since the last day
of Expiation, but of their former sins for which they had formerly offered;
which might intimate to them, that they needed another and better Sacrifice
than those were, for the expiation of their sins, namely, that of the Messiah
to come, in and by whom alone, remission of sins was to be expected. For 'twas
impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats by its own virtue should take away
the guilt of sin, or purify the Conscience; and that by reason of the
disproportion between the means of cleansing on the one side, and the thing
cleans'd, viz. the Soul (together with the filth to be cleans'd away, to wit,
sin) on the other. From Ver. 1, to 5.

Having thus showed the weakness of the Levitical Sacrifices, he comes now to
show the power and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice; and that he proves from
Psalm. 40. v. 6, 7, 8. where Christ is brought in as newly come into the world;
and made Man, speaking to his Father after this manner: Forasmuch as thou did
formerly appoint Sacrifices as types to prefigure the Sacrifice of thy Son, but
did not intend they should continue longer than till He mould be offered up.
Thou delightest therefore in those Sacrifices now no longer; but have sent me
into the world, and prepared me a body, or humane nature (holy, harmless, and
free from sin, that it may be fit to be joined with my Deity) that therein I
might offer up my self a true Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of men. The
words of the Psalmist are, Mine ear have thou opened Hebraea verba sunt, aures
fodiste mihi. Quod quidam de docilitate exponunt; alii de mancipatione
perpetua, ad obedientiam, ut orationis figura desumpta sit a ritu legali. Exodus
21.6. Gomar.
; but the Apostle retaining the sense and scope The Pen men of the
New Testament were not the Translators of the Old, but only quoted places out
of it; so as they tied not themselves to syllables and words, but to the sense.
of the place, ties not himself to the very words. The variation is but the
change of a figurative phrase into a proper, to express the ready obedience of
Christ to do the will See Joh. 4.34. chap. 5.30. chap. 6.38.
of his Father in the work of man's redemption, whereunto, by framing him a
body, God had fitted him. And it is plain, that God was never pleased with the
Levitical Sacrifices for their own sake, but only as they signified the death
of his Son, Therefore in the fullness of time (when God saw it fit) Christ came
into the world to do that which the Levitical Sacrifices did only prefigure,
but could not effectuate. And when that time was come, Christ did assume our
nature, and offered himself willingly unto the Father, declaring himself ready
to perform his will When God had professed that he took pleasure no longer in
Levitical Sacrifices, then comes Christ with an Offering or Sacrifice of his
own Body.
, and to be obedient unto him, even to the death of the Cross, for the
redemption of sinners, as it was fore-prophesied of him in the Sacred
Scripture, or Volume of the Law, Genesis 3.15. The Levitical Sacrifices therefore
being removed and taken away, as being insufficient to make expiation of sin,
Christ's Sacrifice alone remains, as that only which pleases God, and is
available to remove sin. Now by this one Oblation of the body of Christ, which
he performed according to the will V. 10. Qua voluntate] pro, qua voluntatis
executione, h^c obedientia filii erga Patrem, sumus sanctificati.
Sanctificationis nomine late intellige universum genus beneficiorum Christi,
ita ut (...) sit idem quod (...). We are sanctified by the offering up of the
body of Christ, that being the meritorious cause of our sanctification.
of God, once for all sorts of men, we that believe in him are sanctified, that
is, obtain remission of sins, justification, sanctification in this life, and a
title to eternal glory in the life to come. Again, there was this difference
between the Levitical Priests, and Christ: They were many, and ministered as
Servants, repeating daily and frequently the same sacrifices (for kind) which
God had enjoined; none of which had power, of themselves, to free the
Conscience from guilt, or the offender from the punishment due to sin. But
Christ did not always stand ministering and offering sacrifices, as they did;
but having once offered up himself on the Cross (which one Sacrifice suffices
for sin for ever), he ceased and offered no more, but ascended into heaven, and
there sits at the right hand of his Father, and there continues to execute
his Kingly and Priestly Office, till all the enemies of our salvation, and at
last Death it self, shall be vanquished; and then He shall lay down this form
of governing, and with the Father and the Holy Ghost be all in all for ever;
see 1 Cor. 15.24, etc. And he shows, it needs not be wondered at, that Christ
has now no more offerings to make, nor sufferings to endure; for by that one
offering of himself, he has made a perfect satisfaction to the Justice of God,
and a full purchase of all things See Heb. 7.25.
that were requisite and needful, to bring those to eternal life who are
sanctified by his grace, and brought to believe in him with a lively faith. He
has not left any other Offering to be made for them, after His. And he further
proves the absolate perfection of Christ's Sacrifice, by the testimony of the
Holy Ghost, recorded Jer. 31.31. where after God bad promised a new Covenant
instead of the old, and had said, This is the Covenant I will make with them
after those days (viz. when the days of the Old Testament are exspir'd); then
He says, I will put my Law into their hearts, and their sins and iniquities I
will remember no more. Now seeing God promises under the new Covenant,
sanctification and remission of sins to all true believers (of which Covenant
Christ is the Mediator See Chap. 8.6. Chap. 9.16.
, by whose death it is confirmed); therefore his one Sacrifice once offered up,
is abundantly sufficient. And if remission of sins be obtained by Christ's one
Sacrifice, there needs no repetition of it, nor any other offering for sin.
From Ver. 5, to 19.

Hitherto the Apostle has doctrinally informed the Christian-Hebrews, that the
Gospel Ministry under the New Testament (ordained by Jesus Christ, God-man, our
great Prophet and High Priest), far excels the Levitical Ministry under the
Old Testament. He comes now practically to exhort them to diverse Christian
duties, which by way of application he inferrs from his precedent Doctrine,
especially from the Priesthood of Christ. And first, He exhorts them constantly
to hold fast their profession of faith in Christ. 2. To be very careful that
their conversation be correspondent to the Precepts of the Gospel. In his
Exhortation, he uses some arguments taken from the Levitical Types; which he
so lays down, that withal they may tend to raise the minds of the
believing-Hebrews to consider the excellency of the things signified thereby.
And, 1. He shows them, That they having now free access unto God in Heaven,
through the blood of Jesus, and not by the blood of beasts, nor through the old
way, the veil of the Sanctuary, as the High Priest was wont to enter into the
Holy of Holies; but by a new and everlasting way (giving life and refreshment
to them that walk in it) which Christ has consecrated and prepared for them,
through the sacrifice of his own Flesh and Humanity, which was a veil to cover
and hide his Divinity. And seeing He is now the great High Priest over the
Church of God, invested with all authority and power, and having all in
substance, which His Type prefigured; therefore, (1.) They should draw near to
Jesus with a sincere heart, and with fullness of faith, that so they might have
their souls sprinkled with his blood, and delivered from the accusation of an
evil condemning Conscience (and so furnished with a good answer to all
challenges), and their bodies washed with pure water, that is, sanctified by
the Spirit of Christ, which was signified by the legal washings. (2.) They
should hold fast the profession of their faith or hope in Christ, without
wavering or warping in time trial: for the promises which God has made to
those who constantly believe in, and adhere to his Son, shall certainly be
performed. (3.) He exhorts them to maintain Christian communion, as an help to
their stedfastness and perseverance in the faith; observing (e) one another, V.
24. Observemus alii aliorum actus, ut, siqui languescant, eos excitemus ad
dilectionem, and pia facta. Grot.
and exciting and provoking one another to love and all good works; and to
maintain this communion both publicly Deserere conventus est initium quoddam
Defectionis Contra, in Ecclesiis Deus auget sua dona. Idem.
and privately; and the rather, because the day Dies judicii Judaici, qui typus
erat ultimi judicii.
of vengeance on the obdurate Jews drew nigh. From Ver. 19, to 26.

He further presses his Exhortation to stedfastness in the faith, by diverse
arguments: 1. From the fearful case of wilful Apostates, who after illumination
and profession of faith in Christ, make defection from him, and wilfully reject
him and the benefit of his Sacrifice. For such persons, he tells them, there
remains no other sacrifice for sin, nor other way of remission, nor any other
means to help them; But, having knowingly and wilfully rejected Christ, and
maliciously betaken themselves to the side of his Adversaries, there remains
nothing for them but a dreadful expectation of the fiery indignation of God,
which shall devour all such enemies of His. He shows, that the Contemner of
Moses's Law (legally convicted under two or three witnesses) was adjudged to
capital punishment without mercy; therefore much sorer punishment is due to the
Contemners of Christ, who tread under foot (as it were) the Son of God,
counting him as a vile person, and as one that dyed as a Malefactor; and count
the blood of the Covenant, by which Christ was sanctified Filius Dei per
sanguinem suum suit sanctificatus, h. e. Deo in sanctum victimam consecratus,
ut ait Joh. 17.19. Pro iis ego me sanctifico, ut and ipsi sanctificati siut in
veritate. Gomar.

There is a sanctification by consecration, when any thing is devoted or
dedicated unto God; and a sanctification by an inhabitation of the holy Spirit.


(that is, consecrated to God as a Sacred Victim) an unholy thing, and do
despite to the Spirit of Grace, as if he were a liar, who convinces them of
the Deity and Divine Power of Christ. He further shows, That God professes
himself an Avenger of all sin and injuries done to his people [Deut. 32.36.
Psalm. 135.14.]; and much more will he show himself an Avenger of so horrible a
sin and injury against his Son. And it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God, when, as an angry Judge, he takes vengeance on his enemies.
From Ver. 26, to 32.

2. He urges them to persevere; setting before them their former profession of
the faith, and their sufferings for it, partly whilst they themselves were
openly reproached and oppressed by the enemies of the Gospel; and partly,
whilst they out of Christian sympathy joined themselves as companions to those
that were so used. And particularly, he acknowledges how they had showed
compassion to him in his bonds, in mourning for him, and relieving of him. He
also takes notice, how they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, moved
thereto from their assurance of a better inheritance in Heaven. Having
therefore endured so much, he advises them not to desist or shrink from a bold
and courageous profession V. 35. (...)] ita hic appellat liberam Christi
professionem, ut Marc. 8.32. Act. 4.13, 29, 31. Grot.
of Christ and his Doctrine, which would be crowned with a great recompense of
reward. He further tells them, they have need of patience, that they may be
enabled to do and suffer whatever Christ shall call them unto; that so
persevering, they may attain the promised reward. For it is but a little while
ere He will come to take vengeance on the obdurate Jews. In the mean time he
shows them, that (as the Prophet Habbakkuk advises, chapter 24.) the just must live
by faith; but if any apostatize from their profession, God will abhor those
persons. But he tells them, he hopes better things of them (see chap. 6. v.
9.), namely, that they are not of the number of those that will apostatize, but
such as will persevere in the faith, to the saving of their souls. From Ver.
32, to the end.

He proceeds to press his former Exhortation to perseverance in the faith,
nature, properties, effects, and excellency of Faith, and illustrated from the
manifold experiences of the Saints of old.

And, 1. he gives a description of Faith Fides divina ab Apostolo definitur
(...) subsistentia (h. e. assensus firmus, and subsistens, licet inevidens)
eorum, quae non videntur, h. e. quae non sciuntur per causam proximam. (...)
eorum quae sperantur, fiducia, qua quis stat, and consistit, contranitens
adversis sperata in dubium trahentibus vid. 2 Cor. 9.4. and 11.17. Heb. 3.14.
vel, Fides est firma expectatio rerum sperandarum, and certa probatio [(...)]
rerum quae non videntur, id est, certa confidentia, ea quae non videntur, fore,
imo ita certa, ac si jam viderentur: est enim (...) demonstratio sive
argumentum ita certum, ut refelli non possit.
declaring it to be the substance or subsistence of things hoped for; that is
(firmly resting on God's Truth and faithfulness, and that he will infallibly
perform what he has promised), it gives, as it were, a present being and
subsistence (in the mind of the believer) to things future, and which are not
yet enjoyed, but only hoped-for and expected; and it evidently represents to
the eye of the soul things that cannot be seen with our bodily eyes. 2. By
faith, he shows it was, that the Elders and Saints that lived in former ages,
obtained the honorable testimony of God's approving of them. Thus God
testified of Noah, That he was a just and upright man, and one that walked with
him. Abraham also received this testimony, That he was the friend of God; and
David, That he was a man after God's own heart. 3. Faith fully rests in what
God has revealed concerning his making the worlds (that is, all manner of
Creatures, above and below, visible and invisible) out of nothing, (that is,
out of no pre-existent matter), by the word of his power. And if faith be
assured of such an Almighty Power in God, whereby he made this excellent
structure of the world; how can it doubt of His power and ability to perform
any of his promises made to his people? Ver. 3.

He now produces the examples of those ancient Worthies who gave eminent proof
of their faith. And,

1. He shows, that Abel by faith offered a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain.
For Abel not only offered of the best and fattest of his Flock, whilst Cain in
probability offered only some slight fruits; but Abel in his offering looked to
the seed of the woman which should tread upon the Serpent's head; that is, unto
Christ, who by his death should destroy the Devil, Heb. 2.14. By which faith
(applying to himself the righteousness of the Messiah) he obtained a testimony
from God, that he was righteous, Mat. 23.35. For nothing can make a sinner
righteous before God, but the righteousness of Christ laid hold on by faith, 2
Cor. 5.21. And God had respect unto Abel's person, and to his offering;
manifesting his acceptance of them, either by Igne caelitus demisso, ut Levit.
9.24. Grot.

At ignis hic sacrificium Caini reliquit intactum. Menoch.


fire from Heaven, or some other way discernable by Cain. And his faith, and
the fruits thereof, being registered in the holy Scripture; he thereby speaks
as evidently to us, as if we heard his voice.

2. He instances in Enoch, who by faith pleased God, and had the testimony
thereof, by an inward witness of the Spirit, testifying to his Conscience that
God approved him. Insomuch that he was translated from Earth to Heaven (not
seeing, that is, not suffering or tasting death), and was not found any more on
earth, among the living, though possibly those who lived at that time, missing
of him, did search for him, as the Children of the Prophets did for Elijah
after he was taken up into Heaven, 2 King. 2.17. And that it was Enoch's Faith
with which God was so singularly pleased, he proves by this Maxim, Without
faith Opera irregenitorum non sunt bona opera quoad formam and finem.

Fides est matter and radix bonorum operum.


it is impossible to please him, seeing no man out of Christ can please him so,
as to obtain eternal salvation. Joh. 14.6. For he that comes to God either in
prayer or thanksgiving, must believe that he is the only true God (such a God
as he has revealed himself to be), and that he is the Rewarder Et quod sit
mercedis dator iis qui Ipsum requirunt] quae metaphora invocationem and cultum
Dei notat, ut Act. 15.17. Romans 3.11. id quod solum fit recte per veram in
Christum fidem, Romans 10.13, 14. Ephesians. 3.12. Gomar.
of those that diligently seek his favor (in the way he has revealed in the
Gospel), and that his Mercy is no other way obtainable.

3. He instances in Noah, who being warned of God concerning the coming of the
Flood (a hundred and twenty years after), believed and feared, and by the
command of God prepared an Ark The Ark was a type and a sacrament of their
deliverance from eternal damnation. And in this respect Baptism is styled, in
reference to the Ark, a like figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. When two types resembling one
thing, are compared together, they are set out by the Greek word translated a
like figure.
to the saving of his Family; by which he bore his testimony against the
disobedient and unbelieving world, 2 Pet. 2.5, and became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith [see Gal. 5.5.], that is, an heir Factus est
vitae coelestis haeres per eam justitiam quae est secundum fidem. Capel.

Patrum fides habuit objecta duplicia; nempe promissa bona spiritualia ac
communia reliquis fidelibus, and bona peculiaria corporalia, spiritualium
adjuncta, and typos. Hinc fides utraque amplexa est, etiam quando temporalium
tantum fit mentio. Gom. Justifying faith receives the things of this world
from God as a Father in Christ; it extends it self to celestial and temporal
blessings. Dr. Gouge.

The Apostle uses this word righteousness by faith, synecdochically, for that
which follows upon it, viz. Eternal life. Idem.

Justitiae] and vitae eternae ex justitia illa fluentis: synecdoche membri
metonymica. Pisc.


of that eternal inheritance which is obtained by the righteousness of faith,
viz. the Righteousness of Christ, whom he eyed in his preservation by the Ark,
which was a type of Him, v. 7.

4. A Fourth Worthy he mentions, is Abraham Whose faith he more largely
describes, than any of the other Worthies. For it continues to the 20 verse;
only two verses are inserted, viz. 11 and 12, concerning Sarah's Faith, which
also tends to the amplification of Abraham's.

Though instances of sundry temporal things be brought in as evidences of his
faith, yet many of them were types of spiritual and heavenly matters, v. 10,
16; and withal, the temporal things noted, were appendices to spiritual and
heavenly. G.


who by faith followed God, calling him to leave his own Country, and go
whithersoever he should direct him, not knowing whither it was; only receiving
a promise from God, that his posterity should be possessors of that place
whither he was appointed to go, but no way assured that himself should ever be
owner of any part of it. And being come into the Land of Promise, he sojourned
in it as a stranger, living in Tents erected for a transitory passage, and not
in houses, as places of a fixed abode. And so likewise did Isaac and Jacob
after him, who were heirs with him of the same Promise Of the Promise made to
Abraham, read Genesis 12. v. 2, 3, 7. Of the like Promise to Isaac, read Genesis
26.3. Of the same to Jacob, read Genesis 28.13, 14.
. And that which moved him not to go back again in a discontented mood, but
patiently to bear this Pilgrim's life, was, because he had his eye on Heaven
(which he expected God would give him as a reward of his faith and obedience),
which is a City that has foundations (whereas the Tents in which he dwelt, had
none, but only were fastened to posts or stakes set in the ground), that is, the
state of Heaven is unchangeable and unalterable; and whilst other Cities are
built by men, God himself is the Builder and Maker of this City. He has made
it the place wherein he intends to manifest and reveal his own glory, and make
it most apparent to Angels and Men; and by showing them his glory, to glorify
them. Ver. 8, 9, 10.

5. Sarah also, though aged and barren, by faith leaning on the promise V. 11.
Because she judged him faithful who had promised] At first she doubted, and
laughed at it; but afterward being reprehended by God, and better instructed
by her Husband, and considering in her mind that it was God Almighty who had
promised it, she believed it.
of God, conceived by Abraham, when his body, as to the begetting of children,
was as it were dead; and so the promise of God touching his innumerable
offspring took place. Ver. 11, 12.

6. He shows, that all those last mentioned, viz. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
Sarah, died in the faith, that is, in assured expectation that the Promises
made to them, viz. of a numerous offspring, and the Land of Canaan, etc.
should be performed in God's due time, though they never enjoyed those good
things promised themselves, but only by the eye of their minds saw them, and
were confident of the accomplishment of them; and so saluted and embraced them
by the arms of their faith, though afar off, rejoicing in them, and thinking it
enough that their posterity should enjoy them. In the mean time they professed
themselves to be pilgrims This we read only of Jacob before Pharaoh; but the
mind of one of the faithful in the main matters, makes evident what is the
mind of the rest.
and strangers in the earth. And this language of theirs, calling themselves
sojourners in the Land of Canaan, and not possessors of it, signified, that
they did not think themselves at home, but that they had another Country in
their desires, which was not their own Country of Chaldaea, from whence
Abraham first went out upon God's call; for he and his posterity had many
opportunities to have gone back thither, if that had been the Country they
looked after. But it is plain, the Country they had in their desires, was an
heavenly, whereof Canaan was only a type; wher^fore God is not ashamed to be
called their God (even after their death, Exodus 3.6. Mat. 22.32.) who by their
faith gave glory to him in this life, acknowledging his power and faithfulness.
And when they dyed, he prepared for them a City, an heavenly City, which is a
superabundant recompense for their earthly Country which they left at his
command. Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16.

By faith Fides radix operis fuit, and principium internum.
Abraham when he was tried, and required by God to give a clear evidence of his
obedience, Genesis 22, was ready, and did really intend to offer up Isaac, his
only begotten Son of Sarah his lawful Wife, though he had received, embraced,
and firmly believed the Promises of God, that a numerous seed should spring
from him, Genesis 13.15; Nay more, that the Messiah himself (in whom all the
Nations of the Earth were to be blessed) should come of him; for so the promise
ran, In Isaac In Isaac, i. e. per Isaacum vocabitur, h. e. Existet tibi semen
nempe, illud numerosissimum, quod tibi promisi, and praecipue Christus. Pisc.
vide Romans 9 7. vide Amos 7.16.
shall thy seed be called; that is, that posterity thou shall have by Isaac,
shall be very eminent, and shall propagate thy name, and shall possess the Land
of Canaan, and the Messiah according to the flesh shall spring from his loins.
And that which strengthened and supported his faith, was this; he reasoned and A
due consideration of the grounds of faith, does much strengthen faith.
considered with himself, that though he should sacrifice this his Son, God was
able to raise him up again from the dead, and would undoubtedly work such a
miracle, rather than fail of his promise. And accordingly Abraham received him
again in a similitude Recepit in similitudine], h. e. non secus atque si Deus
cum ex mortuis suscitasset. Paraeus.

Nomen (...) pro similitudinis nota accipitur. Calv.


or likeness, and after a sort, even as if he had been raised from the dead;
for his nearness to death was a type, figure, and similitude of death [and
accordingly called death, 2 Cor. 1.10.], and he was as a dead man in his
father's account. Ver. 17, 18, 19.

8. By faith Isaac having revelations from the Lord concerning future things,
settled in his heart an assurance of the accomplishment of them; and accordingly
with a prophetical spirit he blessed his sons. And though through his fatherly
affection he had a mind to have conferred the main blessing on his eldest son,
Genesis 27; yet God so overruled the matter by his Providence, that the younger
had the greater blessing. Esau was blessed with temporal blessings, but Jacob
with temporal and spiritual also. Jacob's posterity were to be Lords over
Esau's; which continued from David's time (2 Samuel 8.14.) till the reign of
Jehoram (2 King 8.20.), when the posterity of Esau broke the yoke from off
their neck, as Isaac had foretold [Gen. 27.40.] Ver. 20.

9. By faith Jacob when he was near unto death, blessed the two sons of Joseph,
adopting them into his family, preferring Ephraim the younger before Manasseh
the elder, by God's appointment; and making them Heads of two distinct Tribes,
he gave them portions in the Land of Cana^^ as if he had been present at the
distribution of it, Gen, 48.22. And inclining upon his Pillow at his beds-head,
being weak and feeble, he held his staff in his hand too; and leaning on it, he
worshipped Et adoravit] sunt verba Mosis, Genesis 47.31. spectantia non
benedictionem filiorum Josephi quae sequenti demum capite refertur, sed
mandatum Jacobi quo se vetuit in Aegypto sepeliri. Paulus videlicet hac
connectione testatum voluit utrumque profectum a fide. Jacob. Capellus.
God, devoutly praising of him, that he should be buried with his Fathers, as
Joseph had promised him; and that his bones should be carried into Canaan,
which was a token and pledge that his posterity should inherit that Land, and
that God would bring them thither. Ver. 21.

10. By faith Joseph when he was near unto death, made mention of the departure
of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Genesis 15.24, and commanded that his
bones should be carried along with them, and buried in Canaan, which he was
assured God in his due time would give them for an inheritance. Ver. 22.

11. By faith Fide permotos suisse Mosis Parents, vidit (...) Deus, and id
Apostolo nostro revelavit. Cap.
it was that Moses's Parents, Amram and Jochebed (both of the Tribe of Levi)
having received a revelation from God (as some think Oraculo prius accepto, ex
ipsis oriturum qui populo libertatis auctor esset. Quare cum in sans ipsis
natus esset, mirum in modum pulcher, non dubitarunt quin is ipse esset ad quem
id oraculum pertineret. Grot.
) that from them should spring one who should be the procurer of liberty to
that people; and a Child being born to them of more than ordinary beauty and
comeliness, they believed, and concluded that this was He whom God intended for
the Deliverer of his people; and therefore notwithstanding the cruel Edict of
Pharaoh [Gen. 1.26.], they hid him three Months; and possibly by reason of some
discovery that was made of him, dur^t hide him no longer [Exod. 2.3.]. Ver. 23.

12. By faith Moses when he was forty years old [Acts 7.23.] refused to be
called the adopted Son of Pharaoh's Daughter Hujus generosi animi praesagium
dedit Moses infans, cum diadema sibi per jocum a Rege impositum in terram
abjecit.
, preferring the afflicted condition of the people of God, and esteeming the
reproaches Probrum Christi] h. e. Causa Christi ut Ephesians. 3.1. Paulus dicitur
vinctus Christi, h. e. propter Christum, and Col. 1.24. afflictiones Christi in
carne mea, quod eas propter Christum in carne sua perferret. Vel notari potest
hic subjectum. Nam Ecclesiae afflictiones in utroque Testamento Christi etiam
sunt, propter unionem mysticam Capitis and membrorum. Vid. Act. 9.4. Gom.
that the Members of Christ's Mystical Body unjustly suffer, greater riches
than the Treasures of Egypt. For, such reproaches he knew would be recompensed
with an exceeding great reward Mat. 5.11, 12. and 19.29.
; and to this he had an eye. Ver. 24, 25, 26.

13. By faith he led the people out of Egypt [Exod. 10.29.], notwithstanding
the King's threatenings; and was constant and courageous in doing his duty, as
having the eye of his faith fixed on him who is Invisible, and who is a ready
help in time of trouble. Ver. 27.

14. By faith he kept the Passover, and sprinkled the blood The rite of
sprinkling blood, was used only the first time of celebrating the Passover,
because it was a sign of that particular deliverance which then only was given.
There was not the like occasion for it at other Passovers; for such a Destroyer
was only sent at that time.
of the Pascal-Lamb on the thresholds and posts of the doors of the Children of
Israel [Exod. 12.21. etc.] that the destroying-Angel that was sent to destroy
the firstborn of the Egyptians that night, might not hurt them. The King of
Egypt had commanded the Midwives to kill all the Male-children of the
Israelites in the birth; which cruel Edict, because it took not effect, he made
another more cruel, That all his people should cast every Son that was born of
an Israelite, into the water, Exodus 1.16, 22. God therefore destroys all
their firstborn, and thus suiteth his Judgment unto their Sin. Ver. 26.

15. By faith the Israelites All of them had not a true and sound faith. There
were many Unbelievers among them, 1 Cor. 10.5. yet the fact has its
denomination from the better part. For the faithful's sake, the unfaithful were
kept from drowning. The wicked, in temporal blessings, fare the better for the
Godly.
passed through the Red Sea 'Twas called the Red Sea, because the sand on the
shores thereof were red, and the Mountains bordering thereon were reddish.
, Moses being their Leader; which the Egyptians essaying to do, were drowned.

16. By the faith of Joshua, and the other Israelites (who trusted in God that
he would accomplish all his Promises), the Walls of Jericho (a strong and
well-fenced City, and a Frontier-Town that kept them from entering far into
Canaan) fell down when they had encompassed it seven There being seven days
spent in the Army's march about Jericho, one of them must needs be the Sabbath.
In some cases some servile work may be done on the Sabbath.
days: They went round about it once a day for six days together; and on the
seventh day they went round it seven times; and then giving a great shout, all
the Walls, over against which the Israelites marched That all the Wall about
the City did not fall, may appear by this, else Rahab's House would have ^allen
together with the Wall.
, fell flat to the ground, and the Army entered into the City, and destroyed it.
Ver. 30.

17. Rahab, who, as it seems, kept an Inn or Victualling-house in Jericho, and
probably had formerly been of an infamous life Certe quaerebatur Rahab ab
exploratoribus, non ut meretrix, sed ut hospita. Quaevis caupona meretrix
audiebat, etiamsi forte cast viveret. In eo censu potuit esse Rahab, etiamsi
Scriptura passim ex usu loquendi recepto, vocet eam (...).

Her seeking to hide the Spies, was an act of faith very pleasing to God; but
her doing it with a lie, is that which cannot be excused, or any way defended;
the work she did was good, though she f^il'd in the manner of doing it.

Quod huic charitatis officio mendacium admiscuit, id non pertinet ad mendacii,
sed ad infirmitatis ^umanae notationem. Capel.


, as many among the Gentiles of that profession were [see Jam. 2.25.]; having
heard of God's wonderful works, Jos. 2.9. etc. was thereby brought to believe
and acknowledge the God of Israel for the true God; and understanding that He
had given the Israelites the Land of Canaan for a p^ssession, she desired
communion with them as the true and only people of God, and was resolved to
live and dye with them. And as a testimony of her faith, she peaceably and
courteously entertained the Israelitish Spies, and protected them, and
dismissed them in safety; and thereupon was saved from perishing with her
unbelieving and disobedient f^llow Citizens; and afterward she was married
among the Israelites, to Salmon the Father of Boaz, one of the forefathers of
David, and consequently of Christ [M^^. 1.5.]. Ver. 31.

18. The Apostle having thus instanced in diverse worthy Examples of faith; he
shows, that besides th^se there ^re many more that might be named, and that a
long time would not be sufficient to write of them. He mentions Gid^on and
Barac, Sampson and Jephta, David and Samuel, and some of the ancient Prophets.
These being extraordinarily raised up by God for the special good of his
Church, and the Commonwealth of the Jews, and firmly d^pending on his power,
they fearlesly discharged their duty in governing the Israelites, fighting
their battles, and making conquests; Gideon over the Midianites, Barac over the
Canaanites, Sampson Sampson's pulling down the House upon himself, and the
Enemies of the Church (which were in, and upon it), was a lawful act, because
he did it by a special warrant, which was the immediate and extraordinary
motion of God's Spirit, and did it in compliance with his function, to which he
was deputed from his Mother's womb, Judge. 13.5, which was to deliver Israel out
of the hands of the Philistines. Dr. Gouge.

The Apostle here does not observe the order of time, but of dignity; for
Gideon had a more excellent spirit than Barak, and Sampson than Jepthtah.
Samuel is put after King David, immediately before the Prophets, because he was
a prime Prophet.


over the Philistines, Jephta over the Ammonites, David over the Amalekites,
Jebusites, Moabites, Philistines, Idumaeans, and Syrians. 'Twas their faith
that gave them courage to fight those battles, and make those conquests. 'Twas
by their faith that they not only lived godly and righteous lives themselves,
but were eminent also in administering righteousness and Justice among the men
of their times, see 2 Samuel 8.15. 'Twas by their faith that they obtained the
performance of some special and particular Promises made unto themselves, as
David of a Kingdom. etc. 'Twas by faith that the Prophets who lived after
Samuel and David, obtained of God that such memorable things should be done for
them. As particularly, Daniel obtained that miracle of mercy and deliverance
from God; that the Lions, when he was thrown into their Dens, did him no hurt.
Others were so favored by God, that the fire did them n^ harm when they were
cast into it, as Daniel's three Companions. Others escaped present danger of
being killed by the Sword, as David by Saul, Elijah and Michajah by Ahab.
Others out of weakness were made strong, that is recovered out of desperate
Diseases, as King Hezekiah. Others became wonderfully valiant in battle, as
Jonathan, 1 Samuel 13, and 14; and David's Captains, 2 Samuel 23, and routed the
Armies of the Heathen- Canaanites, and suchlike aliens and strangers from the
Covenant of God.

Another effect of the vigor of Faith, was this, That some women thereby
received their dead children raised to life again, as the Widow of Sarepta that
entertained Elijah, 1 King. 17; and the Shunamite that lodged Elisha, 2 King.
4. And by faith it was that other Worthies of the Old Testament when racked and
tormented for a knowledging and professing the truth, refused to be delivered
to the prejudice of their Piety, and their Consciences, when they might;
believing that th^ugh they were put to death, they should have a glorious
resurrection to life eternal after death; and looking upon that as much more
desirable than a present freedom from their t^rments. For if they would have
denied God, and broken his Commandments, they might have had a kind of
resurrection from the sentence of death pronounced against them, and have lived
longer in the world. But they refused that for a far better resurrection, which
they assuredly expected. Here some think the Apostle has reference to the Case
of Eleazer, and those torturings which were exercised under the Tyrant
Antiochus, 2 Mac. 6.18: But we need not go so far: If the three Children would
have fallen down and worshipped Nebuchadnezzar's Golden Image, they might have
been delivered. If Daniel would have prayed to King Darius, he might have
escaped the Lions Den. The Apostle goes on to show how other Worthies were
tried by mockings and reproaches, as Micajah, 1 King. 22.24; and scourgings, as
Jeremiah, Jer. 20.2, and 37.15; and bonds and imprisonments, as Joseph in
Egypt, and Jeremy: Some were stoned, as Zacharias the son of Jehojada, 2 Chronicles.
24.21: Some were sawn Hanc Judaeorum traditionem sequuntur Hieronymus and
Epiphanius, and fuisse hoc supplicium non incognitum vicinis Judaeae locis,
apparet. Amos 1.3. 2 Samuel 12.31. 1 Chronicles. 20.3.
asunder, as the ancient Jewish Histories testify of Isaiah under the tyranny
of Manasseh. Others being tempted with fair promises, and remaining resolute,
were slain with the sword, as it happened to many in Ahab's time, 1 King.
19.10; as also in Manasseh's, 2 King. 21.16. Others were driven from their own
homes, and forced to wander about in sheepskins and goat skins, destitute of
all things needful, and many ways perplexed and afflicted. And yet such
excellent persons as these, whose company the world was not worthy to enjoy,
were forced to wander about in deserts and mountains, and to hide themselves in
dens and caves of the earth. From Ver. 31, to 39.

The Apostle having thus set forth the vigor of Faith by the admirable effects
of it in doing and suffering: He concludes this discourse, declaring, That all
these Saints, though they obtained testimony Adepti testimonium] scil
approbationis quod scil Deo placuerint.
, that through their faith they pleased God; yet they obtained not the
accomplishment of the great promise (a) of the exhibition of the Messiah, God
having reserved that great mercy to the times of the New Testament, Non
consequuti sunt promissionem] h. e. (per Meton. adjuncti pro subjecti) rem
promissam, nempe Christum exhibitum in carne, and pro nobis mortuum and
suscitatum.
that they should not be perfected Ne absque nobis consummarentur] Id
intelligendum, ratione meriti Christi, non ratione applicationis: nam
posteriore modo Patres fideles absque nobis fuerunt consummati, utpote
justificati (Romans 4.3 and 6.23, 24.) and vita aeterna donati propter Christum
venturum, and meritum solvendum, fide apprehensum. Priori vero modo nequaquam,
quia redemptor nondum advenerat, ideoque promissum redemptionis pretium nondum
solverat. Gomar.

Vt non sine nobis consummarentur] h. e. Ut eorum salus ex hoc ipso, nobis
exhibito, Messia (nostroque demum tempore peracto ipsius sacrificio) penderet,
per quem and nos una cum eis justificaremur, and servaremur. Illyr.


, that is, justified and saved by any thing done in their time, but by looking
to our time, and Christ's satisfaction made therein Ita ut ab eo, quod nostris
demum temporibus exhibendum ac praestandum erat, salus ipsorum penderet. Bez.
, whereby both they and we are perfected; God not intending that the
Infant-condition of the Church should be made perfect before the exhibition of
Christ, nor without the more complete condition of the Church after Christ.
From Ver. 39, to the end.

Christian Hebrews to perseverance in the faith, and to patience under the
cross, and the afflictions they might meet with for the sake of Christ, from
the many instances (...)] Metaphora ducta est ab avibus magna multitudine
volantibus, quae alis suis umbram instar nubis, faciunt; cujus locutionis
exemplum extat Esa. 60.8. Lud. Cappel.
of the former Saints mentioned in the foregoing Chapter (who have witnessed to
them the power and efficacy of their faith): He comes now further to encourage
them to follow their example. And in order hereunto he tells them, they should
lay aside every weight, that is, the inordinate love of the world, and the
immoderate cares and sollicitudes about it (which are so apt to press down the
soul), and the sin Peccatum quod nos facile circumstat] involvit, and implicat
multo facilius, quam ulla erga pedes and crura currentis ad remorandum illius
cursum. Cap.
that does so easily beset us, that is, does so usually incumber and entangle
us ( viz. the slavish fear of men, and of loss of our wordly comforts or life)
and should run with patience the race that is set before them, and is appointed
for them by God, persevering therein, whatsoever difficulties or afflictions
they may meet with, as they that hope for a glorious reward when they come at
the end of their course.

And that they may be enabled comfortably to run their Christian course, and to
persevere in the faith, he advises them to look up to Jesus, who by his word
and spirit first works Ephesians. 2 8. Phil. 1.6, 29. 1 Cor. 1.8.
the grace of Faith in us, and afterward carries it on, preserves and
increases it. He advises them, not only to look up to him for help, but to eye
him as their Captain and Leader, who for the joy that was s^t before him (unto
which by his sufferings he was not only to come himself, but also to bring all
that truly believe in him, Luke 24.26. 1 Pet. 1.11.) patiently endured the
cross, and despised the shame (which was cast upon him by sinners both in his
life, and at his death), and after his sufferings was advanced to the highest
pitch of glory, dignity, and power (far above all creatures), next unto God
himself; and will reward all the Members of his Mystical Body for whatsoever
they do or suffer for him. And he shows them, that it will be requisite they
duly consider and often meditate on Christ's Patience, and how great opposition
and contradiction from sinners he endured, lest they grow weary and be
discouraged under the Cross, and faint in their minds. But they might possibly
object, That they had suffered much already; see chapter 10.32, 33, 34. He answers,
They had indeed suffered much, but not so much as they must be ready and
prepared to suffer. They had not suffered as their Lord and Master had done, to
the effusion of his blood, striving against, and opposing the wickedness and
infidelity of the enemies of the Gospel, who by cruel and bloody courses
endeavored to force men from the faith, as they had dealt with Stephen and
James, Acts 7, and 12. And therefore every suffering less than that, ought to
seem tolerable in their eyes. From Ver. 1, to 5.

And that he may further stir them up to patience and perseveran^e in the
faith, he tells them, they should consider, that all their sufferings are but
fatherly chastisements. Which consideration that he might imprint the more upon
their minds, he asks them whether they have forgotten V. 5. Obliti estis?]
legenda haec interrogative. Grot.
the exhortation and divine counsel of Wisdom to her children, Prove. 3.11, That
they should neither despise nor disregard the chastnings of the Lord, nor
faint, nor sink under them. For God chastens Licet ab Hebraeo aliquantulum
discrepat haec versio, Paulus tamen eam ut quae sola esset in usu non dubitat
usurpare, quia, rem ipsam quod attinet, utrobique sensus est idem. Vide Prove.
3.12. Capel.
in love every one whom he acknowledges for his son, and receives into his
especial care. And therefore in that they are chastised in order to their
amendment, they are to reckon themselves to be dealt with by God as children.
For what s^n is there whom a wise father does not correct, when he sees him
stand in need of it? If any be totally freed and exempted from chastisement (to
which all true and genuine children are obnoxious, and which every prudent
Parent inflicts upon his dearest children when he sees there is cause), it is an
argument, that though they be in the father's family, yet they are not owned
and acknowledged by him (and so have no title to, or just expectation of the
inheritance), but indeed are bastards and not s^ns; of which this is a shrewd
token, that God suffers them to go on without discipline, and to follow their
own evil ways. Furthermore he tells them, they should consider, that our
Parents who begat us, and were instruments (under God) of our bodily and
earthly being, did in our childhood chastise and correct us, yet we have not
been incited thereby to reverence them the l^ss, or to forsake or renounce
them. And shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits
Patri Spirituum] h. e. Patri Spirituali and coelesti.
[Eccles. 12.7.] when he corrects us in order to our spiritual amendment, and
that we may at last obtain of him eternal life, as a reward of our patience and
obedience. And it is further to be considered, that earthly Parents chastise
their children only whilst they are children Perpetua quidem est Patrum,
quamdiu vivunt, in liberos suos auctoritas, and potestas, sed non eadem
perpetuo. Castigatoriam enim illam jurisdictionem non perpetuam obtinent, sed
ad paucos dies, i. e. annos. V. 10.
, and no longer; and many times by the rules of their own judgment and will
(which very often are corrupt and depraved), but our heavenly Father's
chastisements are all managed with infinite wisdom, and he purely intends our
profit therein, that he may thereby form and fashion us unto holiness, and
bring us to a participation of his own Divine Nature. It Is true indeed, he
tells them, Afflictions are no pleasing things in themselves, nor joyous for
the present; but the fruit of sanctified affliction is righteousness and
holiness, which bring peace to the conscience, after we have been some time
exercised, and our corruptions subdued with this discipline. From all the
foregoing considerations, he exhorts them to courage and constancy in the ways
of Christ, alluding to the words of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 35.3. Strengthen ye
the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees; as if he should have said, Seeing
so glorious fruits spring from sanctified afflictions, be not dejected in mind,
nor suffer fear to seize upon you (which weakens the hands, and infeebles the
knees, and causes them to smite one against another); but be courageous in
your souls; and in case your spirits begin to fail, quicken them up again, and
endeavor to renew your spiritual strength and courage; and make straight paths
with your feet Rectas orhitas facere pedibus] est rectum vitae cursum tenere,
idque ita, ut etiam quasi vestigia quaedam sanctae vitae vestrae appareant, ad
gloriam Dei and aliorum imitationem. Illyr.
; that is, manifest the course wherein you walk, to be the right way that
leads to life, that others may see it, and follow you therein, and look to
it, that the lame be not turned out of the way Ne quod claudum est luxetur
(amplius), q. d. Ne forte siquis jam claudus est ex pedum infirmitate, amplius
novo offendiculo periclitetur ut salutis jacturam faciat. Capel.
, but that they rather be healed, that is, that the weak be not disheartened, or
turned out of the right way, but rather cured of their fears, and confirmed in
their Christian course. From Ver. 5, to 14.

The Apostle having thus endeavored to strengthen them in the Faith, and in a
courageous profession thereof, he comes now to give them many wholesome
precepts for the right ordering their life and conversation, that thereby they
may adorn their profession.

1. That they endeavor as much as in them lies, to be at peace with all men
Quantum id salva conscientia fieri potest.
[Rom. 15.18.]; yet whilst they endeavor after peace, they must be sure they
neglect not holiness. For without peace with men, they may obtain eternal
salvation; but without holiness no man shall ever see God to his comfort. V^r.
14.

2. That they be not only careful as to their own particulars, but also
watchful one over another; that they look to it diligently, and take what care
they can that none among them fail or fai^ short of the grace of God; that is,
fail of the grace of God offered in the Gospel, or fall from the pure doctrine
of grace; and that no root of bitterness spring up among them, viz. no
dangerous error, heresy, or schism; no envy, or malice, to the troubling,
polluting, and infecting of them. See Deuteronomy. 29.18.

3. That they take care there be no fornicators or profane persons found among
them, such as Esau was, who through the impatience of his hunger, for one mess
of meat sold his birthright The privileges belonging to the first born, were:
1. He succeeded to his Father in dignity and superiority over the Family. 2. He
was to have a double portion of his father's good^, Deuteronomy. 21.17. Thus the
birthright being translated to Joseph the firstborn of Rachel, his seed made
two Tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh. 3 He sustained the Office of a Prophet to
instruct the Family, and of a Priest to pray with them, at least till God set
the Tribe of Levi apart for that Function. For the Levites were taken instead
of the firstborn, Numb. 3.41.

Primogenitura complectebatur non tantum primatum, and duplicem portionem, quae
civilia orderi possunt, sed and jus sacerdotii, eoque sacro sanctum filiis
debebat esse jus illud: postquam Leviticae Tribui alligatum fuit sacerdotium,
ex illo jus Primogeniturae minoris fuit venerationis and momenti. Capel.


with all the privileges thereunto belonging (whereof the Priesthood was one);
which was so provoking a sin in the sight of God, that afterward when he would
fain have recovered this blessing, he found no place for repentance ^r
alteration of mind, in his Father Isaac; neither could he move him to reverse
or recall the blessing, which as a Prophet of God, and as His Instrument
(though with mistake as to his apprehension) he had conferred on Jacob, though
he sought it with tears. And as Esau was rejected from the blessings of the
birthright (which before, Genesis 25.34, he had so vilely contemned); So profane
contemners of the grace offered in the Gospel (whereby we become Priests unto
God, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable through Christ) ought to fear
being excluded from the mercy of God; and that though they earnestly seek it
when it is too late, God will not repent or alter his righteous sentence upon
them.

4. That he may further set out what a heinous sin it is, and how high a degree
of profaneness, to neglect or despise the grace of God offered in the Gospel, he
shows them the difference betwixt the Law and Gospel Quanto lex Evangelica cum
suis promissis, praestat legi Mosis, tanto damnabilior est ejus contemptus.
Grot.
, and to how much better a state and condition they were advanced under the
Gospel, than the Jews were in under the Law and old Administration of the
Covenant of Grace, notwithstanding all their boasting of their great
privileges. That therefire he may show the excellency of Christianity above
Judaism, he tells these Christian-Hebrews, that they were not called to hear
the promulgation of the Law given on Mount Sinai. Non accessistis] i. e. non
estis vocati, and adducti per Evangelium ad montem Sinai, ut terrificam legis
promulgationem audiatis, sicut populus Israeliticus; sed vocati estis ad montem
Sion, etc.
, a material Mountain, that was in it self tou^hable and palpable by the hands
of men (though in respect ^f God's charge it might not at that time be touched
Nay, that command had so much terror in it, that they must not approach the
border of the Mountain, Exodus 19.12, etc. If so much as a Beast touched the
Mountain, it must be stoned, or shot through with an arrow.
), a Mountain burning with fire, and covered with blackness, and darkness, and
tempest, the trumpet sounding, and the voice of God in a dreadful manner
promulgating the Law; which voice was so terrible, that the people were not
able to he^r it, but requested that God would not speak to them any more, Exodus
20.19. And so formidable was the aspect of all things that appeared there at
that time, that Moses himself. said, I exceedingly fear and tremble. The
Apostle having thus set out with how much terror the Law, and the old
Administration was delivered, which was enough to keep these Hebrews from any
desire to return to Judaism, he comes now to set before them the happy
condition to wbich they were advanced under the Gospel. He tells them, that by
the Gospel they have been called, and by faith received into the communion of
the Christian Church, figured by Mount Sion (Psalm. 2.6, opposite to Mount
Sinai, Gal. 4.26.), which he calls the Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the
living God, because it is set up, and especially governed by God. And hereby
also they come to have communion with the holy Angels Who are an innumerable
company as to us, though not as to God.
, who are Ministers of Christ, and fellow servants of believers [Rev. 19.10.],
and make a part of the Catholic The Catholic Church is diffused through the
whole world, extends it self to all times and ages; has two parts, one
Militant here on earth, the other Triumphant in heaven.
or universal Church, the great assembly of the firstborn Primogenitorum] h.
e. Electorum, ut qui supra reliquos homines eas habent praerogativas, quas olim
primogeniti supra reliquos fratres; nempe, 1. Potiorem partem haereditatis. 2.
Principatum. 3. Sacerdotium. Capel.
, that is, of the Elect, who by the special grace of God have received many
heavenly privileges above other men, as the firstborn among the Jews had
above his brethren; and whose names are enrolled in Heaven, and they reckoned
by God as free Denizens of his heavenly City, though they be not actually
possessed of the glory thereof Jam tum Deus illos habebat pro civibus
coelestibus jure, etsi nondum possessione. Grot. Vide Luc. 10.20, Phil. 4.3.
Apoc. 13.8.
Nay further, hereby they come to have spiritual communion with God himself,
the Judge of all, and with the Saints in bliss, the spirits of just men made
perfect, they being all Children of the same Father, and all united to the same
Head, all Members of the same Body, and having all a spiritual animation by the
same Spirit. Yea, by the Gospel they are brought to Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant (not to Moses the typical Mediator of the old) who has
established it with his own blood. And to faith in this blood (wherewith their
consciences must be sprinkled before they can be admitted into Heaven), they
are brought by the Gospel; which blood speaks better things than the blood of
Abel. For that cried for vengeance on Cain, but this for mercy on penitent
believers Or to the blood of sprinkling that has much more efficacy in it to
obtain God's acceptance, than had the blood of Abel's Sacrifice, which was the
first type of the blood of Christ; of which we read, and of which it is said,
That God had respect unto it, Genesis 4.4.
. Therefore he advises them to take heed they despise not Christ speaking to
them in the Gospel. For if they were destroyed that contemned Moses, who
received his message on earth, and delivered the Law only from Mount Sinai,
then much severer destruction is to be expected for them who d^spise Him who
came down from Heaven, and received his message in the bosom of his Father,
Joh. 1.18, and does now speak to us from Heaven by his Spirit in his Apostles
and other faithful Ministers. And that he might further set out unto them the
excellency of Christ's Person, and the dignity of his Gospel, he shows them,
that the voice Christ, as God, gave the Law by the ministry of Angels, Gal.
3.19.

Cum lex est promulgata terrefecit terram, non Moses non Angelus aliquis sed,
Dei filius.


of Christ in promulgating the Law, shook the earth, that is, Mount Sinai; but
he promised by the Prophet Haggai, chapter 2. v. 7, That he would shake not only
the earth, but heaven also; which prophecy was partly fulfilled at his first
coming in the flesh Quae Christi adventu in terras aliquatenus impleta diximus
ad Aggaeum; multo autem perfectius implebuntur in adventu ejus ad Judicium.
Grot.
. For then at his birth an extraordinary light shined about the Shepherds, Luke
2.9; and an extraordinary Star appeared in the heavens, Mat. 2.29; and at his
Baptism the heavens opened, Mat. 3.17; and at his Transfiguration a voice came
out of the cloud, Mat. 17.5; and at his Passion the Sun was darkened, the Earth
shook, and the Graves opened, and many dead Saints came out and appeared: And
at the feast of Pentecost there came from Heaven a sound, as of a rushing
mighty wind, and the Holy Ghost in the shape of cloven fiery tongues resting on
the Apostles, and miraculously inabling them to speak all languages, all
Nations were shaken with the preaching of the Gospel. But this prophecy shall
be more perfectly fulfilled when Christ shall come to judgment, when heaven and
earth shall be burnt with fire; and whats^ever corruptibility they have, shall
be abolished, 2 Pet. 3.7, that a new Heaven and a new Earth may succeed,
wherein shall dwell righteousness; that is, wherein the Saints being made
immortal, and perfec^ly righteous, shall dwell and abide. The Apostle further
commenteth upon these words of Haggai (following the Translation of the LXX, in
his quotation of them), and shows, that this word once more In Hebraeo est
(...) adhuc unum modicum est, sed videntur Graeci legisse (...) semel post. hac.
, does intimate, that heaven and earth shall pass away, and shall be
wonderfully changed and altered Non mi rum hoc Nam in id facta est haec quam
videmus machina, u^ olim alteri meliori, and non immutandae locum faciat. Vide
2 Pet. 3.13. and Apoc. 21.1.

Novis istis coelis and novae terrae perpetuitatem immutabilem pollicetur Deus
Esa. 66.22. ad consum^nationem scil, saeculorum. Capel.

Per (...) concutienda seu instabilia, intelligo coeli and terrae machinam, ut
nunc est, corruptioni and vanitati obnoxia; quae vocat factitia quia creata a
Deo: per (...) intelligo illam horribilem conflagrationem futuram in sine
mundi, quam aliquatenus repraesentavit illa montis concussio in Legis
promulgatione: per (...) coelum novum and terram novam, cum novis suis incolis,
i. e. ut verbo dicam, regnum gloriae. Haec mihi videtur genuina hujus loci
interpretatio. Paraeus in loc.


, in respect of their present state; that they being removed, he may make a new
Heaven and a new Earth, wherein his subjects may for ever abide under his Rule
and Government. He concludes this matter with this serious exhortation, That
seeing they had by faith in Christ obtained V. 28. (...)] i. e. cum habeamus
cum obtineamus regnum, i. e. jus ad regnum illud. (...)] (...) pro (...)
retineamus gratiam. Ut To. 15. v. 4. Spem illam teneamus. Per gratiam,
intellige fidem ex gratia Dei profectam. Meton. efficientis. Pisc.
a right to this glorious and immutable Kingdom [2 Pet. 1.11.], he advises them
to hold fast and improve the grace they had already received, that thereby they
might be enabled to serve God acceptably, reverencing him in their hearts as
their heavenly Father, and fearing to offend him. seeing he is to be their
Judge. For he will be a consuming-fire to all disobedient impenitent sinners,
and will execute his wrath very severely against all Apostates. From Ver. 14,
to the end.

Hebrews concerning perseverance in the faith; he now comes, toward the close
of his Epistle, to exhort them to sundry other duties.

1. That brotherly love and Christian charity should abide and continue among
them, and that they constantly persevere therein. See Heb. 6.10, and Ephesians. 4.3,
etc.

2. That they should exercise Hospitality, and kindly entertain strangers and
banished Christians, who were oftentimes constrained to forsake their own
Country, and knew not where to turn in; see Romans 12.18. 1 Pet. 4.9. And to
encourage them the more hereunto, he tells them, that some have hereby unawares
entertained Angels (who at first did not discover themselves), as Abraham
Abraham and Lot, cum primum exciperent Angelos. Arabes eos putarunt, quos
quanquam ignotos multo cum honor exceperunt postea e nuntio quem adferebant,
cognoverunt esse Angelos.
Genesis 18.1; and Lot, Genesis 19.1.

3. That they should sympathize with, and show compassion to those that are in
bonds and adversity, remembering that they themselves also are in the body, and
so subject to the like calamities; and are also members of the same mystical
body of Christ, with other pious suffering-Christians, 1 Cor. 12.26.

4. Having in the former part of the Chapter commended Charity, Hospitality,
and Compassion; in this verse he commends Chastity; showing the means whereby
they may keep themselves chaste, which is by lawful Wedlock, which God allows to
all sorts and degrees of persons, of what estate and calling soever they be [1 Timothy 4.1, 3.], and pronounces it an honorable condition of life; but declares,
that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge (...)] Recte: Dei judicio
reservat illa flagitia, quae solent hominibus aliis esse abscondita. Grot.

Cubile impollutum] h. e. Sua natura purum est and licitum atque concessum, ita
ut legitimo ejus usu non polluatur conscientia. Pisc.


.

5. He advises them to take heed of Covetousness, lest that vice corrupt their
manners; and he prescribes contentation with their present condition, and such
things as they have That which is past, cannot be recovered, and it is a folly
to grieve for it: that which is to come, is uncertain; uncertain whether we
shall get it, or how long we shall keep it. Therefore be content with those
things you at present have. Dr. Jones.

His verbis excludit Apostolus, non sedulam industriam, non providam
sagacitatem; sed sollicitam diffidentiam, cupeditatem inexpletam, semperque
querulum fastidium rerum praesentium aut taedium. Capel.


, as a prime remedy against it. And to persuade them thereunto, he tells them,
that God has promised, That he will never leave or forsake those that trust in
him. For though this promise was made to Joshua in particular [Jos. 1.5.]; yet
any of God's faithful ones may apply it to themselves; and whosoever trusts
in God, as Joshua did, and reposeth himself on his good Providence, shall find
God to be with him, and that he will not fail or forsake him. So that having so
gracious a promise, believers may boldly say as David said of himself, Psalm.
118.6. The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me. From
Ver. 1, to 7.

6. He commends to them the example of their Church-Rulers and Instructors
(some of whom it seems were dead); advising them to imitate them in the
stedfastness of their faith, and so sets before them the holiness of their
conversation, and the happy issue (...) contemplantes quis fuerit exitus
conversationis ipsorum.

Adfert rationem, cur eos imitari debeant a felici eorum exitu, beataque morte,
quam contemplari eos jubet, eaque ut Deo valde probata, moveri ad imitandam
eorum vitam. Illyr.


of it, viz. how after they had persevered in the faith to the end, they dyed
happily in the Lord, with evident proofs of his love and favor. And he shows
them, they may fetch a strong argument for their stedfastness in the faith,
from the object of their faith, which is Jesus Christ, who remains still the
same object of faith, the same means of salvation, the same foundation of his
Church [1 Cor. 3.11.], the same in all his Offices, and the same in efficacy to
all that believe in him, in all ages of the world, Rev. 13.8. And this being
so, they had great reason to continue firm and constant in the faith of Christ,
and to take heed of being carried away with new and strange doctrines, which
were very different from the Gospel. And he further tells them, that it is good
and profitable for them, that their hearts should be established with the true
doctrine of the grace and mercy of God to us in Christ (which gives true rest
and quiet to the conscience), and not think that the mingling the observation
of some of the legal ceremonies (as the distinction of meats, etc.) with the
Gospel, is the right way to get peace and establishment. For such carnal rites
and observances, as the distinction of meats The observation of the distinction
of meats, cannot settle or establish the heart in true and solid peace; but the
grace of God in Christ, is the true Cordial that can strengthen the heart;
therefore he advises them to stick to that, and not to be carried away with
other doctrines.
, he shows has nothing profited, as to righteousness and justification, those
that have most busied themselves about them, and have walked most strictly in
the observance of them. See Romans 14.17. Col. 2.16.

And besides the unprofitableness of these legal rites, he shows they bring
great damage to the observers of them. For thereby they deprive themselves of
all benefit which they might otherwise receive from Christ. For, says he, (to
speak in terms agreeable to the Old Testament) We Christians have an Altar,
that is, a Sacrifice upon an Altar, viz. Jesus Christ, that was sacrificed on
the Altar of his Cross; of which sacrifice they have no right to eat, that is,
have no part in it, who serve the Tabercle Quia Tabernaculum cum toto cultu
erat umbratile, Christum venturum praefigurans, ut docuit supra cap. 9,
deservire igitur Tabernaculo, h. e. Ceremonias observare post Christum
exhibitum, erat Christum abnegare, and victimam ejus evertere. Paraeus.

Dum figuram tenent, a veritate se faciunt alienos. Cluv

Qui exhibito Christo adhuc deserviunt tabernaculo, h e. ad^aerent ceremoniis
legis atque in illis suam coram Deo justitiam quaerunt; illi non possunt edere
de hoc altari spirituali, h. e. Non possunt reddi participes sacrificii, and
beneficiorum per Christi mortem partorum. Glass.


, that is, addict themselves to the legal rites which were used in the
Tabernacle, and belonged to the Ceremonial Law. The Tabernacle and Christ
cannot stand together. If they will needs retain the shadow still, they have no
right to the body. And as the High Priest, who served in the Tabernacle, might
not eat of the bodies of those beasts whose blood he brought once a year into
the most holy place, to make atonement for sin (Lev. 16.6, 24, 27.], they being
to be burnt without the Camp Cum dicit Apostolus, comburuntur extra castra non
suum seculum proprie respicit, sed Mosaicum, quo populus in deserto more
militantium castrametabantur.
: so they, who since Christ was exhibited, serve the Tabernacle, and adhere to
the Levitical Ceremonies, cannot partake of Christ. For He, that he might
fulfill the Type, and might sanctify Christus ut sanguine suo sanstificaret, h.
e. a peccatorum sordibus sanctos nos and puros redderet, etc. Zeger.
his people with his own blood; that is, make a real atonement and expiation of
their sins by his own blood (which the High Priest did only typically by the
blood of beasts), and that he might confer grace upon them, suffered death
without the gates of Jerusalem. And from Christ's going forth to suffer without
the gates, and bearing his Cross, he deduces this tropological or practical
use, that those that profess themselves Christians, should forsake the legal
ceremonies, which were administered within the Camp; and withdraw their hearts
and affections from the world, and should go forth to Christ; that is, cleave
fast to him and his doctrine, being ready to take up his Cross, and bear
reproach for his sake. And he shows, their hearts should be the more disposed
hereunto, because of the uncertainty and instability of all things here below.
Here we have no abiding City, but we seek and expect one to come (if we be such
as truly believe the Gospel), which has firm foundations, and is eternal in
heaven, see Heb. 11.10, 16. And seeing Christ not only bore his Cross, but
offered up Himself a sacrifice for our sins, he exhorts these believing-
Hebrews, and all Christians, to offer up to God, in and through his mediation,
the spiritual sacrifices Non expiatoria, and meriti, quale Christi solius est,
sed Eucharistica and gratitudinis. Ea sunt preces Eleemosynae.
of prayer and praise [1 Pet. 2.5.] and that continually Jugiter] Ne putemus
unquam nos ita perfunctos hoc officio ut deinceps non teneamur amplius eo
^ungi. Vid. These. 5.17.
, all the days of their lives; which sacrifices are the calves or fruits
Fructum labiorum nostrorum] Sic vocat preces, lauds, gratiarum actiones, quas
labiis nostris Deo offerimus confitentes nomini ejus, h. e. Deum pro acceptis
beneficiis celebrantes: Sub specie gratiarum actionis, non dubium quin totum
genus invocationis, and precum comprehendat. Metaphorice, preces and gratiarum
actiones appellat vitulos labiorum, Hos. c. 14. v. 3.
of their lips [Hos. 14.3.], whereby they confess and magnify his blessed Name
Nomen Dei passim sumitur pro Deo. Vid. Romans 15.9.
. And another sacrifice which they must offer up to God, and which he will
graciously accept (in and through Christ) is, beneficence and liberality to
those that are poor and necessitous [see Gal. 6.10. Phil. 4.18. Mat. 25.34,
etc.]. From Ver. 7, to 17.

He begins now to draw to a conclusion of his Epistle; and having before, at v.
7, advised them to follow the example of their spiritual Guides and Instructors
that were dead, and to imitate them in the stedfastness of their faith, and
holiness of their conversation; He exhorts them now to submit themselves, and
to be obedient to their Pastors and Teachers that were living, in all things
they should enjoin them according to the word of God. For he tells thew, Such
as they, watch and take care for the good of their souls, as those that must
give account to God of the people committed to their charge [see Ezekiel. 3.18,
19. 1 Timothy 4.16. Isa. 49.4.] He advises them therefore to be obedient to their
directions, that so they may do their work with joy and comfort, and not with
sighing and complaining to God against the stubbornness and stiff-neckedness of
their people; for thereby (besides that they will dishearten and discourage
their Ministers in their work) they will highly provoke God against themselves
for this their refractoriness. Ver. 18.

He entreats them to remember him in their prayers. For whatever calumnies
false Teachers might spread about of him concerning his rejecting the Levitical
Ceremonies, etc, he hoped that he did endeavor to keep a good conscience
Conscience is a function of the understanding, whereby we apply the general
knowledge that is in us, to our particular thoughts, words, and actions. The
School men say, it is Applicatio scientia ad factum seu faciendum Neoterici, Est
practicus syllogismus hominem excusans aut accusans.
; and was willing in all things to walk uprightly according to God's will and
command. And he beseeches them the rather to pray for him, that the impediments
of his coming to them being removed by their prayers, he might come the sooner,
and they might the sooner enjoy the benefit of his presence and company. He
concludes his Epistle with a solemn prayer; humbly beseeching God, the God of
peace (who is both the Author and lover of peace and concord among Christians,
Romans 15.33. and 16.20.) who raised Jesus Christ from the dead, the great
Shepherd of the sheep (whom he redeemed by his own blood, whereby he ratified
and confirmed the everlasting Foedus aeternum est aeterna reconciliatio cum Deo
sanguine Christi sancita, de qua supra cap. 9. v. 12. dixerat Christum semel
per proprium sanguinem in sacrarium coeleste ingressum aeternam nobis
redemptionem parasse
Covenant that shall never be altered), that he would please to frame and fit
(...)] Aptos vos reddat.
them for every good work, and would accomplish that in them which was yet
wanting; and would work in them by his Spirit what ever was pleasing in his
sight. And this he begs for them through the m^^it and mediation of Jesus
Christ; to whom, as to true God This Praise in the Scripture is never ascribed
to any but to the true and eternal God.
, he shows all honor and glory ought for ever to be ascribed. Last of all, he
exhorts them to take kindly, and to make a right use of the exhortations and
advice he had given them in this short Epistle, wherein he had handled many
weighty matters in few words, and had not dilated and enlarged upon them as he
might have done. He sends them the good news, That Timothy was now set at
liberty, and gone forth, as it is probable, to preach the Gospel; with whom (if
he shortly returned unto him) he hoped he should come to them, being very
desirous to see them. And so with salutations to them all, but especially to
their Church Governors, not only from himself, but from several Christians of
Italy (who often visited him at Rome in his imprisonment); and wishing unto
them an increase of grace, and an abundant sense of the love and favor of God
in Christ, he shuts up his Epistle. From Ver. 18, to the end.

SECT. XII.
THE Apostle Peter being now at Babylon, seems about this time to have written
his first Epistle to the Jews, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia, of whom he had an especial charge, and of whose conversion
he had been a prime Instrument, Act. 2.9. The occasion of his writing to them,
seems to be, that he might confirm them in the faith, that he might stir them
up to constancy and cheerfulness under the afflictions and sufferings they met
with for the profession of the Gospel; and that he might exhort them to adorn
their profession by a holy walking in their several relations.

^he First Epistle of Peter.
In the Epistle there are these three parts,

1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface contains a description of the Penman (whose Apostolic Office
is mentioned, to give the greater authority to his Epistle) and of the Parties
to whom the Epistle is directed, viz. the Christian Jews scattered through
several Regions, whom he minds of their excellent spiritual condition, to
comfort them under their outward afflictions and tribulations. For by the
judgment of charity, he judges them elect according to God's decree and
gracious predestination, and effectually called, that they should be sanctified
Ephesians. 1.4. In sanctificationem Spiritus] i. e. Ut sanctificentur Spiritu, ut
obediant fidei, and aspergantur sanguine, etc. Vatab.
by the Spirit, should obey the truth, and should by faith be sprinkled with
the blood of Christ, and so brought into a state of peace and reconciliation
with God. To all these he wishes an abundant increase of grace and peace. V. 1,
2.

2. He comes to the Body of the Epistle. And first, he begins with solemn
gratulation, humbly and heartily blessing Nos Deo benedicimus cum ejus
beneficia and gloriam celebramus.
God for all spiritual blessings which he vouchsafes to believers, who are by
regeneration and the renewing of his Spirit, raised to a lively hope (by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead) of an inheritance This the Apostle
says, because many Jews looked for an earthly kingdom under the Messiah.
which is incorruptible (the beauty and glory whereof can never be stained, and
which is safely kept for them in heaven, Col. 1.5.); they being in the mean
time kept and pr^served by the power of God through faith in Christ, against
the temptations of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, so that they shall not
fail of attaining that salvation Salutis nomine intelligit non initium quod in
hac vita habemus, per sanctificationis, justificationis, ac pacis conscientiae
gratiam: Sed complementum illius per glorificationem, quod in altera
expectamus, constans perfecta animi and corporis, ab omni miseria, liberatione,
and aeterna gloria, quae ut jam latent, sic ultimo die patefient, 1 John 3.2.
Gomar.
, which is prepared for them, and shall be openly given and bestowed on them at
the last day. In the hopes of which salvation he shows, they had great matter
of rejoicing, though now a little while Nempe dum brevis haec vita durat.
(if need be, and God see it good for them) they be permitted to be in
heaviness through manifold afflictions and temptations. And as their
afflictions are short, so are they necessary for the trial and purifying of
their faith, that it may be more pure, like Gold that is tried. Yet there is
this difference in this matter: Gold being never so well purified, will soon
perish; but faith Aurum usu, and attritu consumitur; fides vero durat usuque
augetur.

Ut exploratio fidei, h. e. Ut explorata fides vestra.


(which is more precious than gold), being purified by afflictions and trials,
will abide, and will be highly esteemed, commended, and gloriously rewarded by
Jesus Christ at his appearing; which blessed Savior, though they never knew by
face, yet they dearly love; and though they have not seen him here on earth,
yet they believe on him, and in so doing have so great and glorious matter of
rejoicing in their souls, that it cannot be expressed by themselves, nor
sufficiently valued by others. Yea, by believing in him, they shall certainly
receive V. 9. (...)] i. e. Certo reportaturi. Enaflage temporis Hebraica.

Mercedem (...)] Meton. adjuncti. Nam merces datur in sine operis, unde Hebraei
mercedem appellant (...) i. e. finem. Prove. 23.18. Pisc.


the fruit, reward, and end of their faith, which is the salvation of their
souls. This is that salvation (through faith in Christ incarnate) of which the
ancient Prophets so diligently enquired and searched after a fuller knowledge
of, who (being inspired by the Spirit of God) prophesied of that grace by which
this salvation is offered, as that which should be more clearly revealed and
manifested in the days of the Gospel. Yea, they diligently enquired to what
time or season the Spirit of Christ that was in them, did point, when it moved
them to prophecy and testify so long beforehand His sufferings and
humiliation, which were to precede his exaltation and glory. And they received
this revelation, that the things of which they prophesied, were not to be
fulfilled in their own, but in aftertimes. The manifestation of the Messiah in
the flesh, they themselves were not to see [Luk. 10.24.], nor his sufferings,
nor his ascension. But these things (he tells them) are now reported and
clearly manifested unto them by the Apostles, who were endued with an
extraordinary measure of the Holy Spirit, sent down upon them on the day of
Pentecost, Act. 2. And this way of salvation, as it is now clearly manifested,
is a matter so ravishing and wonderful, that the Holy Angels themselves delight
to look Alludi ad Cherubim, qui erant super Propitiatorio. Piscator statuit.
Fuit enim propitiatorium typus Christi. Rom 3.25.
into it. And if so, surely Believers ought highly to prize this
Gospel-revelation, and steadfastly to adhere to it, whatever they may suffer for
so doing. From Ver. 1, to 13.

2. He comes now to give them several exhortations to the practice of such
duties of holiness as their excellent estate did oblige them unto. And,

1. He exhorts them to vigilance, to gird up the loins of their mind (as
servants that wait for their Lord), to be sober and watchful, and to hope
steadfastly and perseveringly for that grace Per gratiam quae defertur, salutem
intelligit, quae ratione complementi nobis obtinget ultimo die, quo Christus
secundo patefiet. Gomar.
and salvation, for that perfection in holiness and glory, which God of his
free grace will give them at the appearing of his Son Jesus Christ to judge the
world. Ver. 13.

2. From their right of adoption, he exhorts them to be obedient to their
heavenly Father, not fashioning themselves according to the instigation of
their former lusts (which ruled in them in their ignorance), but to endeavor
to answer their holy vocation: For there should be a conformity between the
holy Lord, and all his Children See Lev. 11.44. and chapter 19.2. and chapter 20.7.
. Ver. 14, 15, 16.

3. He tells them, the Father (whom they call upon, and who will judge every man
impartially according to his work) strictly requires holiness from all those
that draw nigh to him, and call him Father. Therefore they ought to pass the
time of their s^journing here in this world, in the fear of God, walking
awfully as in his sight. Ver. 17.

4. He presses them to the study of holiness, by a motive taken from their
Redemption. He tells them, they cannot be insensible that they were redeemed
from their vain conversation, and former sinful course of life (to which they
had been captivated by the example of their fathers, and by tradition), not
with silver and gold (which yet will rans^m a King), but by the precious blood
of Christ (whom the Pas^hal-Lamb typified), and who was from eternity
foreordained unto the Office of the Mediator, though he was not manifested in
the flesh till th se last days, and that with a special respect to the good and
benefit of those lost sheep of the house of Israel who trust in God and firmly
expect his pardoning mercy in and through his Son's Mediation: Unto which they
are the more encouraged seeing the Father is so fully satisfied with the ransom
paid by his Son, that he has raised him from the dead* and gloriously exalted
him to his right hand in Heaven; upon which account their faith may now safely
and comfortably rest on God Fides in Deum Patrem non excludit fidem in Christum
and Spiritum sanctum, sed includit; quia, unus sunt Deus. Gomar.
, as a reconciled Father to all that truly believe in him in and through his
Son Jesus Christ. From Ver. 18, to 22.

5. He comes now to exhort them to brotherly love: That seeing by the power of
Christ's Spirit enabling them to obey the Gospel, they had got their inward
corruptions of pride and self-love, so far purged out, as to attain unto some
degrees of sincere affection to the people of God; therefore they should labor
to grow in that grace, and to have such a love to them, as is not only fervent,
but flows from a sincere desire of their good, and does prove it self to be
such, by real effects. Ver. 22.

6. Seeing they were regenerate, and born again, as he charitably judged; and
had a new life and nature wrought in them, not by so fading a cause or
principle as that which is the instrument of producing their natural substance;
but by the word of God, which (in its effects upon the regenerate) lives and
abides for ever: therefore the excellency of their new nature, and permanency
of their spiritual estate, should move them to walk suitably to it; and
particularly, to live in love with the rest of the people of God, who are
children also of their heavenly Father. Ver. 23.

Lastly, He sets before them the excellency of their spiritual estate, by
comparing the same with the best estate of men naturally considered, with all
their ornaments of Wit, Wealth, and Honor, wherein they use to glory, which
are all (to allude to that of the Prophet Esaias, chapter 40. v. 6.) like to the
withering grass or fading flowers; but the word of the Lord (which by the
Gospel is preached to them), as to its truth, and as to its effects upon the
regenerate, abides for ever; and consequently so does their estate who are
begotten again by it. Ver. 24, 25.

born again, they should lay aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisy, and
envy, and detraction, which are so contrary to brotherly love (before pressed as
an evidence of their regeneration), and as newborn babes, with great desire
and appetite should receive the sound doctrine of the Gospel, that spiritual,
rational (...), h. e (...), q. d. Non corporis sed animae lac.
, sincere, pure milk (free from all error; which can deceive no man, but is
most convenient for the feeding of the soul), that they may make progress and
growth in piety, and advance to ^a higher pitch of Christianity thereby. And
this, he is confident, they will do, if they have tasted, and real^y perceived
and felt in their minds, by the preaching of the Gospel, the tender love of
Christ to poor sinners. To whom, says he, coming by faith Joh. 6.35.
, as to a living-stone (that is, a lively and firm, not a dead foundation;
having life in himself essentially Joh. 5.26.
, and communicating life spiritual and eternal to every soul that effectually
closes with Him; chosen of God, and in his eyes precious and honorable, though
disallowed and rejected of the carnal Jews and their Rulers), be ye (...)
verbum hoc tam Imperativi quam Indicativi modi esse potest. Calv.
as lively stones, built up a spiritual House or Church; and an holy
Priesthood, to offer up (not typical or expiatory, but) gratulatory sacrifices,
viz. Prayers and Praises unto God, which are sacrifices very acceptable to him,
through the intercession of his Son. Wherefore the Scripture says Ver. 6.
(...) pro (...). Pisc.
, Isa. 28.16. (taking the words not in the literal, but the sublime Sensus
(...) apud Prophetam est: Si qui salvi esse vellent ex december Tribubus, illis
confugiendum Hierosolymam, velut ad arcem; sublimior vero sensus in Christo, ad
quem confugere debent omnes qui in aeternum servari cupiunt. Grot.

Vix alius est V. T. locus, toties in N. T. citatus, and Christo adaptatus.
Vide Mar. 12.10. Act. 4.11. Romans 9.32. Ephesians. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.4, 6.


sense) Christ is laid in the Church as the foundation, or chief cornerstone
thereof (which supports and holds the Edifice together), being chosen of God,
and very precious in his sight, and was first to be manifested in Sion In Sione
lapis ille positus est ubi inchoari oportuit spirituale Dei templum,
quemadmodum and Esaias ait Esai. 2. v. 3.
, or the Church of the Jews [ that from Sion might go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Esa. 2.3. Mic. 4.2.], from whom the news of
him was to go forth to the rest of the world. And they might assure themselves,
that he that truly believes in Him, shall not be ashamed, or confounded, or
deceived in his expectation. To them therefore that believe in Him, he shows
Christ is very precious (...) pro (...), abstractum pro concreto.
, or an honor, and they have a very high esteem of him. But as for others who
slight and neglect him, they should consider, that that stone whom the Rulers
Sacerdotes, Scribae, and Pharisaei, appellantur aedificantes; quia eorum erat,
populum in fide and moribus aedificare.
of his time s^t at naught, is now highly exalted by the Father (according to
the Psalmist's words, Psalm. 118.22.), to be the glorious Head Caput ponitur pro
summitate alicujus rei conspicua, and pro eo quod in re quaque praecipuum est.
of the Church; but he will prove a stone at which those persons will stumble
Qui impingunt in sermonem rebels ad quod and positi sunt] Horum verborum
prius designat proprie poenam, posterius culpam. Pro nomen autem ad quod
refertur ad prius, non ad posterius. Improbos enim destinavit Deus ad poenam,
non ad culpam. Capel.

In hoc increduli a Deo destinati sunt ut gravissime impingant, h. e.
Durissimas ferant incredulitatis suae poenas. Grot.

Sicut qui in lapidem impingit laeditur, and dolorem sentit; sic qui ad
Christum lapidem salutis, incredulitate impingit, laeditur insigniter, and
dolores aeternos incurrit. Et notetur been quod versu 7 praecedenti, (...) ut
antecedens a (...) ut consequente, sejungatur. Ad hoc igitur judicium, and
poenas, propria contumacia promeritas, increduli sunt positi a Deo, justissimo
omnis (...) vindice, and judice, non antecedentis sed consequentis, and
judiciariae voluntatis respectu. Glass.


to their hurt; and a Rock, against which they will split to their utter
confusion; whose blind and carnal hearts do still find out something in the
Gospel whence they take occasion to quarrel at this Savior, and so they will
bring ruin upon themselves, as a mad man does that dashes himself against a
stone in his way; God having in his just Decree appointed, That destruction and
eternal perdition should be the punishment of such obstinate and disobedient
persons. But though this be the woeful state of those that slight Christ; yet he
shows, true believers are highly blessed: for to them those honorable titles
belong, and may justly be given, which the Lord vouchsafed of old unto the
visible Church of the Jews, Exodus 9.6. and Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. viz. they are, 1. A
chosen generation, by effectual vocation separated from the world for his
service. 2. A Royal. Reges appellantur, 1. Quia vitiosis imperant affectibus,
nec peccatis permittunt dominium. 2. Sunt membra Christi Regis, proinde in
capite suo merito Reges consentur. 3. Quia unguntur ut Reges oleo, non quidem
externo, sed Spiritu Sancto, qui est oleum laetitiae. Psalm. 45.7. Fridlib.
Priesthood; being Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6, and having a new
nature in some measure resembling the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4; being coheirs
with Christ, Romans 8.17; of a Kingdom that canvot be moved. Heb. 12.28; and
being Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ. 3. A holy Nation, for they were all foederally holy: but the true
b^lievers among them were endued with true sanctification. 4. A peculiar
people; that is, a people that Christ had purchas^d to hims lf by his own
blood; and all for this end, that they might publish the Wisd^m, Power,
Justice, Grace, and Mercy of Him, who called them out of darkness to light; and
out of a state of sin, ignorance, and wrath, to a state of holin^ss, and the
true knowledge of God, and of favor and reconciliation with him. So that he
might say, that Hos^a's prophecy, chap. 2.28 This place Peter applies to the
scattered Jews, who were converted unto Ch is it: And Romans 9.25, Paul applies to
the converted Gentiles, who are now both one in Christ, Ephesians. 2.^3.
con^erning the restoring the Jewish Nation to the favor of God again, after
their rejection for a time, had now a begun-accomplishment in them. From Ver.
1, to 11.

He further exhorts them, that remembering they were but pilgrims and strangers
here in this world, they should abstain from fulfill ing those fl^shly lusts
which war against* and are directly oppos^te to the good of their s^uls, Romans
7.23. And that their conversation should be so holy and hon^st among the
Gentiles (among whom they lived) that whereas they were r^ady to reproach them
as evildoers, they might by their good works whi h they shall behold, be
brought to change their minds concerning them* and so their good conversation
might be a preparative to their conversion, and occasion them to praise and
glorify God for it, when it shall please him to visit them by his Grace, and
to draw them by his Gospel to beli^ve in his Son [Luc. 19.44.] Ver. 11, 12.

1. He comes now to show them how they should carry thems lves with respect and
submission to any form of lawful Government established in the several
Countries where they were scattered whether the some were ex^^^s d by a King,
or other Governors; which several forms of Civil Government, he calls an
human Ordinance. For though all Power in general is the Ordinance of God; yet
the particular form of Government is not determined by him, but left to the
choice of human prudence directed by the general rules of the word. And he
tells them, they must submit to the Magistracy th y are under, for the Lord's
sake; that is that they may bring honor to God thereby* who has enjoined them
that subjection. 2. Because those M^gistrates are appointed by God, and sent by
him, that they may punish and suppr^ss evil doers, and commend, praise, and
encourage those that do well. Romans 13.3, 4, 5. For this, he tells them is the
will of God, that by well-doing they should confute the calumnies of
unreasonable men, who out of ignorance reproach Christianity. But it may be
some might obj^ct, Are not Christians free? He answers, they are; yet so, as
they are obliged to carry themselves as those that are made free by Christ from
the dominion of sin, but not from a due subjection to lawful Magistrates; and
therefore must not use their Christian liberty as a cloak or covering to any
wickedn^ss or maliciousness whatsoever; but as the true servants of God, must
make conscience of all duties required of them, both toward God and man. And
that they may perform this* he enjoins them to despise no man, but to give that
respect to all men which is due to them, according to the station wherein God
has set them; That they bear an especial love to those who are of the household
of faith; and, That they fear God, and honor the King. From Ver. 13, to 18.

In the n^xt place he exhorts servants to give subjection and obedience to
their own Masters, fearing to give them any just occasion of offense; and that
they carry themselves so, not only to those who are good and gentle, but to
those also who are austere and morose. For this is acceptable to God, if any
man. upon account that he may please him, patiently suffers wrongs and
injuries. But what great matter is it, says he, if men endure submissively
those punishments which their own faults have justly brought upon them? But
when they have done no ill, and are then abused and contumeliously used, if
this be born patiently and humbly, this is that Christian virtue of meekness
which God will certainly reward: and this, he tells them, is that which all
Christians are called unto, and whereof Christ himself has given us an eminent
example to be imitated by us; who though he was perfectly innocent, yet he met
with many bitter contumelies from men; but being reviled, he reviled not again;
and when they put him to death, he neither threatened nor menaced; but, praying
for his persecutors, committed himself and his cause to God, who judges
righteously. And many excellent benefits accrue to us by his sufferings. For,
1. He bare the punishment of our sins in his human nature on the Cross, and so
made expiation ^f them. 2. By his death he purchased virtue for the sl^ying of
sin in us, and for the quickening of us to the duties of holiness; thae we being
dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness. And therefore Christian-servants
should consider not so much what they suffer for Christ, as the benefits they
receive by him. For though they may receive stripes and wounds unjustly from
their Masters in their bodies; yet let them remember what healing Sanati estis]
h. e. Remissis peccatis, Deo reconciliati. Gom.
they have for their souls by the wounds Alludit ad vibices and livores
servorum. Fridlib.
and stripes of Christ. Lastly, He remembers them of the woeful estate they were
in before their conversion; wandering like straying sheep, in ignorance and
sinful ways; but now by the powerful grace of Christ they were brought home to
Him the good Shepherd, and to his Fold; who will take care for the salvation of
their souls, though their bodies and outward man may oftentimes here meet with
hard usage from their unjust Masters. From Ver. 18, to the end.

He now gives Precepts to Wives, directing them how they should carry Husbands,
if it should so happen that they should be unbelievers. He enjoins thew to
carry themselves with so winning a kindness and humility toward them, that if
they be not converted to Christianity by the Gospel preached to them, they may
by the sweet, obliging, and dutiful behavior of their Wives (which they see
the Christian Religion instructs them in) be without any further preaching
wrought on, and converted to the faith; especially they seeing nothing but
chastity and holiness, joined with the fear of God, and reverence toward
themselves, shining in the conversation of their Wives. And for their Attire,
he enjoins they should not be too curious in adorning their outward persons
with plaited hair, gold chains, or gay clothes; but should especially take care
of their hearts and spirits, that those be adorned with the graces of meekness
and quietness (which ornaments will not wax old as the others do), and are in
the sight of God himself, of high value and esteem. For after this manner, he
tells them, viz. with outward modest attire, and inward meekness, the holy
women of ancient times (that were eminent for their piety and faith in God),
did set out themselves, living in obedience to their own Husbands. He instances
in Sarah, who eminently testified her obedience to Abraham her Husband, calling
him by a title of honor, not of equality. To whom, he tells them, they will
show themselves to be like, as Children to a Mother, if they labor to
discharge a good conscience in all the duties required of them; and if they be
not by any fear, or terror, or opposition of their unbelieving Husbands, or any
others, driven out of the way of their duty. From Ver. 1, to 7.

In the next place, he exhorts believing Husbands to dwell with their believing
Wives as men of knowledge (and as such as are well acquainted with their duty),
carrying themselves wisely and discreetly toward them, giving them meet and
due respect; taking care of them, and bearing with them in their weaknesses Vas
seu organon infirmius vocat mulierem, quia tametsi uxor est natura viro
infirmior; tamen insigne ejus organum est ad usus long praestantissimos
conditum. Igitur non id circo negligenda est, quoniam sit imbecillis, sed e
contrario tanto magis solicit habenda. Glass.
, and behaving themselves with tenderness toward them, as being fellow-heirs
of eternal life (which is freely given of grace to all true believers, whether
male or female); that so, through brawling and strife, their prayers and other
religious exercises be not hindered. Ver. 7.

He comes now to exhort all Christians in general, to concord and unity of
judgment and affection among themselves, to sympathy and a fellow-feeling of
one another afflictions, to brotherly love, to mercifulness, to affability, to
courtesy, to patience, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing,
unto them that injure them; but contrariwise, blessing and praying for them,
and wishing all good unto them. And he urges his exhortation with these
reasons: 1. Because Christians are called to the practice of these Virtues,
especially Patience; that they may, by the exercise of them, attain the
glorious inheritance of everlasting bliss and happiness. 2. Because to be
patient, and peaceable, and watchful over their tongues, is the best way to
make their lives comf^rtable. 3. It Is the best way to have the watchful
Providence of God over them for good, and to have their prayers heard; whereas
the face of God is against them that do evil, and he sets himself as an enemy
against them, according to Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14, 15. 4. It Is the probablest way
to escape trouble and harm from evil men, to show themselves constant pursuers
of that which is good. But if (as sometimes it will fall out) they do suffer
for righteousness sake, they should count this no other than a blessing; and
therefore whatsoever danger they are threatened with by the power of their
persecutors, they should not be afraid or disturbed at it, but should sanctify
the Lord in that dispensation toward them [Isa. 8.12, 13.], and should furnish
themselves with such a clear knowledge of the truth of the Gospel, that when
they are asked, they may be able to show the grounds and reasons of the faith
they profess, and consequently of the hope of eternal life wrought in them
thereby; and that with meekness of spirit, and a holy fear of miscarrying in
giving their testimony. Lastly, They should labor to get their Consciences
cleared from all guilt, by faith in the blood of Christ, and so guided by the
light of his word, that they that accuse them as Malefactors, may be convinced
that their lives are very honest and inoffensive, being ordered according to
Christ's doctrine and command. But if it please God to permit them to suffer
for well-doing, they should remember, there is no matter of sorrow in that; but
if a man, to avoid suffering, fall into sin, and then suffer for it, they
should consider, that that will be a sad thing indeed, without any allay or
matter of comfort to him. And seeing the innocent Son of God, who was perfectly
righteous, dyed for our sins (who are unrighteous) that he might reconcile
(...), hic, est idem quod (...), Rom 5.10.
us (who were enemies) unto God, being put to death in his humanity Caro
designat humanam Christi naturam; Spiritus, divinam, ut Romans 1.3, 4. and 9.5.
, but raised up again by the power of his Spirit, or Godhead; it does therefore
well become his followers (for the purchasing of whose redemption he dyed) to
undergo those sufferings cheerfully for his sake, which they meet with in
following their duty to him. And since there are many souls of men and women to
whom Christ did once, by his Spirit, in the Ministry of Noah, and other of his
servants, make known the way to life and salvation Genesis 6 3.
, who are now imprisoned (...)] lis qui nunc in carcere inferorum sunt, tunc
autem vivebant. Scaliger.

Petrus ostendit Christum Spiritu. h. e. Divina sua natura hominibus primi
mundi praedicasse per os Noachi resipiscentiam, and ad eandem lenitate sua, and
arcae constructione invitasse. Qui tamen exceptis paucis, immorigeri per
manserunt: Unde corporibus submersi, spiritibus vero, h. e. animabus in
infernum detrusi, nunc in eo carcere, justo judicio asservantur. Gom.


in Hell for evermore, because of their slighting so much patience as the Lord
did exercise toward them, especially during the time of Noah's preparing the
Ark, wherein a few only escaped destruction (the water bearing up the Ark);
therefore it does concern those who have the Gospel more clearly preached to
them, to give obedience thereunto, whatever they may suffer for it. And since
Believers have a spiritual privilege answering to the Ark, sealing their safety
from the deluge of God's wrath, namely, their Baptism (by which we mean not the
external part of it alone, which can only remove the filth of the body; but the
internal, viz. the application of Christ's blood to the conscience, which
thereupon comfortably answers and witness^s for them before God, and answers
all challenges to the contrary upon this ground, that our Surety is absolved
from our debt which he took on himself, whereof his Resurrection is an
evidence); therefore they have no reason to f^int in doing their duty, or to
fear in the midst of their sufferings. And lastly, Since their Mediator and
Head is gone in their nature and name to possess Heaven, since he is in highest
dignity and power with God the Father, since he has all the Heavenly Host of
Angels at his command, therefore none of his followers need fear suffering in
following their duty to him. From Ver. 8, to the end.

He n^w returns to his former argument, Chap. 4;
to press them to the study of holiness. He tells them, that forasmuch as
Christ has suffered for the expiation of our sins in his human nature, they
ought therefore to arm themselves with the same mind, and t^ be ready t^
imitate him in the mortifying of the flesh. For he that has mortified
Usurpatur hic potius vox (...), quam (...) quae extat Romans 6. v. 2. quia
Apostolus nos vult ad Christum Archetypum revocare, ac docere quod per
mortificationem carnis passioni Christi conformes reddamur. In voce (...) est
(...). Ea enim in priori membro accipiebatur substantialiter pro natura humana
Christi, peccati labis expert. Hic vero accidentaliter pro carnali
concupiscentia and vitiositate naturae ex Adamo derivata. Fridlib.
his corrupt nature (in imitation of Christ's dying for our sins, and by grace
received from him), that person has ceased from living unto sin, or serving
sin any longer, Romans 6.7. And surely he does arm himself with this
consideration, That he ought not to give any of the remaining part of his time
(that he is to live in this mortal life) to the obedience of those lusts, or to
comply with those sinful appetites that ordinarily are stirring in men, but
must endeavor in all things to live according to the will of God. And he tells
them, they Legendum hic videtur (...). Cui lectioni favet collatio versiculi
sequentis. Pisc.
had spent too much of their time part in the days of their ignorance and
unregenera^y, in the s^rvice of their lusts, wallowing in all sorts of vilen ss
against both Tables of the Law, after the manner, and according to the lusts of
the Heathens among whom they were scattered; and 'twas now more than time
Sufficere vobis debet praeteritum tempus quo vos quauquam Judaei vixistis
Gentium more corrupti a pravis doctoribus. Est idololatriae quaedam species
adesse Sodalitiorum (...), de quibus prosecta falsis Diis dantur. Et in hac
maxim re credibile est Judaeos illos antequam Christiani essent, accommodasse
se Gentium moribus. Grot.
to break off that course, and to consecrate the remainder of their days to the
practice of holiness. And th^ugh th^se Heathen unbelievers may think strange,
and be offended at their abstaining from their form^r vices, and that they run
not headlong with them into all dissoluteness and debauchery, and may reproach
them and their Religion upon that account; yet they ought not to be thereby
moved; for those profane persons shall be brought (will they, nill they) to
give an account to Christ of these their reproaches, who shall judge V. 5. Qui
paratus est judicare] potest reddi qui judicaturus est (...). Drusius.
the quick and dead. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached ( viz. by
Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5.) to the men of the old world, who are now dead, that those
among them might be V. 6. Ad hoc enim and mortuis Evangelizatum est, ut
damnarentur secundum homines in carne vivant autem secundum Deum inspiritu, i.
e. (...), quae vox praecessit versu tertio, and hoc loco resumenda, ut
damnarentur qui incedunt secundum homines in carne; viverent vero qui incedunt
secundum Deum in spiritu. Neque aliter video quomodo potuit expediri sensus.
Knatchul.
judged and condemned by Christ; who notwithstanding the light thereof, walked
according to men in the flesh, being led away by their own carnal lusts; and
that those of them might live, and be eternally happy, who walked according to
God in the spirit, that is, according to the will of God, being led and guided
by his holy Spirit. Therefore Christ will judge not only these who shall be
found alive at his coming, but the dead also. From Ver. 1, to 7.

Another argument whereby he presses the study of holiness, is, because the end
of all things was at hand; that is, the end of the Jewish State and Polity. For
that great fatal destruction threatened to the obdurate Jews, and often
mentioned by Christ and his Apostles, drew nigh; see Mat. 24. Jam. 5.3, 9.
Therefore he exhorts them, 1. To be sober, and moderate, and to be much in
prayer with God; and to add to their prayers watchfulness, that that day do not
surprise them unawares. 2. He presses them to exercise a fervent love and
charity one toward another, as the sum and chief of all the duties we owe to
our Neighbor: For Love or Charity, he tells them, will cover a multitude of
sins and failings among Christians [Prov. 10.12.], and will hide them from the
knowledge of the profane. 3. They should be cheerfully hospitable to their poor
brethren, without grudging or murmuring at the charge. 4. They should endeavor
rightly to employ their spiritual gifts for the good of others, which they had
received according to their respective places in the Church, as counting
themselves stewards of those various gifts bestowed on them through the free
grace and favor of God. He instances in two, 1. Preaching of the word;
showing, that he that teaches and instructs the people, ought to do it with
that uprightness and reverence, as becomes one that is a steward or dispenser
of the Oracles of God. 2. Ministration to the poor; which office the Deacons
were faithfully to discharge; and private Christians were also to exercise
their liberality according to the ability God had given them; that in the right
use of all these gifts, God might receive glory (both by the Steward and
dispenser of them, and by those also who are profited by them) through Jesus
Christ, in whose strength only these gifts are rightly employed [Joh. 15.5.],
and through whose merits and mediation, the intention to glorify God by them
is accepted [Heb. 13.5.]; to whom, as to God blessed for ever, all honor and
dominion ought for ever to be ascribed. From Ver. 7, to 12.

Moreover, he exhorts them not to be troubled or amazed at the sharpest
persecutions or hottest trials they should meet with for the sake of Christ.
For considering that in that furnace their graces will be tried, and their
corruptions purged away, they should count it matter of joy to them, because
hereby they are made partakers of the afflictions appointed for the members of
Christ, and are made like unto him in suffering, and shall share with him in
his glory, and have matter of incomparable exultation and joy at his second
coming. In the mean time, if they be reproached for the Name of Christ, and for
their Christian profession, they should esteem it the happiest thing that could
befall them. For the glorious Spirit of God delights with his comfortable and
supporting-operations, to reside in the hearts of such as suffer for
righteousness sake; which blessed Spirit, though he be blasphemed by
persecutors, yet he is glorified by those who boldly confess the truth, which
he teaches and imparts unto them. But he advises them by all means to be
careful, that not any of them suffer as an evil-doer in any kind; but if he
suffer for Christ's sake, or because he is a Christian, he shows that he ought
to rejoice in it, and to glorify God, who has made him willing, and has
enabled him to suffer in so good a cause, and has thereby honored him with a
certain degree of Martyrdom. He tells them, the time is at hand when the
Christians must expect great sufferings. Judgment will begin at the House and
Family of God, for the correction and trial of his own children. And if God
thus begin with his own children, who embrace the Gospel of his Son, what a
dreadful end De Judaeis agit and ejus gentis excidium praedicit: (...) pari
sensu habes Mat. 24.14. Respicitur Danielis locus 9.27. ubi est (...). Grot.
will he make with those that wilfully reject and despise it? And if the
righteous in this life do smart for their sins, and meet with so many
afflictions, that they cannot but with great difficulty (considering their own
weakness) enter into the Kingdom of God. Surely the wicked, who give up
themselves to work iniquity with greediness, shall be wonderfully punished,
sometimes here in this life, but most certainly hereafter: neither shall they
find any place to shelter themselves from the everlasting wrath of God.
Therefore there is no reason why the godly, to shun sufferings from them,
should join with them in their evil ways, seeing their end will be so terrible.
From all which he inferrs, that those who suffer according to the will of God,
should hold on in their duty, and commit the keeping of themselves to him,
exercising faith on his Omnipotence, who created the World, and so is able to
preserve them from the fury and rage of men, if he please; and on his
Faithfulness, who will certainly perform all his promises to every faithful
servant of his, and therefore will certainly preserve them, if it be best for
them; and if he do not, he will make their very sufferings tend to the
enhaunsement and increase of their glory. From Ver. 12, to the end.

He now comes to exhort the Presbyters, the Pastors, and Spiritual Guides Elder
Peter therefore does not exalt himself above all, and as the Head of all
Teachers.
, and one that had been a witness of the sufferings Vidit eum Petrus vinctum;
deinde, quod historia non docet, sed credibile est audiens crucifixum iri, ejus
quoque rei spectator esse voluit, sed eminus and in turba. Grot,
of Christ [Mat. 26.37. Mat. 27.29. Act. 3.15.], and hoped to be a partaker
(...) supple futurus. Grot.
of that glory which should hereafter be revealed and communicated to all true
and sincere Pastors at Christ's second coming. He presses them therefore to
feed the Lord's people with his truth, and to rule them according to his
discipline (both which may be comprehended in the word (...)), and that they
diligently attend the oversight of their flocks; not doing it by constraint,
like Mercenaries; nor merely for filthy lucre's sake; but with a free and ready
mind, designing faithfully to serve their Lord and Master, and to profit his
people thereby; and further, that they should not impiously lord it over the
Church (which is God's heritage and peculiar lot, chosen out of the common
multitude for his own propriety), buc be ensamples to the flock in all holy
walking; that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they may receive an eminent
degree of bliss, a never-fading Crown of Glory. From Ver. 1, to 5.

He then points out the duties of the flock, whom he calls the younger, either
because they were generally younger in years than their spiritual guides, or
because they ought to show that reverence and obedience to them which is
suitable in young ones toward their elders. He exhorts those younger ones to
submit themselves to the guidance of their Elders and Teachers, enjoining and
commanding them things right and just in the name of God. Next, as
fellow members in the Church, he enjoins them mutual subjection one to another,
in all duties of love, and particularly in receiving private admonitions. And
in order hereunto, he advises them to adorn themselves with humility, and a
mean and low esteem of themselves. For, as Solomon says, Prove. 3.24, See Luke
1.51, 52. Mat. 23.12. Luke 14.11. and 18.14. Jam. 4.6.
God opposes himself against them that are high and haughty, and manifests
his grace and favor to them that are humble. He advises them therefore to
submit themselves with humility of mind to the guidance of God, and the
directions of those he has set over them, remembering his Almighty Power, and
how easily he can crush them, if they be disobedient; but if they be obedient,
they should consider, that he is able to exalt them, and will certainly do it,
either in this life (if he see it g ^d for them), or at the day of judgment.
And if they walked in ways of obedidience to him, they need not be disquieted
at any difficulties that they may meet with; but should, with serenity of mind,
cast all their cares on him; for they might assure themselves, he has a
peculiar care of them, and of what concerns them, that no hurt shall accrue
unto them. From Ver. 5, to 8.

He further exhorts them, to be sober, and vigilant, and steadfast, in adhering
to the truth, and the profession of the faith of Christ; and so to resist the
Devil and his temptations (who is our cruel and restless Enemy), especially
those soliciting them to Apostasy by reason of their sufferings; remembering,
they had all the rest of the Lord's people in the world for their
fellow soldiers in this warfare, who have their several shares of affliction to
suffer, and their several measures of hardship to endure, as well as they. And
therefore they should not expect a better condition in the world than the rest
of their brethren. Ver. 8.9.

In conclusion, He solemnly prays for these suffering-Christians* that God (who
is the Author of all Grace, and is freely ready to communicate the same to all
humble and penitent sinners; and who has called them, by the Gospel, to the
possession of his everlasting glory through the merits and mediation of his
Son) would please, after they have suffered a little while here in this world,
to perfect the work of grace he has begun in them, to establish, and
strengthen, and settle them in the truth, that their union with Christ the
Foundation, might be made more firm and strong. To this infinitely gracious God
he desires glory and dominion should be for ever ascribed. Ver. 10, 11.

He tells them, he had writtten this short Epistle to them (by Silvanus, whom
he took for a very faithful friend unto them), wherein he had exhorted them to
their duty, and had born his testimony to the Gospel; assuring them, that that
contains the true Doctrine of Salvation, and a true manifestation of God's
grace to all penitent sinners who by faith lay hold on Christ: Which Doctrine,
as they had been taught, they did hitherto profess, and stand fast in V. 12.
(...) pro (...).
; and they would do well to do so to the end. For it is a Doctrine that would
deceive none that embrace it. He sends them salutations from the Christians at
Babylon The Church at Babylon seems to be made up of the posterity of those
Jews who stayed there after the expiration of the seventy years captivity, whom
this Apostle (being a Minister to the Circumcision) went to visit, having
planted, as it seems, a Church there.
, whom the Lord had chosen out of the world to be a Church to himself, and to
share with others of his people in spiritual and eternal mercies. He salutes
them also from Mark, whom (being instructed by him in the Gospel) he calls his
Son. Lastly, He exhorts them to express their hearty affection one to another
by the kiss of Charity (which was the ordinary sign thereof in those times and
those Countries), and so wishing peace and all manner of prosperity to all
among them that were converted to Christ, and professed faith in him, he shuts
up his Epistle. From Ver. 12, to the end.

SECT. XIII.
THE Apostle Peter, not long after this, seems to have received a revelation
from the Lord of his approaching departure out of this life; and therefore
writes this his second Epistle to the dispersed Jews, intimating the same unto
them, Chap. 1.14. Our Savior had long before given him an intimation that he
should dye a Martyr, Joh. 21.18, 19. Verily I say unto thee, when thou wast
young thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would; but when thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou would not. This he spoke, signifying by what
death he should glorify God. Our Savior further told him, That this should be
before His coming in judgment against Jerusalem, which John should live to see,
Joh. 21. v. 22. It seems the Apostle was now more particularly warned thereof,
and accordingly sends this his Epistle as his last farewell to the
believing-Jews scattered at that time through many Nations. And this is the
last we find in the Scripture of this great Apostle.

In the Epistle there are these three parts, The Second Epi^ of Peter.


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface; which shows us to whom the Epistle is directed, viz. to the
believing-Jews scattered up and down in the Roman Empire, who had obtained like
precious faith, for quality and nature, with the Apostle himself, and which
interessed them all in the same precious promises and privileges which he
himself had interest in, and whose object is the righteousness of Christ (...)]
Ex Graeco apparet, haec de uno and eodem dici, non autem de duobus diversis,
vid. Tit. 2.13. Justitia illa quam fides in actu justificationis amplectitur,
non est justitia Dei essentialis, sed justitia activa and passiva obedientia
Christi parta. Fridlib.
our God and Savior. To all these he heartily wishes an abundance of grace,
and of that peace which does accompany it, together with all kind of
prosperity; and that, in order hereunto, they may daily grow up in larger
measures of the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Ver. 1,
2.

2. He comes to the Body of the Epistle, wherein he expresses the ground of his
confidence, that God would increase grace in them, because V. 3. (...) inservit
illationi; and significat idem, quod (...) postquam vel siquidem. Fridlib.
he had of his own goodness, and the free exercise of his divine power,
afforded them all the helps needful for the attaining of eternal life
hereafter, and for the making them truly pious here; having brought them to a
saving-knowledg of Christ* who had called them by his own glory and virtue
(...) hic aliqui positum putant p^o (...) vid. Bez. and Piscut. Alii per
gloriam and virtutem intelligunt gloriosam virtutem and potentiam Christi.
, that is, by his Gospel [which is the great power of God, Rom, 1.16.], to
glory and eternal felicity, as the end; and to the practice of virtue (that is,
of grace and holiness), as the means. By which Savior (...) (not (...)) as
some Greek Copies read it. Sic Vatablus per quem.
he tells them, are given unto us great and precious promises, as of
justification, sanctification, and eternal life. The fulfilling of which
promises to believers, does make them partakers (not of the infinite Essence of
God, which can neither be divided nor communicated to any creature; but) of
such heavenly qualities as make them in some measure to resemble their heavenly
Father, they having escaped hereby the corrupt manners and debauchedness which
the generality of the world run into, by following the sinful inclinations and
lusts of their own hearts. And this same thing V. 5. (...).]
, that they have receeved such great benefits from God, should mind and excite
them to give all diligence to grow in grace, and to add one virtue to another;
particularly to faith to add the Christian virtue of fortitude Per (...) hic
recte puto posse accipi fortitudinem in fide. Grot.
or courage; to Christian- courage, a greater measure of knowledge; to knowledge,
temperance; to that, patience; to that, godliness, or religiousness (which
consists in a due care rightly to worship God); to that, brotherly kindness,
and an especial love to the household of faith; and to that ch^ri^y, or
good will to all sorts of persons. He tells them, that if these virtues and
graces be in them (especially in any eminent degree), they will produce
excellent fruits and effects V. 8. Ista efficient ut cognitio Christi and
Evangelii quam adepti estis neque inutilis sit aliis neque vobis infructuosa.
Grot.
; so that their knowledge of Christ and the Gospel, will neither be unprofitable
to themselves, nor useless to others. But that Christian-prof^ssor who lacks
these graces, whatever illuminaeion he may pretend to, is indeed blind as to
spirituals, and cannot have any true sight or knowledge of the things of the
other life, and has forgotten (as it seems) the purification (...).

Non meminit inquit baptismi in quo professus fuit se vitia omnia velle
deserere. Vid. Ephesians. 5.26. Idem.


of himself from his former sins, which he professed and obliged himself to in
his Baptism. He exhorts them therefore earnestly to endeavor after these
graces and virtues, that so they may prove and demonstrate themselves to be
effectually called and elected, and may make their calling and election sure
and evident to themselves, and by this means they shall be kept from apostasy,
and a total and final falling away; and God will with a larger and more copious
affection, receive them into the everlasting kingdom of his Son, and eternal
life will (as it were) more largely open it self to receive them, and they
shall have the sense and first fruits of it in a more abundant measure. And
seeing the hazard of negligence, and the advantage of diligence, was so great,
therefore he tells them, he would not be negligent to stir them to their duty,
and to mind them of these things, though many of them he apprehended were both
discerning and solid Christians. And he judged it meet so to do, whilst he was
in the tabernacle of this body, knowing that shortly he must end his life by a
glorious Martyrdom, as Christ had told him, Joh. 21.18, 19. And this
exhortation which he had written, would be profitable to mind them of their
duty after his departure. From Ver. 3, to 16.

He comes now to exhort them to constancy in the faith, and steadfastly to
adhere to the doctrine taught by himself and the other Apostles. And to assure
them of the truth and certainty thereof, he tells them, that himself and his
fellow-Apostles had not followed artificially-devised fables, when they made
known and testified unto them the first coming of Christ in the flesh, and how
by his Doctrine and Miracles he powerfully showed* himself to be the true
promised Messiah. For himself, James, and John, had been with him in his
transfiguration on Mount Tabor Called here the holy Mountain, because it was
hallowed by the evident presence of God, and the glorious appearing of Christ
upon it; as the City of Jerusalem is called the holy City, Mat. 4.5, because
there God has planted his Worship and Sanctuary.
Mat. 17, and had there seen the Majesty that was then instated on him, and
heard the voice that came from the excellent Glory (that is, from the Majesty
of God the Father out of the shining-Cloud), saying, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased. But besides this, he tells them they had the Prophecies
of the Old Testament, which foretold these very things concerning the Messiah,
which have been fulfilled and accomplished in the Person of Jesus of Nazareth;
which prophecies were a more sure word to them than the voice from Heaven. Not
that there was any uncertainty in the Lord's voice uttered from Heaven, but
because a transient voice is more easily mistaken or forgotten, than a standing
authentic Record. Therefore seeing the written word was so sure a ground for
their faith to rest upon, they did well to attend unto it, as to a light that
shined in the dark and shadowy time of the Old Testament [see Romans 13. v. 12.].
And they should continue so to do, till Vox donec antecedens tempus semper
includit, sed consequens non necess^rio excludit, ut Mat. 28.20, and alibi.
Gousar.
by considering those ancient prophecies, and comparing them with what Christ
has really done and suffered, they might find the day dawning upon them, and
the morning star arising in their hearts, that is, the Spirit of Christ himself
(who is the Sun of Righteousness, and the Morning Star of the Church, Rev.
22.16.), so enlightening their minds, and so fully convincing their consciences,
that no more doubts or scruples should be left in them concerning this great
Truth attested by the voice from Heaven, and confirmed by the writings of the
Prophets [Acts 10.43.], namely, that Jesus is true Messiah, the Son of God.
This also he shows, they must hold as a first principle, and a thing especially
to be believed, That none of the writings of the Prophets were of any private
impulse Omnino assentior iis qui hic legendam putant (...), Non est prophetia
res nostri impetus. Grot. Hammondus noster vocem (...) retinendam censet and
sic interpretatur. No prophecy of Scripture is of their own incitation, motion,
or letting loose; that is, is not without particular mission and appointment of
God.

Amiraut sic: Qu' aucune des propheties qui sont continues en l'Escriture,
n'est de l'instinct particulier d'aucun homme, ni ne doit sa revelation aux
lumieres de son esprit. See his Paraphrase on this Epistle.


or incitation, or sprang merely out of their own brains; neither did prophecy
come upon them according to the will of man; that is, they did not prophecy
when they would, or what they would [see 2 King. 4.27.], but they spoke by the
instinct and impulse of the Holy Ghost. From Ver. 16, to the end.

He now forewarns them of false Teachers Hinc discamus Satanam semper veritati,
Ecclesiaeque insidiatum and insidiaturum esse. Discamus etiam non propterea
desinere aliquem caetum esse Ecclesiam, quia in eo tumultuentur aliqui
seductores. Nam Satan sua Zizania potissimum in ipso culto agro Domini inter
bonum triticum spargit, non in Sylvestribus ac saxosis spinetis. Et sicut Deus
ipse olim tentavit populum suum an in semel accepta puritate religionis
perseverare velint Deuteronomy. 13. Sic etiam Christus and Apostoli, constituta semel
doctrina, jusserunt Christianos in ea constantissime perseverare, quia sint
venturi pseudo-prophetae facientes magna miracula and signa Mat. 24. Hoc idem
etiam hic Petrus agit. Fl. Illyricus.
, and Heretical Seducers that should arise among them. He tells them, that as
there were true Prophets among the people of Israel of old (who spoke by the
instinct and impulse of the Spirit of God); so there were some also false, and
such as were mere Cheats and Deceivers, who slily crept in: And thus they must
expect it will be with them now; there will arise some false Teachers among
them, who will privily bring in damnable Heresies, and by their false doctrines
(either directly or implicitly) deny Dominum suum a quo sunt redempti negabunt]
Si non ipsis verbis express, tamen ipso facto; si non direct, tamen per ea
quae ex impia eorum doctrina consequuntur. Fridlib.
the Lord Christ and his benefits, who by his precious blood shed on the Cross,
paid a sufficient Mors Christi sufficiens remedium pro omnibus sed non
sufficiens medium, sine Fide. Vid. Heb. 2.9.
price for them (which would have been available for them, if they had truly
believed in him), and so will bring upon themselves speedy destruction. And
many, he foretells them, will be led away with their destructive carnal
doctrines, whereby the glorious, pure Gospel of Christ will be evil-spoken of,
whilst the very Gentiles shall take notice, that some that profess themselves
Christians, teach impure doctrines, and live wicked lives.

He further tells them, that th^se Deceivers being acted by covetousness, will,
with their cunning words and discourses, seek to circumvent them, and make
advantage of them. However he suggests to them, they should not fear the being
long exposed to their temptations. For the judgment to which such Impostors
were long since adjudged by God, is now approaching, and will certainly
surprise them. And that he might the more clearly convince them of this, he
sets before them a threefold instance: 1. Of the Angels that sinned, whom God
did not spare, but upon their rebellion against him, cast them presently out of
Heaven, and condemning them to the pains of Hell (...)] ad poenas tartarreas
damnavit. Mede.
, reserved them under the restraints of his irresistible power in a state of
misery and horror (as condemned Malefactors are reserved in ch^ins and
darkness) to the day of judgment, the time of their execution, when they shall
be cast into everlasting torments, Mat. 8.29. And if God spared not the Angels
that sinned, they might easily imagine, he will not spare false prophets and
their followers. 2. He instances in the people of the old world, on whom God
brought the Flood, and drowned them, only preserving Noah (with seven more of
his Family) who often warned them to repent and amend their lives. Lastly, He
instances in the wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, and their neighboring
villages or suburbs, which he adjudged to utter destruction, and consumed them
by fire from heaven, and made them an exemplary spectacle and document to all
that should ever live in the like sins. Yet at that time when he manifested so
much severity toward those wicked Cities, he delivered Righteous Lot, and his
Family, whose pious soul was daily vexed with the unrighteous deeds of these
impure Sodomites.

From all th s^ examples he inferrs, That God knows how to preserve his own
faithful s^rvants from the temptations and troubles wherewith they are here
exercised, and he can reserve the wicked to the day of judgment, to be punished
according to their deserts. From Ver. 1, to 10.

Now among these wicked ones, he shows these Heretics and Seducers are chiefly
to be reckoned; whom he thus characterizeth. 1. They are impure and unclean
persons. 2. They despise government, and speak evil of dignities. 3. They are
presumptuous, audacious, and self-willed. Their sin in despising lawful
authority, he aggravates by setting before them the contrary example of good
Angels [see Jude v. 9.], who are greater in power and might than any
Magistrates here on earth; yet even these, though God employs them to protect
his Church, and sometimes to withstand and punish the tyranny and rage of
wicked Rulers Ut apparuit in Aegypto and Sennacheribo
; yet they bring not a railing-accusation against them before the Lord (that we
can find in all the Scripture); neither do they set out, with reviling words,
what they have to say against them, that bear upon them a lawful authority. But
the temper of these Seducers is far different from this: For as brute-beasts,
following the brutish impetus and force of their appetites, pursue after their
prey till they run themselves into the net (and so seem made Quae ad interitum
facta sunt] h. e. dum escam bruto impetu persequuntur, ultro in retia and
exitium suum ruunt.
to be taken and destroyed of men); so these false Teachers speaking vilely and
reproachfully of Magistrates (the use and benefit of whom they understand not),
shall perish by the destruction (...)] Praepositio (...) redundat: suo interitu
interibunt. Pisc.
which they justly bring upon themselves, and shall receive the reward of their
wickedness and unrighteousness. He further shows them, That these are they who
count daily (...) pro (...) in die delicias, i. e. quotidianas delicias. Glass.
voluptuousness their Heaven, and in the daytime take pleasure in those
villainies which are wont to need the night to cover their shame. He tells them,
They are spots and blemishes to the Christian name. They are such as
deliciously (...)] legendum videtur (...) qui deliciantur in agapis vestris.
vide Ep. Judae v. 12. Pisc.

(...) dicebantur convivia illa in quibus Christiani divites, and pauperes pari
victu utebantur. Divitum enim sumptu pauperes isto quasi refrigerio juvabantur.
Ea convivia claudi solebant sacramento Dominicae passionis. Grot.


please themselves in the cunning artifices and fair pretenses whereby they
deceive others, insinuating themselves into them, both at their religious and
ordinary Feasts. And whereas at such Assemblies nothing but modesty and charity
should be expressed; these Deceivers come thither with eyes full of adultery,
and by their lascivious glances are continually soliciting others to sin. They
also ensnare with their errors and vile practices, such as are not well s^tled
and grounded in Christianity. He further adds, That their hearts are a shop
full of avaritious and covetous inventions and designs of extortion, whereby
they manifest themselves children of perdition, and such as having forsaken the
pure Christian Doctrine, are gone astray from the right path, following the
example of the false Yet by the inspiration of God he prophesied the truth
concerning the Messiah, Numb. 24.17.
prophet Balaam, the son of Bozor Beor fuit pater ejus Number. 22, unde binominis
censendus est. Fridlib.
, who instead of obeying the commandment of the Lord, was so tempted by that
great reward which Balak King of Moab promised him, that he would for the hope
of it (even against his Conscience) have cursed Israel: but the madness of this
Soothsayer was miraculously rebuked by an Ass speaking with Man's voice. He
further shows, that these Deceivers pretend to be deep Fountains of
saving-knowledg; but they have no such thing in them. They pretend to be Clouds
Nubes quae a procella feruntur. Loquitur de falsis Doctoribus, qui in doctrina
and confessione sua fluctuant; nec salutaris doctrinae and consolationis
pluviam praebent. Jud. v. 12.
that drop down the saving-doctrine, as rain, to make the Church fruitful;
whereas they are only Clouds driven impetuously by every wind and tempest, from
one vicious doctrine and practice to another; never affording the rain they
promised, but only darkning the sky; to whom is reserved, by the just judgment
of God, eternal darkness Poenae alterius seculi modo sub incendii, modo sub
tenebrarum figura describuntur, ut Mat. 8.12, and 22.13. Augetur significatio
cum non (...) tantum dicitur sed (...), ut and Judae v. 13.
and blackness. He shows, that with a lofty and an affected style they propound
their vain and false doctrines, and thereby amuse the simple [Jude v. 16.], and
allure to their party (by indulging a liberty to the lusts of the flesh, and to
much wantonness) suc^ Novice-Christians who had left the heathenish bestiality,
and had embraced the Christian profession; which they might do, and yet not be
really regenerate. He tells them, They promise indeed to bring them into a
state of liberty, when alas they draw them into the bondage of sin, and they
themselves are the basest slaves to lust and corruption in the world. For those
lusts by which they have been conquered and brought into bondage, the^ must
needs be slaves unto. And they had need take heed of being thus inveagled by
these Seducers, lest they prove flat Apostates from Christ, and then the^r
condition will be far worse than that of ignorant unconverted Heathens. For
they that have been converted from their Heathenism, and the Paganish sin*
wherein they lived, by being brought to the knowledge of Christ and his Gopel,
and then relapse and return to them again; this later estate of theirs, thi^
Christian-Heathenism (as I may so call it) is far worse than their bare
Heithenism at first was. For it had been better for them never to have known
the way of righteousness and justification revealed in the Gospel, than having
known it, to turn away from the holy Doctrine thereof, and the pure precepts it
enjoins, and to fall back again into their former vicious and heathenish
courses. But such as do so, plainly show, that they were never truly and
inwardly renewed by the Spirit, as the sheep of Christ are; but were only
outwardly washed in Baptism; and by an external profession of Christianity
only, had renounced that vileness whereunto now they are returned; so that the
old Proverb mentioned Prove. 26.11, is verified of them; The dog is turned to
lick up his vomit, which before, when it troubled his stomach, he vomited up;
and the sow that was washed, is returned to her wallowing in the mire. From
Ver. 10 to the end.

growth in grace and holiness, in the first part of his Epistle; and cautioned
them against error in the second: He comes now, in this last, to clear up and
defend the Doctrine of the last Judgment, and to show what use believers should
make of it. He shows, the end intended by him in both his Epistles, was to be
their Remembrancer, and to awaken and stir up the sincere-hearted among them,
to obey the instructions which had been given them by the writings of the
Prophets, and by the teaching of the Apostles. And in the first place he would
have them to consider this (and to arm themselves accordingly against it); That
in these last days The last days are to be reckoned from the time that Christ
began to execute his Ministerial function, to the end of the world.
, viz. the times of the Messiah, which were now arrived; certain scoffers will
arise, who walking according to their own lusts, and desiring to sin securely,
will question the second-coming of Christ, and plead that this present world
shall always continue as it is; and they shall scoffingly say, How long will it
be ere that promise Promissio per Metonym. pro complemento promissionis, vel
p^omissio adventus, i e. adventus promissus. Intelligitur autem adventus
Christi secundus, gloriosus and majesticus. Fridlib.
and prediction be fulfilled, That Christ shall come to judge the quick and dead
[see Mal. 2.17.]? We find this indeed long ago foretold in the prophecy of
Enoch [Jude v. 14, 15.]; but yet we see no appearance of its accomplishment:
for from the time (...) subintellige (...): and (...) sum pro tempore. Grot.
that the first men, that were known in the world, dyed, and their children
after them; there has been no resurrection, or summoning men to judgment. And
excepting this, that people have dyed in all ages, there has been no
considerable change (say they) since the creation, but all things have gone on
in a settled constant course.

The Apostle replies to these scoffers, showing them the ground of their vain
reasoning to be their own voluntary and affected ignorance. For first, they
seemed not to understand how God created the world at first by his word; and
how the earth, being the lowest and heaviest of the Elements, was yet by his
power kept from being totally overflowed by the waters V. 5. (...) pro (...) ut
1 Pet. 3. v. 20. scil. tanquam natans in illa, vel per aquam scil. tanquam per
fundamentum cui incumbit. vid. Psalm. 24.2. Pisc.
that go about it, and cover it in many places. By which miracle they might
have perceived, that Nature is governed by the will of God; and from the whole
they might have argued, That if all things were made by God, they might also
easily be destroyed by Him. 2. He shows, they seemed ignorant how God brought
the Flood upon the old world in the days of Noah, and drowned them for their
wickedness; Heaven V. 6. (...) per quae intelligit (...).
and Earth, both contributing at His command their waters thereunto. And if
^hey had known this, they might have clearly seen, that all things have not
continued since the Creation as they were at first. And he that made so great
an alteration in the world then, can easily do so again if it please him. It Is
true, he acknowledges the world that now is (by the word and promis^ of God,
Genesis 9.11.) is secured from being drowned again, it being reserved to be
destroyed by fire Seneca Natural. Ignis, exitus mundi est.
at the day of judgment, that day that will be so terrible to the ungodly, when
they shall receive a full reward of all their wickedness. But these profane
scoffers will perhaps again reply, If Christ intend to come to judgment, why
does he so long defer his coming? The Apostle answers, That this delay ought
not to be judged according to our sense and apprehension. For God does not
measure times as we do; but unto him (in regard of his Eternity and
Omniscience, comprehending all things past, present, and to come), these
periods of time which seem so long to us, are but a moment, Psalm. 90.4. 2. This
delay does not proceed from slackness in God, as some may imagine. For that
person cannot be said to be slack who is long ere he comes; but he is slack
that comes not at his due and appointed time. Now God will not put off his
coming one hour beyond his own set and determined time [see. Heb. 10.37,]. And
they ought to consider, that God's deferring his coming, proceeds not from any
other reason than the abundance of his patience and long-suffering toward poor
sinners, not willing Vult autem hoc non plane and absolute, sed quantum
justitiae and bonitati ejus sufficit. Confer Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11. 1 Timothy
2.4. Grot. See Harm. of the Four Evang. chapter 5. page 163.
(as far forth as may consist with his Justice and Goodness) that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance; and accordingly, that time
should be given them for that purpose. But though this great day of the Lord
Dies illa ultima qua Christus homines judicabit: cujus arrhabo sunt judicia
illa in Judaeos, Luc. 17.24.

The day of the Lord] that is, of Christ, when he shall come to judge the world;
or of God the Father, who shall the world by him, Act. 17.31.


seem slow in coming, yet it will come, and that suddenly, as a thief in the
night, and will surprise many secure and unprepared sinners* who shall then be
found on the face of the earth. And when it shall come, there will be a great
change and dissolution of the whole frame of Nature, the Heavens will pass away
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; and the
earth, and all the works therein, shall be burnt up Non quidem in nihilum
redacta sed in novam formam transmutata. Conser Psalm, 102. v. 26. Rom 8. v. 19.
Pisc.
; yet so, as possibly out of this conflagration God will bring forth a new
edition of Heaven and Earth, and of all or most of the Creatures in them
contained, to be lasting monuments of His own Power and Glory, and objects of
the Saints delightful contemplation. From Ver. 1, to 11.

The Apostle comes now to make a practical improvement of this Doctrine,
exhorting them, from the certain, sudden, and terrible coming of Christ, to the
practice of sundry duties. 1. If the whole Systeme and Frame of Heaven and
Earth must be so wonderfully altered to make it a fit habitation for the
Saints, then they should consider how holy they ought to be, and how great a
degree of purity they should labor to attain, who profess themselves the
people of the Lord, and hope to live in this new world. 2. Such persons, he
tells them, ought not only to expect that day, and to look for it; but to
hasten to it in their longing-desires; and by their prayers and other
endeavors (in their places), ^o further, what they can, those works which must
he done, before it come; and so, as much as lies in them, hastening that day,
which will be so full of terror and majesty, and wherein (as he said before)
the Heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
with fervent heat. Yet this great change, he tells them, will not tend to the
utter ruin and annihilation, but to the refining Ex reliquiis molis antiquae
resurget melior. Grot.
of the world. For according to the promise (says he) which God has made unto
us by his Prophet Isa. 65.17, and 66.22. Ista promissio Isa. 65.17, agit de
regno gratiae, seu statu Ecclesiae Christianae in Novo Testamento. Solenne est
Prophetis a descriptione regni gratiae transitum facere ad descriptionem regni
gloriae, a statu regni Christi in hoc mundo, ad statum ipsius in altero seculo;
quia regnum Christi hic duntaxat inchoatur, in futuro seculo consummabitur.
Fridlib.
we look for new heavens and a new earth (not for substance, but renewed in
qualities) wherein only righteous and holy persons See Mat. 13.43. and Mat.
25.34.
shall dwell, Rev. 21.7. 3. From the consideration of that comfortable estate
and everlasting blessedness which believers have ground to expect hereafter, he
exhorts them to give all diligence, that they may be without spot, and
blameless Ephesians. 5.27. Jude v. 24. Col. 1.22.
, being washed in the blood of Christ, and sanctified by his Spirit; and if it
shall so happen that any of them should live to that day, that then they may be
found of him (when he comes to judgment) in a state of peace and reconciliation
with God, and in peace of mind and conscience, not being affrighted at the
coming of it. 4. He exhorts them to interpret and account the Lord's delay in
coming to judgment, and his patience and long-suffering exercised toward
sinners, as intended by him (not as a connivance at their sins, but) to bring
them to repentance, and so to salvation, if they will make a right use of it.
And agreeably hereunto, he tells them, his Brother and fellow-Apostle Paul
(according to the great wisdom given him by God) had written unto them in his
Epistle to the Romans (wherein there are many things that properly concern the
Jews), and in his Epistle to the Hebrews, and so in several of his other
Epistles. In which he acknowledges, there are some things hard to be
understood, which unlearned and unstableminded-men do oftentimes wrest (as
they do also other Scriptures) to their own ruin and destruction. And therefore
they had need to labor after a clear understanding of those Scriptures, that
they may not mistake about them. From Ver. 11, to 17.

He comes now to the Conclusion of his Epistle; wherein he tells them, That
seeing they were forewarned of their danger, and acquainted how to prevent it,
they should be more wary, lest they be drawn aside by the seduction of wicked
men, from the way of Truth and Holiness wherein they had been in some measure
established, and which they had hitherto professed. But on the contrary, they
should labor daily to grow more and more in grace, and in a clear and distinct
knowledge of our Lord and Savior, and his Doctrine. To this blessed Savior he
desires humbly and affectionately, that all honor and glory may be for ever
ascribed. Amen. From Ver. 17, to the end.

SECT. XIV.
THE Epistle of Jude was written probably about this this time, being very near
of kin in style and matter to the second Epistle of Peter. This Jude, or Judas,
was son of Alpheus and Mary (sister to the blessed Virgin), and brother to
James the Less [see page 309.], and Cousin-german to our Savior, Mat. 13.55.
He was called also Lebbaeus and Thaddaeus Thaddaeus signifies in Syriac the
same thing which Judah does in Hebrew, viz. praise and confession. Lebbaeus
signifies a wise and an understanding man.
[ Mat. 10.3.], to distinguish him (as some think) from Judas Iscariot, whose
very Name was now grown odious. Of this Jude's conversion and call to be an
Apostle, the Scripture speaks not particularly. We find little more mentioned
of him, besides his being numbered among the Twelve Apostles, and his writing
this Epistle, save only this, That he propounded that Question to our Savior,
Joh. 14.22, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not
unto the world? This Apostle is reported by the Ecclesiastic Historians See
Niceph. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 40, and 44. Hist. Eccles. Magd. Cent. 1. lib.
2. c. 10.
to have preached the Gospel afterward in many parts of the world, as
particularly in Idumaea, Arabia, Syria, and a long time in Mesopotamia, as also
in Pontus, and Egypt, and at last in Persia; where it is said, he was slain by
the Magi for his free and faithful reproof of their Superstitions.

In the Epistle there are these three parts, The Epistle of Iu^


1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface; wherein is declared, 1. Who was the Penman of the Epistle,
viz. Jude the servant of Christ, and brother of James. 2. Who were the persons
to whom it was directed, viz. to all the Christian- Hebrews, who were
effectually called That word (called) both in the construction of the words,
and the order of nature, is to be read first. See Junius, Paraeus, and others.
, and sanctified by the Spirit of God the Father, and kept (...)] est
participium praeteritum pro praesenti. Grot.
and preserved in See 1 John 2.27, 28.
and by Christ, in their state of grace and holiness, unto salvation. To all
whom he wishes that the mercy, favor, and good will of God, may be more and
more manifested, and that inward peace of conscience, and love to God, and to
one another, may be daily more and more increased in them. Ver. 1, 2.

2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle, wherein he tells them, That seeing
he gave himself with all diligence to write unto them of the common salvation
(which he and they, and all the Saints, have interest in), he found it needful,
in the first place, to exhort them, that they should earnestly contend for the
faith E^dem intelligit hic quae creditur, i e. doctrinam fidei Act. 6, 7.
, that is, the sound doctrine of the Gospel, which is necessary to be owned and
believed, in order to the obtaining salvation, and was once Dicit semel quia de
ea doctrina nihil immutandum. Grot.

Semel tradita, h. e. perfect. Tridlib.


and perfectly (never after to be altered) delivered to the Saints, that is, to
the holy Apostles, to be propagated; and to particular believers, to be
faithfully kept and preserved by them, and transmitted unto posterity. He
inforces his exhortation with these reasons: 1. He tells them, certain wicked
Seducers were slily crept into the Church, men long before written (...) h. e.
jam olim in, sacris literis a Prophetis and Apostolis praedicti, ut apparet ex
v. 14, 15, and 18. Non ergo dicit quod Deus illos ab aeterno in damnationem
praeordinaverit, and descripserit aut praedestinaverit, sed quod jam pridem in
scriptura praedicti sint, sicut and Romans ^5. v. 4. haec ipsa vox usurpatur. H.
Illyric. in loc.
of, and prophesied of [see v. 14, 15. and 17, 18.], as those that would by
their great sins and impieties fall into that condemnation which God has
ordained as a just reward to such transgressions. Th^se wicked and ungodly men,
he shows, will pervert the doctrine of the free grace of God, and of
justification by faith in Christ, and make it patronize looseness and
lasciviousness Revera Evangelium transformabant in doctrinam libidinosam. Grot,
(as the Nicol^^^^s, Gnostics, and other impure Heretics did) and will either
openly or covertly deny Jesus Christ our only Master, God, and Lord, lessening
the dignity of his Person, and invalidating (as much as lies in them) the
benefits of his death and sufferings. That therefore those unto whom he wrote,
might take heed of following their pernicious ways, he sets before them the
examples of Gods vengeance inflicted in former times up in persons guilty of
such transgressions as these seducers were guilty of. And, 1. He tells them,
that he will once Duae illae voces (...) cum verbo praecedente (...) congrue
cohaerent, tanquam si hoc modo legeretu^; (...), q. d. Etsi scio vos haec
tenere cognita tamen semel adhuc (dum scil. in hoc tabernaculo sum) vos de eo
commonefaciam. Fridlib.
more be their Remembrancer while he is in this Tabernacle (though they knew
this already) how God destroyed Perdidit, nempe per serpents, per morbos, per
Angelum, per manus Levitarum. Vid. 1 Cor. 10.5, 8, 9.
the Israelits in the Wilderness for their unbelief, after they were brought
out of Egypt. And so those now that fall into the like sin, are to expect the
like destruction. 2. He sets before them the example of the Angels who kept not
that first estate of blessedness in which they were created; but being for
their sins and rebellion against God, thrown down from Heaven (where the good
Angels have still their habitation, Mat. 24.36. Mar. 12.25.) they are now
reserved under the restraint of his irresistible Power, in an estate of misery
and horror (as condemned Malefactors are reserved in chains and darkness to the
judgment of the great day, when their condition shall be made much more
miserable than now it is; see 2 Pet. 2.4. And if God spared not Apostate
Angels, surely he will not spare Apostatizing Seducers. 3. He shows them how
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighbouring-Cities Adma and Zehoim, giving
themselves up to prodigious lusts and uncleanness, were then most notoriously
punished with utter destruction by fire and brimstone from heaven; yet that was
but as a forerunner of those eternal flames of Hell which they now suffer, and
so may well be a terrifying-example and warning to all that fall into the same
sins at this time. And yet for all these dreadful examples, he shows, that in
like manner did these Seducers (who vent Stulta imaginantes ut ii qui somniant.
Grot.
their own dreams and fantasies instead of Gods truth, Jer. 23.25.) pollute
and defile themselves with filthy libidinous practices. Nay further, they
despise dominion, and show themselves adversaries to Civil Government, and
revile and speak contumeliously of those that are in Authority, see 2 Pet.
2.10. Now this their sin in despising lawful Authority, he aggravates, by
setting before them the contrary example of good Angels. He tells them, that
Michael the Archangel, though excellent in nature and high in office when he
contended with the Devil about the Body of Moses (which God, knowing Israel's
proneness to Idolatry, had buried no man knows where, lest they should commit
Idolatry with it, as they did with the brazen Serpent), and when he withstood
him because he endeavored to discover it, that he might thereby tempt the
people to Idolatry; yet his holy nature would not permit him to deal with this
impure Spirit in an indecent and contumelious manner; but he made his attempts
fruitless by an holy and modest address to God, desiring the Lord to rebuke him
These circumstances the Apostle might receive by divine revelation; and here
they are authorized and made authentic.
[see Zach. 3.2.], and referred the whole judgment of the cause to him. But
these Seducers, he shows, belch out their reproaches against Dignities and
Magistrates (the usefulness of whom they know not), and possibly against the
mysteries of the Christian faith it self, which they understand not, though
they call themselves Gnostics, and pretend to a greater and larger knowledge
than others; see 2 Pet. 2.12. Nay, what they know naturally by the very light
of Nature to be unlawful, in those things, as brute beasts, they corrupt and
defile themselves. The Apostle also charge them with other sins; as, 1. With
Envy, Malice, and Hatred against their Brethren and Fellow Christians. Woe He
speaks it by way of prophecy, not execration.
unto them (says he), they have gone in the way of Cain, who was a Murderer,
and slew his Brother, and they in like manner, by reason of their hatred to
their brethren, are no less than Murderers, 1 John 3.12, 15. 2. They have
adulterated the truth for base gain, and so have followed greedily the error of
Balaam Numb. 22. see his end, Numb. 31.8.
, who to get a reward, ensnared the Israelites in a great villainy, Rev. 2.14.
3. He charge them with seditiousness against Magistracy and Ministry, and
imitating Corah and his Accomplices, who rose up against Moses and Aaron, Numb.
16.31; and this he tells them will certainly bring ruin upon them, as it did
upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. He further sets out their wickedness, by sundry
resemblances: 1. He says they are spots and blemishes in their Love Feasts, 2
Pet. 2.12. (the infamy of their lives being a scandal to their
Christian-Assemblies); and coming thither, they feed luxuriously, without any
fear of offending either God or Man. 2. They are Clouds without water,
promising rain, but giving none (2 Pet. 2.17.); making a show of learning and
knowledge, but not having any such thing really in them; they are indeed no more
but empty Clouds, impetuously driven by winds and tempests from one vicious
doctrine and practice to another; and being unstable, come to nothing in the
end. 3. They are Trees that bring forth no good and wholesome fruit, but only
such as presently withers and rots; they are twice dead Bis mortuae] Sumpta
Metaphora ab arboribus, quae bis moriuntur, primum cum deficiunt far fructus,
secundo cum excisae traduntur ignibus. Zeger.
, 1. In respect of their natural estate, upon which account they are dead in
trespasses and sins: And then in respect of their apostasy, and falling off
from their Christian profession: And thus having to their natural, drawn upon
themselves a judicial hardness, if they so continue, as they are fit for
nothing else, so they shall certainly be plucked up by the roots (...)] Est hic
Aoristus pro Futuro.
, and cast into the fire. 4. They are raging and furious waves of the sea [Isa.
57.20.], always turbulent, foaming out and discovering the filthiness of their
hearts, which they ought to be ashamed of. 5. They are wandring-starrs; they
take upon them the name of illuminated persons, but are indeed uncertain,
unstable Teachers, wandering and departing from the true faith once delivered to
them: but though they profess themselves Stars, yet to them blackness of
darkness (that is, exceeding great darkness, called outward darkness, Mat.
8.12, as being furthest off from that region of light and glory wherein the
Saints shall dwell) is reserved as their just reward and punishment. He further
shows that to these men the Prophecy of Enoch belongs, who at the beginning of
the world (being the seventh from Adam), by the spirit of prophecy, foretold
the sins of such persons, and their condemnation at the day of judgment, when
Christ shall come in a glorious manner attended with Myriads of Saints and
Angels to execute judgment upon all the ungodly, and especially upon such as
have spoken contumeliously against Himself and his holy Truth. And that these
men are some of those ungodly ones whom this prophecy concerns, may appear by
this; They are murmurers and complainers, never contented, but always
quarrelling and complaining of their present condition; they love to walk after
the lusts of their own hearts, without being restrained by any laws: their
mouths are full of haughty Qui ont la bouche plene de paroles enflees,
hautanes, and insolentes, qu'and ils ont afaire a ceux a qui ils s' estiment
supericurs, mais qui flattent and cajolent, qui estiment and qui adm rent les
persons don't ils attendent quelque avantage, ou don't ils esperent quelque
profit? Amiraut in his paraphrase on the place.
and insolent speeches, when they have to do with those whom they judge
themselves superior unto; but they flatter, cajole, and seem to admire the
persons and the actions of others from whom they expect any benefit or
advantage. And besides this ancient Prophecy for the fortifying of them against
these Seducers, he advises them to remember and consider the warnings Intellige
autem, non tantum quae scriptis mandata, sed and quae voce dicta, per manus
tradebantur. Crot.
and advertisements given them by the Apostles Paul and Peter [see 2 Pet.
3.2.], who expressly speak of these wicked scoffers, sons of Belial, that should
arise in the Church in the last times Called here the last days, either with
respect to the approaching judgment on the Jews; or because from the preaching
of the Gospel, the last dispensation was begun, which God intended to continue
without change to the end of the world.
, which were now come. These mockers and scoffers, he shows, were such, as
without any just cause or warrant, separated themselves from the communion and
society of faithful Christians, and sought to draw others also into the like
separation, pretending to be more holy, and spiritual, and perfect, than they;
whereas indeed they themselves were mere Sensualists, such in whom sense and
the flesh do reign with full vogue and sway, and have nothing of that
enlightening, sanctifying, quickening, comforting-Spirit, which Christ
communicates to his faithful ones. From Ver. 2, to 20.

He comes now in the close of his Epistle to give them some hortatory
Directions, by way of Antidote, against these Seducers, and their Seductions.

1. That they should labor to build up one another in holiness, being settled
on that holy and pure Doctrine of Faith (as on a firm foundation) which they
had learned from the Apostles.

2. They should be earnest in prayer unto God, That by his Divine Grace and
Power he would strengthem them therein; laboring to pray by the assistance of
the Holy Ghost He prays in us, by exciting the gifts and graces he has given
us. We pray in him by his assistance, when he helps us to stir up and
exercise those gifts and graces.
; and exciting in themselves the gifts and graces he has given them.

3. That they should keep themselves continually in the exercise of love to
God, laboring to increase therein more and more; cheerfully expecting and
looking for that merciful V. 21. Mercy] the Cause is put for the Effect.
sentence of Christ at the Day of Judgment, whereby he will bestow eternal life
on them.

4. He gives them directions how to deal with those that are any way corrupted
by these Seducers, viz. That they should deal with them aft^r a different
manner, according as their particular condition required; such as were w^ak and
simple, and had been easily seduced, he advises they should deal with them with
great tenderness and compassion: But as for those who were further entangled,
and corrupted, and hardened in their errors by these Seducers; they should
endeavor to save them with fear, that is, they should terrify them with the
fear of God's judgments and wrath, if they went on in these ways; and by sharp
admonitions, and a due and solemn use of Church Censures (as occasion required)
snatch them, as it were, out of the fire which will destroy them if they
continue in it. And thus they would show and declare their great detestation of
holding any co-partnership or fellowship with them in their errors; and that
they not only hated all impiety and wickedn^ss of life, but all erroneous
Doctrines that might infect men, or draw them into it; as when a man would
avoid the infection of the Pestilence, he will fly from, and not dare to touch
any garment By the garment spotted with the flesh, the Apostle intends that
which seems to have any affinity or nearness to the vices of those sinners
which were among them. See Mr. Jenkins learned Commentary on this Epistle.
of an infected person.

He shuts up his Epistle, commending them to the Divine Grace of Christ, who is
able to keep them from apostasy and falling away after the example of these
Seducers, and to cause to stand before his own most glorious Throne, such as
shall be accounted blameless Ephesians. 5.27.
in his sight, to their exceeding great joy and triumph. To this only wise God,
who is our Savior, he desires all Glory, M^j^sty, Dominion, and Power, may for
ever be ascribed. Amen.

SECT. XV.
ABOUT this time Paul seems to have written his Second Epistle to Timothy (now,
as it is probable, at Ephesus) who had been imprisoned with him at Rome, but was
at this present set at liberty: see Heb. 13.23.

^ second Epistle to Timothy.
In the Epistle there are these three parts:

1. The Preface. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface, in which he declares himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by
the will and appointment of God the Father, that he might declare and make
known the Gospel or Promise Secundum promissionem] i.e. Ad annunciandum
hominibus promissionem illam Dei qua is vitam aeternam promisit omnibus in
Christum credentibus. Simili significatione accipitur praepositio (...) Tit.
1.1. nempe ut notet finem sen causam sinalem, more Hebraeorum quae inte^dum
valet (...), interdum (...). Piscat.
o^ eternal life, which is made to all who truly believe in Christ. He directs
his Epistle to Timothy, calling him his dearly beloved son (because by him
converted to the faith), to whom he wishes an increase of grace, an abundant
sense of the mercy of God toward him, and much inward peace from God the
Father, the Fountain of all blessings; and from Jesus Christ the Mediator, who
is the Conduit-pipe by whom they are conveyed. And in the first place he tells
him, that he solemnly gave thanks Gratiam habeo Deo pro te. Testis enim mihi
^st Deus cui servio a majoribus cum pura conscientia, quod assidua^ tui
memoria^ teneam, etc. absque hoc supplemento plane non liquet, unde pende^t
conjunctio (...) ubi dicitur (...), etc. Idem.
to the Lord for the gifts and graces he had bestowed on him. And God (whom he
served after the example of the holy Patriarchs of old, with an upright
conscience) was his witness, how he was continually mindful of him in his
prayers night and day. He tells him, he desired earnestly to see him again. For
he remembered how passionately he wept at their parting, and he should be glad
(if it so pleased God) that their meeting again might be as full of joy as
their parting was of sorrow. He further tells him how much he pleas^d himself
with the contemplation of that sincere faith which he believed was in him;
which grace eminently manifested it self before in his Grandmother Lois, and
Mother Eunice: And as it dwelt and continued in them unto the end; so he was
confident it would do in him also. From Ver. 1, to 6.

2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle; wherein, first, he tells him, That
seeing he wished him so well, he would be his Monitor and Remembrancer, and
would exhort him to excite and stir up the Ministerial gi^t that was in him (by
a diligent exercise thereof), viz. the faculty of tea^^ing the Gospel, which
was conferred on him by his hands [1 Timothy 4.14. see page 218.], when with the
consent and concurrence of the Presbytery he ordained him to the Office of a
Minister. Which gift he should not through cowardice or fear suffer to lie
unprofitably by him. For the holy Vox Spiritus significat aliquando per
Metonym. motus hominis a Spiritu excitatos, five bonos, five malos, ut hoc
loco; ubi spiritus timoris est trepidatio mentis; spiritus virtutis est
confirmatio and roboratio mentis: spiritus dilectionis est bonus animi motus
quo diligimus Deum, and proximum; spiritus sobrietatis est bonus animi motus
quo moderate omnia agimus. Fridlib.
Spirit which God gives his faithful Ministers, is not a Spirit infusing fear
and cowardice into them (which would hinder them in the discharge of their
duties); but a Spirit of Power, animating them with Christian courage, and a
Spirit of love, working in them an holy love to God, and an ardent desire of
the salvation of men; and lastly, a Spirit working in them a sound and composed
mind, and giving them that prudence and sobriety, that they neither through
their own indiscretion bring troubles upon themselves; nor when they come upon
them, break out into rage or impatience. Ver. 6, 7.

2. He exhorts him not to be ashamed of the Gospel which testifies of Christ,
nor of his sufferings who was imprisoned for it; but to be a cheerful partner
and co-sufferer with him, in bearing patiently his share of those afflictions
which follow a sincere profession of the Gospel, according as God shall please
to afford him power and strength.

3. He shows, that not only Timothy, but all true Christians, have great cause
to dispose themselves to a willingness to suffer for the Gospel when called to
it, because God has saved them by his Son Jesus Christ from eternal misery;
having called them with an holy calling, not for any works foreseen in them,
that could merit this calling, or move him thereunto; but according as it
pleased and seemed good to himself, even according to his own free mercy and
goodness, and the grace by himself given them (...), i. e. quam decrevit nobis
dare Deus. M^^^^. subj. Reipsa, data est nobis is it haec grotia, per efficacem
vocationem in tempore, non autem ante tempora secularia. Piscat.
, that is, which he purposed and decreed to give them in and through his Son,
before the world began Ante tempora secularia] Ante tempora seculorum quae
praeterieunt a jactis mundi fundamentis. Drus.
[see page 186.]. Which grace (he shows) God has now manifested very clearly,
and made them partakers of it, by Christ's coming into the world Postquam
Christus mundo apparuit, Dei gratia and charitas in homines apparuisse
dicuntur. Tit. 2.11. and 3, 4.
, who has by his death on the Cross taken away the sting of natural death to
all true believers, and totally freed them from the punishment of eternal
death; and has showed them, by the preaching of the Gospel, a clear way to
attain a glorious everlasting life and immortality, which before was not so
clearly revealed. And for the preaching and teaching of this Gospel (especially
to the Gentiles), he declares that God had given him the authority and
commission of an Apostle. And this very thing, viz. his preaching to the
Gentiles (he tells him) had highly exasperated the Jews, and so had brought
these troubles upon him which he now suffered. But he was not ashamed of his
sufferings in so good a cause, nor discouraged at them: For he knew in whose
Power and Faithfulness he had put his trust, and was fully assured he was able
to keep safe that great depositum or pledge he had committed to him ( viz. his
Soul and Body), to the day of Christ's glorious coming to judgment, at which
time he expected a glorious reward for all his sufferings. From Ver. 8, to 13.

4. He exhorts him to hold fast that Expressam formam teneto (...) subaudi
(...), qui sunt de fide and charitate, vel qui occupantur in fide and charitate
Pisc. Notatur objectum, and materia doctrinae Pauli.
form of sound words (or short summary of such things as were to be believed
and practiced by all) which he had received from him; which summary of sound
doctrine, he shows, consisted principally in precepts and directions con^erning
faith in Christ, and love to God and our Neighbor; which graces are required
by Christ, and framed in the hearts of all his true members, by his Spirit; see
1 Timothy 1.14. Gal. 5.6. Ephesians. 6.23. He enjoins him also to keep inviolably that
great treasure or depositum of the Gospel 1 Timothy 6.20
(which was entrusted to him to be kept pure and uncorrupted by him, and
transmitted to posterity), though the power and assistance of the Holy Ghost,
who dwells in the hearts and souls of true believers. He tells him, he
supposed he had heard that the Asian-Christians, who were then at Rome, had in
the time of his distress, forsaken him; as particularly, Phigellus and
Hermogenes. He des^res the Lord to show merry unto, and plentifully to reward
the Family of On^siphorus, who, being come to Rome, sought him out dilgently,
and found him, and showed great kindness unto him, and often refreshed him, and
owned him without fear or shame in this time of his imprisonment, see Ephesians.
6.20. He desires he may find mercy of the Lord in that great day when he shall
come to judge the quick and dead, and to distribute rewards and punishments.
For, says he, besides what he has done for me here at Rome, thou know also
very well in how many things else he relieved me when I was at Ephesus. From
Ver. 13, to the end.

5. He proceeds to direct Timothy in the right management of his Ministerial
Office. In order to which,

1. He exhorts him to strengthen and encourage himself through the grace
derived to him from God the Father, as the Fountain; and in and by Jesus Christ
as the Conduit-pipe. Ver. 1.

2. That the sacred Doctrine of the Gospel, and the precepts of holy living
which he had heard him deliver in the presence of many the same he should
impart and commit to persons of known ability and fidelity, who may be able to
teach others. V. 2.

3. He should be ready to endure hardship, and encounter difficulties, as a
good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And therefore as Soldiers were not to entangle
themselves in the ordinary affairs of this life, such as Merchandise, Trades,
or Husbandry, etc. but were to attend upon their Colors, and to observe the
orders of their Commanders, so neith^r must a faithful Teacher of the Gospel
cumb^r himself with such worldly matters as may hinder him from a faithful
discharge of his Office, but must diligently attend upon his Ministry; and
esp^cially that he may please Christ who has called him to this warfare, and
is his Commander and General, and is able abundantly to reward him for all that
he shall do or suffer for him. And as they that strive for Masteries in the
Olympick-Games, are not to be crowned except they strive lawfully, that is,
observe the Laws and Rules of the Games, be they never so difficult or painful
to be observed; And as the Husbandman must first Sermonis ordo, paulo
perturbatior, obscuritatem adduxit orationi. Ea tolletur si (...) sit
praeteriti temporis and ab eo pendeat adverbium (...), prius and non ab
insinitivo verbo quod sequitur (...) and sententiam ad hunc modum ordinemus,
oportet agricolam accipere fructus, sed si prius laboravit. Erasm

Praestat verborum Metathesin agnosc^re ut hoc dicatur (...). Scultet.


toil and labor, before he can be partaker of the fruits of the earth: so a
Teacher of the Gospel must first labor, and take pains, and endure hardship,
before he can hope to reap that great fruit and benefit, the gaining and
converting of souls to Christ. He advises him therefore to consider of what he
said, and desires the Lord to give him a right and sound judgment, that he may
understand how to do all things right which belong unto him. From Ver. 3, to 8.

4. He advises him to inculcate the Doctrine of Christ's taking his humane
nature of the seed of David according to the Scriptures, and the Doctrine of
his Resurrection; this being the Doctrine which he himself had every where
preached; and for the preaching of this V. 9. (...) cujus causa. Grot.
, he was now imprisoned at Rome as if he were a Malefactor. But he acquaints
him, that the word of the Lord, or the Gospel, was not bound; for he preached
it feely, notwithstanding his bonds; yea, his imprisonment had been a means of
divulging and spreading it very much in Rome. And he tells him, that the Elect
were worthy, that for their edification and confirmation in the faith (in order
that they may obtain salvation and eternal glory, which is freely given through
the Merits and Mediation of Christ), himself, and other Ministers of Christ,
should suffer all sorts of afflictions; and they ought not in the least to be
discouraged thereat: For this (says he) is a most true saying, If we be
afflicted with him, and suffer as he suffered, for the defense of the truth
[Rom. 8.17, 36. 2 Cor. 4.10.]; nay, if we be persecuted even to death for his
sake, we shall also live together with him, and shall certainly be rewarded
with a participation of his glory. But on the contrary, if we deny him, he will
deny us. And we may assure our selves of this, that though we may be unfaithful
(...)] Si nos in illum infidi sumus; (...) in his libris modo credentem
significat, modo fidelem. Grot.
in not confessing him steadfastly, or serving him with that fidelity we ought;
yet he always abides faithful, and will never fail of performing any of his
promises; for he cannot do any thing that is contrary to the perfection of his
Divine Nature. From Ver. 8, to 14.

5. He directs him to inculcate these things into his Auditors upon all
occasions; and charge them strictly, as they will answer it before the Lord at
his coming, That they fall not into those idle disputes and verbal-contentions,
such as are mentioned 1 Timothy 6.4, which tend not to any real profit or good,
but infuse uncharitableness and faction into men's minds, and tend to the
drawing them off from sound doctrine. As for Timothy himself, he exhorts him,
That in his Ministry he should endeavor to approve himself unto God, an
upright, sound, and faithful Teacher, a workman who (in respect of any
unskilfulness* negligence, or unfaithfulness) has no cause to be ashamed, and
one that is a right divider Qui prudenter distribuat and accommodet usibus
Auditorum.
and distribut^r of the word of truth. But he should avoid (...) pro Cavere
habemus Tit. 3.9. quia circumcludere solemus ea a quibus nobis metuimus. Grot.
and take h^ed f^r himself, and endeavor that his Flock should avoid also the
profane and vain bablings and discourse s of proud Heretics; for such
discourses will tend to the promoting and increasing Ad incrementum impietatis
proficient. Vatabil.
of more and m^re impiety in the hearers. And their false doctrine, if it be
not stopped at first, will eat as does a Gangrene, and spread far into the body
of the Church. This he plainly evidenceth unto them, by instan^ing in the
dangerous error of Hymenaeus [see 1 Timothy 1.20.] and Philetus, who affirmed,
that the resurrection was past already, acknowled^ing no other but the
spiritual resurrection of the soul from the death of sin; by which dangerous
doctrine the Orthodox Faith Intellige fidem temporariam, Nam vera fides
subverti nequit. Pisc.
of some concerning the resurrection of the body In Evangelio (...) tam aperte
and tot locis describitur, ut non possit alia intelligi quam quae erit post
corporis ab animo sejunctionem. Grot.
at the last day, was overthrown. But he tells him, though some turn away from
the truth, and the faith of some be overthrown; yet the foundation which God
has laid for tho salvation of true believers, stands sure and unmovable,
having this seal to confirm it, God knows who are his, and discerns them from
others, and loves them, and takes care of them, and will preserve them unto
eternal life; yet such as have good ground to believe they belong to God, must
not be secure and careless of their salvation, or indulge themselves in sin;
but must know, that there is required on their part a conscientions care to
please God, and that every one who names the name of Christ, and professes to
believe in him, must make conscience to depart from all iniquity. But he shows
it cannot be expected in the Church, any more than in a great Family, that all
should be equally good. In a great house there are Vessels of gold and silver,
and some also of wood and earth; some for more creditable, some for less
creditable uses (g; so it is not unsuitable to the state of the visible Church
(God's great house) to have in it some Heretical, Huc tendit (...); Non mirum,
si Deus aliquos sinat se insinuare in Ecclesiam, qui deinde malis factis se
prodant. Deo nihil abscedit, quia novit and bonis and malis uti. Confer quae
sunt, Romans 9.21, 22. Grot.
as other Orthodox professors. Which thing should stir up every one of us to
endeavor to be of the number of the best. For if a man (through the assistance
of grace) do labor to purify himself from all pollution of error, and
sinfulness of life (which these Heretical Teachers he speaks of were s^ tainted
with), he will then manifest himself to be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and
consecrated to the service of the Lord, and meet for the Master's use, and
fitted and made ready to perform all manner of good works. From Ver. 14, to 22.

5. He admonishes him to keep himself from those carnal affections which young
men are most apt to be led away with, such as are not only love of pleasure,
but rashness, contention, pride, vainglory, which young Preachers too often use
to be infected with. And on the contrary, he advises him to pursue after
righteousness, fidelity Ver. 22. (...)], h. e. fidem in verbis. Grot.
, charity, and concord and agreement with all them that worship God sincerely.

6. That he shun those idle and unprofitable questions which tend not to the
promoting true Piety or Christianity, but engender strifes and contentions. For
the servant of the Lord (who serves him in the Office of Teaching) must not be
of a boisterous contentious spirit, but must be mild, and gentle, and calm, and
ready to instruct others, dealing with much patien^e and meekness with those
that oppose themselves against the truth, and are otherwise persuaded than we
are, and so trying V. 25. Experiendo an det Deus illis poenitentiam; (...) pro
(...) ut Luc. 3.15. ubi (...) habemus pro an. Grot.
whether it may not please God to bring them to a sight and sense of their
sins, and to repent of them, and to an acknowledgment of the truth, that so
they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, by whom they were
before captivated and enslaved to do his will. From Ver. 22, to the end.

Timothy of those dangerous Seducers and enemies of the truth, that were even
then arising, and should in aftertimes much more arise in the Church; charging
him to have no communion with such persons, but to avoid them. He tells him,
that in the last days (viz. the time betwixt Christ's ascension and
second-coming) many Monsters shall arise in the Church, who shall be guilty of
many notorious vices and enormities. He particularizes no less than Nineteen.
He says, they will be inordinate self-lovers, covetous, vainglorious, boasters
of their gifts and virtues, Romans 1.30; proud, flying in the face of God himself
with their wicked blasphemies, if he cross them. Rev. 16.9, 11, disobedient to
Parents, unthankful, impure, and unholy; without natural affection, not
regarding the very bonds of nature. Romans 1.31. Truce Breakers, unfaithful in
Covenants and Contracts; false accusers, loading the innocence of others with
feigned calumnies; Incontinent, fierce, and bloodily disposed, haters and
persecutors of all good men; Traitors V. 4. (...)] Qui amicissimos produnt:
Qualis Judas Luc 6.16. Grot. Vide etiam Hammondum in loc.
, that is, betraying their Fellow Christians into the hands of persecutors,
Mat. 10.21, and 24.9, 10. Heady and rash, high-minded and insolent persons,
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form or show of godliness,
but no way manifesting the power or efficacy thereof in their lives. Of this
sort he shows they are, who creep into houses, and seduce weak and unstable
women, laden with sins, and transported with diverse lusts and passions, who out
of their curiosity are always affecting something that is new, and accordingly
seek after such Teachers that may satisfy their curiosity; and though they
give themselves up to be disciples to them, and pretend to be ever learning
something of them; yet its impossible for them by such Teachers (who know it
not themselves) ever to attain to the knowledge of the truth, or the right way
of salvation. From Ver. 1, to 8.

The Apostle proceeds in describing these Seducers: He shows, that as Jannes
Their names are not found in the Old Testament. It Is possible the Apostle
learnt them either from some ancient Record of the Jews then extant, or by the
inspiration of the Spirit of God.
and Jambres, the Egyptian-Magicians, resisted Moses, and sought to render his
miracles ineffectual, Exodus 7.11: so these resist the truth, and the
saving-doctrine of the Gospel, and those that teach and maintain it; being men
of corrupt minds, and such as have no right or sound judgment in the matters of
faith, but such as ought to be rejected of all men. But he tells him, they
shall not proceed much further to deceive, for their folly shall be made
manifest, and they shall be discovered to be Impostors, as those
Egyptian-Magicians were. Ver. 8, 9.

As for Timothy, he tells him, Thou have another pattern quite contrary to
theirs. For thou have been present, and have often heard the doctrine I have
taught; thou have seen the way and manner wherein I order my life; thou have
known (...)] A principio usque ad finem adfuisti, and testis es omnium. Vatab.
the scope and aim which I propounded to my self in my Ministry, and my
faithfulness in the discharge of it; thou have seen my enduring many neglects
and affronts, before I would give over my endeavors to reduce impenitent
sinners: thou have seen my charity, and brotherly affection to all Christians,
and my patience in bearing afflictions and persesecutions, as particularly
those that came upon me at Antioch of Pisidia, Act. 13.45, at Iconium. Act.
14.2, at Lystra, Act. 14.19: I say, thou have seen what great persecutions I
have endured, yet out of them all the Lord has delivered me. And therefore be
not thou discouraged when thou meetest with such tribulations. For this I
foretell thee, That all that will live godly according to the rules of Christ,
shall meet with persecution, and must accordingly arm themselves with patience
and expectation of it. But though evil men and seducers will wax worse and
worse, deceiving others, and being themselves deceived; yet continue thou
steadfast in that doctrine thou have learned of me, and whereof thou have been
assured that it is the true doctrine of Christ, being delivered to thee by my
self, who am an Apostle of his, and called immediately by him, and who was
taken up into the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. And thou ought the more firmly
to adhere to this doctrine, because from a child thou have been instructed in
the holy Scriptures of the Old Testament; which if thou do well understand,
they will make thee wise to discern the right way of attaining eternal life,
which is by faith in Christ Jesus the promised Messiah, Joh. 5.39. And all
those Divine Writings both of the Old and New Testament, being given by the
inspiration of God, V. 16. Omnis scriptura], i. e. tota scriptura Intelligitur
totum scripturae systema, cui, quae antecedunt, and sequuntur, praedicata
augusta competunt, non vero singulis vel libris, vel dictis. Glass.

Non id vult Apostolus quod unaquaeque pars Scripturae sit utilis ad omnia
ista; hic enim sensus liquido falsus esset: sed, quod in universa Scriptura hae
quatuor utilitates reperiantur. Estius.


should be diligently read and considered by thee, there being contained in
them that which is profitable to teach the truth, to convince of error, to
correct evil manners, to instruct in righteousness, and to make the man of God,
the Pastor of the Church, perfectly meet and fit for every part of his Office,
and to furnish him with directions for the performing of every good work
required of him. From Ver. 10, to the end.

He now gives Timothy a very solemn charge and exhortation, not knowing come in
the Clouds gloriously attended with all his holy Angels, and when there shall
be a full manifestation of his Kingly Power) to preach the word faithfully, to
be instant with an holy importunity in season and out of season Spartenda est
manus: non potest fieri ut non aliquando succedat mulea tentanti. Sen. Ep. 29.
(that is, at such times and seasons as were proper and appointed for it, yea,
and at some that were not) that he labor to convince evildoers of their wicked
courses, to reduce by reprehension those that are fallen, though not so foully
and scandalously to exhort others to go on that have begun well; and all this
with lenity and gentleness joined with sound instruction. For he tells him,
such times were coming wherein many would not endure sound doctrine; but having
ears itching after novelties, and such things as might please their lusts,
would seek after such Teachers as would gratify their humor, Isa. 30.10. (and
they would find many V. 3. Cumulabunt] Multos reperient tales doctores.
such), and by them they would be turned from the truth, and brought to believe
fables and mere lies. He advises Timothy therefore in such dangerous times, to
be very wachful over himself in all respects, and diligently to watch over
those also whom he was to instruct, to endure afflictions courageously, to do
what belongs to an Evangelist, or a person entrusted by the Apostles of Christ
with the propagating of the Gospel [Eph. 4.11.], to labor to fulfill (...)]
Imple. Grot.
his Ministry, and to perform all the parts of it in such manner, that he may
sufficiently evid^nce and prove that he is a faithful Minister of Christ. As
for himself (he tells him), he was shortly to be offered (...)] immolor, h. e.
mox immolabor, praesens pro paulo post futuro; alludit ad vini vel sanguinis
libationem in sacri ficiis. Frid.

Metonymia adjuncti metaphorica, nam sacrificiis libamina adjungebantur. Vid.
Phil. 2.17. Pisc.


up as a sacrifice to God, his blood was to be shed and poured forth, the time
of his departure out of this world was at hand This the Apostle knew, either by
some special revelation, or by observing the condition and circumstances of his
affairs.
. And he could mention it with joy and comfort, that he had (through grace)
behaved himself faithfully in his Christian warfare; he had run his Christian
race diligently, and was now almost come to the end of it. He had been faithful
to Christ in his Office, and had not fallen off, nor made defection at any time
from the faith which he had taught and professed, and therefore he doubted not
but there was a Crown of Righteousness reserved for him, such as God of his
free grace has promised to give his faithful servants, as a just recompense of
their righteous and holy walking before him. And such a reward, he doubted not
but Christ the righteous Judge would give him, in part at the day of his
dissolution, but more fully at the last Judgment Distinguendum de diverso modo
quo corona haec justitiae datur. Datur enim vel in spe nimirum in hac vita, vel
reipsa: and quidem vel inchoate statim post mortem respectu animae, vel
consummate and perfect respectu animae simul ac corporis in die novissimi
adventus. Fridlib.
. And not only himself, but all other faithful Christians also, may expect the
same, who joyfully look and long for Christ's second coming, that they may then
see him in his glory, who suffered so much for them in this world, and may
receive from him their everlasting reward. From Ver. 1, to 9.

In the Conclusion of his Epistle he desires Timothy to come to him with all
the speed be could. And he should the rather hasten his coming, because Demas,
who did assist him in preaching the Gospel, Philem. v. 24, and Col. 4.14,
through worldliness had now forsaken him, and was gone to Thessalonica. And as
for Crescens, he had sent him to Galatia to preach the Gospel there; and on the
same errand he had sent Titus to Dalmatia, and Tychicas to Ephesus. By which
means he was almost all alone at present, no body but Luke remaining with him,
which made him the more to stand in need of his help and presence. And when he
came, he should bring Mark (Barnabas's Kinsman) with him, who he knew would be
very useful to him there for the preaching and propagating of the Gospel. He
orders him to bring him from Troas a Cloak Vide paupe^tatem tanti Apostoli qui
rem tantillam, tam long relictam, inter damna censuerit. Grot.
that he left there, as also some Books (possibly the Volumes of the Old
Testament, with some Jewish Commentators on them); but especially the
Parchments Per has (...) intelliguntur Schedae pelliceae in quibus Paulus
quaedam scitu digna ad juvandam memoriam annotaverat, unde de iis singulariter
sollicitus, dicit, Et maxim membranas. Gerhard. in loc.

Paulus Bibliothecam librorum Graecorum non habebat; attamen in membranis ad
usum suum excerpserat alia ex Epimenide, alia ex Arato, alia ex Menandro. Grot.


, wherein possibly he had written many things for the help of his memory.

He tells him, That Alexander the Copper-smith (probably that person mentioned
Act. 19.33.) had done him a great deal of wrong at his being there; but God
will one day reward V. 14. Reddat ei Deus tam quae fecit, quam quae faciet. Hoc
non est imprecantio, sed Deo judicium omne permittentis. M.S. and Syrus legit
(...).
him according to his works. He advises him especially to beware of him, and to
avoid him as an Excommunicate person [see 1 Timothy 1.20.], and as one that has
violently and vehemently opposed the truth and sincere preaching of the Gospel.
He tells him, that at his first-Hearing before Nero the Emperor, or his
Officers; all of his acquaintants that were able to have stood him in any
stead, either by their power at Rome, or by their testimony in his defense,
through infirmity and fear of suffering, forsook him. He desires God to pardon
them for it. Yet notwithstanding, God stood by him, and strengthened him, that
his boldness and constancy in defending Christianity in the face of all
dangers, might be a convincing argument, that the preaching of the Gospel Ut ex
mea omnium praesidio orbati constantia and mortis contemptu, omnes
intelligerent and quasi in animis suis convincerentur, praeconium Evangelii non
esse opus humanum, sed divinum. Scult.

Erat non vulgaris Ministerii ejus confirmatio, quod cum totus mundus furiose
in eum insaniret, and humana omnia praesidia ipsum desicerent, invictus tamen
steterat. Calv. in loc.


was not a thing carried on by man's power, but by divine assistance; and he
was so wonderfully preserved, that the preaching of the Gospel might be more
fulfilled by him, and that the doctrine of Christ might be spread into Nero's
Court, and among all those Gentiles of several Nations that frequented Rome.
And for this reason he supposes it was, that God at this time so wonderfully
delivered him from the imminent danger of death, and the cruelty of Nero, as
out of the mouth of the Lion. Yea, he was confident, that God would still
deliver him from doing any thing unworthy of an Apostle and Servant of His, or
that might blemish his holy profession; and would bring him safe at last unto
his heavenly Kingdom. To this only wise and ever blessed God he desires all
honor and glory may for ever be ascribed. Amen.

He desires him to remember him kindly to Prisca and Aquilla, and the Family of
Onesiphorus. As for Erastus and Trophimus, if he desires to know what is become
of them, he tells him, That Erastus stayed at Corinth, and did not come at all
to Rome; but he left Trophimus sick at Miletum Omnino assentior doctissimo
Bezae legenti (...) vid Act. 28.1. In itinere Hierosolymis Paulus Meliten
attigit, non Miletum. Videmus hic obiter Deum qui dona sanationum Apostolis
dederat. aliquas voluisse corporis infirmitates and in ipsis and in ipsorum
amicis manner, ut appareret eos esse homines. Grot.
. He desires him again to make haste to him, and to come to him, if possibly he
could, before Winter. He sends him salutations from several Christians there at
Rome. He shuts up his Epistle with this accustomed seal [see 2 These. 3.17.],
wishing that the grace of Jesus Christ may (as to its effects and sense) reside
in his soul and spirit, to enlighten, sanctify, and comfort him more and more.
And the same he wishes to all the faithful that were with him at Ephesus. From
Ver. 9, to the end.

SECT. XVI.
AND now we can trace this great Apostle Paul no further by any light the
Scripture has left us. Some learned men indeed hold, that (the two years being
ended in which he was detained in Military custody, and taught the Doctrine of
Christ at Rome) he preached the Gospel up and down in Italy; and from thence
went into Spain and the Western parts. And some hold, that he went into Greece
and Asia, where for five or six years he confirmed and established the Churches
he had before planted in those Countries, and then returned to Rome again;
where, on the 29 of June, in the 13 year of Nero, he was beheaded. Chrysostom
in his 26 Hom. on 2 Cor. says, The day of his death was more certainly known
than that of Alexander the Great. Vid. Vsserii Annals. But others think, that
after his writing his second Epistle to Timothy (about which time it seems he
had warning that his departure was at hand, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.), it is impossible
to find out by any Scripture Light, what became of him; and it is no fault to be
ignorant of that which God has not thought fit to have revealed to us. Indeed
he mentions in his Epistle to the Romans, chapter 15.24, his desire and intent to
go and preach in Spain. But it seems he saw cause to change his resolution. For
it appears that when he wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews, he intended very
shortly (if Timothy came to him from Ephesus) to go for Judea, Heb. 13.23; yea,
to go to Philippi [Phil. chapter 2. v. 24.] and to Coloss [Philem. v. 22.].
Possibly the apostasy and wavering he heard of in the Eastern Churches, caused
him to think it more needful to go thither, than to go Westward. He expected
indeed Timothy to come to him again to Rome; but whether they ever met and
traveled together again, or what further became of either of them, we cannot
from any thing the Scripture has left us, certainly determine.

SECT. XVII.
THE Apostle and Evangelist John, the son of Zebedee, and Brother of James, the
Disciple whom the Lord so entirely loved [ Joh 13.23.], wrote, as it is
probable, about this time, his first Epistle (which only is Catholic, the
other two being particular), from Ephesus, not long before the destruction of
Jerusalem, as seems to be intimated chap. 2. v. 18. The occasion of writing it,
seems to be this: 1. He saw that many Heretical Teachers and Seducers were
risen up in that Age, some of whom denied the Deity, others the Humanity of
Christ, or that he was appointed to be the Savior of Mankind: These he calls
Antichrists, as forerunners of the great Antichrist, and arms those to whom he
writes, against their Seductions. 2. He saw that many that professed
Christianity, neither lived piously toward God, nor charitably with their
Brethren; and he thought it needful to reprove these scandalous enormities, and
to strengthen all true believers in the Christian Faith, and in a steadfast
profession thereof; and to press them to holiness of life, and sincere
brotherly love.

The parts of the Epistle are three: The first Epistle John.


1. The Preface or Introduction. 2. The Body of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
1. THE Preface or Introduction; wherein he shows what was the subject matter
he intended principally to treat of in this Epistle, viz. the great Theme,
Argument, and Matter of the Gospel, Jesus Christ. And, 1. He intends to speak
of his Godhead, which he sets forth by these phrases. That which was from the
beginning -- the word of life -- the life -- that eternal life which was with
the Father -- 2. He speaks of his Humanity, which he s^ts forth by these
expressions, Which we have heard, seen, looked upon, and our hands have handled.

He tells them therefore, that that Person Sermo hic est de filio Dei incarnato
quem Apostoli viderunt, audiverunt, and manibus contrectaverunt. (...)] quod
erat, pro qui erat a principio. Neutrum genus potest non solum de re quae non
est persona intelligi, sed etiam de re quae est persona. Vide. c. 5. v. 4.
Christum hic intelligi docent attributa, quia visio, and contrectatio, Christi
personae, non vero Evangelio possunt convenire. Gomar.

Quod fuit ab initio] Si Christus a principio mundi, seu quum mundus inciperet
jam erat, erat igitur ab aeterno, quia tempus cum mundo incepit. (...) autem
nominatur Christus quia est aeterna illa sapientia per quam Deus Pater mundum
condidit, and genus humanum inde a mundi principio allocutus est. Denique vita
nominatur, itemque vita aeterna, quia est author vitae in omnibus creaturis
quocunque illae vitae genere vivant. Pisc.


who was in the beginning, and had a being before the beginning of the world,
whom they (his Apostles) had heard preach in Judea, whom they had seen with
their eyes, and familiarly conversed with, and their hands had touched both
before and after his resurrection; Him they did now declare unto them; yea,
whatever was needful to be known of the Word of life De verbo vitae] Idem sonat
ac si diceret illud ipsum aeternum Dei verbum vivens, ac vivificans, quod
incarnatum ac inter nos versatum est, de eo jam loquor.
, that is, of Christ Jesus, the Eternal Word of the Father, who has life in
himself, and communicates both natural and spiritual life to all that partake
of it. But here some might object, How could you see the Word of life? God is
invisible; no man has seen him at any time. He answers, they might see him:
For that life, that eternal life which was with the Father V^ta quae erat apud
Patrem] h. e In sinu ^atris, ut silius unigenitus, unum cum patre natura, and
gloria, non aliud; diversus vero and alius persona, Joh. 1.1. Hic distinguuntur
duae personae nempe verbum, and Pater apud quem verbum fuit. Non enim unum
idemque apud seiptum fuisse dicitur. Gomar.
from eternity (being his Eternal only begotten Son, and a distinct Person from
him) was in the fullness of time manifested in the flesh; and we his Apostles
saw him in his assumed human nature; and do now testify, publish, and declare
him unto you, that you may have communion with us and other faithful Christians
(and not with false Teachers), and that being in our communion, you may partake
with us of all those spiritual benefits and privileges which Christ has
purchased for us; and you will have no cause to repent of coming into this
sacred communion and fellowship. For we that have sincerely embraced the
Doctrine of the Gospel, have communion with the Father, who in and through
Christ is now our reconciled Father (having adopted us for his Children) and
with his Son Jesus Christ; to whom being by faith united, we are made partakers
of his righteousness, and receive spiritual life and grace from him for the
sanctifying of our natures. I write these things therefore unt^ you, to direct
you into that way wherein you may have abundant matter of joy and comfort [Joh.
15.11.]; so that you will be no losers by following my directions. From Ver. 1,
to 5.

2. He comes now to the Body of the Epistle; wherein he exhorts them to the
practice of holiness. He tells them, that this is the sum of the Gospel
preached by Christ, which they his Apostles heard from him, and now testify
and publish, that God is light, that is, infinitely full of wisdom and purity;
neither is there error, ignorance, falsehood, or the least imaginable touch of
impurity in him, neither can any impurity please him. Therefore whoever
pretends to have communion with him (who is Light and Holiness), and yet walks
in the dark ways of sin and impurity, he is a liar, and deals not uprightly,
but denies in his works what he professes with his mouth. For what communion
can there be between light and darkness? But (says he) If we walk in the light,
that is, in the clear knowledge and light of the Gospel, framing our lives and
conversations according to the pure precepts thereof, and conforming our selves
to God, who is light and perfect purity, and dwells in light glorious and
inaccessible [1 Timothy 6.16.], and whose actions are all holy and pure; then we
shall have fellowship one with another, we with him, and He with us; and being
by faith united unto Christ, his blood cleanses us from the guilt of all our
sins both original and actual. But if we shall say or imagine, that we are so
free from sin, that we need not the blood of Christ, nor his intercession, for
the purging our consciences from guilt, we miserably deceive our selves, and
there is no true judgment or discerning of things in us, but we glory in that
which is a mere lie and falsehood. But if we penitently confess our sins, and by
faith have recourse to the merits and intercession of Christ for the pardon of
them, God is so faithful, that he will forgive us all our sins, according to
his own gracious promise; and he is also so just, that he will not exact the
debt from those for whom his Son has satisfied, but will for his sake forgive
us all our unrighteousness. If we should say therefore, that we have not
sinned, or have not made our selves so guilty and so liable to eternal death,
that we need such an expiation as the death and passion of the Son of God, we
should in effect give God the lie, and deny what he has affirmed in his word,
namely, That all men are sinners, and so need a Savior; and thereby we shall
show, that the truth of God, as it is revealed in his word, is not received nor
believed by us. From Ver. 5, to the end.

Now lest any, from what he before said (of God's readiness to forgive should
encourage themselves to sin freely and boldly; he tells them (giving them from
the abundance of his love and paternal affection, and in respect of his age,
the loving compellation of little children) Vox est blandissime monentis, qua
and Christus ad discipulos suos usus est, Mar. 10. and Joh. 13. and Paulus ad
Galatas cap. 4. Ipse vero Johannes in hac Epistola frequentissime, octier
adminimum.
, that his end and scope in writing these things, was to keep them off from
sin, and to exhort them to use all possible care to avoid it. But if they have
fallen, or shall fall through infirmity, or the violence of temptation, into
any act of sin, then they should not despair, but consider (for their
encouragement) that they have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous (whose perfect righteousness renders him a fit and meet Intercessor
for us, and who requires nothing of the Father in our behalf, but what is
justly due to him upon the account of the merit of his death), and having
offered up himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins on the Cross, his
intercession now in Heaven must needs be of mavelous virtue. Nay, you may
assure your selves, that his Sacrifice was of such infinite value and merit,
that it is not only sufficient for the obtaining pardon for our sins who are
Jews, but for the sins of the Gentiles also, provided they repent and believe
in him. Ver. 1, 2.

2. He comes now to show, That it is not enough for them to profess they know
Christ, except they yield sincere obedience unto him. For this is the
certainest mark and proof that we know Christ effectually, and have communion
with him, If we so love him, that we sincerely endeavor to keep his
Commandments. For he that boasts he knows him, and yet makes no conscience to
observe his commands, neither does his knowledge work in him any endeavor to
conform himself to Him in holiness and purity, that man is a great liar,
neither is there any truth or sincerity in him. But a conscientious endeavor
to observe his word and commandments, is a great and sure argument, that in him
that does so, the love of God is grown to a high pitch, and a great evidence to
himself that he is a true branch in Christ, and a true member of him. And
whosoever professes to be one of his members, ought to imitate him in a holy
life and conversation. From Ver. 3, to 7.

3. He exhorts them to sincere brotherly love. He tells them, it is no new Vos
Israelitae jam olim habuistis hoc praeceptum, Lev. 19.18. Non ergo novum vobis
videri debet, quanquam protensum latius, and provectum sublimius.

V. 7. Quod vos audictis] i. e. Vestri Majores. Grot.


matter which he now enjoined them, but that which they were taught not only in
the Old Testament, but at the first preaching of the Gospel among them [Mat.
5.44. Joh. 15.12.]; and what was so early taught them, may well be called an
old Commandment: I said (says he), it was an old Commandment, and yet in some
respects I may call it a new one, and so it is called by our Savior himself,
Joh. 13.34, because it is pressed in a new manner by Christ, and urged upon a
new ground, and confirmed by his own example and special love, and imprinted in
the hearts of believers by his own Spirit, according to the Promise of the New
Covenant, Jer. 31.33. And there was in Christ a true and sincere love toward
you Sicut, in Christo est vera and sincera dilectio; similiter, sit etiam in
vobis.
; and therefore you ought to look that there be a true and sincere love in you
toward him. And this ought the rather so to be, because the darkness of
ignorance which was formerly in the world, is now past, and the true light of
the Gospel clearly shines among you. He further presses this duty from this
reason, Because he that professes himself to be in the light, and to know the
truth, and yet hates his brother, is in the darkness of ignorance and sin. For
if the eyes of his understanding were clearly enlightened with Gospel Truth, his
affections would be otherwise disposed. But on the contrary, he that truly
loves his brother, thereby eviden eth himself to abide in the light, and in
the truth, and that the true light abides in him. And whilst he thus walks
in the light, he walks inoffensively in a state of grace, and neither
stumbleth himself, neither is there occasion given by him that others should
stumble, or be drawn into any sin, or hardened in it. But he that hates his
brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness; he goes on in sin, swerving
from the right way that leads to salvation, and knows not whither he goes,
nor how near he is to a precipice, and utter ruin, because his mind is darkened
with sin. He now directs his speech to those who were sincere Christians among
them, and walked in the light (and to these, from his paternal affection, he
gives the endearing-compellation of little Children V. 12. Filioli] Nondum
incipit distributio in certas aetates, quae continetur v. seq. sed ista
appellatio cunctas aetates complectitur. Pisc.
), telling them, That he gave them these exhortations to brotherly love,
because God has been so kind to them, as to forgive them all their sins for
Christ's sake; and therefore they ought, upon that account, to be ready to
forgive one another, and to love one another. From Ver. 7, to the 13.

And now, says he, beloved Christians, suffer me to speak unto you as a Father
does to his Children, and distinguishing you according to your several ages, to
address my exhortations and instructions particularly unto you. And first, Let
me speak to you that are more advanced in age, and are, as it were, Fathers
among the rest. It Is agreeable to your age to know ancient things; and seeing
you have attained to a greater measure of knowledge than others, of the Ancient
of days, the Eternal Son of God [Dan. 7.9, 13, 22.], Dat cuique ordini quae
ipsi convenient. Senihus competit notiti^, and congruum est ut Antiqui
cognoscant Antiquum dierum. Estius.
I think fit to exhort you to make a good improvement of it. Let it be an
engagement upon you to love him more ardently, and to imitate him more
carefully. 2. Let me speak to you young men, who are in the flower of your age,
and the vigor of your strength; It Is agreeable to your age to be valiant
Soldiers, and to be ambitious of Victory and Conquest. Now seeing you have been
enabled by God not only to fight valiantly against flesh and blood, but against
the Devil and his temptations, and (through the assistance of grace) have
overcome him, I exhort you to take especial care that he do not at any time
surprise you, and so prevail over you. 3. Let me speak unto you little
Children. The first knowledge young Children use to have, is of their Father.
They know their Fathers before other men, and are more fond of them than of
others: Seeing therefore you know your heavenly Father, I exhort you that you
endeavor to express a very ardent affection to him, and to labor to please
him, and to be obedient to him in all things. Again, I reiterate and reinforce
my exhortation upon you ancient men, to imprint it the deeper upon you: And so
likewise on you young men also, because Christ has endued you with strength
from above (which is far more excellent than your natural strength), and has
put his word into your minds (which is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17.),
whereby you have been enabled to overcome the evil one. Take you heed
especially, lest at any time he prevail over you, and so deprive you of the
glory of your victory. And seeing both old men, and those that are in their
middle-age, are apt to love the world too much; let me exhort you all to take
heed of all inordinate love of it, or of any of the things that are in it. For
such a love of the world, and the true love of God, are inconsistent; because
the one promotes corruption and sin, and the other sanctification and holiness.
And you should consider, that all the things that are in the world (which can
invite us to love them), are reducible to these three heads: 1. The lust of the
flesh, that is, all corporeal delights and pleasures. 2. The lust of the eye,
that is, all visible possessions and riches, and outward estate. 3. The pride
of life; that is, all honors, pomp, high places, and advancements. And an
inordinate affecting or lusting after these things, comes from the corruption
that prevails in the world, and in worldly men; and not from the Father, unto
whose holiness they are no way agreeable. And besides this, they should
consider, that the World, and the things therein (that are so lusted after So
lust is to be taken here; as hope is put for the thing hoped for, To. 8.24. and
faith for the thing believed, Jude 3.
), are but transitory and fading things, and soon pass away; neither can they
give to those that most love them, any durable feli^ity. But on the contrary,
they that set themselves to do the will of God, and to mortify those
inordinate lusts and affections to the things of the world, shall obtain
eternal life Sub tam magna spe nulli labores duri videri debent. Grot.
. Lastly, He addresses himself again to those whom he before called little
children: He intimates to them, that though covetousness and the love of the
world is not usually found in that age, as it is in the two former; yet the
weakness of their understandings, and want of sound judgment and discerning,
does commonly expose them to a danger of another kind, and that is, to be
seduced and drawn away by erroneous Teachers. And though there were many
Seducers in former ages, yet he tells them, that now they will be more rife
than ever. For this is the last time; The destruction of the City, and Temple,
and Polity of the Jews was now at hand. Ye have heard (says he) of a great and
notorious Antichrist (the Prince of all Seducers) that shall come and appear in
the world [see 2 These. 2.3.]; I tell you, He is not yet come; but there are
sundry forerunners of him come, such as will endeavor to draw men off from
believing in Christ the true Messiah, and will persuade them to believe lies.
And our Savior himself foretold [Mat. 24.11, 24.], that such Seducers as
these would come, and advertised us of the time of their coming; and according
to his prediction, there are now many Antichrists Quod Johannes de Antichristis
jam exortis ait, illud verissimum esse ex Cerenithi, Ebionis, Simoniis Magi,
Basilidis and Nicolaitarum historia constat. Gom.
come into the world, viz. false prophets, who corrupt the Christian Doctrine;
and being acted by such a Spirit of error as the grand Antichrist will be acted
by, they may well partake of his name; and by their swarming now, you may know
that the last time is come. And these Antichrists and false Teachers, he shows,
once held external communion with Orthod^x and faithful Christians; but they
departed from their communion, and thereby declared, that they never were sound
members of that Body. If they had been of the same Faith, and had really
believed the same truth, they would not have departed from them. But as for
them, he tells them, he need not write much about this matter; for they had an
Unction from the Holy One; that is, they were furnished with the gifts and
graces of the illuminating and sanctifying Spirit of Christ, teaching them all
things nec^ssary Ver. 20. (...)] scil. quae ad vitandos tales impostores sunt
necessaria. Restringi debet vocum universalitas ex subjecta materia. Grot.
for their salvation, and preservation from Seducers. Therefore his writing to
them now, was not because he apprehended they were ignorant of the truth; but
seeing they knew the truth, he was willing to confirm them in it; and he
doubted not, but by their knowing the truth, they would be able to discern a
lie, or a false doctrine from it, seeing it does in no wise agree with it. A
lie or falsehood, he tells them, has nothing of the nature of truth in it;
therefore they will not easily receive the one for the other. Now he would have
them consider, what Lie or Falsehood can be equal to the denying of the great
Truths of the Gospel? And who is a greater liar and seducer, than he that
denies Jesus to be the promised Messiah? Whoever does so, he tells them, is an
Antichrist, and denies in effect both the Father and the Son. He denies the Son
directly; he denies the Father by consequence, who testified See chap. 5.9, 10.
of Christ by his voice from Heaven, and by Miracles; which testimony is not
true, if Jesus be not the Christ. Therefore whosoever denies the Son to be the
Messiah, or denies his Person, Natures, Offices, or Merits, he is an
Antichrist Non quod eximius ille Antichristus primus id facturus sit, sed quod
eximie and impudenter supra caeteros, ac majore cum effectu.
, and denies as well the testimony of the Father, as the Messias-ship of the
Son. And whosoever denies the Son, cannot have the Father for his God, or
reconciled Father, seeing there is no reconciliation for fallen man with God,
but in and through Christ. He advises them therefore, that whatever their
temptations should be, they should not forsake the Doctrine which from the
beginning of their Christianity they had received. To which if they firmly
adhered, they should continue in the favor and love, and in the communion of
God the Father, and of Christ Jesus his Son. And whatsoever hazzards they
should run by so doing, they might comfort themselves with this, That He has
promised eternal life to all that continue in the faith and obedience of his
doctrine. These things he tells them he had written to them, to arm them
against the Seducers that were now among them. But he need not give them any
other armature than what they had already. For the anointing which they had
received from Christ ( viz. the illumination of his Spirit) abiding in them,
would teach them all things ne^essary to salvation. And they need not that any
man should teach them any new doctrine, any new fundamental principles of
Faith, as yet strange and unknown to them. They need no new Gospel or Doctrine
for kind and substance, though they need more teaching in order to their growth
and further improvement in real Piety and Christianity. Seeing therefore the
Anointing which they had received from the Spirit of Christ, instructed them
concerning all things necessary to salvation, and seeing what it taught and
suggested, was the very truth, and no lie; he was confident they would abide in
Christ, and the profession of his truth. And now returning to speak to them all
in general, he exhorts them to look to it, that they do abide in the faith of
Christ, in his communion and doctrine, and thereby they shall have confidence
to look him in the face, and not be ashamed to present themselves before him at
the great and glorious day when he shall come to judge the world. From Ver. 13,
to 29.

4. He exhorts them to the sincere practice of righteousness, and to abandon
all manner of sin and unrighteousness. For if they know and be sensible (as
sure they must needs be), that God Transit de Christo ad Deum; nec id mirum,
cum utriusque mentio praecesserit. Grot.
is a God infinitely righteous and holy, they may well know also, that
whosoever is born of him, and has received a new and divine life from him,
does endeavor to live righteously, and thereby declares himself to be a child
of his, and like unto him; and, as a son, may expect protection, and an
inheritance from him. V. 29.

true believers and righteous persons should both be, and also be accounted and
acknowledged for the children of God, and should have the privileges belonging
to that state. It Is true, the world does not acknowledge them for such, but
mocks and jeers at them, because they pretend to it: And this is not much to be
marvelled at; for, not knowing the Father, of whose Spirit they are spiritually
and supernaturally begotten; and being ignorant of the holy nature of God, no
wonder they acknowledge not those for his children who resemble him in holiness.
But, says he, let the world judge what it will, the state and condition of us*
that are true believers, is the state and condition of the children of God. We
have at present the right of children, but what we shall be hereafter, and what
shall be the glory of that inheritance that shall be made over to us, is not
fully manifested: but this we know, that when that blessed time shall arrive
when Christ shall come to judge the world, we shall then be made like unto him
in holiness, in glory, and bliss (but with a different degree from Him our
Head), and he will enable us to see him in his transcendent gl^ry, which will
be a beatifying-vision to us, Mat. 5.8. And whosoever has a well-grounded hope
in him of this glory, will (through the assistance of grace) endeavor to
purify himself from all pollution both of flesh and spirit, setting Christ
before him as his Pattern and Copy; and laboring to imitate him, though he
cannot reach or arise to his perfect purity. However this he knows, that all
sin is contrary to this purity. And whosoever follows not after righteousness,
but gaveth himself up to the commission of sin, transgresses Peccatum, est
actus quivis, quem scias and sentias pugnare cum aliqua lege Dei, i. e. cum
aliqua patefactione divinae voluntatis. Grot.
the Law of God, and so is disloyal and rebellious against the King of Heaven,
and has no reason to expect from him that glory and bliss before spoken of.
Yea, such a person is not only a transgressor of the law of God, but he sets
himself against Christ also, and vilifies his redemption. For Christ (in whom
there was no sin) was manifest in the flesh to take away sin; the guilt of it
by his blood, the power of it by his Spirit. Therefore whosoever abides in
him, being united to him by a lively faith, gives not up himself to a trade of
sin In his and consimilibus sententiis (...) and (...), est operam dare
peccato, sceleratum esse. Sceleratus est non tantum qui scelus aliquod
committit, sed qui sceleribus operam dat ac in iis patrandis assiduus est. Hoc
regeneratis non contingit; quia Deus etsi patiatur eos peccata quaedam gravia
patrare, non patitur tamen eos in eo luto diu volutari, ac veluti cum voluptate
se totos immergere. Capel.
, nor lives in a course of known sin Non peccat] Accipe non de eventu, sed de
studio ac conatu non-peccandi. Illyr.
, deliberately and indulgently, walking after the flesh [Rom. 8.1.], and being
a servant of sin, Romans 6.17. Whosoever does so, whatever he pretends, has no
right knowledge V. 6. Quisquis peccat, non vidit eum neque novit] h.e. (ut Joh.
17.3. per synecdochen generis pro specie) fidem vivam non habet, ideoque in
Christo non manet. Gom.
of Christ, nor any true faith in him. For, says he, let no man deceive you,
and make you believe that a true faith may consist with an unholy and impure
life. He that leads a godly and righteous life, and diligently exercises
himself in all good works, does show plainly, and manifest, that he is a
righteous man Non dicit, quod exercendo justitiam justi fiamus; sed, quod
exercitium justitiae sit fructus justificati cordis, and signum evidentissimum.
Illyr.
, justified by faith in Christ's blood, and sanctified by his Spirit, and one
that is in some measure like unto Christ himself in righteousness and holiness
(though not equal to him), having in him a sincere love of righteousness. But
on the contrary, he that commits sin, that is, gives himself up to a course
of sin, is a child of the Devil, and resembles him, who sinned at the
beginning, soon after the Creation, and from that time has ever since been a
Tempter, inspiring by his suggestions and temptations an inclination to sin,
into the minds and souls of men. But the Son of Man was not only perfectly free
from sin himself, but came into the world to destroy the works of the Devil,
viz. to remove the guilt of sin to believers, and to free them from the
punishment of it, by his merits and intercession, and to regenerate and
sanctify their natures by his Spirit, and so to destroy the dominion and power
of sin in them. Therefore they that give themselves up to a course of sin,
belong not to Christ, but to the Devil. For he that is born of God, and
regenerated by his Spirit, does not indulge himself in a course of sin, as
carnal unregenerate persons do, because he has a seed of grace repugnant
thereunto, remaining in him; and he cannot deliberately and freely allow
himself in sin, because by the grace of regeneration the dominion of sin is
broken in him. The new nature wrought in him by the word of God See 1 Pet. 1.23.
, accompanied with his Spirit, is a principle that abhors sin, and fights
against it. Therefore a course of sin, or delighting in sin, is unreconcilable
with this state. In the conclusion of this discourse, he tells them, that by
these two marks the children of God may be manifestly distinguished from the
children of the Devil: They that live righteously, and holily, and sincerely
love their brethren, are the children of God; and they that do not, are of the
Devil. From Ver. 1, to 11.

5. He comes now to enforce his former exhortation ^o brotherly love, and
uses many pathetical arguments to provoke them to it. 1. He tells them, This
precept concerning brotherly love, was given them by C^^^^^ and his Apostles,
from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel. 2. The (...) Disciples of
Christ must not be like wicked Cain, who was a child of the Devil, and a
murderer of his brother. And what mov d him to do this horrid wi^k^dness, but
mere envy and ill will, because he saw that God gave to Abel (who lived
piously) a testimony that he was accepted with him, whilst his own sacrifice
displeased him, because he lived wickedly: see Heb. 11.4. Therefore those that
are real, pious Christians, need not wonder if the world hate them, seeing it
was so from the beginning; but ought so much the rather to love one another,
because the world hates them. 3. Brotherly love is a good evidence Non
indicatur meritum dilectionis, sed effectum fidei; per quam solam ex morte in
vitam transimus, Pise.

Particula (...), hic non est causalis, sed ratiocinativa. Fridlib.


we are regenerate, and passed from death to life. He that loves not his
brother, abides in a state of sin and wrath, and is liable to eternal death.
He that hates Qui odit fratrem suum] Occidendi animo scilicet, Talis homicida
est apud Deum, qui animum spectat. Drusius.

Quod de adulterio dixit Christus, Mat. 5.28, pari jure ad alia crimina
aptandum est. Grot.


his brother in his heart, and has a desire to destroy him if he durst, is, in
the sight of God, a murderer of him. And he that is such, has no spiritual
life (which is the beginning of the eternal) abiding in him, nor any right to
eternal life and happiness, but is in a state obnoxious to eternal misery. 4.
He presses brotherly love from Christ's own example, who being God as well as
Man, yet so loved us, that he laid down his life to redeem us. And we should,
in imitation of him, be willing, in some cases, to hazard our lives for the
brethren [see Romans 16.3, 4. Phil. 2.17.], yea, to be ready to lay them down Hoc
praeceptum egregie implevere Apostoli and eorum Adjutores, and post eos tot
Confessores and Martyrs. Grot.
, if the glory of God, the edification of the Church, and the eternal salvation
of our brethren, do require it. And if we ought to be ready to do thus much (in
some cases) for them, surely we ought to do that which is much less, viz. to
communicate to them of our worldly goods in their necessity, if we be able; and
he that does not so, how can he think there is any thing of that love Quomodo
esset in eo dilectio quam Deus exigit? Grot.
in him, which God requires. He tells them, real Christians should love in deed
and truth, and not in word only. 5. Hereby they will evidence themselves to be
true and sincere Christians, who rightly understand, believe, and live
according to the truth of the Gospel; and their sincere brotherly love, will
give their hearts and consciences great assurance, and peace, and tranquillity
before God. And this is a great matter. For, says he, if our own hearts and
consciences witness against us, and condemn us, that we do not sincerely love
God and our Neighbor; God, who knows all things, and is greater and mightier
to condemn than our consciences, will much more condemn us. But if our
consciences (though they may accuse us of imperfection) yet do not condemn us
of hypocrisy, or want of charity, then we have boldness and confidence toward
God, that he will own us for his children, and will hear our prayers, and that
we shall obtain those good things of him which we ask according to his will,
because we are such as do endeavor (through his grace) to obey and observe his
commandments, and to do the things pleasing in his sight. And this is his great
commandment, that we believe in his Son V. 23. Vt credamus nomini] i. e. filio
ejus. Metonym. adjuncti. Pisc.
, and that we testify the truth of our faith, by loving one another, according
as he enjoined us when he was here upon the earth. He therefore that sincerely
obeys these commands, has such an intimate union with Christ, that he abides
in Him as his Member, and Christ abides in him by the gracious operations of
his holy Spirit. And the abiding of the Spirit of Christ in him by his gracious
operations and assistance, is a plain and evident argument that Christ dwells
in him. From Ver. 11, to the end.

6. Having mentioned the abiding of the Spirit of Christ in the hearts of
Teacher Spiritui] i. e. Doctori revelationem Spiritus jactanti. 1 Timothy 4.1.
Pisc.
that pretends to be inspired, nor his Doctrines; but to examine and try them,
whether they be of God, and such as agree with his Word. And he tells them,
they had need so to do, for many false Prophets and Teachers were now gone out
into the world. He directs them therefore how to try the spirits: By this they
might know a Teacher that was acted and inspired by the Spirit of God, from one
that was not; Whatsoever spirit or Teacher does own and acknowledge the Person
of Christ, according to his Divine Nature, wherein he did exist from eternity;
and according to his Human Nature, which he truly assumed in his incarnation;
and does also seriously own him in all his Offices and attributes to him alone
the whole glory of a perfect Savior, this spirit is of God. And whosoever does
not confess Christ after this manner, but derogates from his Person or Nature,
or Offices or Merit, or the virtue and efficacy of his Sacrifice, that spirit
is not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist; which spirit, he tells them, is
now abroad in the world, although it has not yet so for prevailed, as to erect
a Throne to it self openly in the Church. But as for them, he tells them, they
being truly regenerated by the Spirit of God, and thereby enlightened with the
knowledge of the true doctrine of the Gospel, need not fear being seduced by
these false Teachers. For they had by their stedfastness in the true doctrine,
already overcome the machinations and persuasions of such Impostors and
Deceivers as have been among them, and have not been prevailed upon by them, as
others have been. For Christ, who by his Spirit and Doctrine dwells in them, is
greater and more powerful than the Devil (the Spirit of Error), who rules and
domineers in worldly and unregenerate men, such as Seducers are. They commonly
are worldly and sensual men, and their doctrine Ex mundano affectu mundana
loquuntur. Zeger.
is agreeable to the corrupt humor and inclination of worldly-minded men, and
therefore no wonder that the world readily bears them. But he tells them,
Himself and the other Apostles were ^aught of God; they had their doctrine and
call from him, and taught his truth; and those that truly know God as he has
revealed himself in his word, will hear them, and receive their doctrine; but
those that are not taught of God, will not. And hereby me know (says he) in
whom is the Spirit of Truth (namely, in such as hear us, and embrace our
doctrine); and in whom is the Spirit of Error, namely, in those that refuse our
Doctrine. So that by the Doctrine and Writings of the Apostles (as also of the
Prophets and Evangelists), the truth or falsehood of doctrines must be judged.
From Ver. 1, to 7.

7. He resumes his exhortation to brotherly love, and urges it again with more
arguments. 1. This is not only strictly commanded us by God, but exemplified to
us by himself, and it is a Grace highly pleasing in his sight. 2. It Is a
certain sign we are regenerate by his Spirit, if there be in us a true love to
God and our Neighbor. 3. It Is an evidence we have a right knowledge of God,
both of his Nature and Will, and what he requires. He that has not this grace
in him, has no true knowledge of God, whatever he pretends. For God is love it
self Tale illud, Tu quantus-quantus, nil nisi sapientia es.
, and full of loving kindness and tender compassion to the children of men. And
in this he highly manifested it toward us (...) pro (...), Piscator.
, in sending his Son into the world, that we, and all those that believe in
him, might obtain eternal life through him. And in this appeared the height of
Gods love to us, not that we first loved him, and so by our loving him, moved
him to love us (for we were by nature enemies to him); but he first loved us,
even when there was nothing in us to deserve his love, and freely sent his Son
to offer up himself a propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins, and to deliver us
from the punishment due to them. And if God so loved us, we ought to imitate
his love in loving one another. 4. He shows, no man has seen God at any time,
or can see him with his bodily eyes; he is not so to be seen or conversed with.
But if we find this grace of love in our hearts, it is certain then that God
abides in us by his Spirit; and our love to our Brethren is a ^ertain evidence
that love to God is perfectly formed in us, and brings forth effects agreeable
to its nature; or it is a sign that our love to him is perfected Perfection here
is not opposed to imperfection, but hypocrisy. Our love is said to be
perfected, when it is demonstrated to be in some height. As God's Power is said
to be perfected in man's weakness, because then it is more remarkably manifested.

Perfectam intellige, non omnibus numeris absolutam, in qua nihil prorsus
possit desiderari (talis enim in hac vita ^e in sanctissimos quidem cadit), sed
veram atque sinceram, and quae ad perfectionem omni studio atque conatu tendit.
Pisc.


, that is, manifests it self to be sincere [see chap. 2.5.], and to have all
its essential and needful parts, though it be not perfect in all degrees. And
hereby (says he) we know that we remain and abide in the savor, and love, and
protection of God, and that He dwells in us, because he has given us of the
gifts and graces of his holy Spirit, and particularly that of love. But (says
he) though we that are Apostles have not seen God with our bodily eyes, yet
this we have seen, and do testify to all men, That God the Father sent his Son
to be the Savior of the world, that is, not of the Jews only, but of the
Gentiles also. Whoever therefore by a true and lively faith relying on Christ
for eternal life, and witnessing his faith by his love and other good fruits
For otherwise the Devils confessed this truth, Mat. 8.29.
, shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, it is certain that God dwells in
him by his Spirit, and that he remains in the love and favor of God. And we
Apostles having certainly known and firmly believed the great love that God
has manifested toward us, do with all assurance give our testimony thereof to
the world. Nay we testify, that God is love See V. 8. Deus sua essentia est
ipsissima beneficentia, misericordia and Charitas, etiam sons, and origo
charitatis.
. He that abides in the sincere exercises of love to God and his Neighbor,
abides and continues in the love and favor of God, and God dwells in him
by the graces and comforts of his holy Spirit. And in this is our love known
and manifested to be sincere, and to have attained to some excellent degree and
height So Perfection is sometimes taken, viz. Comparatively, not for absolute
perfection. See Phil. 3.15.
(so that we may think of appearing at the day of judgment with boldness), if,
as Christ was in the world full of love, and holiness, and purity, so we labor
to be also, imitating his holy example. And by this love, as by a certain sign,
we may be persuaded, that we are of the number of those who shall escape
condemnation at the day of judgment. For there is no ground for them to fear
condemnation (which fear is joined with torment) who truly believe in Christ,
and testify their faith by their sincere love to God and their Neighbor. For
such a perfect or sincere love Qui Deum and Proximum vere diligit, is non
metuit sibi a judicio Dei, quia novit se esse praeditum Spiritu Dei, ac proinde
esse filium Dei per fidem in Christum.

Perfect or sincere love does not cast out a child-like reverential fear of
offending God, but that whereby we question the favor of God.


casts out this tormenting-fear, this fear of wrath and Hell. But he that is
under those apprehensions and fears, cannot love God with such a perfect and
sincere love as others do, whose hearts are delivered from those fears. And
truly (says he) we that believe in Christ, have reason to love V. 19. (...),
Diligamus] Let us love him. So the Greek text will bear.
God with our highest and best affections, for he loved us first, when we were
enemies and sinners, and had deserved nothing but hatred and vengeance from
him. But possibly every body will say, I love God. He answers, That whosoever
says, He loves God, and yet hates his brother, is plainly a liar. For it is
impossible truly to love God, and not to do what God commands; and one thing
which he strictly commands, is, that we love our Brother. And if we do not
exercise love to our brethren with whom we daily converse, and whose persons,
state, and condition, we see and know; what reason is there to imagine we do
sincerely love God, when of our love to him, and the sincerity of it, we were
never able to make this trial, because we never saw him, nor had opportunity
offered us of showing any real acts of love to him, otherwise than by obeying
his commands, whereof this is one, That if we love him, we should testify it
by loving our brother also. From Ver. 7, to the end.

He proceeds to show, that the love of God, and of the children of God, etc.)
and not from such a charity as manifests and expresses it self by ende^vouring
to keep God's commandments. For this is the love that God requires of us, and
hereby we shall evidence that we do indeed love him, if we faithfully endeavor
to keep his Commandments. And his Commandments to the Regenerate are not
grievous, because of the gracious assistance afforded to them by the Spirit of
God. Love, and hope of reward, and the assistance of the Spirit, will make
things that are difficult to flesh and blood, easy and delightful. And he that
is born of God, abides constant in his Christian profession, notwithstanding
all worldly allurements, temptations, or oppositions to the contrary. And that
which enables him thus to overcome the world (which is so apt to draw away the
heart from God), is not any power of nature, but faith in Christ, from whom he
receives strength to do it. So that faith Fidem per Metonym. appellat
victoriam, h. e. Causam victoriae, quod ea Christum ejusque justitiam
apprehendat, and per charitatem sit efficax, Gal. 5.6. Gom.
is the instrumental Cause of this victory, and Christ (in whom he believes) is
the Principal. And if they enquire what faith this is which is so victorious:
He tells them, it is a lively and effectual faith, resting on Jesus Christ as
the eternal Son of God. From Ver. 1, to 6.

He comes now to prove, That Jesus is the Christ, that he is truly God and Man,
and the true Messiah that was to come into the world to be the Savior of
mankind. This he proves by many arguments: 1. Because Christ is the substance
of the ancient types, and by him was really fulfilled what was represented by
the legal and ceremonial washings by water, and by the blood of the Expiatory
Sacrifices. He came by his Spirit, as by water, to sanctify those that believe
in him, and by his blood to make a full atonement for their sins. An admirable
symbol of both which, was the flowing of water and blood out of his side on the
Cross. 2. He shows, the Spirit bears witness to this in the Consciences of
the Regenerate; and this testimony being the testimony of the Spirit of God, is
authentic, and fit to be believed: For he is the Spirit of truth V. 6. (...),
i. e. (...), quomodo (...) supra, cap. 4. v. 8.
, and cannot possibly bear witness to a lie. 3. There are three in Heaven Tres
sunt in coelo qui testi ficantur] Non hoc dicitur, Tres illos testari in coelo
seu apud coelites, sed significatur, esse Testes coelestes, qui quidem
testificati sunt in terra apud homines. Pisc.
that bear record or witness to this, That Jesus is the Christ, viz. the three
persons in the holy Trinity, who (being one in Essence) consent in bearing
witness hereunto: 1. The Father at the Baptism of Christ [Mat. 3.17.], and his
transfiguration [Mat. 17.], with an audible voice pronounced, that he was his
beloved Son in whom he was well pleased. 2. The Word See Joh. 5.24, 36, 37. and
chapter 10.30, 33, 36, 38.
bears record of himself, affirming it often, plainly and directly, and making
it manifest by his doctrine and miracles, that he came from the Father, and
faithful^y de^lared his couns^l conc^rning the true and only way wherein he
would s^ve sinners, Joh. 5.^6. and chapter 6.40. 3. The Spirit bears witness to
this, partly by his d scending on Christ at his Baptism in the shape of a Dove,
and partly by desc^nding on his Apostles and Disciples on the day of Pentecost
[ Act. 2. see also Heb. 2.4. Joh. 15.26.]. And as there are three in Heaven
that b^^r t^stimony to this* so there are three on earth that lik^wis^ testify
the same. The Spirit, the Wa^er, and the Blood Aliqui per Spiritum per Metonym.
Evangelium intelligunt ut 2 Cor. 3.6. per aquam and sanguinem duo ordinaria
N.T. sacrament^, Baptismum a mate^ia, and coenam Domini a re significata. Quia
ut Evangelium testatur Jesum esse filium D^i, Joh. 20.31, sic etiam Sacramenta
tanquam Evangelii sigilla divina idem in terris nobis ^^rpetuo testantur. Sed
salvo aliorum judicio videtur Spiritus distinct hic designare donum Spiritus
sancti quo per Evangelium exterius nob^s testimonium perhibetur de Jesu Christo
silio Dei, and int^erius in mente nostr^ per donationem fidei; de qua re 1 ^oh.
5.^. Deinde aqua videtur baptismum nostrum designare, quo b^^tizamur in nomen
Patris, ^ilii, and ^piritus Sancti Daenique sanguis videtur sig^^ficare
A^ostolorum, and fidelium pro Christo caedem; unde Martyrs h e Testes
dicuntur, Apoc. 2.13. Gomar. See also the Notes upon 1 Cor. 1.6.
: 1. The Spirit in the preaching of the G^sp^l, testi^i^s* that Christ is the
Son of God, and persuades the hearts of men to believe in him [see 1 John,
5.10.]. 2. The Water* or Sa ram^nt of Baptism, testifies this also; for we are
baptiz^d in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghos^. 3. The Blood, or the
Martyrdom of some of the Apostles, and other Conf^ss^rs of Christ, s^aled this
truth. And so these three lik^wise agree in this testimony, That Jesus is the
Son of God, and the Savior of the world. Now, if for the believing of any
thing, it be ordinarily thought suff cient to have the testimony of two or
three creditable men [Deut. 17.6.], surely God's testimony from Heaven is much
more worthy of belief. And this testimony now produc^d, That Christ is the Son
of God, is evidently the testimony of God. He therefore that truly believes on
Christ as the Son of God, and the true M^ssias, need not fear any thing, having
the testimony of the Father without him, and the inward testimony of his Spirit
within him, to secure him. And he that after all this, when God has so plainly
testified of his Son, that he is the tr^e M^ssias, does still refuse to believe
it, and consequently to have recourse to him f r life and salvation, he does in
effect accuse God of a lie, b^c^use he r^j^cts his testimony as if it were not
true. And the sum of God's testimony concerning his Son, is this, That he has
given a right to eternal life to all th^se who truly believe in him, seeing he
has by his Merits procured it for them V 11. Et haec vita in filio ejus est] h
e. Per filium suum est (...) pro per. Vatab.
, and by his Spirit sanct^fying their natures, he sits them for it. So that he
that has a real interest in the Son of God, and is by a lively faith united
unto him V. 12 Qui habet filium] Habetur is per fidem, quippe per quam habitat
in cordibus nostris, Ephesians. 3.^7. Pisc.
, and has his Spirit dwelling in him, has eternal life b^gun in him; he has
an earnest of it in his soul; he has a right to it, and is as sure of
attaining of it hereafter as if he were already possessed of it. But he that
has not embraced the Son of God by a true and lively faith, has none of
these. He tells them. He had written these things to those among them who were
true believers, that they might know (to their comfort) that they had a right
to eternal life, and that they might put forth stronger acts of faith and
affiance in Christ, and might always persevere therein, and never be tempted to
fall off for any pers^cu ions whatsoever.

H^ further shows them, what a great advantage they have who truly believe in
Christ; for they may have this confidence in their approaches to God by prayer,
That whatsoever they shall ask according to his will (asking it in faith, Jam.
1.6.), they shall obtain it of him. And if this of God's hearing our prayers
(when they are thus qualified) be universally true, then in proportion it must
needs be true of every parti^ular petition which we have or shall put up to
him. We may be confident we shall obtain V. 15. (...) pro (...). praesens pro
fut. Deus statim exaudit, sed non statim dat
th^se petitions in his time, and in that manner and way that he s^es best for
us. H^ instances in one particular; If a man see his fellow-Christian sin a sin
which is not unto death, that is, which does not certainly bring damnation
(though it deserves it) as the sin against the Holy Ghost does, but whereof
remission may be obtained; and he pray to God for him (that God would please to
give him repentance), he shall be heard in the thing he desires, and God will
please (upon his repentance and faith in his Son to give him eternal life. But
he tells them, There is a sin which certainly brings eternal death and
damnation along with it, and that is blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, when any
one denies the truth of the Christian Doctrine, concerning which he has been
enlightened and convin^ed by the Holy Ghost, and maliciously blasphemeth and
persecuteth the same, Mat. 12.31. For such sinners, he would not that they
should pray, seeing God never intends to forgive them, but leaves them to a
final impeniten^y and hardn^ss of heart, by reason that they reject the only
means of salvation, which is the Sacrifice of his Son. And though all
unrighteousness and transgression of the Law, be sin, and s^ d^s^rves death;
yet eternal death and damnation does not follow upon all sin, because all kind
of sin is pardonable except this, to them that truly r^pent and believe in
Christ. But as for this sin unto death, he tells them, that he that is born of
God does not fall into it, nor so sin, that sin has dominion over him, but he
keeps himself (through the assistance of grace) that the Devil (who seeks
to bring him to this) shall not be able to wound him with so deadly a stroke.
Non tangis eum] h e. Non potest illum inducere in istam blasphemiam atque ita
lethaliter tangere. Pisc.

Non tangit eum tactu qualit^tivo, says Cajetan, so as to leave an impression
of his own devilish spirit upon him.


And as for us (says he) who believe in Christ, we know we are truly
regenerate, and born of God; but the generality of the world disowning Christ,
lies in sin and wickedness, and under the power of the Devil. And we are
assured, that the Son of God is come into the world, and has savingly
enlightened us to know the true and living God, the Father of our Lord Jesus,
whilst he suffers a great part of the world to continue in their natural
blindness, worshipping false Gods, and serving stocks and stones. And further,
we have ground to believe, that we are in the favor and love of this only true
God, being his adopted children, V. 20. (...)* hic, valet per Grot
having obtained this great mercy in and by his Son Jesus Christ, who is the
very true God, and the Author, Purchaser, and giver of eternal life to all that
truly believe in him. From Ver. 6, to 21.

He concludes his whole Epistle, giving them this s^rious caution and advice,
That seeing the Church was environed on all sides with the Idolatry and
Superstition of the Gentiles that owned not Christ, and some that had taken on
them the name of Christi^ns, did many times join with them in their Heathenish
Worships, and seduced others also to join with them therein; therefore they
should take heed to themselves, and keep themselves from all Idolatry,
Superstition, Image Worship, sacrificing to Idols, frequenting Idol-feasts,
etc. these things being inconsistent with the worship of the true God, and real
Christianity. Ver. 21.

SECT. XVIII.
THE Second Epistle of John was written to an eminent Religious Matron This is
the only Epistle in the Scripture directed to a Woman.
, and one (as it seems) of great Estate, and a great Reliever and Supporter of
the Members of the Church in her days.

The Second Epistle of John.
The Parts are,

1. The Preface. 2. The Contents of the Epistle. 3. The Conclusion.
IN the Preface he styles himself the Elder, in respect of his great age and
office in the Church. He addresses his Epistle to an eminent Gentlewoman (whom,
for those eminent graces and virtues that shined in her, be judges elect of
God); and to her children, who had been religiously educated by her, all whom
he professes sincerely to love, as did all others also thereabout, who had been
brought to a saving-knowledg of the Gospel, and had effectually entertained it.
And the ground of his sincere and cordial love to them, he shows was this, That
they had embraced the same Gospel Truth with himself, and other faithful
Christians; and he was confident they would always abide and remain in the
sincere belief and profession thereof. To this Lady and her children he
heartily wishes an increase of grace, and an abundance of mercy and peace from
God the Father, the Fountain of all blessings, and from Jesus Christ his Son,
the Conduit-pipe by which they are conveyed; and particularly, that they may
continue constant in the profession of the Truth, and in the exercise of Love
to one another. From Ver. 1, to 4.

2. He comes to the Contents of the Epistle; and in the first place he tells
her, it was matter of great joy to him, that he had found of her children that
had not only taken on them a profession of the truth, but walked in it, so that
their conversation was framed according to the commandment which they had
received from the Father, by the Son [1 John 15.15.]. And this is his command,
That we believe in his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, 1 John 3.23. He
tells her, the main thing he had to request of her was, That with the
profession of the Gospel she would constantly join the practice of Christian
charity, that so they may all live in unity, peace, and concord. Which was no
new 'Twas an old Commandment ratione substantiae, Lev. 19.18. New, ratione
circumstantiae. New, because purged from the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees,
and (as it were) made new by Christ, because by him further extended, and
carried up to a higher pitch. 2. Because pressed by a new example, even his
own, As I have loved you, etc. Joh. 18.34 3. New, because it was never to wax
old, but to be always fresh in memory and practice. 4. New, because
new-delivered, and more plainly and apertly set forth to the world; as a
picture done over with new colors, may be called a new picture.
commandment of his, but that which himself and the other Apostles had in
charge from Christ strictly to enjoin, and to oblige all Christians unto, even
from the beginning of their call to be Apostles and Preachers of the Gospel.
And by this, says he, shall we make it appear that there is a true love of God
in us, if we endeavor to frame our lives according to his commandments ^ow
this, he tel^s them, is the great commandment, wh^^ they ^^^rd fr^^ the
beginning, when the Gosp^l was first preached unto (...) s^^^ld believe in
Christ, and love one another, and should ^on^^^^^^ly pers^^^ in the pr^ctise of
these duties, walking in the truth, and (...) love. He shows he had reason to
press them to constancy herein; for ma^y Im^os^ors were come abroad [see 1 John
4.3.], who will not own or ^^knowl^dg that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
and so subvert the very foundation of Chri^^ianity: And whos^^ver does so, he
tells them is a deceiver, and one of those Antichrists of whom he spoke, 1 John
2.18. Therefore he advises them to look to themselves, that they constantly
persevere i^ the true faith, and in sincere obedience to the Gospel, that so
they may not lose Ne perdamus pro ne perdatis. Enallage personae per (...).
Pisc.

We may lawfully look at the recompense of reward, yet non tantum and
praecipue, but that God also may be gl^rified by our works.

Mercedem intelligit non meritam, quia omnes samus peccatores, and debitores;
and fides nostra ut and charitas imperfecta est, sed mercedem immeritam E^ ex
gratia, propter Christum promissam, nobisque debitam ob gratuitam Dei
promissionem, Gom.


the fruit of the faith they have hitherto prof^ssed, or of the afflictions
which for Christ's sake they have suffered, or of the works of piety and
charity which they have performed; but continuing faithful to the end, may
receive a competent reward and crown. He further declares, That whosoever
transgresses by teaching or receiving a doctrine contrary to the Gospel, or
apost^tizeth or fall^th off from the Orthodox prof^ssion, not abiding in the
doctrine of Christ, has not the Spirit of God in him, nor is in his favor,
nor shall partake of his glory. Wh^reas he that abides steadfastly and
constantly in the belief and profession of the doctrine of Christ, he has the
Spirit of the Father and the Son dwelling in him, and remaining in their savor
and love; see 1 John 2.24. He forbids them therefore all familiarity and
fellowship with such Seducers, and not to entertain them when they come to
their houses under pretense to instruct them, nor so much as courteously to
salute them, or show them any respect; that so they may manifest a dislike and
disapproving of their Errors. For he that does not discountenance them in their
errors (whereby others are seduced to their great p^ril^, does in a sort
encourage them, and so partakes with them in their sins. From Ver. 4, to 12.

In Conclusion, he excuses the shortness of his Epistle, telling this Lady,
That he hoped to come shortly and s^e her. And though he had many things to
write, yet all things were not fit to be written, and besides, a lively Voice
affects more than a Letter. And he hoped at their meeting they should be filled
with mutual joy at their s^eing one another, and c nferring together. And so
with salu^ations from the Children of her gracious Sister (who manifested her
election by her holy conversation) he shuts up his Epistle. Ver. 12, 13.

SECT. XIX.
THE Third Epistle of John ^^e Third Epistle of John.
was directed to his beloved Gaius. We find three persons of this name in the
Scripture; 1. Gaius of Macedonia, Act. 19.29. 2. Gaius of Derbe, Act. 20.4. 3.
Gaius of Corinth, whom Paul (writing from Corinth to the Romans) calls his
Host, and the Host of the whole Church, Romans 16.23. This man being eminent for
his hospitality (especially to the Ministers and Members of the Church of
Corinth), seems to be the person to whom the Apostle now addresses this Epistle.

And in the first place he assures him, That he loved him sincerely, and
accordingly wished unto him, that as he had a healthful soul, endued with the
knowledge of sound doctrine, and with the manifold graces of the Spirit of God;
so he might also have a healthful body, and that all his outward conc^rns might
suc^eed prosperously. He tells him, he had r^ceived a very co^^end^ble
testimony of his sincerity and uprightness, and of the agreeableness of his
conversation to the Gospel which he professed from the Brethren w^ h came from
him, and who had tasted of his liberality; which gave him great ^^se of
rejoicing and blessing God in his behalf For there was nothing did more comfort
or rejoice him, than to hear that h^^ Dis ^les (whom he had begotten to Christ
through the Gos^ l) did walk in the Truth. He tells him, he did as became a
faithful and si^cere p^^s ss^r ki^dly to entertain poor Christians, and
especially those strangers that had (...) lately with him, who coming to
Ephesus, had openly born witness of his charity in the public Assemblies of
the Church. These possibly mig^^ be some faithful Ministers, who came from
beyond Corinth to the Apostle f^r advice, and preached the Gospel by the way,
whom Gaius had very kindly entertained, and the Apostle advises him to do so
again at their return, and to accompany them some part of the way, and to
furnish them with necessaries for their journey as became his Christian
profession, and his great piety toward God. And there was great reason he
should do it, because it was on Christ's errand (that is, to preach his Gospel)
that they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles, to whom they preached,
for their pains. It Is necessary therefore, he tells him, they should be
received by some. And they that shall receive them, shall thereby have the
comfort of having co-operated and contributed their part toward the
propagating the Gospel of Christ. And to this purp^se he had written to the
Church there (whereof Gaius was a member), viz. to give relief and succor to
such faithful servants of Christ; but Diotrephes (a Presbyter Diotrephes hic,
suit aliquis ex Presbyteris ejus Ecclesiae in qua erat Gaius, ex Gentili factus
Christianus. Is vero ex illo erat hominum genere, qui Judaeos quanquam Christum
professos fi legis ritus observabant (quod multi faciebant ad haec usque
tempora) ad suos coetus non admitteban^ Grot.
in that Church), who exalted himself above his brethren, and lorded it over
them, and sought to draw all respect to himself, regarded neither him nor his
Letters, nor acknowledged his Authority. For which contempt (he says) if God
give him an opportunity to come thither, he will use some severity toward this
ambitious As^ector of Preeminence (according to the authority God had given
him), who was not content to slight the Apostle, and prat^ against him with
malicious words, and to reject the Christian Jews himself that came thither;
but he would not permit the Gentile-Christians to receive them to their
communion. And if any among them, being m^ved with charity or respect to the
Apostle or his Letters* have had a mind and inclination to receive them, he
prohibits them; and if they do it, he either rejects them, or threatens to
reject and cast them out of the Church. He advises Gaius therefore, not to be
an imitator of this evil example of Diotrephes, but to exercise kindness to the
Jewish Christians. For he that sincerely endeavors to do good, and to be
merciful, shows himself to be of a Christian temper, and to be born of God; but
he that is malicious, and proud, and uncharitable, has no true saving-knowledg
of God, whatever he pretends. He acknowledges, that Demetrius (a
Gentile-Convert) has a very good report for Piety and Charity, feom all the
faithful that know him. Yea, he says he has done many things that more fully
testify the same of him, than the report of men can do. And the same testimony
the Apostle himself, with others, did give of him also. And thou know (says
he) that I am not wont to affirm things which are not true. In conclusion, he
excuses his writing so short an Epistle to him, seeing he hoped shortly to see
him, and to speak much more to him than now he had written. And so concludes
with his Apostolical Valediction and Salutation.

The End of the Apostolical History.
SECT. XX. Containing a short History of the Destruction of JERUSALEM.
HAVING thus, by the good Providence of God (to whom alone be all the glory and
praise thereof entirely rendered in and through Jesus Christ), finished my
Apostolic History; I thought it requisite, for the clearing of many passages
in this History, as also in the Gospels, to add a short Narration of the
dreadful Destruction of the City and Temple of Jerusalem. And first, I will set
down the prodigious and dreadful Sights See Luc. 21.11.
that preceded the War that brought on this fatal Desolation; and then show
the Occasion of it.

The Prodigies related by Josephus were these: Not long before the War, on the
day of Unleavened bread, about nine of the clock at night, between the Altar
and the Temple there shined such a light, that it might have been thought to be
midday, which continued half an hour. In the same Feast also a Cow that was
led to sacrifice, brought forth a Lamb in the middle of the Court of the
Temple. The East gate of the Temple, which was Brass, and mighty heavy, and
could scarce be shut with twenty men, and at evening was locked up, and barred
with bars of Iron, was seen (about six of the clock at night) to open of its
own accord. On the 21 of May, before Sunset, were seen in the air Iron
Chariots, and Armies in battel-array passing along in the Clouds, and begitting
the City. And in the Feast of Pentecost, the Priests going into the inner
Temple, according to custom, to celebrate the Worship of God, at first they
found the place to move, and heard a noise; and afterward they heard a voice,
which said, Let us depart hence. A Blazing-star in fashion of a Sword, hung
over the City for a year together: See Har. of the Four Evangelists, chap. 5.
p. 168. And thus much of the Prodigies that preceded the War. I come now to
show the Occasion of it.

The Occasion of the War that brought that fatal ruin and destruction upon the
City of Jerusalem, and the Jewish State, was this: Florus being sent by Nero to
succeed Albinus in the Procuratorship of Judea, being a vile and wicked person,
outragiously abused his Authority, and by all manner of Rapines and Insolences
vexed and oppressed the Jews; insomuch, that by a public Crier he gave leave
to Thieves and High way-men to rob and spoil throughout the whole Country,
provided he himself might have part and share of the booty. The Jews not able
to endure these Outrages, some of them abandoned their houses, and fled to
strange Countries. Others of them (being of themselves forward enough to
revolt) were yet greatly provoked thereunto by the daily oppressions of Florus,
who endeavored to drive them to it, that his great and intolerable Oppressions
and Villainies might be lessened by their Revolt. Another thing also that much
disposed them thereunto, was this: There was a Prophecy Suetonius Vesp. c. 4.
Pererebuerat orient toto vetus and constans opinio, esse in fatis, ut eo
tempore Judea profecti rerum potirentur. Id de Imperatore Romano (quantum
eventu postea paruit) praedictum, Judaei ad se trahentes, rebellarunt. Ac
similiter Cornel. Tacitus, Hist. lib. 5.
passed among them [That there should come from Judaea those that should be
Masters of all]. The event afterward showed, that this was a Prediction only
of the Roman Emperor. But the Jews applying it to themselves, revolted; and so
Christ's blood lying upon them, and crying for vengeance, they themselves
hastened that vengeance by their own Madness. The War began in the Twelfth
year of Nero, in the Month of May, who was then in Grecia, and stayed there
till Winter.

King Agrippa (who had under his government Galilee, Tiberias, Tarichea, Julias
beyond Jordan, with the neighbouring-Villages, and Chaleis), in a long Oration
dehorts the Jews from war, but in vain. For a little while after he was gone
from Jerusalem, some of the Seditious possessed themselves, on a sudden, of the
strong Castle Massada, and put to the sword all the Romans they found there. At
Jerusalem also, Eleazer the son of Ananias the High Priest, and Commander of
the Soldiers of the Temple (a bold and factious young man) persuaded the
Priests that they should not offer any more the Sacrifices that were wont to be
offered for Caesar, and the welfare of the Romans. Which rash act, the
Governors of the City (that were peaceable men) plainly saw tended to open
rebellion. Whereupon, not being able to persuade the Seditious from this
course, they sent Messengers to Florus at Caesarea, and to King Agrippa;
desiring them; that they would presently send Forces and suppress the Rebellion
in the beginning. Florus, who desired there should be a Revolt, neglected it.
But King Agrippa sent a thousand Horsemen, who together with the Rulers and
Priests, and the rest of the people (that loved peace), seized upon and held
the upper City against the Seditious, who kept the Temple, and the lower City.
Between these two parties there were continual skirmishes for seven days
together. After some ado the Rebels brake into the upper Quarters, burnt diverse
Palaces and public Houses, and then besieged the Castle Antonia, and after two
days took it, and killed all the Roman Soldiers they found there, and set the
Castle on fire. After this, they lay siege to the King's Palace, which they
took and burnt; and upon the very Sabbath Day put to death the Romans who
(after the Palace was won by assault) had retired into the Castles of Hippico,
Phasaelus, and Mariamne; where, being besieged, and yielding upon composition,
and delivering their arms, yet contrary to all faith they were put to death.

On the day following Sic Matthias, in Theatro Historico.
, at Caesaria, most of the Jews that dwelt there, were mass^cred at the
instigation of Florus, by the Roman Soldiers, to the number of Twenty thousand;
at which the Jews through all the Country were so enraged, that they wasted
the Villages of the Syrians and Neighbour-Cities. Then the Syrians fell upon
the Jews, and executed their rage upon them; partly out of the old hatred
against them and their Religion; and partly out of love of Plunder, and desire
of revenge. Only they of Antiochia, Apanea, and Sidonia, spared the Jews that
dwelt amongst them. But at Alexandria (the Metropolis of Egypt) upon a Sedition
that was raised there, in one day Fifty thousand Jews were killed by two Roman
Legions that were let in upon them Cestius Gallus, President of Syria, having
notice of these Commotions, comes from Antioch into Judea with twelve Legions,
and takes with him also some of King Agrippa's Soldiers; and having taken some
Towns, sat down at last before Jerusalem at the Feast of Tabernacles. The men
of Jerusalem oppose him; but he forces them into the City, into which also he
brake, and held the lower part of it. Then he assaults the Temple, and the
Upper-City, and had easily taken it if he had valiantly continued the assault,
the soberer sort of the people favoring the Romans, and the Seditious only
opposing him. But when he was near taking the Temple, without any sufficient
reason he drew off, and retreated to Antipatris After Cestius's his raising his
siege, many of the Christians that were in Jerusalem, got out of the City, and
fled (^s Eusebius says) to ^ella, being warned by our Savior so to do, Luke
21.20. and Mat. 24.15. When ye shall see the abomination of des^lation spoken
of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the Holy place, then let them which be in
Judea, slay to the Mountains.

Illa abominatio desolationis, fuit Templi Hierosolymitani prosanatio
abominanda, quae in signum data fuit futurae desolationis Ea Templi profanatio
hoc ipso anno a seditiosis Judaeorum ducibus facta est, cum ^emplum more
castrorum munissent, and inde adversus suos contribules Judaeos pro Romany
stantes, ferocius dimicarent. Non enim exteriorem tantum Templi partem ab ^is
occupatam fuiss^; sed and obsidente civitatem Cestio, in interiorem partem se
recopisse, testatur Josephu^ lib. 5. cap. 2.


, having lost in his March many both Romans and Auxiliaries, with a great part
of his Baggage and Ammunition, by the Jews who pursued him. The Jews, puffed up
with this Victory, being returned to Jerusalem, create Joseph the Son of
Gorion, and Ananias the High Priest, Governors of the City; and send away
Commanders into the several Provinces, and among others they send Joseph (the
Writer of this War) into Galilee; where after he had fortified many Towns, and
ordered all things to endure a War, he expected the invasion of the Romans. In
the mean time there are many Commotions and Attempts of several of the Cities
against him; and by the subtilty and fraud of John the Son of a certain Levite
(of whom more afterward), and by the envy of some of the Governors of
Jerusalem, there were endeavors used to turn him out of his Government. But
Joseph brake the neck of all these Endeavors and Counsels, and by his Prudence
and Patience defeated them, and forced John to flee to Jerusalem. At Jerusalem,
Ananias the Governor of the City prepares all things necessary for sustaining
the War; He repairs the Walls, and takes order that warlike Instrum^nts, viz.
Darts and Arms, etc. be made through the whole City. He endeavors to reconcile
those they called Zealots (because they boasted of their zeal for the Law of
God, and the Customs of their Country) but in vain; he endeavors to apprehend
Simon Son of Giora (who exercised Thievery, and affected Tyranny) by sending
Soldiers against him. But He with his Party fled to the Thieves that k^pt
Massada, from whence they infested all the Countries of Judea and Idumea with
their Robberies.

Things going on in this manner, Cestius sends M^ssengers to Nero who was th^n
in Achaia entertaining himself with Tragedies and the Olympic Sports,
declaring unto him the troubled state of Judea. Nero being much moved with this
News, sends Vespasian thither. Vespasian having received this Command s^nds his
Son Titus to Alexandria in Egypt, to bring from th^nce the Fifth and Tenth
Legion into Judea; and he himself goes by land from Achaia into Asia, and from
thence comes into Syria At Antioch he gathers together the Roman Forces, with
other Aids from the Neighbouring-Princes, and to marches to Ptolemais where his
Son Titus met him sooner than could have been expected by reason of the Winter
season All their Forces, with their Auxiliaries, being now come together, made
Threescore thousand Horse and Foot. Nero now returning to Rome in (...) m^^^ant
manner, after he had been two years in Greece; Julius Vindex, a Gaul by birth,
but of Senatorian-degree among the Romans, incensed his Contrymen against
him, representing what great and intolerable burdens they groaned under. Yet he
designed not to advance himself to the Principality, but offered it to Galb^ an
old Soldier, and now Gov^rnour of the Tarraconian-Province in Spain; who
accepted of it. Vesp^sian in the mean while invades Galilee, and burns and
wastes the City of the Gadarens; then coming to Jotapata on the 21 of May, he
lays siege to it; after forty days siege, he takes it by force, and burns it,
after it had been valiantly defended by Joseph, who was Governor thereof. He
also takes Joseph, who ^ y hid in a Cave, gives him his life, but keeps him
Prisoner Joseph was taken* and is kept to be sent Prisoner to Nero; but
desiring to speak with Vespasian, foretold that he should release him out of
Captivity, and that when he was Emperor. See Sueton. in Vita Vespasiani, cap. 5.
. Jotapata being thus destroyed, Vepasian retires with his Army to Caesarea,
and th^re places Two Legions to refresh themselves after the siege; a Third he
sends, for the same reason, to Scythopolis. At Caesarea he is feasted by King
Agrippa for twenty days together: There he prepares for the Sieges of Tiberias
and Taricha. They of Tiberias immediately yield, and at the entreaty of Agrippa
it is granted to them, that the City shall not be razed. But Taricha, after it
had suffered a siege, is taken by storm. These Cities being recovered, almost
all Galilee inclined to the Romans, except Gamala and Gascala, which was kept
by John, and the Mountain Itaburium. Gamala, after a Months siege, was taken;
and not long after, the Mountain Itaburium. Titus sets upon Giscala, which was
kept by John with his party of Zealots. John seems to like the Conditions of
Peace offered him by Titus, but in the night with his party slips out of the
City, and betakes himself to J^rusalem. Titus spares the City; and, putting a
Garrison into it, goes to C^sarea.

In the mean time there was a great dissension throughout all Judea, some being
for war, others desirous to live in peace under the protection of the Romans.
Whereupon Troops of Thieves gathered together, who plundered them that were
desirous of peace; and being loaded with their Plunder, they were received into
Jerusalem, and there filled all things wi^h Murders, Discords, and Rapines.
And first, they cast Antipas and a great many Noblemen, and the chief of the
City into prison, and shortly after put them to death without any ^rial; falsely
accusing them, That they intended to deliver up t^^ City to the Romans.
Moreover they kept all the Passes, and seized those that endeavored to get out
of the City; and, killing them, let them lie unburied.

During these troubles, the Zealots fell out among themselves: John (who came
from Giscala to Jerusalem) affecting the Sup^remacy, and others not enduring
him to be their Superior. But though they thus disagreed among themselves, yet
they were unanimous enough in ^obbing the people; and all Judea, after the
example of Jerusalem, was full of Thieves, and most miserably vexed.

The Jews by these discords thus inhumanly destroying each other; Vespasian was
entreated by the cries of some of them (who fled to him) to take some course to
preserve their Country from ruin. Hereupon he prepares to go against
Jerusalem. And that he might leave nothing behind him that might trouble ^^m
when he was at that siege, he comes with his Army to Gadara to quench the
tumults there, and presently takes the City, the Seditious flying away; which
he understanding, he sends Placiaus with his Horse to pursue them, and to put
them to the sword; and so he possessed himself of the Country beyond the
River, even to the Lake Asphaltis, except the Castle of Macherun; and so having
appointed Garrisons for the several Towns, and Winter Quarters for his
Soldiers, he comes to Caesarea again, and there winters.

Vespasian hears now of the stirrs raised in Gallia by Vindex, who had armed
the Gauls against Nero, and the Romans; which made him more earnest to finish
this War against the Jews. Wherefore in the beginning of the Spring, he runs
with his Army through all Judea and Idumea, and miserably wastes it. Then leads
them through Samaria to Jericho, from whence the Inhabitants fly into the
Mountain-Countrey opposite to Jerusalem; but he pursues them and beats them
from the Hills, and by placing Citadels at Jericho and other places, distresses
the Jews on every side.

Nero hearing that Galba, and Spain, had revolted from him, pronounced himself
undone; and at last slew himself to escape public and more shameful execution,
on the 9th day of June, in the 13th year of his Reign.

The Soldiers in Spain proclaim Galba Emperor, against whom rises up Otho, and
cuts him off in his 7th Month. Otho was scarce set in the Throne, when
Vitellius rises up against him, and Otho is killed the 90th day of his Reign.
Vitellius is now Lord of all, a luxurious and most intemperate person.

But to return to Vespasian, who as he was now with his Army preparing to
besiege Jerusalem, news is brought him of the death of Nero. Upon which tidings
he defers the War against the Jews, and sends Titus his Son to Galba (who he
heard was proclaimed Emperor), to know his pleasure concerning the Jewish War.
Titus going by ship to Achaia, heard there that Galba was killed. Whereupon he
presently returns to his Father at Caesarea, they being in suspense (the Empire
now tottering) what to do, thinking it not convenient to invade a strange
Country, when their own was in such apparent danger.

In the mean time Simon the Son of Giora (of whom before) a bold young man,
went from Massada, whither he had fled to the Murderers, in the Mountainous
Country of Judea, and by promises of liberty to servants, and rewards to
Freemen, in a short time got a band of Thieves, and by little and little
increasing his Forces, he came at last to that power, that he conquered all
Idumea, and wasted Judea, and at length came before Jerusalem; where pitching
his Tents, he became a terror both to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the
Zealots also; and thus were the Citizens of Jerusalem grievously oppressed on
both sides, within by the Zealots whom John commanded; and without by Simon. In
the mean time the Idumeans, who were of John's party, and were among his
forces, falling at variance with him, and the matter coming to blows, they
killed many of the Zealots; and then taking John's Palace, and burning it,
forced him with his party into the Temple; but then they fearing (as also did
the Citizens) lest by night he should make an excursion into the City, and burn
it, they upon consultation send for Simon, and admit him into the City, that
they might defend themselves against John.

Vespasian, during these stirrs, hearing of Otho's death, began to think of
freeing his Country from the Tyranny of Vitellius. Many of his Commanders
earnestly persuaded him to take the Government upon him. Tiberius Alexander the
Governor of Egypt, was the first that swore the Legions to him on the Calends
of July, which day was afterward kept as a Festival. Shortly after, the Jewish
Army swore Allegiance to him; so that there was but one year and twenty two
days, between Nero's death, and the beginning of the Reign of Vespasian.

Vespasian (the Armies in several Provinces declaring for him) now leaves
Caesarea; and sending Mutianus with Forces into Italy, to oppose Vitellias,
himself goes to Alexandria to make sure of Egypt.

In Maesia, Antonius Primus who held for Vespasian, leads the third Legion into
Italy against Vitellius, and in the fight at Cremona against the Vitellians, he
routs them, and puts them to flight. Then coming to Rome, and joining his
Forces with Mutianus in the midst of the City, he overthrows Vitellius's Army;
and taking Vitellius himself, and dragging him through the Marketplace, there
cuts his Throat, after he had held the Government eight Months and five days.

Vespasian hearing these things at Alexandria, sends his Son Titus with Forces
into Judea, to finish that War; but he himself saileth into Italy.

The City of Jerusalem was at this time divided into a threefold Faction: For
Simon, whom the Citizens had admitted in, kept the higher City; and John with
his Zealots possessed the outward Courts of the Temple, and the lower City. And
Eleazer, who was once Captain and Commander of the Zealots (envying John, who
by his boldness and subtilty had got the power into his hands, and did all
things at his own pleasure) withdrawing himself, and getting some Soldiers
along with him, possessed himself of the inner part of the Temple, and from
thence fights against John. And so John, who held the outward Circuit of the
Temple, and the Porches, was forced to fight both against Eleazer and Simon.
During these stirrs, many things about the Temple were burnt up, and the
Provisions destroyed which might have served them a long time, and for want of
which they were sorely oppressed with Famine afterward, when besieged by the
Romans.

Titus, in prosecution of his Father's Orders, comes from Alexandria to
Caesarea, where gathering his Forces together (which were Four Legions, with
the Aids and Auxiliaries of the Neighbouring-Kings), marches toward Jerusalem
accompanied with Tiberius Alexander (who was in principal favor with him), and
Joseph the Jew, who for the truth of his prediction that Vespasian should be
Emperor, was now released out of bonds. He sat down within six or seven
furlongs of the City, a little before the Feast of the Passover, and by that
means shut up an infinite number of men, who had (according to custom) come up
to the Feast. And hereby all provisions were consumed in a very short time, and
a most cruel Famine oppressed them On the day of Vnleavened-bread (April 14.),
Eleazar (who kept the inner part of the Temple) opened the Gates to the people
who desired to sacrifice; but John taking hold of this opportunity,
treacherously sent many of his party in among them (with swords hid under their
Garments), who killing Eleazar and many of his Faction, seized also on that
part of the Temple; and hereby the Three Factions were reduced to Two; that
under John consisted of 8400, and the other under Simon of 10000 fighting-men,
besides 5000 Idumeans. And notwithstanding the Enemy was at the Walls, they
brake out, the one upon the other, and the poor people suffered miserably under
both. The City being fortified with three Walls on every side, but where it was
fenced with deep Valleys, Titus having with much opposition placed his Engines
and Rams, battered the outermost of them, and made a breach in it; at which
entering, and the Jews retiring inwards, he possessed himself of the
North-quarter of the City, even to the Castle Antonia, and the Valley of
Cedron. Five days after, he brake with his Rams the Second Wall, and entered;
but the Besieged making diverse Salleys, repulsed him, and beat him out again.
Four days after, he recovers the place again* and prepares for the bittering
the Third Wall. He now sends Joseph the Historian to persuade them to yield;
but he is entertained only with scoffs and reproaches. Many of the people
thinking to escape out of the City, John and Simon stop up all passages. Yet
the Famine increasing, many made shift to get out, who being taken by Titus, he
caused them to be crucified On the 12th of May he began Four Mounts, wherein to
place his Battering Rams; Two, near the Castle Antonia, by which he hoped to
take the Temple; and the other Two near the Monument of John the High Priest,
where he thought he should with most ease break into the upper part of the
City. John, who was to oppose the Romans in the former place, cast down the
Mounts that were near his Quarter, and two days after Simon did as much by the
other, though seventeen days had been spent in making of them. He destroyed
also many Rams and Engines, and brake into the very Camp of the Romans, but was
repelled and forced into the City again. Titus now calling a Council of War,
'twas therein resolved to compass the whole City with a Trench, which with
incredible diligence and celerity was finished in three day^; they built also
thirteen Forts to hinder the flight of the Besieged, and to hinder the
conveyance of any relief into the City.

The Seditious were nothing herewith moved, though Famine not only raged among
the common sort, but themselves also were pressed by it A certain Noble Woman
sod her Child to eat it; and such a Mo^tali^y ensued, that from the 14 of April
to the first of July, were carried out to be buried at the public charge, an
incredible number of Carcasses of the poorer sort, as Titus was told by one
Mannaeus, who was appointed to pay the money. And some others certified him,
that many thousands of the ordinary sort were cast dead out of the Gates; and
because they could not carry all out, they cast them in great heaps together
into empty houses, others they threw over the Walls, filling up the Ditches
with them.

Simon, notwithstanding all these calamities, abstained not from Murders and
Rapines, but killed Mathias the High Priest (by whom he had been let into the
City) with his three Sons, and sixteen of the Noblest of the people, pretending
that they purposed to flee to the Enemy. Judas, one of his own Captains, hating
his cruelty, attempted to betray a certain Tower (whereof he had the charge) to
the Romans; but his design being discovered, he was put to death, with ten
other of his Accomplices. John also, in these extremities, converted to his own,
and profane uses, the holy things of the Temple, as Vessels of Gold, and
Silver, and the Money of the Temple; nay, he was compelled to distribute to his
Soldiers the very Oil and Wine ordained for Sacrifices.

Titus, in pursuit of his design, cut down all the Groves near the City, and
brought in the Timber to make Forts and Engines for the siege, and causing more
Mounts or Scaffolds to be made, on the first day of July he began to batter the
wall of the Castle Antonia, by which a breach being made on the fifth day
after, they entered the Castle, and pursued the flying-Jews even unto the
Temple. At this time many false Prophets (suborned by the Seditious) flattered
the multitude with expectation of assistance from God; and therefore though
Titus often exhorted them to yield, yet they flatly refused. The Romans now
pressing hard toward the Temple, the Contest was earnest on both sides. After
a long skirmish, the Romans breaking in by Antonia, seized upon the North and
West Porches of the outward Range of the Temple; part of which Porches
(especially that which was joined to Antonia) was burnt and overthrown by the
Jews; and two days after, the other part was burnt by the Romans, the Jews
being so amazed, that they endeavored not to quench it. Titus had an intention
to have saved the Temple; but on the tenth of August a certain Soldier without
any command (nay, against the command of his General), moved as by instinct
from above, cast a flaming firebrand into the Chambers and Buildings of the
North-side of the Temple, which immediately taking fire, burnt the Temple also
which joined to them, notwithstanding all that Titus could do to prevent it.
And this happened on the same day of the same Month on which the former Temple
was set on fire by the command of Nebuchadnezzar.

The Temple thus burning, Titus was saluted Emperor by his Soldiers, and the
Zelots and Seditious fled into the Upper City called Sion. They now desire a
parley with the General himself, who checked them for their obstinacy, but
promised them life if they would yield to him. They being unwilling to commit
themselves to his Mercy, required to depart the City with their wives and
children, and to go into the Wilderness. Titus being enraged at these
Proposals, threatens them with utter destruction, and forthwith commands all
the lower City to be set on fire. Then he began to assault the Higher City,
which was seated on a steep Rock. And beginning to raise his Mounts on the 20th
of August, and perfecting them on the 7th of September, he brings his Engines
to the Walls, wherein having made a breach, the Seditious through fear and
amazement deserted their strong Towers, and so on the 8th of September the
Romans brake in and destroyed all with fire and sword. Titus now commands both
the City and Temple to be utterly razed to the foundation, and to be laid
plain, and a Plough to be brought over it, according to custom, which was done
by Turnus Rufus; and so the Prophecy was fulfilled, Zion shall be plowed as a
field, Mic. 3.12. Only the West part of the Wall, with three Towers, for their
strength and beauty were preserved, to bear witness of the stateliness of the
City to posterity.

Of those which during the whole War were taken Captives, the number amounted
to 97000: and of those that perished in the siege, to 1100000. So heavy was the
guilt that lay on them for the death of Christ, and so horrid were the
enormities committed by them, that Josephus says, If the Romans had delayed to
come against them, he thought the City would either have been swallowed up of
the earth, or have perished by Thunderbolts and Lightning from Heaven, and so
have suffered like Sodom; the Inhabitants whereof they exceeded in wickedness.
See Josephus toward the end of his sixth Book.

And thus fell this famous City on the 8th day of September, in the second year
of Vespasian, He and Titus his Son being Consuls, 38 years after the death of
Christ, whose blood cried for vengeance against these obdurate Jews.

That this dismal destruction of Jerusalem is set out Mat. 24, as the
destruction of the whole World, need not seem strange if we consider, that it
was the destroying of the Lord's own Habitation, and the place chosen by
Himself above all the places in the world, to put His Name there, and the
destroying of the State and Polity of the Jews, who were his old peculiar
people; A people once highest in his favor, now deepest in his displeasure:
formerly the people of his highest dignations; but now their casting off was
sealed by the ruin of their City and Temple, their dispersion and scattering
abroad among other Nations, and their great obduration.

Titus having thus ended the War, returns to Caesarea, and from thence to
Antiochia in Syria, and then into Egypt, and thence sails to Rome, where he was
welcomed home by all men, and (together with his Father) triumphed for the
Conquest of Judea.

The two Captains of the Seditious, John and Simon, who had hid themselves,
were taken, and reserved to be led in triumph, and 700 other Jews that excelled
in beauty and strength; of all whom only Simon suffered death. The LAW also of
the Jews was carried in this Triumph as the last of the spoils, which together
with the Purple Veils of the Sanctuary, were laid up in the Palace.

From this Victory both Father and Son got the Name of Emperor; yet neither of
them had the Title of Judaicus, although many other Honors, especially
Triumphal Arches, were decreed unto them.

A year after, Lucilius Bassus was sent Lieutenant into Judea, who receiving
the Army from Cerealis Vitellianus, took the Castle Herodian and Macharua
beyond Jordan.

Not long after, Vespasian wrote to Tiberius Maximus to sell all the Land of
the Jews; upon whom, wheresoever they lived, he imposed a yearly Tribute to be
paid into the Capitol, viz. the Didrachma or half Shekel, it being that they
were wont to pay in former times unto the Temple at Jerusalem.

A year after, Publius succeeds Bassus, and finishes the War, taking the
strong Castle of Massada from Eleazar, the Nephew of Judas Galilaeus the
Captain of the Thieves. All the Thieves in the Castle (to the number of 900,
with their Wives and Children) at the persuasion of Eleazar, set fire on the
Castle, and the Furniture thereof, and then put each other to death, lest they
should fall into the power of the Romans. And so the War in Judea ended.

Many of the Thieves that escaped from Judea, fled into Egypt, to Alexandria,
and there they solicited the Jews to revolt; but the common people taking 600
of them, delivered them up to the Romans to be punished. Vespasian having
notice of these things, commands Lupus the Governor of Alexandria, that he
should pull down the Jewish Temple that was there built long ago by Onias the
Brother of the High Priest; which he neglected to do, but only spoiled it of
some of its Consecrated things, and so shut it up. But Paulinus, his Successor,
having spoiled it of all its gifts, made an Order that none should presume to
come to it; and so he put an end to the exercise of the Jewish Religion there,
343 years (as some compute) after that Temple was first built by Onias.

A certain Jew, a Weaver, Jonathan by name, escaping to Cyrene, drew 2000 Jews
to follow him into the Wilderness, promising to show them signs and wonders;
but by the chiefest of the Jews the matter being discovered to Catullus,
Governor of those parts, he sent Soldiers, who slew most of them; and not long
after, Jonathan himself was taken, who accused the most wealthy of the Jews
(unjustly) to have had a hand in this Insurrection. To whose accusations
Catullus willingly giving ear, put 3000 of them to the sword. And this he did
with the greater confidence, because he confiscated their Estates to Caesar's
use. Jonathan he sent prisoner (with others that were taken) to Vespasian, that
he might accuse the most honest of those Jews that lived at Rome and
Alexandria, as if they had held correspondence with him; yea, he affirmed, That
Joseph the Writer of the Jewish History, sent to him both Arms and Money. But
Vespasian looking upon this as a false accusation, upon Titus's entreaty
acquitted these men, and deservedly punished Jonathan, whom having whipped, he
burnt alive. Catullus at present escaped through the mildness of the Emperor;
but not long after, fell into grievous anguish of mind, and imagined he saw the
Ghosts of those men he had so unjustly slain before his eyes. At last his guts
and bowels issuing out of him, he died miserably.

Here Josephus ends his History of the Destruction of Judea. But his Jewish
Antiquities he finished not till the Thirteenth of Domitian, when he was Fifty
six years old, as himself testifies at the end of his Work.

I shall conclude all with an hearty Prayer to God for the Conversion of the
Jews, and the Union of all Christians.

O LORD, the Father of Mercies, let not thy indignation always burn against thy
ancient people, nor cast them off for ever. Though the blood of thy dear Son,
our blessed Savior, lies heavy upon them, and hitherto thou have justly
hardened them; yet be pleased, of thy infinite mercy, to open their eyes, to
unstop their ears, to mollify their hearts, and to cause them to mourn over
him whom their forefathers pierced. Cause them to understand those Sacred
Oracles which thou did commit to their keeping; that our Savior, who has
long since been a light to lighten the Gentiles, may, in thy due time, be the
glory of thy people Israel; that so there may be but one Sheepfold, as there is
but one Shepherd. For the speeding of their conversion, be pleased to compose
the many differences that are among Christians; and so unite their
disagreeing-affections, that our examples may no longer discourage, but may
invite them to embrace our Lord and Savior, and his blessed Doctrine. Cause
thy Truth, O Lord, to shine forth gloriously and triumphantly, as the Sun at
noonday; and let it dispel the thick mist of darkness and error that has
overspread so many Nations of the world; set up thy pure Worship, and thy own
Institutions every where; and throw down Idolatry and false worship wherever
it prevails. Break the yokes of oppression and violence, and rebuke the spirit
of profaness, impiety, intemperance, ungodliness; and let holiness,
righteousness, brotherly-kindness, and charity, prevail wherever the Gospel
of Christ is owned and professed. Unite all Christians in those things that are
the main fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion; and give them
charity and mutual forbearance of each other in less important matters. Let all
that name the Name of Christ, make conscience to depart from all iniquity, and
live as becomes his disciples and servants. Grant this, O Lord, for thy own
great Mercies, and our dear Savior's Merits sake; To Whom, with thy Self, and
Holy Spirit, be all Honor, Glory, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Sincere Obedience,
rendered now and for evermore. Amen. Glory be to God in the Highest, on earth
peace, good will toward men.
FINIS.
map of the ancient Mediterranean by Pieter van den Keere and Philip Holmes
after that of Abraham Ortelius in Theatrum Orbis Terrarum, with inset
representations of St Paul's conversion on the road to Damascus and of his
shipwreck at Melita or Malta DESCRIPTIO PEREGRINATIONIS D PAULI APOSTOLI
Exhibens
Loca fere omnia tam in Novo Testamento quam in Actis Apostolorum memorata
Opera ABRAHAMI ORTELII.

Phillip Holmes sculp
Petrus Kaerius Caelavit



