Wit and Loyalty REVIVED, In a Collection of some smart SATYRS In Verse and
Prose on the late TIMES.

By Mr. Abraham Cowley, Sir J. Berkenhead, and the Ingenious Author of
Hudibras, etc.

Victrix Causa Deis Placuit sed victa Poetis. LONDON Printed, for W. Davis.
1682.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
I Have been often tempted to admire, since the Publishing Mr. Cowley's Papers,
by what fate so excellent a Satyr upon the Times, and so worthy the Author, as
the Puritan and Papist, should escape the ingenious Publisher, when at the same
time his Copy upon Brutus, and that upon the Bishop of Lincoln's enlargement
from the Tower have met with the good fortune to have place there, although
they are in some sort, Satyrs upon himself and so unworthy his Name, and the
good Company they appear in: that considering the Loyalty of their Arguments,
we might, it may be have expected them in Mr. Waller's Works rather than Mr.
Cowley's; and from thence to have been purged by the Wisdom of later and more
correct Editions of his Book, together with the Penegyrick to Oliver, and the
Elegy on his Death, called the Storm. Both which seem, in a manner, to have
inherited the Lot, no less than the Guilt of the Usurper, upon whom they were
made: the former, claiming the Laurel, but that it wanted abetter Title to the
crown: and the latter, to have so insensibly disappeared on a sudden as if by a
resembling fate, it had been snatched away in the same Storm in which the Tyrant
himself was lost.

Whether it were an Exeess of Modesty in Mr. Cowly that condemned it as an
Abortive, and so, though it had appeared formerly in Print to have no place in
his Collection, but to take its fortune with the Blossoms and unripe follies of
his Youth: Or whether it were an Excess of good Nature in him that sentenced it
to suffer, merely as it was a Satyr and so looked upon as a piece of
persecution, and like Draco's Laws, written in Blood, as we find the best
Natures inclined to check and be angry at themselves when once the fit of
Choler is over; I say whether of these were the cause of suppressing it I shall
not now presume to examine.

But because under the Color of doing Justice to the Satyr, I may be thought
to have done Wrong to Mr. Cowly, and only to have borrowed his Name; to enhance
the value of what comes with it, its own recommendation. To remove such doubts,
I shall observe in its Justification, that it first come out in the Year 1643.
what time he lay at St. John's College in Oxford, Signed with A. C. though to
make the Cipher plainer yet, I doubt not when the Satyr is dully considered, to
those that can Judge aright, it will spell his entire name at length. For as
the Proportions, the Posture or Design serve as never failing Marks to such as
are curious to discern the m^st^rly Hand of the inimitable Titian, or Vandike.
So in the adm^red Pieces of our great Masters of Writing, there want not the
like bold strokes and life- touches in the Style that evidently betray whose
Originals they are. In so much as to convince any who are their Authors, when
they discover themselves by their own Light, is altogether, as needless is to
hold a Candle to the Sun. If we believe Horace in his Art of Poetry (surely
in his own Art Horace is as much to be believed, as Aristotle in Philosophy) he
reckons ^^t amongst the Felicities of a good Style, that it cannot be imitated
when he says. Ex noto fictum Carmen sequar, ut sibi quivis.
Sperat idem, sudat multum, frustraque laboret.
Ausus idem --


Which is finely rendered by the E. of Roscomon. Begin with Truth, then give
invention scope,
And if your Style be Natural and smooth,
All men will try, and hope to Write as well;
And (not without much pains) be undeceived.


Now if this be justly esteemed a Masterpiece of Poetry, that what it delivers
comes the nearest to our understandinge, at the same time as it is removed the
farthest from our imitation, I am very well assured, I shall be acquitted from
all suspicion of cheating the world with any thing under Mr. Cowley's Name
which has no Title to it, since his Style is no less difficult to Counterfeit,
than it is easy to conceive.

I cannot think it any reproach to Mr. Cowly for him to walk abroad into the
world in good company; the other two Gentlemen being, both of them celebrated
Wits, and of the Loyal party engaged, in the same interest, and active in the
same Cause with himself. And it is no new thing for Wits and Cavaliers, to find
out one another and associat together Indeed they were men whose Mirth was so
innocent, whose Wit so regular, and whose Conversation so entertaining and
agreeable as I cannot but persuade my self, that they themselves would have
made choice of no other Company when they were Living, as the Reader can
embrace no better, amongst the Dead.

The Puritan and the Papist, a Satyr first published in the year 1643. by Mr.
Cowley.

The Character of the Assembly-man, first printed in the year 1648. by Sir J.
Berkenhead.

Proposals for farming out Liberty of Conscience, first published in the year
1663. by the ingenious Author of Hudibras.

THE PURITAN AND THE PAPIST.

A SATYR,

By Mr. Abraham Cowley.

LONDON Printed for W. Davis, 1681/2.

THE PURITAN AND THE PAPIST.
A SATYR.
SO two rude Waves, by Storms together thrown,
Roar at each other, Fight, and then grow One.
Religion is a Circle; men contend,
And Run the Round in dispute without end.
Now in a Circle who go contrary,
Must, at the last, meet of necessity.
The Roman Cath'lique to advance the Cause
Allows a Lie, and calls it Pia Fraus.
The Puritan approves and does the same,
Dislikes naught in it but the Latin name.
He flows with his devises, and dares Lie
In very deed, in truth, and verity. Paralleled in Holy Cheats.

He whines, and sighs out Lies, with so much ruth,
As if he grieved, 'cause he could never speak truth.
Lies have possessed the Press so, as their due,
'Twill scarce I fear, henceforth Print Bibles true.
Lies for their next Strong Fort ha'th' Pulpit chose,
There they throng out at 'th Preachers Mouth, and Nose.
And how ee'r gross, are certain to beguile
The poor Book-turners of the middle Isle.
Nay to the Almightie's self they have been bold
To lie, and their blasphemous Minister told,
They might say false to God; for if they were
Beaten, he knew't not, for he was not there.
But God, who their great thank fullness did see,
Rewards them straight with another Vict'rie,
Just such an one as Brainford; and san's doubt In Publishing False News as
Legends.

Will weary er't be long their gratitude out.
Not all the Legends of the Saints of old,
Not vast Baronius, nor sly Surius, hold
Such plenty of apparent Lies, as are
In your own Author, Jo. Brown Cleric. Par.
Besides what your small Poets, said or writ;
Brooks, Strode, and the Baron of the Saw-pit:
With many a Mental Reservation. In Mental Reservations.

You Will maintain Liberty, Reserved [your own.]
For th'publique good the sums raised you will disburse;
Reserved, [The greater part for your own Purse.]
You Will root the Cavaliers out, every man;
Faith, let it be reserved here; [If ye can.]
You Will make our gracious CHARLES, a Glorious King;
Reserved [in Heaven,] for thither ye would bring
His Royal Head; the only secure Room
For Kings, where such as you, will never come.
To keep th'Estates o'th'Subjects you pretend;
Reserved [in your own Trunkes] You will defend
The Church of England, it is your Protestation;
But that is New England, by a small Reservation.
Power of Dispensing Oaths the Papists claim; In allowing Perjuries.

Case has got leave of God to do the same.
For you do hate all Swearing so, that when
You Have Sworn an Oath, ye break it straight again.
A Curse upon you! which hurts most these Nations,
Cavaliers Swearing, or your Protestations?
Nay, though Oaths be by you so much abhorred,
Y'allow God damn me in the Puritan Lord.
They keep the Bible from Laymen, but ye
Avoid this, for ye have no Layety.
They, in a forraigu and, unknown Tongue pray, In an unintelligible Worship.

You in an unknown Sense your prayers say:
So that this difference 'twixt ye does ensue,
Fools understand not them, not Wise men you.
They an unprofitable zeal have got,
Of Invocating Saints that hear them not.
'Twere well you did so, naught may more be feared
In your fond Prayers, than that they should be heard.
To them your Nonsense well enough might pass,
They Would never see that in the Divine Looking-Glass.
Nay, whether you would worship Saints is not known,
For you have as yet of your Religion none.
They by good-works think to be justified,
You into the same Error deeper slide;
You think by Works too justified to be, Both hold Justification by Works, the
one by Good the other by Ill Works.

And those ill Works; Lies, Treason, Perjurie.
But oh! your Faith is mighty; that has been,
As true Faith ought to be, of things unseen.
At Wor'ster, Brainford and Edg-hill, we see,
Only by Faith you have got the Victory.
Such is your Faith, and some such unseen way
The public Faith at last your debts will pay.
They hold free will (that naught their Souls may* bind)
As the great Privilege of all Mankind.
You're here more moderate, for it is your intent, Free Will one holds belongs
to all men, the other only to Parliament men.

To make it a Priv'ledg, but of Parliament.
They forbid Priests to marry; you worse do,
Their marriage you allow, yet punish too:
For you would make Priests so poor, that upon all
Who marry, scorn and beggary must fall.
They a bold power over sacred Scriptures take,
Blot out some Clauses, and some new ones make.
Your great Lord Jesuit Brooks publicly said, They agree in interlining
Scriptures and Creeds,

(Brooks whom too little learning has made Mad)
That to correct the Creed ye should do well,
And blot out Christ's descending into Hell.
Repent wild man, or you will never change, I fear,
The sentence of your own descending there:
Yet modestly they use the Creed, for they
Would take the Lord's Prayer Root and Branch away.
And wisely said a Levite of our nation,
The Lord's Prayer was a Popish Innovation.
Take heed, you will grant ere long it should be said,
An't be but to desire your Daily Bread.
They keep the people, ignorant, and you.
Keep both the people, and your selves so too, In Implicit Faith,

They blind obedienee and blind duty teach;
You blind Rebellion and blind faction preach.
Nor can I blame you much, that ye advance
That which can only save ye, Ignorance;
Though Heaven be praised, t'has often been proved well
Your Ignorance is not Invincible.
Nay such bold lies to God himself ye vaunt,
As if you would fain keep him too, Ignorant.
Limbus and Purgatory they believe, One believes Purgatory hereafter, and the
other, erects a Purgatory here.

For lesser Sinners, that is, I conceive.
Malignants only; you this Trick does please,
For the same Cause ye've made new Limbuses,
Where we may lie imprisoned long ere we
A Day of Judgment in your Courts shall see.
But Pym can, like the Pope, with this dispense;
And for a Bribe, deliver Souls from thence.
Their Councils claim Infallibility, The Assembly of Divines as infallible as a
general Council.

Such must your Conventicle Synod be:
And Teachers from all parts of The Earth ye call,
To make it a Council, Occumenical.
They several times appoint from Meats t'abstain;
You now for the Irish Wars, a Fast ordain:
And that that Kingdom might be sure to Fast,
Ye take a Course to Starve them all at last. One fasts Frydays and Eves, the
other all Sundays.

Nay though ye keep no Eves, Fridays, nor Lent,
Not to dress Meat on Sundays you're Content;
Then you Repeat, Repeat, and Pray, and Pray;
Your Teeth keep Sabbath, and Tongues, Working day.
They preserve Relics; you have few or none, Both have their Relics

Unless the Clo^ sent to John Pym by one.
Or Holl^ses Rich Widow, She who carried
A Relic in her Womb, before she married.
They in Succeeding Peter take a Pride; Both claim to succeed St. Peter.

So do you; for your Master ye've denied.
But chiefly Peter's Privilege ye choose,
At your own wills to Bind and to Unloose.
He was a Fisherman; you will be so too,
When nothing but your Ships are left to you.
He went to Rome, to Rome you Backward Ride,
(Though both your goings are by some denied.)
Nor is it a Contradiction, if we say,
You go to Rome the quite Contrary way;
He died of the Cross; that death's unusual now;
The Gallows is most liked, and that is for you.
They love Church Music, it offends your sense, The one for Church Music the
other for Singing without Music

And therefore ye have sung it out from thence,
Which shows, if right your mind be understood,
You hate it not as Music but as Good.
Your Madness makes you Sing as much as they
Dance, who are bit with a Tarantula.
But do not to your selves alas appear,
The most Religious Traitors that eer' were;
Because your Troops Singing of Psalms do go;
There Is many a Traitor has marched Holborn so.
Nor was it your wit this holy project bore;
Tweed and the Tyne has seen those Tricks before.
They of strange Miracles and Wonders tell, Both boast their Miracles.

You are your selves a kind of Miracle;
Even such a Miracle as in writ divine
We read of the Devils hurrying down the Swine.
They have made Images to speak, it is said,
You a dull Image have your Speaker made;
And that your bounty in offerings might abound,
You Have to that Idol given six thousand pound,
They drive out Devils they fay; here ye begin
To differ, I confess; you let them in.
They maintain Transubstantiation; Each has a several Transubstantiation.

You by a Contrary Philosophers stone,
To Transubstantiate Metalls have the skill;
And turn the Kingdoms Gold to Ir'n and Steel.
In The Sacrament ye differ but it is noted,
Bread must be Flesh, Wine Blood, if e'rt be voted.
They make the Pope their Head, y'exalt for him
Primate and Metropolitan, Master Pym; Both Infalible in Cathedra.

Nay White, who sits in the Infallible Chair,
And most infallably speaks Nonsense there:
Nay Cromwell, Pury, Whistler, Sir John Wray,
He who does say, and say, and say, and say.
Nay Lowry who does new Church-Gover'ment wish,
And Prophesies, like Jonas, 'midst the Fish,
Who can such various business wisely sway,
Handling both Herrings and Bishops in one day.
Nay all your Preachers Women, Boys, and Men,
From Master Calamy to Mistress Ven,
Are perfect Popes in their own Parish grown;
For to outdoe the story of Pope Jone:
Your Women Preach too, and are like to be
The Whores of Babylon, as much as She.
They depose Kings by Force; by Force you would do it, Both for deposing Kings; the
one by fair means, the other by Foul.

But first use fair means to persuade them to it.
They dare kill Kings; and 'twixt ye here is the strife,
That you dare shoot at Kings, to save their Life.
And what is the difference, 'pray, whether he fall
By the Popes Bull, or your Ox General?
Three Kingdoms thus ye strive to make your own;
And like the Pope usurp a Triple Crown.
Such is your Faith, such your Religion;
Let Us view your Manners now, and then I Have done. Their Avarice

Your Cov'teousness let gasping Ireland tell,
Where first the Irish Lands, and next ye sell
The English Blood; and raise Rebellion here,
With that which should suppress, and quench it there.
What mighty sums have ye squeezed out of the City?
Enough to make 'em Poor, and something Witty.
Excise, Loans, Contributions, Pole-moneys,
Bribes, Plunder, and such Parl'ament Priv'ledges,
Are words which you never learnt in Holy Writ,
'Till the Spirit and your Synod mended it.
Where Is all the Twentieth part now which has been
Paid you by some, to forfeit the Nineteen?
Where Is all the Goods distrain'd, and Plunders past?
For you're grown wretched, pilfring knaves at last;
Descend to Brass and Pewter; till of late,
Like Midas, all ye touched, must needs be Plate.
By what vast hopes is your Ambition fed? Their Ambition

It Is writ in Blood and may be plainly read.
You must have Places and the Kingdom sway;
The King must be a Ward to your Lord Say.
Your Inn'cent Speaker to the Rolls must rise,
Six thousand Pound has made him proud and wise. Lord Privy Seal.

Kimbolton for his Fathers place does call;
Would be like him; would he were, Face and all.
Isaac would always be Lord Mayer and so,
May always be, as much as he is now. Pennington

For the Five Members, they so richly thrive,
That they would always be, but Members Five.
Only, Pym does his Natural right enforce,
By the Mothers side he is Master of the Horse,
Most shall have Places by these pop'lar tricks,
The rest must be content with Bishoprics.
For it is against Superstition your intent,
First to root out that great Church Ornament,
Money and Lands; your Swords alas are drawn,
Against the Bishop, not his Cap, or Lawn.
O let not such lewd Sacrilege begin,
Tempted by Henrie's rich succesful Sin.
Henry the monster King of all that age;
VVild in his Lust, but wilder in his Rage.
Expect not you his Fate, though Hotham thrives
In imitating Henrie's tricks for Wives
Nor fewer Churches hopes than Wives to see
Buried, and then their Lands his own to be.
Ye boundless Tyrants, how do you outvy,
The Athenians Thirty, Romes Decemviry? Their Tirany.

In Rage' Injustice' Cruelty as far
Above those men, as you in Number are.
What Mist'ries of Iniquity do we see?
New Prisons made to defend Liberty;
Our Goods forced from us for propri'ti's sake;
And all the Real Non-scence which ye make.
Ship Money was unjustly taken, ye say; The Counterfiet grivances of the Kings
Reign compared with the Royal ones of their Usurpation.

Unjustlier far, you take the Ships away.
The High Commission, you called Tyranny,
Ye did; Good God! what is the High-Committy?
Ye said that gifts, and bribes preferments bought,
By money and blood too, they now are sought.
To the Kings will the Laws men strove to draw;
The Subjects will, is now become the Law.
'Twas feared a New Religion would begin;
All new Religions, now are entered in.
The King Delinquents to protect did strive;
What Clubs, Pikes, Halberts, Lighters, saved the Five?
You think the Parl'ment, like your State of Grace,
What ever sins men do, they keep their Place.
Invasions then were feared against the State.
And Strode swore last year would be eighty-eight. viz. 1642.

You bring in Foreign Aid to your designs;
First those great Foreign Forces of Divines,
With which Ships from America were fraught.
Rather may stinking Tobacco still be brought.
From thence, I say: next ye the Scots invite,
Which ye term Brotherly assistance right;
For England you intend with them to share:
They who alas! but younger Brothers are,
Must have the Moneis for their Portion;
The Houses and the Lands will be your Own.
We thank ye for the wounds which we endure,
Whilst scratches and slight pricks ye seek to cure.
We thank ye for true real fears at last,
Which free us from so many false ones past.
We thank ye for the Blood which fats our Coast,
As a just debt paid to great Strafford's Ghoast.)
We thank ye for the ills Received, and all
Which yet by your good care, in time we shall.
We thank ye, and our gratitude's as great
As yours, when you thankt' God for being beat.
The Character of an HOLY-SISTER
She that can sit three Sermons in aday,
And of those three, scarce bear three Words away,
She that can Rob her Husband, to repair
A Budget Priest that Noses a long Prayer.
She that with Lamb-black, purifies her shoes,
And with half Eyes and Bible, softly goes;
She that her Pockets with Lay-Gospel stuffs,
And edifies her looks with little Ruffs.
She that loves Sermons as she does the rest,
Still standing stiff, that longest are the best.
She that will Ly, yet swear, she hates a Liar,
Except it be the man, that will Lie by her.
She that at Christenings, thirsts for more Sack,
And draws the broadest handkerchief for Cake.
She that sings Psalms devoutly next the street,
And beats her maid, in the kitching where none see it.
She that will sit in shop for five hours space,
And register the sins of all that pass.
Damn at first sight, and proudly dares to say,
That none can possibly be saved, but they.
That hangs Religion in a naked Ear,
And judge men's hearts, according to their Hair.
That could afford to doubt, who wrote best sense,
Moses or Dod on the Commandments.
She that can sigh and cry, Queen Elizabeth,
Rail at the Pope, and scratch out sudden death.
And for all this can give no reason why,
This is an holy sister verily.
THE Assembly-man;

Written by Sir John Birkenhead; in the Year 1647.

(...).

(...).

(...). i. e. He seditiously stirs up men to fight: he will teach others the way
whereof himself is most ignorant; and persuades men to take an Oath, because
himself had sworn it before.

LONDON, Printed for W. Davis, Anno Dom. 1681/2.

READER,
THis Pamphlet was torn from me by those who say they cannot rob, because all
is theirs. They found it where it slept many years forgotten; but they 'waken'd
it, and made false Transcripts. They Exciz'd what they liked not; so mangled
and Reformed, that 'twas no Character of an Assembler, but of themselves. A
Copy of that Reformling had crept to the Press. Iseiz'd and stopped it, unwilliug
to Father other men's sins. Here therefore you have it (as 'twas first scribled)
without addition of a syllable; I wish I durst say here is nothing lopt off. But
men and manners are changed, at least they say so. If yet this trifle seem born
with teeth, you know whose hands were knuckle-deep in the blood of that
renouned Chancellor of Oxon (Archbishop LAUD) though when they cut up that
great Martyr, his two greatest Crimes were the two greatest Glories Great
Britain can boast of, St. Paul's Church and the Oxford Library. Where you find
no coherence, remember this Paper has suffered Decimation: Better times have
made it worse, and that is no fault of

J. Berkenhead.

THE Assembly-man.
AN Assembler is part of the States' Chattels: nor Priest, nor Burgess, but a
Participle that shark's upon both. He was chosen, as Sir Nathaniel, because he
knew least of all his Profession: not by the Votes of a Whole Diocese, but by
one whole Parliament Man. He has sat four years toward a new Religion, but
in the interim left none at all: as his Masters, the Commons had along Debate
whether Canales or no Candles, but all the mean while sat still in the Dark:
And therefore when the Moon quits her oldLight, and has acquired no new,
Astronomeres say she is in her Synodes. Show me such a Picture of Judas as the
Assembler, (a griping, false, Reforming Brother; rail's at Waste spent upon the
Anointed; persecutes most those Hands which Ordained him; brings in men with
swords and staves; and all for Money from the Honorable Scribes and
Pharisees:) One Touch more (a Line tied to his Namesake Elder-tree) had made
him Judas, Root and Branch. This Assembly at first was a full Century; which
should be reckoned as the Scholiast's Hecatomb, by their Feet, not Heads: or
count them by Scores, for in things without Heads Six score go to an Hundred.
They would be a New Septuagint; the Old translated Scripture out of Heberw into
Greek, these turn in to four shillings a day? And and these Assemblers were
begot in one day, as Hercules's fifty Bastards all in one night. Their first
List was sprinkled with some names of Honor, (Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley-Dr.
Hammond, etc,) But these were Divines; too worthy to mix with such scandalous
Ministers, and would not Assemble without the Royal Call. Nay, the first List
had one Archbishop, one Bishop, and an Half, (for Bishop Brownrigg was then but
Elect.) But now their Assembly (as Philosophers think the World) consists of
Atoms; petty small Levites, whose Parts are not perceptible. And yet these
inferior postern Teachers have intoxicated England (for a man sometimes grow's
drunk by a Glister.) When they all meet, they show Beasts in Asrick by
promiscuous coupling engender Monsters. Mr Seldom visit's them (as Persians
use) to see wild Asses fight: when the Commons have tired him with their new
Law, these Brethren refresh him with their mad Gospel: They lately were
gravelled 'twixt Jerusalem and Jerico; they knew not the distance 'twixt those
two places; one cried twenty miles, another ten, 'twas concluded seven, for
this reason, that Fishwas brought from Jericho to Jerusalem market: Mr Seldom
smiled and said perhaps the Fish, was salt Fish and so stopped their mouths.
Earl Philip goes thither to hear them spend; when he heard them toss their
National, Provincial, Classical, Congregational; he swore damnably, that a pack
of good Dogs made better Music: His Allusion was porper, since the Elder's
Maid had a four-legg'd Husband. To speak truth, this Assembly is the two Houses
Tiring-room where the Lords and the Commons put on their Visards and Masks of
Religion. And their Honors have so sifted the Church, that at last they have
found the Bran of the Clergy. Yet such poor Church-menders must Reform and
shuffle: though they find Church Government may a thousand ways be changd for
the worse, but not one way for the better. These have lately published
Annotations on the Bible, where their first Note (on the word CREATE) is a
Libel against Kings for creating of Honors. Their Annotation on Jacob's two
Kids, is, that two Kids are too much for one man's supper: but he had (say
they) but one Kid and the other made Sauce. They observe upon Herod, what a
Tyrant he was, to kill Insants under two years old, without giving them legal
Trial, that they might speak for themselves. Commonly they follow the Geneva
Margin, as those Seamen who understood not the Compass crept a long the Shore.
But I hear they threaten a secoud Edition, and in the interim thrust forth a
paultry Catechism, which expounds Nine Commandments, and Eleven Articles of
the Creed. Of late they are much in love with Chronograms, because (if
possible) they are duller than Anagrams; O how they have torn the poor Bishops
names to pick out the number 666! little dreaming that a whole Bakers dozen of
their own Assembly have that beastly number in each of their Names, and that as
exactly as their Solemn League and Covenant consist's of 666 words. But though
the Assembler's Brains are Lead, his Countenance is Brass; for he damned such
as held two benefices, while himself has four or five, besides his Concubine
Lecture. He is not against Pluralities, but Dualities; He says it is unlawful
to have two of his own, though four of other men's; and observes how the Hebrew
word sor Life has no singular number. Yet it is some relief to a sequestered
person to see two Assemblers snarl for his Tithes; for of all kind of Beasts
none can match an Assembler but an Assembler. He never enters a Church by the
Door, but clambers up through a Window of Scquestration, or steals in through
Vaults and Cellars by Clandestine Contracts with an Expecting Patron. He is
most sure no Law can hurt him, for Laws dyed in England the year before the
Assembler was born. The best way to hold him, is (as our King Richard bound the
King of Cyprus) in silver chains. He loves to discourse of the New Jerusalem,
because her streets are of fine Gold; and yet could like London as well, were
Cheapside paved with the Philosopher's stone. Nay, he would say his Prayers
with Beads, if he might have a Set made of all Diamonds: This, this is it which
tempts him to such mad Articles against the Loyal Clergy, whom he dresses as he
would have them appear; just as the Ballad of Dr. Faustus brings forth the
Devil in a Friars weed. He accused one Minister, for saying the blessed Virgin
was the Mother of God, ((...), as the Ancients call her.) Another he charged
for a common Drunkard, whom all the Country knows has drunk nothing but Water
these 26 years. But the Assembler himself can drink Widows Tears though their
husbands are not dead. Sure, if Paracelsus's Doctrine were true, (that to eat
creatures alive will perpetuate man's life) the Assembler were imortal, for he
swallows quick Men, Wives, and Children; and devours Lives as well as Livings,
as if he were born in that Pagan Province where None might marry till he had
Killed twelveChristians. This makes him kneel to Lieutenant General Cromwell (as
Indians to the Devil;) for he saw how Oliver first threw --, then -- and can
with a wink do as much for --: Like Milo in the Olympicks, by practicing on a
Calf grew strong enough for a Bull, and could with ease give a lift to an Ass.
The great Turk was sending his Ambassador, to congratulate the Assemblies
Proceedings against the Christians; He Ordered them Thanks for Licencing his
Alcoran to be printed in English; but hearing Ottoman Cromwell had talked of
marching to the Walls of Constantinople, that Embassy was stopped. The only
difference 'twixt the Assembler and a Turk, is, that one plants Religion by the
^ower of the Sword, and the other by the power of the Cymeter. Nay, the
greatest strise in their whole Conventicle, is who shall do worst; for they all
intend to make the Church: but a Sepulcher, having not only Plundered but
Anatomized all the true Clergy; whose torment is hight'ned in being destroyed
by such dull instruments; as the Prophet Isaiah was sawn to pieces with a
wooden Saw. The Assembler wonders that the King and his Friends live still in
hope; he thinks them all in St. Clemens's case, drowned with an Anchor tied
about his neck. He has now got power to visit the Universities; where these
blinking Visitors look on eminent Scholars (as the Blind-man who saw men like
Trees) as Timber growing within the Root-and-Branch Ordinance. The Assembler
has now lest Scholars so poor, they have scarce Rags wherewith to make Paper. A
man would think the Two houses intend to transport the Universities, since they
load Asses with Colledge-Revenues. For though these Assemblers made themselves
Heads, they are rather Hands of Colleges, for they all are takers; and take
all. And yet they are such creeping Tyrants, that Scholars are Expelled the two
Universities, as the old Thracians, forced from their Country by Rats and
Mice. So that Learning now is so much advanced, as Arrowsmith's Glass-eye sees
more then his natural. They never admit a good scholar to a Benefice, for the
Assemblies Balance is the Lake of Sodom, where Iron swims and Feathers sink.
Their Divinity-Disputations are with Women or Laymen; and it is only on one
Question (Episcopacy) where the Assembler talks all that he and his friends can
say, (though his best medium to prove Presbyters more ancient than Bishops, is,
that Scribes, Pharisees, Priests and Elders where before the Apostols;) Yet if
a Scholar or good Argument come, he flies them as much as if they were his
Text. This made him curse Dr. Steward, Dr. Lancy and Dr. Hammond, and had he
not had more Brass in his Face than in his Kitchen, he had hanged himself at
Uxbridge, and ended with that Treaty. For he has naught of Logic, but her
clutch'd fist, and rail's at Philosophy as Beggars do at Gentlemen. He has very
bad luck when he deals in Philologie, as one of them (and that no mean man) who
in his preface to the Reader, says, that St. Paul had read Eustathius upon
Homer, though the Apostle dyed a thousand years before Eustathius was born. The
Assembers Diet is strangely different, for he dines wretchedly on dry Bread at
Westminster; four Assemblers for 13 pence: But this sharpens and Whets him for
supper, where he feeds gratis with his City-Landlord, to whom he brings a huge
Stomach and News; for which Crammed Capons cram him. He screws into Families
where is some rich Daughter or Heir; but whoever takes him into their bosom,
will dye like Cleopatra. When it rains he is Coach'd (a Classis of them
together) rouling his Eyes to mark who beholds him. His shortest things are his
hair and his Cloack. His hair is cut to the figure of 3; two high Cliffs run up
his Temples, whose Cap of shorn hair shoots down his Forehead, with Creeks
indented, where his Ears ride at Anchor. Had this false Prophet been carried
with Habbakuk, the Angel had caught fast hold of his Ears, and led him as he
leads his Auditory. His Eyes are part of his Tithe at Easter, which he boyles
at each Sermon. He has two Mouths, his Nose is one, for he speaks through both.
His hands are not in his Gloves but his Gloves in his Hands, for 'twixt
sweatings that is, Sermons, he handles little else, except his dear Mammon. His
Gown (I mean his Cloak) reaches but his pockets: when he rides in that mantle,
with a Hood on his shoulders and a hat above both, is he not then his own Man
of sin with the Triple Crown? you would swear some honest Carpenter dressed
him, and made him the Tunnel of a Country Chimney. His Doublet and Hose are of
dark Blew, a grain deeper than pure Coventry: but of late he is in Black, since
the Loyal Clergy were persecuted into Colors. His two longest things are his
Nayls and his Prayer. But the cleanest thing about him is his Pulpit-Cushion,
for he still beats the Dust out of it. To do him right, commonly he wears a
pair of good Lungs, whereby he turns the Church into a Belfry, for his Clapper
makes such a Din, you cannot hear the Cymball for the Tinkling. If his pulpit
be large he walks his Round, and speaks as from a Garrison, (his own Neck is
Palizado'd with a Ruff) When he first enters his prayer before Sermon, he
winks and gasps, and gasps and winks, as if he prepared to preach in another
world, He seems in a slumber, then in a Dream; then rumbles a while; at last
sounds forth, and then throws so much Dirt and Nonsense toward Heaven, as he
durst not offer to a Member of Parliament. Now because Scripture bids him not
curse the King in his thought, he does it in his Pulpit by word of mouth;
though heaven strike him Dumb in the very Act, as it did Hill at Cambridge, who
while he prayed; Depose Him, O Lord, who would depose us, was made the dumb
Devil. This (one would think) should gargle his foul mouth. For his only hope
why God should hear him against the King, is the Devil himself (that great
Assembler) was heard against Job. His whole prayer is such an irrational
Bleating, that (without a Metaphor) it is the Calves of his Lips: And commonly
it is larded with fine new words, as Savingable, Muchly, Christ-Jesusnes, etc.
and yet he has the face to preach against Prayer in an unknown Tongue.
Sometimes he is foundered, and then there is such hideous Coughing: But that is
very seldom, for he can glibly run over Nonsense, as an empty Cart trundles
down a Hill. When the King girt round the Earl of Essex at Lestyth^ell, an
Assembler complained that God had drawn his People into the Wilderness, and
told Him, He was bound in honor to feed them; for, Lord, said he, since thou
give them no Meat, we pray thee, O Lord, to give them no Stomachs. He tore
the Liturgy, because, forsooth, it shackled his Spirit, (he would be a Devil
without a circle;) and now if he see the Book of Common Prayer, the fire sees
it next, as sure as the Bishops were burned who compiled it. Yet he has mercy
on Hopkins and Sternhold, because their Me^^ers are sung without Authority (no
Statute, Canon, or Injunction at all,) only like himself, first crept into
private houses, and then into Churches. Mr. Rous moved those Me^ters might be
sequestered, and his own new Rithmes to enjoy the sequestration; but was refused
because John Hopkins was as ancient as John Calvin; Besides, when Rous stood
forth for his Trial, Robin Wisdom was found the better Poet. It Is true, they
have a Directory, but it is good for nothing but Adoniram, who sold the Original
for 400 l. And the Book must serve both England and Scotland as the Directory
Needle point's North and South. The Assembler's only ingenuity is, that he
prays for an ex tempore Spirit, since his Conscience tells him he has no
Learning. His prayer thus ended, he then looks round, to observe the Sex of his
Congregation, and accordingly turns the Apostle's Men, Fathers, and Brethren,
into Dear Brethren and Sisters. For, his usual Auditory is mostpart Female; and
as many Sisters flock to him, as at Paris on Saint Margarets day, when all come
to Church that are, or hope to be with child that year. He divides his Text as
he did the Kingdom, makes one part fight against* another: or as Burges divides
the Dean of Paul's House, not into parts, but Tenements, that is, so as 'twill
yield most money. And properly they are Tenements; for each part must be dwelt
upon, though himself comes near it but once a Quarter; and so his Text is
rather let out than Divided. Yet sometimes (to show his skill in Keckerman,) he
Butchers a Text, cuts it (just as the Levite did his Concubine) into many dead
parts, breaking the sense and words all to pieces, and then they are not
divided, but shattered like the Splinters of Don Quixot's Lance. If his Text be
to the occasion, his first Dish is Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver; yet
tells not the People what Pictures those were. HisSermon and prayer grin at
each other, the one is Presbyterian, the other Independent, for he preaches up
the Classes, yet prays for the Army. Let his Doctrine and Reason be what they
will, his Use is still to save his Benefice and augment his Lecture. He talks
much of Truth, but abhorrs Peace, lest it strip him as naked as Truth; and
therefore hates a personal Treaty, unless with a Sister. He has a rare
simpering way of expressions he calls a Married Couple Saints that enjoy the
mystery; and a man Drunk, is a Brother full of the Creature. Yet at Wedding
Sermons he is very familiar, and (like that Picture in the Church at Leyden)
shows Adam and Eve without Figleaves. AtFunerals he gives infallibleSigns that
the Party is gone to Heaven; but his chief Mark of a child of God, is to be
good to God's Ministers. And hence it is he calls his Preachment Manna, fitted
not to his hearers Necessity, but their Palate; for it is to feed himself, not
them. If he chance to tire, he refreshes himself with the Peoples Hum, as a
Collar of Bells to cheer up a Pack-horse. It Is no wonder he will preach, but that
any will hear him, (and his constant Auditors do but show the length of their
Ears;) For he is such an (...), that to hear him makes good Scholars sick, but
to read him is death. Yet though you heard him three hours he will ask a fourth,
as the Beggar at Delph craves your Charity because he eats four pound of Bread
at a Meal. 'Twas from his Larum the Watch-makers learned their infinite Skrew.
His Glass and Text are equaly handled, that is, once an hour: nay sometimes be
sally's and never returns, and then we should leave him to the Company of
Lorimers, for he must be held with Bit and Bridle. Who ever once has been at
his Church can never doubt the History of Balaam. If he have got any new Tale
or Expression, it is easier to make stones speak than him to hold his peace. He
hates a Church where there is an Echo, for it Robs him of his dear Repetition,
and confounds the Auditory as well as he. But of all Mortals I admire the
Short-hand-men, who have the patience to write from his Mouth: had they the art
to shorten it into Sense, they might write his whole Sermon on the back of
their Nail. For his Invention consists in finding a way to speak nothing upon
any thing; and were he in the Grand Seignior's power, he would lodge him with
his Mutes; for Nothing and Nothing to purpose are all one. I wonder in
conscience he can preach against Sleeping at his Opium-Sermons. He preaches
indeed both in season and out of season; for he rayl's at Popery; when the Land
is almost lost in Presbytery; and would cry out Fire, Fire, in Noah's Flood.
Yet all this he so acts with his Hands, that in this sense too his Preaching is
an Handicraft. Nor can we complain that Plays are put down while he can preach;
save only his Sermons have worse sense and less truth. But he blew down the
Stage and preached up the Scaffold. And very wisely, lest men should track him,
and find where he pilfers all his best Simile's, (the only thing wherein he is
commendable, St Paul himself having culled Sentences from Menander's Thais,
though 'twas his worst, that is, unchaste Comedy.) Sometimes the Assembler will
venture at the Original, and then (with the translator of Don Quixot) he
mistakes Sobs and Sighs for Eggs and Collops. But commonly (for want of Greek
and Latin) he learns Hebrew, and straight is illuminated; that is, mad: his
Brain is broke by a Brickbat cast from the Tower of Babel. And yet this empty
windy Teacher has Lectur'd a War quite round the Kingdom: he has found a
Circulation of blood for Destruction (as famous Harvey for Preservation) of
Mankind. 'Twas easy to foresee a great Mortality, when Ravens were heard in
all Corporations. For, as Multitude of Froggs presage a Pestilence, so croaking
Lecturers foretold an Assembly. Men come to Church, as the Great Alexander went
to Sacrifice, led by Crows. You have seen a small Eldertree grow in chinks and
clefts of Church-walls, it seems rather a Weed than a Tree; which, lend it
growth, makes a Rent in the Wall, and throws down the Church. Is not this the
Assembler? grown from Schisms (which himself begot,) and if permitted, will
make the Church but a Floor or Churchyard. Yet, for all this, he will be
called Christ's Minister and Saint, as the Rebels against King John were the
Army of God. Sure when they meet they cannot but smile; for the dullest amongst
them needs must know that they all cheat the people; such gross, low impostors,
that we die the death of the Emperor Claudius, poisoned by Mushromes. The old
Heretickshad Skill and Learning (some excuse for a Seduced Church; those were
Scholars, but these Assemblers; whose very Brains (as Manichaeus's skin) are
stuffed with Chaff. For they study little, and preach much, ever sick of a
Diabetes: nor do they read, but weed Authors, picking up cheap and refuse
Notes, that with Caligula they gather Cockle-shells, and with Domitian retire
into theirStudie to catch Flies. At Fasts and Thanksgivings the Assembler is
the State's Trumpet; for then he does not preach, but is blown; proclaims News
very loud, the Trumpet and his Forehead being both of one Metal. (And yet,
good man, he still prays for Boldness.) He hackneys out his Voice like a Crier;
and is a kind of Spiritual Agitant, receives Orders, and spreads them. In
earnest the States cannot want this Tool, for without him the Saints would
scarce Assemble. And if the Zealots chance to fly out, they are charmed home by
this Sounding Brass. There is not on earth a baser Sycophant; for he ever is
chewing some Vote or Ordinance; and tells the People how savoury it is; like
him who licked up the Emperor's spittle and swore 'twas sweet. Would the two
Houses give him Cathedral Lands, he would prove Lords and Commons to be sure
Divino: but should they offer him the Self-denying- Ordinance, he would
justisie the Devil and curse them to their faces, (his Brother Kirk-man did it
in Scotland.) It Is pleasant to observe how finely they play into each others
hands; Marshall procures thanks to be given to Sedgwick (for his great pains)
Sedgwick obtains as much for Marshall, and so they all pimp for one another.
But yet (to their great comfort be it spoken) their whole seven years Sermons
at Westminster are now to be sold in Fetter-lane and Precorner. Before a
Battle the Assembler ever speaks to the Soldiers; and the holding up of his
hands must be as necessary as Moses's against the Ama^ekites: For he pricks
them on, tells them that God loves none but the valiant: but when Bullets fly,
Himself runs first, and then cries All the sons of Adam are cowards! Were there
any Metempsychosis his Soul would want a Lodging; no single Beast could fit
him, being wise as a Sheep and innocent as a Wolf. His sole comfort is, he
cannot out-sin Hugh Peter's: Sure, as Satan has possessed the Assembler, so
Hugh Peter's has possessed Satan, and is the Devil's Devil. He alone would fill
a whole Herd of Gadarens. He has sucked Blood ever since he lay in the
Butcher's Sheets: and now (like his Sultan) has a Shambles in his Countenance;
so crimson and torrid, you may there read how St. Laurence dyed, and think the
three Children were delivered from his face. This is St. Hugh, who will Level
the Assembler, or the Devil's an Ass. Yoke these Brethren; and they two couple
like a Sadducee and a Pharisae, on a Turk and a Persian, both Mahumetans. But
the Assembler's deepest, highest Abomination, is his Solemn League and
Covenant; whereby he strives to damn or beggar the whole Kingdom; out-doing the
Devil, who only persuades, but the Assembler forces to perjury or starving And
this) whoever lives to observe it) will one day sink both him and his Faction:
for he and his Oath are so much one, that were he halfhang'd and let down
again, his first word would be Covenant! Covenant!

But I forget, a Character should be brief (though tedious Length be his best
Character.) Therefore I Will give ye' (what He denies the Sequesterd Clergy) but
a fifth Part. For weigh him single, and he has the Pride of three Tyrants, the
Forehead of six Gaolers and the Fraud of twelve Brokers. Or take him in the
Bunch, and their whole Assemblyis a Club of Hypocrites, where six dozen of
Schismatik spends two hours for four shillings apiece.

FINIS
(...) A Proposal humbly offered for the Farming of Liberty of Conscience.
Written in the year 1663. By the Author of Hudibress.
SInce nothing can be dearer unto poor Christians than Liberty, or the free
exercise of their Judgments and Conscience, which has kindled that fire in the
bowels of the three Kingdoms, which all the precious blood that has been shed,
during those late Troubles, has not been able totally to extinguish: And since
many of Us, whose Names are affixed, were so profitably instrumental in those
late Combustions, as appears all along in our Sermons before the Honorable
House of Parliament, in the Years 1642, 43, 44, 45, 46. in exciting the good
people of this Nation, to seek and maintain their Christian Liberty, against
all Prelatical and Antichristian Imposition whatsoever. And considering that
the Little Finger of Apostasy from our first Love, would be a greater burden
upon our Tender Consciences, than the Loins of Episcopacy. We being more bound
in Honor than Conscience, cannot totally desist; neither need any man fear, or
so much as suspect, lest any Inconvenience or Alteration should happen in
Religion, by the great diversity of Opinions, Tongues, and Languages, tolerated
amongst us, unless in the great Babel of Episcopacy, that may possibly be
pulled down and destroyed by this our notable Confusion; for, if the Gospel was
wonderfully spread abroad by every man's speaking in his own Language, and the
very Enemies thereof astonished, and miraculously wrought into a belief of it:
how it is likely to be now obstructed in the free exercise of our Spiritual
Gifts, with these our cloven and divided Tongues. And since many worthy persons
from whom we might little expect it, but far less deserve it, out of their
Goodness and Clemency, are pleased to incline to some Liberty, did not some
persons, Aliens and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, take up a
Reproach against us, as Persons reprobated into an unpossibility of submission
to Principles of Concord, Peace, and Order, in Church or State, never being
able hitherto to come to any consistency amongst our selves; The Ark of God
having, for twenty years together, been exposed to by-ways, Streets, and worse
places, for want of an Agreement amongst our own Brethren where to rest it, or
how to entertain it. If this be our Case, and could we be sure of so much
favor as Saul once desired of Samuel, that the Bishops would but honor us
before the People, We would in a private Christian way, lay our hands upon our
hearts, and acknowledge the hand of God, and the Justice thereof, in turning us
out of his Vineyard, as wicked and unprofitable Servants, and to suffer the
iniquity of our heels to overtake us; crying out with reverend Mr. Calamy, The
Ark of God is justly departed from us; but being not yet thus assured, do hope
the people will yet believe these to be only Bears skins lap'd about us by
Episcopal hands: And therefore to the end that a Consistency, and Oneness of
Judgment of the whole separating Brethren, and their Moderation, may be known
unto all men, and that the World may know, that there is a Spirit of Rule and
Government resting in us;

IT is humbly proposed to the Sole Power of granting Licenses and Indulgences
for Liberty of Conscience, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Barwick, may be vested in the Persons under named for the Term of
seven years, under the Farm Rent of an hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum, to
Commence from the twenty fifth day of March next, under such Rates and
Qualifications as are hereafter specified.

The Names of the Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience;
proposed on Monday, March 2. 1662. being the day of a private Fast, kept by Mr.
Calamy, Mr. Baxter, and others, at Mr. Beal's house, near my Lord of Ely's
Chapel in Holborn.
Mr. Edmund Calamy. Mr. Titham late of Colchester. Mr. Philip Nigh. Mr. Feak.
Mr. Stanley of Dorchester. George Fox, Executor of the last Will and Testament
of James Nailor deceased. Doctor Lazarus Seaman, Mr. Dell, late of Cambridge.
Doctor Owen. Mr. Bryan, late of Coventry. Mr. Matthew Mead. Mr. John Coppin.
Dr. Manton. Mr. Kiffen. The Executor of Mr. Venner, lately executed. Mr. Thomas
Case. Mr. Reynor, late of Lincoln. Mr. Ralph Venning. Mr. Rogers. Mr. Benn,
late of Dorchester. Mr. George Griffith, late of Charterhouse. The Executor of
Hugh Peter's, lately executed. Mr. George Newton, late of Taunton. Mr. Dan.
Dyke, late of Hertfordshire. Mr. William Jenkins. Mr. Fisher, late of Kent.
Doctor Thomas Goodwin. Mr. Hammond, late of New Castle. Mr. Peter Sterry. Mr.
Bridges, late of Yarmouth. Mr. Joseph Carryll. Mr. Tombs, late of Lemster. Mr.
Leegh, late of Lumbard-street. Mr. Mayo, late of Kingston. Mr. Joshua Sprigg.
Mr. Henry Jessey. Mr. Newcomen of Dedham in Essex. Doctor Tuckney of Cambridge.
Doctor Cornelius Burges. Mr. Zachary Crofton. Doctor Holmes. Mr. John Cann. Mr.
Thomas Brooks.
That the Persons aforesaid may be constituted Grand Commissioners, and Farmers
of Liberty of Conscience, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick, and may be empowered to set up one public Office within the
City of London, and to nominate and elect a convenient number of Registers,
Clerks, and other Officers: And for the more certainty of all Certificates to
be granted as is hereafter appointed, the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers
may form a common Seal to be known, and called by the common name of The
public Seal of the Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience,
engraven, An Ass without Ears, Braying, with this Motto encircled, Stat pro
ratione Libertas: And the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, or any twenty
four of them in the said Office assembled, may, from time to time, compound and
agree for Liberty of Conscience, with any Person or Persons, under such Rates
and Qualifications, as are hereafter specified.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, or any twenty four of them, may
constitute and appoint, under the Public Seal of the Office, Sub
Commissioners, and other Officers, for every County within the said Kingdom,
not exceeding the number of twelve for each County, whereof, seven to be a
Quorum, who may compound and agree for Liberty of Conscience, with any person
or persons, Select Congregations, Cities, Towns Corporate, Parishes, Hamlets,
and Villages, by the great, or otherwise, within their respective Countries,
not exceeding the Rates hereafter mentioned.

Rates to be observed in all Compositions for Liberty of Conscience.
Per Annum. A Presbyterian Minister. 500 A Ruling Elder. 400 A Deacon. 300 A
Hearer, Male or Female in Fellowship to all Ordinances. 200 A Common Hearer
only 100 An Independent Pastor 5 A Teaching Elder 400 A Helper in Government
300 A Deacon 300 A Hearer Male or Female in Fellowship to all Ordinances. 200 A
common Hearer only 100 A Baptist admitted to the Administration of all
Ordinances 500 A preaching Assistant 400 An Elder in Office 300 A Deacon 200 A
Hearer in Fellowship Male or Female to all Ordinances 200 A common Hearer only
100 A Fifth Monarcher admitted to hold forth 500 An Elder under the same
Administration 300 A Deacon under the same Administration 300 A Hearer Male or
Female in Fellowship according to the value of his or her Estate 2 s. per l.
per annum. A common Hearer male or female according to the value of his or her
Estate, 12 d. per l. per annum. A speaking male Quaker 400 A speaking female
Quaker 300 A common Quaker male or Female -- 200 A Confessor -- -- -- -- 600 A
Seminary of Mass-Priest at large -- -- 500 A private Mass-priest -- -- -- 400 A
Roman Catholic in any other Order -- 300 A Roman Catholic not in order Male
or Female 100 An Officer under any Administration not mentioned in the Rates
aforesaid, being a Native of England, such only excepted as stand Conformable
to the Church of England. -- -- -- 500 A common person under any Administration
not mentioned in the Rates aforesaid, being a Native of England, such only
excepted as stand Conformable to the Church of England. -- -- 200 An Officer
under any Administration whatsoever, not a Native of England, except
conformable to the Church of England. 1000 A private person under any
Administration whatsoever, not a Native of England, except conformable to the
Church of England -- -- 500
Rates to be observed in compounding for Liberty of Conscience in the
Particulars following, viz.
FOR Liberty to assert the Pope's Supremacy 1000 For Liberty to write, speak,
or preach against the Government, as they shall be inwardly moved 500 For
Liberty to keep on their Hats before Magistrates, or in Courts of Judicature --
-- 200 For Liberty to rail publicly against the Bishops and Common Prayer --
-- -- 100 For Liberty to refuse all manner of Oaths, of Allegiance and
Supremacy, or in Cases Civil or Criminal -- -- -- -- -- 200 For Liberty to deny
Tithes and other Church Duties -- -- -- -- 100 For Liberty to expound the
Revelations, and the Book of Daniel -- -- -- 100 For liberty to disturb any
Congregation after Sermon -- -- -- -- 0100 For Liberty to assert the Solemn
League and Covenant. -- -- -- -- 150 For liberty to instruct youth in the short
Catechism, set forth by the Assembly of Divines. 0100
That any Person or Persons gifted for any the Particulars abovesaid, may have
Liberty therein, either as an Itinerate, in private or public, at the Rates
abovesaid.

That no person or persons be admitted to compound for Liberty of Conscience,
until he, or they, have first taken, and subscribed to the Solemn Protestation
following, before the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, or their Sub
Commissioners respectively.

I A. B. do here solemnly protest, That I judge my self still bound by the
Solemn League and Covenant, by the Engagement, by private Church Covenant, or
by any other Oath which I have taken ever since the Year 1641. And that so far
as with Safety to my Person and Estate I may, I will endeavor the utter
Ertirpation of Episcopacy, and to the utmost of my Power, will abett and
promote all Schism, Faction, and Discord, both in Church and State, according
to the best form and manner, prescribed and laid open in the Sermons of many of
the Grand Commissioners and Farmers, before the Parliament, appointed to be
Printed, and now called the Homilies of the separated Churches. And that I will
never by what Conviction of Authority soever, whether Legal or Episcopal, ever
consent to the Established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England.

And I do likewise believe, That Liberty of Conscience was a mysterious, yet
profitable Talent committed to the Churches, and that it may be lawfully Farmed
out for Advantage and Improvement.

That no person within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Barwick, may, from, and after the twenty fifth day of March next, use or
exercise any manner of Liberty of Conscience, except persons standing
conformable to the Church of England; until such Person or Persons, shall
first take the Solemn Protestation, and shall compound with the said Grand
Commissioners and Farmers, for Liberty of Conscience, nor shall he be admitted
or permitted to be a Speaker or Hearer, in any Meeting or Assemblies whatsoever.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have Power to constitute, under the Public Seal of the said Office, a
convenient number of Spiritual Gagers, who may have and exercise all such
Powers, Privileges, and Authorities, as the Gagers for Excise of Beer and Ale,
have, or ought to have and enjoy, and may, at any time, in case of Suspicion
enter into any house or place, public or private, to Gage, and try the Spirits
and Affections of any Person or Fersons; and by Praying, Preaching, or other
good Exhortation, dissuade from Episcopacy, and the Common Prayer, the better
to fit and prepare them to compound for Liberty of Conscience.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have power to fine any person or persons (not exceeding the Sum of twenty
pounds for every offense, who shall, after Composition for Liberty of
Conscience, and subscribing the Solemn Protestation, be present in any Church
or Chapel, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Barwick, in the time of any part of Divine Service, unless at the Funeral of
his Father, or some other like occasion, he shall either respond, be uncovered,
or carry himself reverently, in the Time of Divine Service aforesaid.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, or any
twenty four of them assembled at the Office aforesaid, may have and exercise a
Jurisdiction of Appeal in all matters relating to Liberty of Conscience, within
the said Kingdom of England, and shall have a conclusive power in all matters
brought before them, by way of Appeal as aforesaid.

That for the better Management of all such matters as shall be brought
judicially before the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers of Liberty of
Conscience, by way of Appeal, the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, shall
have Power to constitute and appoint Mr. Oliver St. John's, and such others as
they judge fit for their said Service, to be of Standing-Councel with the said
Grand Commissioners and Farmers: And the said Mr. Oliver St. John's, being so
constituted and appointed under the public Seal of the said Office, shall, and
may be exempted and discharged from being in any public Office, or place of
Trust or Profit, for the said Term of seven Years, any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That if any person or persons shall happen to be proceeded against in any of
the Ecclesiastical Courts of the Bishops of this Kingdom, for Contumacy, for
Nonconformity, for Non-payment of Tithes, and other Church-Duties, for public
Railing against the Bishops, the Common Prayer, or the Government of the Church
of England, or shall speak Opprobriously or Scandalously against the Doctrine
or Discipline thereof, as Antichristian, or shall maintain any Positions or
Doctrines contrary thereunto; every such person producing a Certificate from
the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers under the public Seal of the said
Office, that such person or persons are under Composition for Liberty of
Conscience, shall actually be discharged, and all farther Proceedings stayed,
Any thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

That if any persons shall happen to be Indicted, or criminally proceeded
against in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or elsewhere within the
Kingdom of England, either for Treasonable Speeches, or Practices, for public
railing at the Government, or for Scandalous words against either or both
Houses of Parliament, or for transgressing any of the penal Laws and Statures
of this Kingdom, Every such person or persons, producing a Certificate from the
said Grand Commissioners and Farmers under the public Seal of the said Office,
that such person or persons are under Composition for Liberty of Conscience;
and that such words or practices were not spoken or acted malitiose, but were
only the natural and proper Effects and Product of Liberty of Conscience, shall
be discharged, and all further Proceedings stayed; Any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

That the said Grand Commissioners, and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have Power from time to time, to ordain Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, or any
other Officers, under any Administration whatsoever, by the laying on of the
Public Seal of the Office: Which said Imposition of the said Public Seal
being received with a Certificate, shall be as Lawful an Ordination, as if
every such Person had received Imposition from the Hands of the Presbytery; any
late Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers may have Power from time to
time, to set apart days of Public Fastings, and Humiliation, and Thanksgiving;
on which days it may be lawful for any Person or Persons appointed, to
officiate before the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers, to stir up the
People to a Holy Indignation against themselves, for having by their want of
Zeal, and Brotherly Kindness one toward another, lost many Precious
Enjoyments; and above all, the never-to-be-forgotten Loss of the late Power and
Dominion, which, with the Expense of so much Blood and Rapine, was put into the
Hands of the Saints. And to take up for a Lamentation, and great thoughts of
Heart, the Divisions of Reuben, that having our Sacks full, such an Evil Spirit
should be found in the midst of us, as to fall out by the way; might it have
been with those that abode by the Stuff, as with those that went out to the
Battle, it had not been with us as at this day. Some starting aside, like a
broken Bow, in the Year 48. others continue to bear the Burden and Heat of the
Day until 60, being harnessed, did then turn their Backs in the day of Battle:
As was most sweetly handled at the Fast kept Yesterday, at Mr. Beale's, by Mr.
Calamy, Mr. Baxter, and others.

That the Twentieth day of April next, commonly called Easter Monday, be kept
as a day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for a Blessing upon these Gospel --
Undertakings; and that Mr. Edmond Calamy, Mr. Peter Sterry, Doctor Lazarus
Seamon, and Mr. Feake, be desired to carry on the Work of the Day in Prayer and
Preaching, before the said Grand Farmers; and that the particulars following,
be recommended to their Consideration in the Work of the Day.

1. To Bewail, 1. All our Court Sins. 2. Our Bishops Sins. 3. Our Monks Sins.
4. Our Common Prayer Sins.

2. To Divert* 1. Westminster Hall Judgments. 2. Our Old Bailey Judgments. 3.
Our Tower Hill Judgments. 4. Our Charing Cross Judgments. 5. Our Tyburn
Judgments.

Lastly, For Deliverance from the Hand of Dun, that uncircumcifed Philistine.

That the said Grand Comissioners, and Farmers of Liberty of Conscience, may
have Power to build Churches and Chapels in any place, or places, except upon
such Ground where Churches or Chapels do already stand, in regard of the
Inconvenience of setting up Altar against Altar: And forasmuch as the Custom of
reading some part of the Holy Bible before Sermon, commonly called First and
Second Lessons, has been found fruitless, That therefore the said Grand
Commissioners and Farmers, may have power to appoint instead thereof, the
Annual reading of those Sermons preached by many of the said Grand
Commissioners and Farmers, before the Parliament, upon special Occasions of
Thanksgiving and Humiliation, from the Year 1641. to the Year 1648, Which said
Sermons, may be called the Homilies of the Separating Churches.

That the said Grand Commissioners and Farmers may have Power to require Mr.
Gilbert Millington, and Mr. Luke Robinson, the lame Evangelist, to deliver up
all such Articles, Orders, Books, Papers, and other Writings, as were
transacted before the late Committee for Plundered Ministers; and likewise, all
such as were passed and transacted before Mr. Philip Ney, and some others of
the now Grand Commissioners and Farmers, and heretofore called Commissioners,
or Spiritual Tryers, to the end the said Articles, Orders, Books, and other
Papers, may be Printed and Published, and may be kept at the said Office upon
Record for ever, and appointed to be the Book of Canons of the Separated
Churches.

All this being done, we may upon Scripture Grounds expect, that the Door of
Hope may yet be open to Us, and our Children after us, to see the Travel of our
Souls, and to set us into the Promised Land, and to reap some of those Clusters
of the Grapes of Canaan, which with so much Labor and Toil of Body, and Mind
were planted, especially in the Years of 1641, 42, 43, 44, 45. by many of Us,
and other Precious Saints and Ministers of the Gospel, who are since fallen
asleep, and have, we hope, reaped the Fruits of those Labors, the Lord having
in that day put a mighty Spirit into Us, and set us as Watchmen upon the Towers
of Israel, to cry mightily Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly. Grant that those
Heartbreaking Labors of Ours, those Kingdestroying Labors, those
Kingdom-ruining Labors, those Gospel-scandalizing Labors, those
Church-subverting Labors, those Soul-confounding Labors of Ours may never be
forgotten, but may be written as with the point of a Diamond, upon the Heart of
the King, upon the Hearts of the Bishops, upon the Heart of the Parliament, and
upon the Hearts of all the People from Dan to Beersheba, that so in God's good
time, we may receive our Reward Sevenfold into our own Bosoms, and that the
Generations to come, may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

So prays S. Butler.

The Roundheads Resolution.
WHereas we are, through our great Ignorance and Obstinacy grown to a most
Seditious and Malignant head, and the Horns of that Head (though of a main
length) not able to support our Arrogant Faction, as appears by our last being
soundly slashed and bastinado'd, by a mad Crew called the Cavaliers; and
whereas a great part of Us have shut up our Shops, because we could no longer
keep them open, which kind of shutting up, proceeds commonly from our vast
Expense in White-broths, Custards, and other Luxurious Dishes, provided for the
Edification one of another. And whereas the Multitude, called True Protestants,
endeavor to hold up Bishops, to maintain good Order, Discipline, and Orthodox
Preaching in the Church; Learning and Arts in the Universities, and Peace in
the Commonwealth; all which is nothing but Idolatry, Superstition, Profaneness,
and plain Popery: And further, whereas we (who are nothing properly but Round
heads and Fanatics) are in most scandalous manner termed Holy Brethren, the
Zealots of the Land, and which in sincerity we never were, or ever will be.

And sorasmuch likewise as the profane World of True Protestants, are a
stiff-necked Generation, and will not yield unto Us the Pre-eminence of
Doctrine and Religion, not withstanding the many Senceless two hours of those
Spiritual Trumpets of Our Faction, the Sanctified Clergy-Lecturers, or of Our
more Divine Lectures of our Supreme Shee-Lecturers, whose Bowels do even earne
for the getting in of the Saints unto Us, and have, as it were even a zealous
lusting after Us.

And forasmuch as the Religion professed by Us; in the purest and most decent,
as appears by the great Love and Community betwixt the Brethren and the
Sisters, the Convenience of the Woods, Saw-pits, and Dark Places, the putting
out Lights, and defying those Tapers of Iniquity, which cause us to behold our
own Wicked Deeds, the gooly Bigness of the Ear, with the shortness of the Hair,
which hinders not the Sound of the Shepherds Voice, but easily hears him
call to a great Feast, amongst the Rich Saints, the length and sharpness of the
Nose, which not only smells the sweet Savors of the Holy Plum-broth, but also
promises an eager Appetite to some good Work toward the Younger Sisters, the
roundness of the Band, the length of the Dublet, and the shortness of the
Breeches, being a habit correspondent to the Pictures of the Apostles in the
Geneva Print, the mightiness of our Faith, which is able to remove a Church
into a Wood, the Transparency of our Charity, that is so invisible, that
neither the right hand, nor the left ever knew it, the Multitude of our Good
Works, which no man living can number, the Godly Works of our tautological
Prayers, and the Zeal thereof, which brings us even to Divine Consumption;
whereby we look like the Prodigal Son at his return home, or the Priests in the
Arras, the defying of all Fathers, Bishops, and Doctors, Conformable Persons,
Canonical Robes, Ecclesiastical Gestures, and Utensils, all Learning, liberal
Arts and Degrees, as the rags of Superstition, the dregs of Popery are
abominable in the goggle eyes of a right Roundhead; and yet this simple
Innocent Profession is scorned and baffled, and by whom? But by Scholars, and
such as profess Learning, which is no more necessary to Religion, than a
Public Church (which verily) is but a Den of Thieves when we are absent.

All which Grievances do stand with much reason, and therefore are utterly
against our tender Consciences, and never were allowed by any Synod of
More-fields or Westminster.

That therefore which we do now resolve to maintain, and desire have confirmed,
and never to altered (till some new toy tickle us in the Pericranium, which
will be very shortly) is,

1. That our Religion, Tenants, and Manors, beforementioned, be established
and maintained against all Reason, Learning, Divinity, Order, Discipline,
Morality, Piety, or Humanity whatsoever.

2. That the very Name of Bishops, shall be a sufficient Jury and Judge, to
condemn any of them, without any further Evidence or Circumstance.

3. That if any man whatsoever, having knowledge in the Latin Tongue (being a
Popish Language) shall presume to think he can save a Soul by Preaching, he be
excommunicated both in this World, and in the World to come; unless it be some
certain Lecturers, of whose approved Railing and Ignorance, we are well
assured, and have known to stand six hours: on a Fasting Day.

4. That the Felt-maker and the Cobbler, two innocent Cuckolds may be instituted
Primares and Metropolitans of the two Arch-Provinees, and the rest of the Sect
preserved, according to their Imbecillities of Spirit, to such Bishoprics and
other Livings, as will competently serve to procure fat Poultry, sor the
filling of their insatiate Stomachs, in which regard, Church Livings had more
need to be increased, than diminished.

5. That no man whatsoever, who bears the name of Cavalier, may be capable of
making any of the Brethren a Cuckold, unless he cut his Hair, and alter his
Profession; but be excluded from the Conventicles, as the King's Friend, and a
Reprobate.

6. Lastiy, That there be two whole days set apart to Fast and Pray for the
Confusion of all that are not thus resolved.

A Caveat to the Roundheads.
I Come to charge ye
That slight the Clergy,
And pull the Miter from the Prelat's Head,
That you will be wary,
Least you miscarry
In all these factious humors you have bred;
But as for Brownists we'll have none,
But take them all, and hang them one by one.
Your wicked Actions,
Joined in Factions,
Are all but aims to rob the King of his due.
Then give this reason
For your Treason,
That you will be ruled, if he will be ruled by you;
Then leave these factions, zealous Brother,
Least you be hanged one against another.
Your Wit abounded,
Gentle Roundhead,
When you abused the Bishops in a Ditty,
When as you sanged,
You must be hanged,
A Timpinee of Malice made you witty,
And though your hot zeal made you bold,
When you are hanged, your Arse will be a cold.
Then leave confounding,
And expounding
The Doctrine that you preach in Tubbs,
You raise this Warring,
And private Jarring,
I doubt, in tinte, will prove the Knave of Clubbs.
It Is for your Lying, and not for your Oaths,
You shall be hanged, and Ketch shall have your Clothes.
FINIS.

