POEMS: Viz. I. MISCELLANIES. II. The Mistress, or, Love Verses. III.
PINDARIQVE ODES. And IV. Davideis, OR, A SACRED POEM OF THE TROUBLES OF DAVID.

Written by A. COWLEY.

VIRG. GEORG. 3. -- Tentanda via est qua me quoque possim
Tollere humo, victorque virum volitare per ora.
LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard, M.DC.LVI.

ELEGIA DEDICATORIA, ad ILLUSTRISSIMAM Academiam CANTABRIGIENSEM.
HOc tibi de Nato ditissima Matter egeno
Exiguum immensi pignus Amoris habe.
Heu meliora tibi depromere dona volentes
Astringit gratas parcior arca manus.
Tune tui poteris vocem hic agnoscere Nati
Tam male formatam, dissimilemque tuae?
Tune hic materni vestigia sacra decoris,
Tu Speculum poteris hic reperire tuum?
Post longum, dices, Coulei, sic mihi tempus?
Sic mihi speranti, perfide, multa redis?
Quae, dices, Sagae Lemuresque Deaeque nocentes,
Hunc mihi in Infantis supposuere loco?
At Tu, sancta Parens, crudelis tu quoque, Nati
Ne tractes dextra vulnera cruda rudi.
Hei mihi, quid Fato Genetrix accedis iniquo?
Sit Sors, sed non sis Ipsa Noverca mihi.
Si mihi natali Musarum adolescere in arvo,
Si been dilecto luxuriare solo,
Si mihi de docta licuisset before unda
Haurire, ingentem si satiare sitim,
Non ego degeneri dubitabilis ore redirem,
Nec legeres Nomen fusa rubore meum
Scis been, scis quae me Tempestas publica Mundi
Raptatrix vestro sustulit e gremio,
Nec pede adhuc firmo, nec firmo dente, negati
Poscentem querulo murmr Lactis opem.
Sic quondam aerium Vento bellante per aequor,
Cum gravidum Autumnum saeva flagellet Hyems.
Immatura sua velluntur ab arbore poma,
Et vi victa cadunt; Arbor and ipsa gemit*
Nondum succus inest terrae generosus avitae,
Nondum Sol roseoredditur ore Pater.
O mihi jucundum Grantae super omnia Nomen!
O penitus toto cord receptus Amor!
O pulchrae sine Luxu Aedes, vitaeque beatae,
Splendida Paupertas, ingenuusque decor!
O chara ante alias, magnorum nomine Regnum
Digna Domus! ^rini nomine digna Dei.
O nimium Cereris cumulati munere Campi,
Posthabitis Ennae quos colit illa jugis!
O sacri Fontes! and sacrae Vatibus Vmbrae,
Quas recreant Avium Pieridumque chori!
O Camus! Phoebo nullus quo gratior amnis!
Amnibus auriferis invidiosus inops!
Ah mihi si vestrae reddat bona gaudia sedis,
Detque Deus docta posse quiet frui!
Qualis eram cum me tranquilla mente sedentem
Vidisti in ripa, Came serene, tua;
Mulcentem audisti puerili flumina cantu;
Ille quidem immerito, sed tibi gratus erat.
Nam, memini ripa cum tu dignatus utraque
Dignatum est totum verba refer nemus.
Tunc liquidis tacitisq, simul mea vita diebus,
Et similis vestrae candida fluxit aquae.
At nunc ^aenosae luces, atque obiice multo
Rumpitur aetatis turbidus ordo meae.
Quid mihi Sequana opus, Tamesisve aut Thybridisunda?
Tu potis es nostram tollere, Came, sitim.
Foelix qui nunquam plus uno viderit amne!
Quique eadem Salicis littora more colit!
Foelix qui non tentatus sordescere Mundus,
Et cui Pauperies nota nitere potest!
Tempore cui nullo misera experientia constat,
Ut res humanas sentiat esse Nihil*
At nos exemplis Fortuna instruxit opimis,
Et documentorum satque superque dedit.
Cum Capite a vulsum, Diadema, infractaque sceptra,
Contusasque Hominum Sort minante minas,
Parcarum ludos, and non tractabile Fatum,
Et versas fundo vidimus orbis opes.
Quis poterit fragilem post talia credere puppim
In^ami scopulis naufragiisque Mari?
Tu quoque in hoc Terrae tremuisti, Academia, Motu,
(Nec frustra) atque aedes contremuere tuae.
Contremuere ipsae pacatae Palladis arces;
Et timuit Fulmen Laurea sancta novum.
Ah quanquam iratum, pestem hanc avertere Numen,
Nec saltem Bellis ista licere, velit!
Nos, tua progenies, pereamus; and ecce, perimus!
In nos jus habeat: Ius habet omne malum.
Tu stabilis brevium genus immortale nepotum
Fundes; nec tibi Mors ipsa superstes erit.
Semper plena manens uteri de font perenni
Formosas mittes ad mare Mortis aquas.
Sic Venus humana quondam, Dea saucia dextra.
(Namque so^ent ipsis Bella nocere Deis)
Imploravit opem superum, questusque cievit,
Tinxit adorandus candida membra ^ruor.
Quid quereris? contemn breves secura dolores;
Nam tibi far Necem vulnera nulla valent.
THE PREFACE.
AT my return lately into England, I met by great accident (for such I account
it to be, that any Copy of it should be extant any where so long, unless at his
house who printed it) a Book entitled, The Iron Age, and published under my
name, during the time of my absence. I wondered very much how one who could be
so foolish to write so ill Verses, should yet be so Wise to set them forth as
another Man's rather then his own; though perhaps he might have made a better
choice, and not fathered the Bastard upon such a person, whose stock of
Reputation is, I fear, little enough for maintenance of his own numerous
Legitimate Offspring of that kind. It would have been much less injurious, if
it had pleased the Author to put forth some of my Writings under his own name,
rather then his own under mine: He had been in that a more pardonable Plagiary,
and had done less wrong by Robbery, then he does by such a Bounty; for no body
can be justified by the Imputation even of another Merit; and our own course
Clothes are like to become us better, then those of another man's, though never
so rich* but these, to say the truth, were so beggarly, that I my self was
ashamed to wear them. It was in vain for me, that I avoided censure by the
concealment of my own writings, if my reputation could be thus Executed in
Effigy; and impossible it is for any good Name to be in safety, if the malice
of Witches have the power to consume and destroy it in an Image of their own
making. This indeed was so ill made, and so unlike, that I hope the Charm took
no effect. So that I esteem my self less prejudiced by it, then by that which
has been done to me, since almost in the same kind, which is, the publication
of some things of mine without my consent or knowledge, and those so mangled
and imperfect, that I could neither with honor acknowledge, nor with honesty
quite disavow them. Of which sort, was a Comedy called The Guardian, printed in
the year, 1650. but made and acted before the Prince, in his passage through
Cambridge toward York, at the beginning of the late unhappy War; or rather
neither made not acted, but rough-drawn only, and repeated; for the hasie was
so great, that it could neither be ravised or perfected by the Author, nor
learnt without-Book by the Actors, nor set forth in any measure tolerably by
the Officers of the College. After the Representation (which, I confess, was
somewhat of the latest) I began to look it over, and changed it very much,
striking out some whole parts, as that of the Poet and the Soldier; but I have
lost the Copy, and dare not think it deserves the pains to write it again,
which makes me omit it in this publication, though there be some things in it
which I am not ashamed of, taking in the excuse of my age and small experience
in humane conversation when I made it. But as it is, it is only the hasty
first-sitting of a Picture, and therefore like to resemble me accordingly. From
this which had happened to my self, I began to reflect upon the fortune of almost
all Writers, and especially Poets, whose Works (commonly printed after their
deaths) we find stuffed out, either with counterfeit pieces, like false Money
put in to fill up the Bag, though it add nothing to the sum; or with such,
which though of their own Coin, they would have called in themselves, for the
baseness of the Allay: whether this proceed from the indiscretion of their
Friends, who think a vast heap of Stones or Rubbish a better Monument, then a
little Tomb of Marble, or by the unworthy avarice of some Stationers, who are
content to diminish the value of the Author, so they may increase the price of
the Book; and like Vintners with sophisticate mixtures, spoil the whole vessel
of wine, to make it yield more profit. This has been the case with Shakespeare,
Fletcher, Johnson, and many others; part of whose Poems I should take the
boldness to prune and lop away, if the care of replanting them in print did
belong to me; neither would I make any scruple to cut off from some the
unnecessary young Suckars, and from others the old withered Branches; for a
great Wit is no more tied to live in a Vast Volume, then in a Gigantie Body; on
the contrary, it is commonly more vigorous, the less space it animates. And as
Statius says of little Tydaeus, -- Totos infusa per artus Stat. 1. ^. Theb.

Major in exiguo regnabat corpore virtus.
I am not ignorant, that by saying this of others, I expose my self to some
Raillery, for not using the same severe discretion in my own case, where it
concerns me nearer: But though I publish here, more then in strict wisdom I
ought to have done, yet I have suppressed and cast away more then I publish; and
for the ease of my self and others, have lost, I believe too, more then both.
And upon these considerations I have been persuaded to overcome all the just
repugnances of my own modesty, and to produce these Poems to the light and view
of the World; not as a thing that I approved of in it self, but as a lesser
evil, which I chose rather then to stay till it were done for me by some body
else, either surreptitiously before, or avowedly after my death; and this will
be the more excusable, when the Reader shall know in what respects he may look
upon me as a Dead, or at least a Dying Person, and upon my Muse in this action,
as appearing, like the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and assisting at her own
Funeral.

For to make my self absolutely dead in a Poetical capacity, my resolution at
present, is never to exercise any more that faculty. It is, I confess, but
seldom seen that the Poet dies before the Man; for when we once fall in love
with that bewitching Art, we do not use to court it as a Mistress, but marry it
as a Wife, and take it for better or worse, as an Inseparable Companion of our
whole life. But as the Marriages of Infants do but rarely prosper, so no man
ought to wonder at the diminution or decay of my affection to Poesy; to which
I had contracted my self so much under Age, and so much to my own prejudice in
regard of those more profitable matches which I might have made among the
richer Sciences. As for the Portion which this brings of Fame, it is an Estate
(if it be any, for men are not oftener deceived in their hopes of Widows, then
in their opinion of, Exegi monumentum are perennius) that hardly ever comes in
whilst we are Living to enjoy it, but is a fantastical kind of Reversion to our
own selves: neither ought any man to envy Poets this posthumous and imaginary
happiness, since they find commonly so little in present, that it may be truly
applied to them, which S. Paul speaks of the first Christians, If their reward
be in this life, they are of all men the most miserable.

And if in quiet and flourishing times they meet with so small encouragement,
what are they to expect in rough and troubled ones? if wi^ be such a Plant,
that it scarce receives heat enough to preserve it alive even in the Summer of
our cold Clymate, how can it choose but wither in a long and a sharp winter? a
warlike, various, and a tragical age is best to write of, but worst to write
in. And I may, though in a very unequal proportion, assume that to my self,
which was spoken by Tully to a much better person, upon occasion of the Civil
Wars and Revolutions in his time, Cic. de Clar. Orator.
Sed in te intuens, Brute, doleo, cujus in adolescentiam per medias lauds
quasi^quadrigis vehentem transversa incurrit misera fortuna Reipublicae.

Neither is the present constitution of my Mind more proper then that of the
Times for this exercise, or rather divertisement. There is nothing that
requires so much serenity and cheerfulness of Spirit* it must not be either
overwhelmed with the cares of Life, or overcast with the Clouds of Melancholy
and Sorrow, or shaken and disturbed with the storms of injurious Fortune; it
must like the Halcyon, have fair weather to breed in. The Soul must be filled
with bright and delightful Idaea's, when it undertakes to communicate delight
to others; which is the main end of Poesy. One may see through the style of
Ovid de Trist. the humbled and dejected condition of Spirit with which he wrote
it; there scarce remains any footsteps of that Genius, Quem nec Iovis ira, nec
ignes, etc. The cold of the Country had stricken through all his faculties,
and benumbed the very feet of his Verses. He is himself, methinks, like one of
the Stories of his own Metamorphosis; and though there remain some weak
resemblances of Ovid at Rome, It is but as he says of Niobe, In vultu color often
sine sanguine, Ovid. Metam. l. 6.
lumina maestis
Stant immota genis; nihil est in Imagine vivum,
Flet tamen --
The truth is, for a man to write well, it is necessary to be in good humor;
neither is Wit less eclypsed with the unquietness of Mind, then Beauty with the
Indisposition of Body. So that it is almost as hard a thing to be a Poet in
despite of Fortune, as it is in despite of Nature. For my own part, neither
my obligations to the Muses, nor expectations from them are so great, as that I
should suffer my self upon no considerations to be divorced; or that I should
say like Horace, Quisquis erit vitae, Hor. Sat 1. l 2. Ser.
Seribam, color. I shall rather use his words in another place, Vixi Camaenis
nuper idoneus, L. 3. Car. Ode 26. Vixi puellis* etc.

Et militari non sine gloria,
Nunc arma defunctumque bello
Barbiton hic paries habebit.
And this resolution of mine does the more befit me, because my desire has been
for some years past (though the execution has been accidentally diverted) and
does still vehemently continue, to retire my self to some of our American
Plantations, not to seek for Gold, or enrich my self with the traffic of
those parts (which is the end of most men that travel thither; so that of these
Indies it is truer then it was of the former, Improbus extremos currit Mercator
ad Indos
Pauperiem fugiens --)
But to forsake this world for ever, with all the vanities and Vexations of it,
and to bury my self in some obscure retreat there (but not without the
consolation of Letters and Philosophy) Oblitusque meorum, obliviscendus and
illis. As my former Author speaks too, who has enticed me here, I know not how,
into the Pedantry of this heap of Latin Sentences. And I think Doctor Donnes
Sun Dyal in a grave is not more useless and ridiculous then Poetry would be in
that retirement. As this therefore is in a true sense a kind of Death to the
Muses, and a real literal quitting of this World: So, methinks, I may make a
just claim to the undoubted privilege of Deceased Poets, which is to be read
with more favor, then the Living; Tanti est ut placeam tibi, Mart.
Perire.

Having been forced for my own necessary justification to trouble the Reader
with this long Discourse of the Reasons why I trouble him also with all the
rest of the Book, I shall only add somewhat concerning the several parts of
it, and some other pieces, which I have thought fit to reject in this
publication: As first, all those which I wrote at School from the age of ten
years, till after fifteen; for even so far backward there remain yet some
traces of me in the little footsteps of a child; which though they were then
looked upon as commendable extravances in a Boy (men setting a value upon any
kind of fruit before the usual season of it) yet I would be loath to be bound
now to read them all over my self; and therefore should do ill to expect that
patience from others. Besides, they have already past through several Editions,
which is a longer Life then uses to be enjoyed by Infants that are born before
the ordinary terms. They had the good fortune then to find the world so
indulgent (for considering the time of their production, who could be so
hard-hearted to be severe?) that I scarce yet apprehend so much to be censured
for them, as for not having made advances afterward proportionable to the
speed of my setting out, and am obliged too in a manner by Discretion to conceal
and suppress them, as Promises and Instruments under my own hand, whereby I
stood engaged for more then I have been able to perform; in which truly, if I
have failed, I have the real excuse of the honestest sort of Bankrupts, which
is, to have been made Vnsolvable, not so much by their own negligence and
ill-husbandry, as by some notorious accidents, and public disasters. In the
next place, I have cast away all such pieces as I wrote during the time of the
late troubles, with any relation to the differences that caused them; as among
others, three Books of the Civil War it self, reaching as far as the first
Battle of Newbury, where the succeeding misfortunes of the party stopped the
work; for it is so uncustomary, as to become almost ridiculous, to make Laurels
for the Conquered Now though in all Civil Dissentions, when they break into
open hostilities, the War of the Pen is allowed to accompany that of the Sword,
and every one is in a manner obliged with his Tongue, as well as Hand, to serve
and assist the side which he engages in; yet when the event of battle, and the
unaccountable Will of God has determined the controversy, and that we have
submitted to the conditions of the Conqueror, we must lay down our Pens as well
as Arms, we must march out of our Cause it self, and dismantle that, as well as
our Towns and Castles, of all the Works and Fortifications of Wit and Reason by
which we defended it. We ought not sure, to begin our selves to revive the
remembrance of those times and actions for which we have received a General
Amnestie, as a Favor from the Victor. The truth is, neither We, nor They, ought
by the Representation of Places and Images* to make a kind of Artificial Memory
of those things wherein we are all bound to desire like Themistocles, the Art
of Oblivion. The enmities of Fellow-Citizens should be, like that of Lovers,
the Redintegration of their Amity. The Names of Party, and Titles of Division,
which are sometimes in effect the whole quarrel, should be extinguished and
forbidden in peace under the notion of Acts of Hostility. And I would have it
accounted no less unlawful to rip up old wounds, then to give new ones; which
has made me not only abstain from printing any things of this kind, but to
burn the very copies, and inflict a severer punishment on them my self, then
perhaps the most rigid Officer of State would have thought that they deserved.

As for the ensuing Book, it consists of four parts: The first is a Miscellanie
of several Subjects, and some of them made when I was very young, which it is
perhaps superfluous to tell the Reader; I know not by what chance I have kept
Copies of them; for they are but a very few in comparison of those which I have
lost, and I think they have no extraordinary virtue in them, to deserve more
care in preservation, then was bestowed upon their Brethren; for which I am so
little concerned, that I am ashamed of the arrogance of the word, when I said,
I had lost them.

The Second, is called, The Mistress, or Love-Verses; for so it is, that Poets
are scarce thought Freemen of their Company, without paying some duties, and
obliging themselves to be true to Love. Sooner or later they must all pass
through that Trial, like some Mahumetan Monks, that are bound by their Order,
once at least, in their life, to make a Pilgrimage to Meca, In furias ignemque
ruunt; Amor omnibus idem. But we must not always make a judgment of their
manners from their writings of this kind; as the Romanists uncharitably do of
Beza, for a few lascivious Sonnets composed by him in his youth. It is not in
this sense that Poesy is said to be a kind of Painting; it is not the Picture
of the Poet, but of things and persons imagined by him. He may be in his own
practice and disposition a Philosopher, nay a Stoic, and yet speak sometimes
with the softness of an amorous Sappho. Feret and rubus asper Amomum. He
professes too much the use of Fables (though without the malice of deceiving)
to have his testimony taken even against himself. Neither would I here be
misunderstood, as if I affected so much gravity, as to be ashamed to be thought
really in Love. On the contrary, I cannot have a good opinion of any man who is
not at least capable of being so. But I speak it to excuse some expressions (if
such there be) which may happen to offend the severity of supercilious Readers;
for much Excess is to be allowed in Love, and even more in Poetry; so we avoid
the two unpardonable vices in both, which are Obscenity and Profaneness, of
which I am sure, if my words be ever guilty, they have illrepresented my
thoughts and intentions. And if, notwithstanding all this, the lightness of the
matter here displease any body; he may find wherewithal to content his more
serious inclinations in the weight and height of the ensuing Arguments.

For as for the Pindarick Odes (which is the third part) I am in great doubt
whether they will be understood by most Readers; nay, even by very many who are
well enough acquainted with the common Roads, and ordinary Tracks of Poesy.
They either are, or at least were meant to be, of that kind of Style which
Dion. Halicarnasseus calls, (...), and which he attributes to Alcaeus: The
digressions are many, and sudden, and sometimes long, according to the fashion
of all Lyriques, and of Pindar above all men living. The Figures are unusual
and bold, even to Temeritie, and such as I durst not have to do withal in any
other kind of Poetry: The Numbers are various and irregular, and sometimes
(especially some of the long ones) seem harsh and uncouth, if the just measures
and cadencies be not observed in the Pronunciation. So that almost all their
Sweetness and Numerosity (which is to be found, if I mistake not, in the
roughest, if rightly repeated) lies in a manner wholly at the Mercy of the
Reader. I have briefly described the nature of these Verses, in the Ode
entitled, The Resurrection: And though the Liberty of them may incline a man
to believe them easy to be composed, yet the undertaker will find it
otherwise.

-- Vt sibi quivis
Speret idem, multum sudet frustraque laboret
Ausus idem --.
I come now to the last Part, which is, Davideis, or an Heroical Poem of the
Troubles of David; which I designed into Twelve Books; not for the Tribes sake,
but after the Pattern of our Master Virgil; and intended to close all with that
most Poetical and excellent Elegy of David's upon the death of Saul and
Jonathan: For I had no mind to carry him quite on to his Anointing at Hebron,
because it is the custom of Heroic Poets (as we see by the examples of Homer
and Virgil whom we should do ill to forsake to imitate others) never to come to
the full end of their Story; but only so near, that every one may see it; as
men commonly play not out the game, when it is evident that they can win it,
but lay down their Cards, and take up what they have won. This, I say, was the
whole Design, in which there are many noble and fertile Arguments behind; as,
The barbarous cruelty of Saul to the Priests at Nob, the several flights and
escapes of David, with the manner of his living in the Wilderness, the Funeral
of Samuel, the love of Abigal, the sacking of Ziglag, the loss and recovery of
David's wives from the Amalekites, the Witch of Endor, the war with the
Philistims, and the Battle of Gilboa; all which I meant to interweave upon
several occasions, with most of the illustrious Stories of the Old Testament,
and to embellish with the most remarkable Antiquities of the Jews, and of other
Nations before or at that Age. But I have had neither Leisure hitherto, nor
have Appetite at present to finish the work, or so much as to revise that part
which is done with that care which I resolved to bestow upon it, and which the
Dignity of the Matter well deserves. For what worthier subject could have been
chosen among all the Treasuries of past times, then the Life of this young
Prince; who from so small beginnings, through such infinite troubles and
oppositions, by such miraculous virtues and excellencies, and with such
incomparable variety of wonderful actions and accidents, became the greatest
Monarch that ever sat upon the most famous Throne of the whole Earth? whom
should a Poet more justly seek to honor, then the highest person who ever
honored his Profession? whom a Christian Poet, rather then the man after Gods
own heart, and the man who had that sacred pre-eminence above all other
Princes, to be the best and mightiest of that Royal Race from whence Christ
himself, according to the flesh, disdained not to descend? When I consider
this, and how many other bright and magnificent subjects of the like nature,
the Holy Scripture affords, and Proffers, as it were, to Poesy, in the wise
managing and illustrating whereof, the Glory of God Almighty might be joined
with the singular utility and noblest delight of Mankind: It is not without
grief and indignation that I behold that Divine Science employing all her
inexhaustable riches of Wit and Eloquence, either in the wicked and beggarly
Flattery of great persons, or the unmanly Idolizing of Foolish Women, or the
wretched affectation of scurril Laughter, or at best on the confused antiquated
Dreams of senseless Fables and Metamorphoses. Amongst all holy and consecrated
things which the Devil ever stole and alienated from the service of the Deity;
as Altars, Temples, Sacrifices, Prayers, and the like; there is none that he so
universally, and so long usurpt, as Poetry. It is time to recover it out of the
Tyrants hands, and to restore it to the Kingdom of God, who is the Father of
it. It is time to Baptize it in Jordan, for it will never become clean by
bathing in the Waters of Damascus. There wants, methinks, but the Conversion of
That, and the Jews, for the accomplishing of the Kingdom of Christ. And as men
before their receiving of the Faith, do not without some carnal reluctancies,
apprehend the bonds and fetters of it, but find it afterward to be the truest
and greatest Liberty: It will fare no otherwise with this Art, after the
Regeneration of it; it will meet with wonderful variety of new, more beautiful,
and more delightful Objects; neither will it want Room, by being confined to
Heaven. There is not so great a Lie to be found in any Poet, as the vulgar
conceit of men, that Lying is Essential to good Poetry. Were there never so
wholesome Nourishment to be had (but, alas, it breeds nothing but Diseases) out
of these boasted Feasts of Love and Fables; yet, methinks, the unalterable
continuance of the Diet should make us Nauseate it: For it is almost impossible
to serve up any new Dish of that kind. They are all but the Cold-meats of the
Ancients, new-heated, and new set forth. I do not at all wonder that the old
Poets made some rich crops out of these grounds; the heart of the Soil was not
then wrought out with continual Tillage: But what can we expect now, who come a
Gleaning, not after the first Reapers. but after the very Beggars? Besides,
though those mad stories of the Gods and Heroes, seem in themselves so
ridiculous; yet they were then the whole Body (or rather Chaos) of the
Theology of those times. They were believed by all but a few Philosophers, and
perhaps some Atheists, and served to good purpose among the vulgar, (as pitiful
things as they are) in strengthening the authority of Law with the terrors of
Conscience, and Expectation of certain rewards, and unavoidable punishments.
There was no other Religion, and therefore that was better then none at all.
But to us who have no need of them, to us who deride their folly, and are
wearied with their impertinencies* they ought to appear no better arguments for
Verse, then those of their worthy Successors, the Knights Errant What can we
imagine more proper for the ornaments of Wit or Learning in the story of
Deucalion, then in that of Noah? why will not the actions of Sampson afford as
plentiful matter as the Labors of Hercules? why is not Ieptha's Daughter as
good a woman as Iphigenia? and the friendship of David and Jonathan more worthy
celebration, then that of Theseus and Perithous? Does not the passage of Moses
and the Israelites into the Holy Land, yield incomparably more Poetical
variety, then the voyages of Ulysses or Aeneas? Are the obsolete threadbare
tales of Thebes and Troy, half so stored with great, heroical and supernatural
actions (since Verse will needs find or make such) as the wars of Joshua, of
the Judges, of David, and diverse others? Can all the Transformations of the
Gods, give such copious hints to flourish and expatiate on, as the true
Miracles of Christ, or of his Prophets, and Apostles? what do I instance in
these few particulars? All the Books of the Bible are either already most
admirable, and exalted pieces of Poesy, or are the best Materials in the world
for it. Yet, though they be in themselves so proper to be made use of for this
purpose; None but a good Artist will know how to do it: neither must we think
to cut and polish Diamonds with so little pains and skill as we do Marble. For
if any man design to compose a Sacred Poem, by only turning a story of the
Scripture, like Mr. Quarle^'s, or some other godly matter, like Mr. Heywood of
Angels, into Rhyme; He is so far from elevating of Poesy, that he only abases
Divinity. In brief, he who can write a profane Poem well, may write a Divine
one better; but he who can do that but ill, will do this much worse. The same
fertility of Invention, the same wisdom of Disposition; the same Judgment in
observance of Decencies, the same luster and vigor of Elocution; the same
modesty and majesty of Number; briefly the same kind of Habit, is required to
both; only this latter allows better stuff, and therefore would look more
deformedly, if ill dressed in it. I am far from assuming to my self to have
fulfilled the duty of this weighty undertaking: But sure I am, that there is
nothing yet in our Language (nor perhaps in any) that is in any degree
answerable to the Idea that I conceive of it. And I shall be ambitious of no
other fruit from this weak and imperfect attempt of mine, but the opening of a
way to the courage and industry of some other persons, who may be better able
to perform it thoroughly and succesfully.

Miscellany.

Errata.
THe Reader is desired to correct with his pen, these ensuing errors, which are
material, and corrupt the sense. False pointings, false spellings, and such
like venial faults (as also some mistakes in the Greek) are recommended to his
judgment and candor to mend as he reads them.

Faults in the Preface. Gigantie for Gigantique, Tidaeus for Tideus, Militari
for Militavi.

In the Miscellanies. Page 5. line 30. Past for Pass, p. 14. l. 6. Littled-Much
for Little much, p. 21. l. 24. Natures for Nature, lb. l. 34. plac for place,
p. 35. l. 16. Love for Loves.

In the Pindariques. Page 24. l. 32. once for one, p. 26. l. 11. till for it is,
p. 34. l. 13. to had for t'had, p. 37. l. 34. Poetry for Poverty, p. 38. l. 6.
Claudines for Claudians, p. 46. l. 23. within for which in.

In Davideis, B. 1. Page 9. l. 1. thine own for shine on, p. 10. l. 17. Noon
for Moon, p. 25. l. 11. Nemessarius for Nemesianus, p. 26. l. 10. Mineius for
Mincius, 1. 11. dele con, p. 27. l. 27. dele we, p. 28. l. 11. seem for seems,
p. 34. l. 3. has for have, p. 36. l. 7. dele And, p. 41. l. 15. Tatus for
Talus, l. 19. In Boethius for In Boeotic. p. 44. l. 5. The for de.

David. B. 2. Page 47. l. 31. Joy for Ivy, p. 49. l. 9. their for your, p. 75.
l. 44. Syrians for Syrian, p. 60. l. 7. Angels for Angel, lb. l. 40* forepart
for forepast, p. 62. l. Scrape'd neatly from pure Ar^ams, for Caught gliding
ore pure streams.

David. B. 3. Page 86. l. 20. had for led, p. 87. l. 45. Nobler age for Noble
rage, p. 94. l. 23. Iesse for Iessey. p. 96. l. 32. called for call, p. 99. l.
43. objects, for object, p. 110. l. 36. Beaten Chederl. for Beaten by
Chederlaom. l. 44. dele or, p. 112. l. 28. Plato to the Comaed. for Plato the
Comed. p. 114 l. 41. Reginem grava for Regina gravem.

David. B. 4. Page 124. l. 26. Word for Sword, p. 129. l. 28. honor for horror,
p. 142. l. 37. rent for went, p. 151. l* 45. Josephus for Joseph.

David. in Lat. Page 3. l. 42. To ti pro Torti, p. 5. l. 12. Erebrum pro
Erebum, p. 7. l. 46. Iusto pro Iusso, p. 19. l. 11. Venatur pro venator.

Miscellanies.
THE MOTTO. Tentanda via est, etc.
WHat shall I do to be for ever known,
And make the Age to come my own?
I shall like Beasts or Common People die,
Unless you write my Elegy;
Whilst others Great, by being Born are grown,
Their Mothers Labor, not their own.
In this Scale Gold, in the other Fame does ly,
The weight of that, mounts this so high.
These men are Fortunes Jewels, molded bright;
Brought forth with their own fire and light.
If I, her vulgar stone for either look;
Out of my self it must be struck.
Yet I must on; what sound is it strikes mine ear?
Sure I Fames Trumpet hear.
It sounds like the last Trumpet; for it can
Raise up the bur'ied Man.
Unpast Alps stop me, but I Will cut through all,
And march, the Muses Hannibal.
Hence all the flattering vanities that lay
Nets of Roses in the way*
Hence the desire of Honors, or Estate;
And all, that is not above Fate.
Hence Love himself, that Tyrant of my days,
Which intercepts my coming praise.
Come my best Friends, my Books, and lead me on;
It Is time that I were gone.
Welcome, great Stagirite, and teach me now
All I was born to know.
Thy Scholars vict'ories thou do far out-doe;
He conquer'ed the Earth, the whole World you.
Welcome, learned Cicero, whose blessed Tongue and Wit
Preserves Romes greatness yet.
Thou art the first of Ora'tors; only he
Who best can praise Thee, next must be.
Welcome the Mantu'an Swan, Virgil the Wise,
Whose verse walks highest, but not flies.
Who brought green Poesy to her perfect Age;
And made that Art which was a Rage.
Tell me, ye mighty Three, what shall I do
To be like one of you.
But you have climbed the Mountains top, there sit
On the calm flourishing head of it,
And whilst with wearied steps we upward go,
See Us, and Clouds below.
ODE. Of Wit.
1.
TEll me, O tell, what kind of thing is Wit,
Thou who Master art of it.
For the First Matter loves Variety less;
Less Women love't, either in Love or Dress.
A thousand different shapes it bears,
Comely in thousand shapes appears.
Yonder we saw it plain; and here it is now,
Like Spirits in a Place, we know not How.
2.
London that vents of false Ware so much store,
In no Ware deceives us more.
For men lead by the Color, and the Shape,
Like Zeuxe's Birds fly to the painted Grape,
Some things do through our Judgment pass
As through a Multiplying Glass.
And sometimes, if the Object be too far,
We take a Falling Meteor for a Star.
3.
Hence it is a Wit that greatest word of Fame
Grows such a common Name.
And Wits by our Creation they become,
Just so, as Tit'ular Bishops made at Rome.
It Is not a Tale, it is not a Jest
Admir'ed with Laughter at a feast,
Nor florid Talk which can that Title gain;
The Proofs of Wit for ever must remain.
4.
It Is not to force some lifeless Verses meet
With their five gowty feet.
All ev'ery where, like Man's, must be the Soul,
And Reason the Inferior Powers control.
Such were the Numbers which could call
The Stones into the Theban wall.
Such Miracles are ceast; and now we see
No Towns or Houses raised by Poetry.
5.
Yet it is not to adorn, and gild each part;
That shows more Cost, then Art.
Jewels at Nose and Lips but ill appear;
Rather then all things Wit, let none be there.
Several Lights will not be seen,
If there be nothing else between.
Men doubt, because they stand so thick in the sky,
If those be Stars which paint the Galaxie.
6.
It Is not when two like words make up one noise,
Jests for Dutch Men, and English Boys.
In which who finds out Wit, the same may see
In An'agrams and Acrostiques Poetry.
Much less can that have any place
At which a Virgin hides her face,
Such Dross the Fire must purge away; it is just
The Author blush, there where the Reader must.
7.
It Is not such Lines as almost crack the Stage
When Bajazet begins to rage.
Nor a tall Metaphor in the Oxford way,
Nor the dry chips of short lung'ed Seneca.
Nor upon all things to obtrude,
And force some odd Similitude.
What is it then, which like the Power Divine
We only can by Negatives define?
8.
In a true piece of Wit all things must be,
Yet all things there agree.
As in the Ark, joined without force or strife,
All Creatures dwelt; all Creatures that had Life.
Or as the Primitive Forms of all
(If we compare great things with small)
Which without Discord or Confusion lie,
In that strange Mirror of the Deity.
9.
But Love that moulds One Man up out of Two.
Makes me forget and injure you.
I took you for my self sure, when I thought
That you in any thing were to be Taught.
Correct my error with thy Pen;
And if any ask me then,
What thing right Wit, and height of Genius is,
I Will only show your Lines, and say, It Is This.
To the Lord Falkland. For his safe Return from the Northern Expedition against
the Scots.
GReat is thy Charge, O North; be wise and just,
England commits her Falkland to thy trust;
Return him safe: Learning would rather choose
Her Bodley, or her Vatican to loose.
All things that are but writ or printed there,
In his unbounded Breast engraven are.
There all the Sciences together meet,
And every Art does all her Kindred greet.
Yet justle not, nor quarrel* but as well
Agree as in some Common Principle.
So in an Army govern'ed right we see
(Though out of several Countries raised it be)
That all their Order and their Place maintain,
The English, Dutch, the Frenchman and the Dane.
So thousand diverse Species fill the air,
Yet neither crowd nor mix confusedly there,
Beasts, Houses, Trees, and Men together lie,
Yet enter undisturbed into the Eye.
And this great Prince of Knowledge is by Fate
Thrust into th'noise and business of a State,
All Virtues, and some Customs of the Court,
Other men's Labor, are at least his Sport.
Whilst we who can no action undertake,
Whom Idleness it self might Learned make,
Who hear of nothing, and as yet scarce know,
Whether the Scots in England be or no.
Pace dully on, often tire, and often stay,
Yet see his nimble Pegasus fly away.
It Is Natures fault who did thus partial grow,
And her Estate of Wit on One bestow.
Whilst we like younger Brothers, get at best
But a small Stock, and must work out the rest.
How could he answer't, should the State think fit
To question a Monopoly of Wit?
Such is the Man whom we require the same
We lent the North; untoucht as is his Fame.
He is too good for War, and ought to be
As far from Danger, as from Fear he is free.
Those Men alone (and those are useful too)
Whose Valor is the only Art they know,
Were for sad War and bloody Battles born;
Let Them the State Defend, and He Adorn.
On the Death of Sir Henry Wootton.
WHat shall we say, since silent now is He
Who when he Spoke all things would Silent be?
Who had so many Languages in store,
That only Fame shall speak of him in More!
Whom England now no more returned must see.
He Is gone to Heav'en on his Fourth Ambassie.
On earth he traveled often; not to say
H'ad been abroad, or past loose Time away.
In whatsoever Land he chanc'ed to come,
He read the Men and Manners, bringing home
Their Wisdom, Learning, and their Piety,
As if he went to Conquer, not to See.
So well he understood the most and best
Of Tongues that Babel sent into the West,
Spoke them so truly, that he had (you would swear)
Not only Liv'ed, but been Born every where.
Justly each Nations Speech to him was known,
Who for the World was made, not us alone.
Nor ought the Language of that Man be less
Who in his Breast had all things to express.
We say that Learning's endless, and blame Fate
For not allowing Life a longer date.
He did the utmost Bounds of Knowledge find,
He found them not so large as was his Mind.
But, like the brave Pellaean Youth, did moan
Because that Art had no more worlds then One.
And when he saw that he through all had past,
He dy'ed, lest he should Idle grow at last.
On the Death of Mr. Jordan, Second Master at Westminster School.
HEnce, and make room for me, all you who come
Only to read the Epitaph on this Tomb.
Here lies the Master of my tender years,
The Guardian of my Parents Hope and Fears,
Whose Government nere stood me in a Tear;
All weeping was reserv'ed to spend it here.
Come hither all who his rare virtues knew,
And mourn with Me: He was your Tutor too.
Let Us join our Sighs, till they fly far, and show
His native Belgia what she is now to do.
The League of grief bids her with us lament;
By her he was brought forth, and hither sent
In payment of all Men we there had lost,
And all the English Blood those wars have cost.
Wisely did Nature this learned Man divide;
His Birth was Theirs, his Death the mournful pride
Of England; and to avoid the envious strife
Of other Lands, all Europe had his Life,
But we in chief; our Country soon was grown
A Debtor more to Him, then He to'his Own.
He plucked from youth the follies and the crimes,
And built up Men against the future times,
For deeds of Age are in their Causes then,
And though he taught but Boys, he made the Men.
Hence 'twas a Master in those ancient days
When men sought Knowledge first, and by it Praise,
Was a thing full of Reverence, Profit, Fame;
Father it self was but a Second Name.
He scorned the profit; his Instructions all
Were like the Science, Free and Liberal.
He deserved Honors, but despis'ed them too
As much as those who have them, others do.
He knew not that which Complement they call;
Could Flatter none, but Himself least of all.
So true, so faithful, and so just as he,
Was naught on earth, but his own Memory.
His Memory, where all things written were
As sure and fixed as in Fates Books they are.
Thus he in Arts so vast a treasure gained,
Whilst still the Use came in, and Stock remained.
And having purchased all that man can know,
He labored with it to enrich others now.
Did thus a new, and harder task sustain,
Like those that work in Mines for others gain.
He, though more nobly, had much more to do,
To search the Vein, dig, purge, and mint it too.
Though my Excuse would be, I must confess,
Much better had his Diligence been less.
But if a Muse hereafter smile on me,
And say, Be thou a Poet, men shall see
That none could a more grateful Scholar have;
For what I ow'ed his Life, I Will pay his Grave.
On His Majesty's Return out of Scotland.
1.
WElcome, great Sir, with all the joy that is due
To the return of Peace and You.
Two greatest Blessings which this age can know;
For that to Thee, for Thee to Heav'en we ow.
Others by war their Conquests gain,
You like a God your ends obtain.
Who when rude Chaos for his help did call,
Spoke but the Word, and sweetly Ordered all.
2.
This happy Concord in no Blood is writ,
None can grutch heav'en full thanks for it.
No Mothers here lament their Childrens fate,
And like the Peace, but think it comes too late.
No Widows hear the jocond Bells,
And take them for their Husbands Knells.
No Drop of Blood is spilt which might be said
To mark our joyful Holiday with Red.
3.
'Twas only Heav'en could work this wondrous thing,
And only workt by such a King.
Again the Northern Hindes may sing and plow,
And fear no harm but from the weather now.
Again may Tradesmen love their pain
By knowing now for whom they gain.
The Armor now may be hung up to sight,
And only in their Halls the Children fright.
4*
The gain of Civil wars will not allow
Bay to the Conquerors Brow*
At such a Game what fool would venture in,
Where one must lose, yet neither side can win?
How justly would our Neighbors smile
At these mad quarrels of our Isle
Sweld with proud hopes to snatch the whole away,
Whilst we Bet all, and yet for nothing Play?
5*
How was the silver Tine frighted before,
And durst not kiss the armed shore?
His waters ran more swiftly then they use,
And hasted to the Sea to tell the News.
The Sea it self, how rough so ere,
Could scarce believe such fury here.
How could the Scots and we be Enemies grown?
That, and its Master Charles had made us One.
6.
No Blood so loud as that of Civil war;
It calls for Dangers from afar.
Let Us rather go, and seek out Them, and Fame;
Thus our Fore fathers got, thus left a Name.
All their rich blood was spent with gains,
But that which swells their Childrens Veins.
Why sit we still, our Spi'rits wrapped up in Lead?
Not like them whilst they Liv'ed, but now they are Dead?
7.
This noise at home was but Fates policy
To raise our Sp'irits more high.
So a bold Lion ere he seeks his prey,
Lashes his sides, and roars, and then away.
How would the Germain Eagle fear,
To see a new Gustavus there?
How would it shake, though as 'twas wont to do
For Jove of old, it now bore Thunder too!
8.
Sure there are actions of this height and praise
Destin'ed to Charles his days.
What will the Triumphs of his Battles be,
Whose very Peace it self is Victory.
When Heav'en bestows the best of Kings,
It bids us think of mighty things.
His Valor, Wisdom, Offspring speak no less;
And we the Prophets Sons, write not by Guess.
On the Death of Sir Anthony Vandike, The famous Painter.
VAndike is Dead; but what Bold Muse shall dare
(Though Poets in that word with Painters share)
T'express her sadness? Po'esie must become
An Art, like Painting here, an Art that is Dumb.
Let Us all our solemn grief in silence keep,
Like some sad Picture which he made to weep,
Or those who saw't, for none his works could view
Unmov'ed with the same Passions which he drew.
His pieces so with their live objects strive,
That both or Pictures seem, or both Alive.
Nature herself amaz'ed, does doubting stand,
Which is her own, and which the Painters Hand.
And does attempt the like with less success
When her own work in Twins she would express.
His All-resembling Pencil did out-pass
The mimick Imag'ry of Looking-glass.
Nor was his Life less perfect then his Art,
Nor was his Hand less erring then his Heart.
There was no false, or fading Color there,
The Figures sweet and well proportioned were.
Most other men, set next to him in view,
Appeared more shadows then the men he drew.
Thus still he liv'ed till heav'en did for him call,
Where reverent Luke salutes him first of all.
Where he beholds new sights, divinely fair;
And could almost wish for his Pencil there;
Did he not gladly see how all things shine,
Wondrously painted in the Mind Divine,
Whilst he for ever ravished with the show
Scorns his own Art which we admire below.
Only his beauteous Lady still he loves;
(The love of heav'enly Objects Heav'en improves)
He sees bright Angels in pure beams appear,
And thinks on her he left so like them here.
And you, fair Widow, who stay here alive,
Since he so much rejoices, cease to grieve.
Your joys and griefs were wont the same to be;
Begin not now, blessed Pair, to Disagree.
No wonder Death mov'ed not his gen'erous mind.
You, and a newborn You, he left behind.
Even Fate expressed his love to his dear Wife,
And let him end your Picture with his Life.
Prometheus ill-painted.
HOw wretched does Promethe'us state appear,
Whilst he his Second Mis'ery suffers here!
Draw him no more, lest as he tortur'ed stands,
He blame great Jove's less then the Painters hands.
It would the Vulturs cruelty outgoe,
If once again his Liver thus should grow.
Pity him Jove, and his bold Theft allow,
The Flames he once stole from thee grant him now.
ODE.
1.
Here Is to thee Dick; this whining Love despise;
Pledge me, my Friend, and drink till thou be'st wise.
It sparkles brighter far then she:
It Is pure, and right without deceit;
And such no woman ere will be:
No; they are all Sophisticate.
2.
With all thy servile pains what can thou win,
But an ill-favor'd, and uncleanly Sin?
A thing so vile, and so short-lived,
That Venus Ioys as well as she
With reason may be said to be
From the neglected Foam deriv'ed.
3.
Whom would that painted toy a Beauty move,
Whom would it ere persuade to court and love,
Could he a woman's Heart have seen,
(But, oh, no Light does thither come)
And viewed her perfectly within,
When he lay shut up in her womb?
4.
Follies they have so numberless in store,
That only he who loves them can have more.
Neither their Sighs nor Tears are true;
Those idly blow, these idly fall,
Nothing like to ours at all.
But Sighs and Tears have Sexes too.
5.
Here Is to thee again; thy senseless sorrows drowned;
Let the Glass walk, till all things too go round;
Again; till these Two Lights be Four;
No error here can dangerous prove;
Thy Passion, Man, deceiv'ed thee more;
None Double see like Men in Love.
Friendship in Absence.
1.
WHen chance or cruel business parts us two,
What do our Souls I wonder do?
Whilst sleep does our dull Bodies tie
Methinks, at home they should not stay,
Content with Dreams, but boldly fly
Abroad, and meet each other half the way.
2.
Sure they do meet, enjoy each other there,
And mix I know not How, nor Where.
Their friendly Lights together twine,
Though we perceive't not to be so,
Like loving Stars which often combine,
Yet not themselves their own Conjunctions know.
3.
'Twere an ill World, I Will swear, for every friend,
If Distance could their Union end.
But Love it self does far advance
Above the power of Time and Space,
It scorns such outward Circumstance,
His Times for ever, every where his Place.
4*
I Am there with Thee, yet here with Me Thou art,
Lodged in each others heart.
Miracles cease not yet in Love,
When he his mighty Power will try
Absence it self does Bounteous prove,
And strangely ev'en our Presence Multiply.
5*
Pure is the flame of Friendship, and divine
Like that which in Heav'ens Sun does shine:
He in the upper air and sky
Does no effects of Heat bestow,
But as his beams the farther fly
He begets Warmth, Life, Beauty here below.
6.
Friendship is less apparent when too nigh,
Like Objects if they touch the Eye.
Less Meritorious then is Love,
For when we Friends together see
So much, so much Both One do prove,
That their Love then seems but Self-love to be.
7.
Each day think on me, and each day I shall
For thee make Hours Canonical.
By every Wind that comes this way,
Send me at least a sigh or two,
Such and so many I Will repay
As shall themselves make Winds to get to you.
8.
A thousand pretty ways we'll think upon
To mock our Separation.
Alas, ten thousand will not do;
My heart will thus no longer stay,
No longer 'twill be kept from you,
But knocks against the Breast to get away.
9.
And when no Art affords me help or ease,
I seek with verse my griefs to appease.
Just as a Bird that flies about
And beats it self against the Cage,
Finding at last no passage out
It sits, and sings, and so orecomes its rage.
To the Bishop of Lincoln, Upon his Enlargement out of the Tower.
PArdon, my Lord, that I am come so late
T'express my joy for your return of Fate.
So when injurious Chance did you deprive
Of Liberty, at first I could not grieve;
My thoughts awhile, like you, Imprisoned lay;
Great Ioys as well as Sorrows make a Stay;
They hinder one another in the Crowd,
And none are heard, whilst all would speak aloud.
Should every man's officious gladness have,
And be afraid to show it self the last;
The throng of Gratulations now would be
Another Loss to you of Liberty.
When of your freedom men the news did hear
Where it was wished for, that is every where,
'Twas like the Speech which from your Lips does fall,
As soon as it was heard it ravished all.
So Eloqu'ence Tully did from exile come;
Thus longed for he returned, and cherisht Rome,
Which could no more his Tongue and Counsels miss;
Rome, the Worlds Head, was nothing without His.
Wrong to those sacred Ashes I should do,
Should I compare any to Him but You;
You to whom Art and Nature did dispense
The Consulship of Wit and Eloquence.
Nor did your fate differ from his at all
Because the doom of Exile was his fall,
For the whole World without a native home
Is nothing but a Pris'on of larger room,
But like a melting Woman suffered He,
He who before out-did Humanity.
Nor could his Spi'rit constant and steadfast prove,
Whose Art t'had been, and greatest end to Move.
You put ill Fortune in so good a dress
That it outsh one other men's Happiness.
Had your Prosper'ity always clearly gone
As your high Merits would have led it on,
You'had Half been lost, and an Example then
But for the Happy, the least part of men.
Your very sufferings did so graceful show,
That some straight envy'ed your Affliction too.
For a clear Conscience and Heroic Mind
In I lls their Business and their Glory find.
So though less worthy stones are drowned in night,
The faithful Diamond keeps his native Light,
And is oblig'ed to Darkness for a ray
That would be more oppressed then helped by Day.
Your Soul then most showed her unconquered power,
Was stronger and more armed then the Tower.
Sure unkind fate will tempt your Spi'rit no more,
She'has try'ed her Weakness and your Strength before.
To'oppose him still who once has Conquered so,
Were now to be your Rebel, not your Foe.
Fortune henceforth will more of Provi'dence have,
And rather be your Friend, then be your Slave.
To a Lady who made Posies for Rings.
1.
I Little thought the time would ever be,
That I should Wit in Dwarfish Posies see.
As all Words in Few Letters live,
Thou to few Words all Sense do give.
'Twas Nature taught you this rare art
In such a Littled-Much to show,
Who all the good she did impart
To Womankind Epitomiz'ed in you.
2.
If as the Ancients did not doubt to sing,
The turning Years be well compar'ed to a Ring,
We'll write what ere from you we hear,
For that is the Posie of the Year.
This difference only will remain,
That Time his former face does show
Winding into himself again,
But your unweari'ed Wit is always New.
3.
It Is said that Conju'rers have an Art found out
To carry Spi'rits confin'ed in Rings about.
The wonder now will less appear
When we behold your Magic here.
You by your Rings do Prisoners take,
And chain them with your mystic Spells,
And the strong Witchcraft full to make,
Love, the great Dev'il, charm'ed to those Circles dwells.
4.
They who above do various Circles find,
Say, like a Ring the Equator Heav'en does bind.
When Heaven shall be adorned by thee
(Which then more Heav'en then it is will be)
It Is thou must write the Posie there,
For it wants one as yet,
Though the Sun pass through't twice a year,
The Sun who is esteemed the God of Wit.
5.
Happy the Hands which wear thy sacred Rings,
They Will teach those Hands to write mysterious things.
Let other Rings, with Jewels bright,
Cast around their costly light,
Let them want no noble Stone
By Nature rich, and Art refined,
Yet shall thy Rings give place to none,
But only that which must thy Marriage bind.
Prologue to the Guardian
WHo says the Times do Learning disallow?
It Is false, 'twas never Honored so as Now.
When you appear, Great Prince, our Night is done;
You are our Morning Star, and shall be'our Sun.
But our Scene's London now; and by the rout
We perish, if the Roundheads be about.
For now no ornament the Head must wear,
No Bays, no Mitre, not so much as Hair.
How can a Play pass safely, when ye know
Cheapside Cross falls for making but a Show?
Our only Hope is this, that it may be
A Play may pass too, made Extempore.
Though other Arts poor and neglected grow,
They Will admit Po'esie which was always so.
But we contemn the fury of these days,
And scorn no less their Censure then their Praise.
Our Muse, blessed Prince, does onely'on you rely;
Would gladly Live, but not refuse to Dye.
Accept our hasty Zeal; a thing that is played
Ere't is a Play, and Acted ere it is Made.
Our Ign'orance, but our Duty too we show;
I would all Igno'rant People would do so!
At other Times expect our Wit or Art;
This Comedy is Acted by the Heart.
The Epilogue.
THe Play, great Sir, is done; yet needs must fear,
Though you brought all your Fathers Mercies here,
It may offend your Highness, and we'have now
Three hours done Treason here for ought we know.
But power your grace can above Nature give,
It can give power to make Abortives Live.
In which if our bold wishes should be crossed,
It Is but the Life of one poor week t'has lost;
Though it should fall beneath your mortal scorn,
Scarce could it Dye more quickly then 'twas Born.
On the Death of Mr. William Hervey.
Immodicis brevis est aetas, and rara Senectus. Mart.
1.
IT was a dismal, and a fearful night,
Scarce could the Morn drive on the unwilling Light,
When Sleep, Deaths Image, left my troubled breast,
By something liker Death possessed.
My eyes with Tears did uncommanded flow,
And on my Soul hung the dull weight
Of some Intolerable Fate.
What Bell was that? Ah me! Too much I know.
2.
My sweet Companion, and my gentle Peer,
Why have thou left me thus unkindely here,
Thy end for ever, and my Life to moan;
O thou have left me all alone!
Thy Soul and Body when Deaths Agony
Besieg'ed around thy noble heart,
Did not with more reluctance part
Then I, my dearest Friend, do part from Thee.
3.
My dearest Friend, would I had dy'ed for thee!
Life and this World henceforth will tedious be.
Nor shall I know hereafter what to do
If once my Griefs prove tedious too.
Silent and sad I walk about all day,
As sullen Ghosts stalk speechless by
Where their hid Treasures ly;
Alas, my Treasure's gone, why do I stay?
4*
He was my Friend, the truest Friend on earth;
A strong and mighty Influence joined our Birth.
Nor did we envy the most sounding Name
By Friendship giv'en of old to Fame.
None but his Brethren he, and Sisters knew,
Whom the kind youth preferred to Me;
And eve'n in that we did agree,
For much above my self I loved them too.
5.
Say, for you saw us, ye immortal Lights,
How often unweari'ed have we spent the Nights?
Till the Ledaean Stars so fam'ed for Love,
Wondered at us from above.
We spent them not in toys, in lusts, or wine;
But search of deep Philosophy,
Wit, Elequence, and Poetry,
Arts which I lov'ed, for they, my Friend, were Thine.
6.
Ye fields of Cambridge, our dear Cambridge, say,
Have ye not seen us walking every day?
Was there a Tree about which did not know
The Love betwixt us two?
Henceforth, ye gentle Trees, for ever fade;
Or your sad branches thicker join,
And into darksome shades combine,
Dark as the Grave wherein my Friend is laid.
7.
Henceforth no learned Touths beneath you sing,
Till all the tuneful Birds to'your bows they bring;
No tuneful Birds play with their wonted cheer,
And call the learned Youths to hear,
No whistling Winds through the glad branches fly,
But all with sad solemnity,
Mute and unmoved be,
Mute as the Grave wherein my Friend does ly.
8.
To him my Muse made haste with every strain
Whilst it was new, and warm yet from the Brain.
He lov'ed my worthless Rhymes, and like a Friend,
Would find out something to commend.
Hence now, my Muse, thou can not me delight;
Be this my latest verse
With which I now adorn his Hearse,
And this my Grief, without thy help shall write.
9.
Had I a wreath of Bays about my brow,
I should contemn that flourishing honor now,
Condemn it to the Fire, and joy to hear
It rage and crackle there.
Instead of Bays, crown with sad Cypress me;
Cypress which Tombs does beautify;
Not Phoebus griev'ed so much as I
For him, who first was made that mournful Tree.
10.
Large was his Soul; as large a Soul as ere
Submitted to Inform a Body here.
High as the Place 'twas shortly in Heav'en to have,
But low, and humble as his Grave.
So high that all the Virtues there did come
As to their chiefest seat
Conspicuous, and great;
So low that for Me too it made a room.
11.
He scorned this busy world below, and all
That we, Mistaken Mortals, Pleasure call;
Was filled with inn'ocent Gallantry and Truth,
Triumphant ore the sins of Youth.
He like the Stars, to which he now is gone,
That shine with beams like Flame
Yet burn not with the same,
Had all the Light of Youth, of the Fire none.
12.
Knowledge he only sought, and so soon caught,
As if for him Knowledge had rather sought.
Nor did more Learning ever crowded lie
In such a short Mortality.
When ere the skilful Youth discourst or writ,
Still did the Notions throng
About his eloquent Tongue,
Nor could his Ink flow faster then his Wit.
13.
So strong a Wit did Nature to him frame,
As all things but his Judgment overcame;
His Judgment like the heav'enly Moon did show,
Tem'pring that mighty Sea below.
Oh had he liv'ed in Learnings World, what bound
Would have been able to control
His over-powering Soul?
We'have lost in him Arts that not yet are found.
14.
His Mirth was the pure Spirits of various Wit,
Yet never did his God or Friends forget.
And when deep talk and wisdom came in view,
Retir'ed and gave to them their due.
For the rich help of Books he always took,
Though his own searching mind before
Was so with Notions written ore
As if wise Nature had made that her Book.
15.
So many Virtues joined in him, as we
Can scarce pick here and there in History.
More then old Writers Practice ere could reach,
As much as they could ever teach.
These did Religion, Queen of Virtues sway,
And all their sacred Motions steare,
Just like the First and Highest Sphaere
Which wheels about, and turns all Heav'en one way.
16.
With as much Zeal, Devotion, Piety,
He always Liv'ed, as other Saints do Dye.
Still with his soul severe account he kept.
Weeping all Debts out ere he slept.
Then down in peace and innocence he lay,
Like the Suns laborious light,
Which still in Water sets at Night,
Unsullied with his Journey of the Day.
17.
Wondrous young Man, why were thou made so good,
To be snatched hence ere better understood?
Snatched before half of thee enough was seen!
Thou Ripe, and yet thy Life but Green!
Nor could thy Friends take their last sad Farewell,
But Danger and Infectious Death
Maliciously seized on that Breath
Where Life, Spirit, Pleasure always used to dwell.
18.
But happy Thou, taken from this frantic age,
Where Igno'rance and Hypocrisy does rage!
A fitter time for Heav'en no soul ere chose,
The place now only free from those.
There among the Blessed thou do for ever shine,
And wheresoere thou casts thy view
Upon that white and radiant crew,
See not a Soul clothed with more Light then Thine.
19.
And if the glorious Saints cease not to know
Their wretched Friends who fight with Life below;
Thy Flame to Me does still the same abide,
Only more pure and rarifie'd.
There whilst immortal Hymns thou do rehearse,
Thou do with holy pity see
Our dull and earthly Poesy,
Where Grief and Mis'ery can be joined with Verse.
ODE. In imitation of Horace his Ode. Quis multa gracilis te puer in rosa
Perfusus, etc. Lib. 1. Od. 5.
1.
TO whom now Pyrrha, art thou kind?
To what heart-ravisht Lover,
Do thou thy golden locks unbinde,
Thy hidden sweets discover,
And with large bounty open set
All the bright stores of thy rich Cabinet?
2.
Ah simple Youth, how often will he
Of thy chang'ed Faith complain?
And his own Fortunes find to be
So airy and so vain,
Of so Camaeleon- like an hew,
That still their color changes with it too?
3.
How often, alas, will he admire
The blackness of the Skies?
Trembling to hear the Winds sound higher,
And see the billows rise;
Poor unexperienc'ed He
Who never, alas, before had been at Sea!
4.
He'enjoys thy calmy Sunshine now,
And no breath stirring hears,
In the clear heaven of thy brow,
No smallest Cloud appears.
He sees thee gentle, fair, and gay,
And trusts the faithless April of thy May.
5.
Unhappy! thrice unhappy He,
T'whom Thou untry'ed do shine!
But there is no danger now for Me,
Since over Loretto's Shrine
In witness of the Shipwreck past
My consecrated Vessel hangs at last.
In imitation of Martials Epigram. Si tecum mihi care Martialis, etc. L. 5. Ep.
21:
IF, dearest Friend, it my good Fate might be
TO enjoy at once a quiet Life and Thee;
If we for Happiness could leisure find,
And wandering Time into a Method bind,
We should not sure the Great Men's favor need,
Nor on long Hopes, the Courts thin Diet, feed.
We should not Patience find daily to hear,
The Calumnies, and Flatteries spoken there.
We should not the Lords Tables humbly use,
Or talk in Ladies Chambers Love and News.
But Books, and wise Discourse, Gardens and Fields,
And all the joys that unmixt Natures yields.
Thick Summer shades where Winter still does ly,
Bright Winter Fires that Summers part supply.
Sleep not controlled by Cares, confin'ed to Night,
Or bound in any rule but Appetite.
Free, but not savage or ungracious Mirth,
Rich Wines to give it quick and easy birth.
A few Companions, which ourselves should choose,
A Gentle Mistress, and a Gentler Muse.
Such, dearest Friend, such without doubt should be
Our Plac, our Business, and our Company.
Now to Himself, alas, does neither Live,
But sees good Suns, of which we are to give
A strict account, set and march thick away;
Knows a man how to Live, and does he stay?
The Chronicle. A Ballad.
1.
MArgarita first possessed,
If I remember well, my breast,
Margarita first of all;
But when a while the wanton Maid
With my restless Heart had played,
Martha took the flying Ball.
2.
Martha soon did it resign
To the beauteous Cartharine.
Beauteous Catharine gave place
(Though loath and angry she to part
With the possession of my Heart)
To Elisa's conqu'ering face.
3.
Elisa till this Hour might reign
Had she not Evil Counsels taken.
Fundamental Laws she broke,
And still new Favorites she chose,
Till up in Arms my Passions rose,
And cast away her yoke.
4.
Mary then and gentle Ann
Both to reign at once began.
Alternately they swayed,
And sometimes Mary was the Fair,
And sometimes Ann the Crown did wear,
And sometimes Both IN obeyed.
5.
Another Mary then arose
And did rigorous Laws impose.
A mighty Tyrant she!
Long, alas, should I have been
Under that Iron-Scepter'd Queen,
Had not Rebecca set me free.
6.
When fair Rebecca set me free,
'Twas then a golden Time with me.
But soon those pleasures fled,
For the gracious Princess died
In her Youth and Beauties pride,
And Judith reigned in her sted.
7.
One Month, three Days, and half an Hour
Judith held the Sovereign Power.
Wondrous beautiful her Face,
But so weak and small her Wit,
That she to govern was unfit,
And so Susanna took her place.
8.
But when Isabella came
Armed with a resistless flame
And th'Artillery of her Eye;
Whilst she proudly marched about
Greater Conquests to find out,
She beat out Susan by the By.
9.
But in her place I then obeyed
Black-ey'd Besse, her Viceroy-Maid,
To whom ensued a Vacancy.
Thousand worse Passions then possessed
The Interregnum of my breast.
Bless me from such an Anarchy!
10.
Gentle Henriette than
And a third Mary next began,
Then Ione, and Jane, and Audria.
And then a pretty Thomasine,
And then another Katharine,
And then a long Et caeera.
11.
But should I now to you relate,
The strength and riches of their state,
The Powder, Patches, and the Pins,
The Ribbans, Jewels, and the Rings,
The Lace, the Paint, and warlike things
That make up all their Magazins:
12.
If I should tell the politic Arts
To take and keep men's hearts,
The Letters, Embassies, and Spies,
The Frowns, and Smiles, and Flatteries,
The Quarrels, Tears, and Perjuries,
Numberless, Nameless Mysteries!
13.
And all the Little Lime-twigs laid
By Matchavil the Waiting-Maid;
I more voluminous should grow
(Chiefly if I like them should tell
All Change of Weathers that befell)
Then Holinshead or Stow.
14.
But I will briefer with them be,
Since few of them were long with Me.
An higher and a nobler strain
My present Emperess does claim,
Hele onora, First of the Name;
Whom God grant long to reign!
To Sir William Davenant. Upon his two first Books of Gondibert, finished
before his voyage to America.
MEthinks Heroic Poesy till now
Like some fantastic Fairy Land did show,
Gods, Devils, Nymphs, Witches and Giants race,
And all but Man in Man's chief work had place.
Thou like some worthy Knight with sacred Arms
Do drive the Monsters thence, and end the Charms.
Instead of those do Men and Manners plant,
The things which that rich Soil did chiefly want.
Yet ev'en thy Mortals do their Gods excel,
Taught by thy Muse to Fight and Love so well.
By fatal hands whilst present Empires fall,
Thine from the Grave past Monarchies recall.
So much more thanks from humane kind does merit
The Poets Fury, then the Zelots Spirit.
And from the Grave thou mak'est this Empire rise
Not like some dreadful Ghost t'affright our Eyes,
But with more Luster and triumphant state,
Then when it crowned at proud Verona sat:
So will out God rebuild man's perished frame,
And raise him up much Better, yet the same.
So God-like Poets do past things rehearse,
Not change, but Heighten Nature by their Verse.
With shame, methinks, great Italy must see
Her Conqu'erors rais'ed to Life again by Thee.
Raised by such pow'erful Verse, that ancient Rome
May blush no less to see her Wit overcome.
Some men their Fancies like their Faith derive,
And think all Ill but that which Rome does give.
The Marks of Old and Catholic would find,
To the same Chair would Truth and Fiction bind.
Thou in those beaten paths disdainst to tread,
And scorn'st to Live by robbing of the Dead.
Since Time does all things change, thou think not fit
This latter Age should see all New but Wit.
Thy Fancy like a Flame its way does make,
And leave bright Tracks for following Pens to take.
Sure 'twas this noble boldness of the Muse
Did thy desire to seek new Worlds infuse,
And never did Heav'en so much a Voyage bless,
If thou can Plant but there with like success.
An Answer to a Copy of Verses sent me to Iersey.
AS to a Northern People (whom the Sun
Uses just as the Romish Church has done
Her Profane Laity, and does assign
Bread only both to serve for Bread and Wine)
A rich Canary Fleet welcome arrives;
Such comfort to us here your Letter gives,
Fraught with brisk racy Verses, in which we
The Soil from whence they came, taste, smell, and see'
Such is your Present to' us; for you must know,
Sir, that Verse does not in this Island grow
No more then Sack; One lately did not fear
(Without the Muses leave) to plant it here.
But it produc'ed such base, rough, crabbed, hedge
Rhymes, as ev'en set the hearers Ears on Edge:
Written by -- Esquire, the
Year of our Lord six hundred thirty three.
Brave Iersey Muse! and he is for this high style
Called to this day the Homer of the Iste.
Alas, to men here no Words less hard be
To Rhyme with, then The name of one of the Castles in Iersey.
Mount Orgueil is to me.
Mount Orgueil, which in scorn of the Muses law
With no yoke fellow Word will dain to draw.
Stubborn Mount Orgueil! it is a work to make it
Come into Rhyme, more hard then 'twere to take it.
Alas, to bring your Tropes and Figures here,
Strange as to bring Camels and Ele'phants were.
And Metaphore is so unknown a thing,
'Twould need the Preface of, God save the King.
Yet this I Will say for the honor of the place,
That by Gods extraordinary Grace
(Which shows the people' have judgment, if not Wit)
The land is undefil'ed with Clinches yet.
Which in my poor opinion, I confess,
Is a most sing'ular blessing, and no less
Then Irelands wanting Spiders. And so far
From the Actual Sin of Bombast too they are,
(That other Crying Sin of the English Muse
That even Satan himself can accuse
None here (no not so much as the Divines)
For the Motus primo primi to Strong Lines.
Well, since the soil then does not natu'rally bear
Verse, who ( a Devil) should import it here?
For that to me would seem as strange a thing
As who did first Wild Beasts into Islands bring.
Unless you think that it might taken be
As Green did Gond'ibert, in a Prize at Sea.
But that is a Fortune falls not every day;
It Is true Green was made by it; for they say
The Parl'ament did a noble bounty do,
And gave him the whole Prize, their Tenths and Fifteens too.
The Tree of Knowledge. That there is no Knowledge. Against the Dogmatists.
1.
THe sacred Tree midst the fair Orchard grew;
The Phoenix Truth did on it rest,
And built his perfum'ed Nest.
That right Porphyrian Tree which did true Logic show,
Each Leaf did learned Notions give,
And the Apples were Demonstrative.
So clear rheir Color and divine,
The very shade they cast did other Lights outshine.
2.
Taste not, said God; it is mine and Angels meat;
A certain Death does sit
Like an ill Worm in the Core of it.
Ye cannot Know and Live, nor Live or Know and Eat.
Thus spoke God, yet Man did go
Ignorantly on to Know;
Grew so more blind, and she
Who tempted him to this, grew yet more Blind then He.
3.
The only Science Man by this did get,
Was but to know he nothing Knew.
He straight his Nakedness did view,
His ign'orant poor estate, and was asham'ed of it.
Yet searches Probabilities,
And Rhetoric, and Fallacies,
And seeks by useless pride
With slight and withering Leaves that Nakedness to hide
4.
Henceforth, said God, the wretched Sons of earth
Shall sweat for Food in vain
That will not long sustain,
And bring with Labor forth each fond Abortive Birth.
That Serpent too, their Pride,
Which aims at things denied,
That learned and eloquent Lust
Instead of Mounting high, shall creep upon the Dust.
Reason. The use of it in Divine Matters.
1.
SOme blind themselves, 'cause possibly they may
Be led by others a right way;
They build on Sands, which if unmov'ed they find,
It Is but because there was no Wind.
Less hard it is, not to Err ourselves, then know
If our Fore fathers erred or no.
When we trust Men concerning God, we then
Trust not God concerning Men.
2.
Visions and Inspirations some expect
Their course here to direct,
Like senseless Chemists their own wealth destroy,
Imaginary Gold to enjoy.
So Stars appear to drop to us from sky,
And gild the passage as they fly.
But when they fall, and meet th'opposing ground,
What but a sordid Slime is found?
3.
Sometimes their Fancies they 'bove Reason set,
And Fast, that they may Dream of Meat.
Sometimes ill Spirits their sickly souls delude,
And Bastard-Forms obtrude.
So Endors wretched Sorceress, although
She Saul through his disguise did know,
Yet when the Dev'il comes up disguised, she cries,
Behold, the Gods arise.
4.
In vain, alas, these outward Hopes are tried;
Reason within's our only Guide.
Reason, which (God be praised!) still Walks, for all
It Is old Original Fall.
And since itself the boundless Godhead joined
With a Reasonable Mind,
it plainly shows that Mysteries Divine
May with our Reason join.
5.
The Holy Book, like the eighth Sphaere, does shine
With thousand Lights of Truth Divine.
So numberless the Stars, that to the Eye,
It makes but all one Galaxie.
Yet Reason must assist too, for in Seas
So vast and dangerous as these,
Our course by Stars above we cannot know,
Without the Compass too below.
6.
Though Reason cannot through Faiths Myst'eries see,
It sees that There and such they be;
Leads to Heav'ens Door, and there does humbly keep,
And there through Chinks and Key-holes peep.
Though it, like Moses, by a sad command
Must not come in to the Holy Land,
Yet thither it infallibly does Guide,
And from afar it is all Discry'ed.
On the Death of Mr. Crashaw.
POet and Saint! to thee alone are given
The two most sacred Names of Earth and Heaven.
The hard and rarest Union which can be
Next that of Godhead with Humanity.
Long did the Muses banished Slaves abide,
And built vain Pyramids to mortal pride,
Like Moses Thou (though Spells and Charms withstand)
Have brought them nobly home back to their Holy Land.
Ah wretched We, Poets of Earth! but Thou
Were Living the same Poet which you are Now.
Whilst Angels sing to thee their airs divine,
And joy in an applause so great as thine.
Equal society with them to hold,
Thou need'st not make new Songs, but say the Old.
And they (kind Spirits!) shall all rejoice to see
How little less then They, Exalted Man may be.
Still the old Heathen Gods in Numbers dwell,
The Heav'enliest thing on Earth still keeps up Hell.
Nor have we yet quite purg'ed the Christian Land;
Still Idols here like Calves at Bethel stand.
And though Pans Death long since all Oracles breaks,
Yet still in Rhyme the Fiend Apollo speaks.
Nay with the worst of Heathen dotage We
(Vain Men!) the Monster Woman Deifie.
Find Stars, and tie our Fates there in a Face,
And Paradise in them by whom we lost it, place.
What different faults corrupt our Muses thus?
Wanton as Girls, as old Wives, Fabulous!
Thy spotless Muse, like Mary, did contain
The boundless Godhead; she did well disdain
That her eternal Verse employed should be
On a less subject then Eternity.
And for a sacred Mistress scorned to take,
But her whom God himself scorned not his Spouse to make.
It (in a kind) her Miracle did do;
A fruitful Mother was, and Virgin too.
M. Crashaw died of a Fever at Loretto, being newly chosen Canon of that
Church.
How well (blessed Swan) did Fate contrive thy death;
And made thee render up thy tuneful breath
In thy great Mistress Arms? thou most divine
And richest Off'ering of Loretto's Shrine!
Where like some holy Sacrifice t'expire,
A Fever burns thee, and Love lights the Fire.
Angels (they say) brought the fam'ed Chapel there,
And bore the sacred Load in Triumph through the air.
It Is surer much they brought thee there, and They,
And Thou, their charge, went singing all the way.
Pardon, my Mother Church, if I consent
That Angels led him when from thee he went,
For even in Error sure no Danger is
When joined with so much Piety as His.
Ah, mighty God, with shame I speak't, and grief,
Ah that our greatest Faults were in Belief!
And our weak Reason were ev'en weaker yet,
Rather then thus our Wills too strong for it.
His Faith perhaps in some nice Tenants might
Be wrong; his Life, I Am sure, was in the right.
And I my self a Catholic will be,
So far at least, great Saint, to Pray to thee.
Hail, Bard Triumphant! and some care bestow
On us, the Poets Militant below!
Oppos'ed by our old En'emy, adverse Chance,
Attacqu'ed by Envy, and by Ignorance,
Enchain'd by Beauty, tortur'ed by Desires,
Exposed by Tyrant-Love to savage Beasts and Fires.
Thou from low earth in nobler Flames did rise,
And like Elijah, mount Alive the skies.
Elisha-like (but with a wish much less,
More fit thy Greatness, and my Littleness)
Lo here I beg (I whom thou once did prove
So humble to Esteem, so Good to Love)
Not that thy Spirit might on me Doubled be,
I ask but Half thy mighty Spirit for Me.
And when my Muse soars with so strong a Wing,
'Twill learn of things Divine, and first of Thee to sing.
Anacreontiques: OR, Some Copies of Verses Translated Paraphrastically out of
Anacreon.
I. Love.
I Will sing of Heroes, and of Kings;
In mighty Numbers, mighty things,
Begin, my Muse; but lo, the strings
To my great Song rebellious prove;
The strings will sound of naught but Love.
I broke them all, and put on new;
It Is this or nothing sure will do.
These sure (said I) will me obey;
These sure Heroic Notes will play.
Straight I began with thundering Jove,
And all the' immortal Pow'ers but Love.
Love smil'ed, and from my'enfeebled Lyre
Came gentle airs, such as inspire
Melting love, and soft desire.
Farewell then Heroes, farewell Kings,
And mighty Numbers, mighty Things;
Love tunes my Heart just to my strings.
II. Drinking.
THe thirsty Earth soaks up the Rain,
And drinks, and gapes for drink again.
The Plants suck in the Earth, and are
With constant drinking fresh and fair.
The Sea it self, which one would think
Should have but little need of Drink,
Drinks ten thousand Rivers up,
So filled that they oreflow the Cup.
The busy Sun (and one would guess
By's drunken fiery face no less)
Drinks up the Sea, and when'has don,
The Moon and Stars drink up the Sun.
They drink and dance by their own light,
They drink and revel all the night.
Nothing in Nature's Sober found,
But an eternal Health goes round.
Fill up the Bowl then, fill it high,
Fill all the Glasses there, for why
Should every creature drink but I,
Why, Man of Morals, tell me why?
III. Beauty.
Liberal Nature did dispense
To all things Arms for their defense;
And some she arms with sin'ewy force,
And some with swiftness in the course;
Some with hard Hoofs, or forked claws,
And some with Horns, or tusked jaws.
And some with Scales, and some with Wings,
And some with Teeth, and some with Stings.
Wisdom to Man she did afford,
Wisdom for Shield, and Wit for Sword.
What to beauteous Womankind,
What Arms, what Armor has she'assigne'd?
Beauty is both; for with the Fair
What Arms, what Armor can compare?
What Steel, what Gold, or Diamond,
More Impassible is found?
And yet what Flame, what Lightning ere
So great an Active force did bear?
They are all weapon, and they dart
Like Porcupines from every part.
Who can, alas, their strength express,
Armed, when they themselves undress,
Cap a pe with Nakedness?
IV. The Duel.
YEs, I will love then, I will love,
I will not now Loves Rebel prove,
Though I was once his Enemy;
Though ill-advis'd and stubborn I,
Did to the Combat him defy,
An Helmet, Spear, and mighty shield,
Like some new Ajax I did wield.
Love in one hand his Bow did take,
In the other hand a Dart did shake.
But yet in vain the Dart did throw,
In vain he often drew the Bow.
So well my Armor did resist,
So often by flight the blow I mist.
But when I thought all danger past,
His Quiver empti'd quite at last,
Instead of Arrow, or of Dart,
He shot Himself into my Heart.
The Living and the Killing Arrow
Ran through the skin, the Flesh, the Blood,
And broke the Bones, and scortcht the Marrow,
No Trench or Work of Life withstood.
In vain I now the Walls maintain,
I set out Guards and Scouts in vain,
Since the En'emy does within remain.
In vain a Breastplate now I wear,
Since in my Breast the Foe I bear.
In vain my Feet their swiftness try;
For from the Body can they fly?
V. Age.
Often am I by the Women told,
Poor Anacreon thou grow'st old.
Look how thy Hairs are falling all;
Poor Anacreon how they fall?
Whether I grow old or no,
By the effects I do not know.
This I know without being told,
It Is Time to Live if I grow Old,
It Is time short pleasures now to take,
Of little Life the best to make,
And manage wisely the last stake.
VI. The Account.
WHen all the Stars are by thee told,
(The endless Sums of heav'enly Gold)
Or when the Hairs are reckon'ed all,
From sickly Autumns Head that fall,
Or when the drops that make the Sea,
Whilst all her Sands thy Counters be.
Thou then, and Thou alone may prove
The Arithmeticean of my Love.
An hundred Loves at Athens score,
At Corinth write an hundred more.
Fair Corinth does such Beauties bear,
So few is an Escaping there.
Write then at Chios seventy three;
Write then at Lesbo's (let me see)
Write me at Lesbos ninety down,
Full ninety Loves, and half a One.
And next to these let me present,
The fair Ionian Regiment.
And next the Carian Company,
Five hundred both Effectively.
Three hundred more at Rhodes and Crete;
Three hundred it is I Am sure Complete.
For arms at Crete each Face does bear,
And every Eye's and Archer there.
Go on; this stop why do thou make?
Thou think, perhaps, that I mistake.
Seems this to thee too great a Sum?
Why many a Thousand are to come;
The mighty Xerxes could not boast
Such different Nations in his Host.
On; for my Love, if thou be'st weary,
Must find some better Secretary.
I have not yet my Persian told.
Nor yet my Syrian Loves enrolled,
Nor Indian, nor Arabian;
Nor Cyprian Loves, nor African;
Nor Scythian, nor Italian flames;
There Is a whole Map behind of Names.
Of gentle Love in the temperate Zone,
And cold ones in the Frigid One,
Cold frozen Loves with which IN pine,
And parched Loves beneath the Line.
VII. Gold.
A Mighty pain to Love it is,
And it is a pain that pain to miss.
But of all pains the greatest pain
It is to love, but love in vain.
Virtue now nor noble Blood,
Nor Wit by Love is understood,
Gold alone does passion move,
Gold Monopolizes love!
A curse on her, and on the Man,
Who this traffic first began!
A curse on him who found the Oar!
A curse on him who digg'ed the store!
A curse on him who did refine it!
A curse on him who first did coin it!
A curse all curses else above
On him, who used it first in Love!
Gold begets in Brethren hate,
Gold in Families debate;
Gold does Friendships separate,
Gold does Civil wars create.
These the smallest harms of it!
Gold, alas, does Love beget.
VIII. The Epicure.
FIll the Bowl with rosy Wine,
Around our temples Roses twine,
And let us cheerfully awhile;
Like the Wine and Roses smile.
Crowned with Roses we contemn
Gyge's wealthy Diadem.
To day is Ours; what do we fear?
To day is Ours; we have it here.
Let Us treat it kindly, that it may
Wish, at least, with us to stay.
Let Us banish Business, banish Sorrow;
To the Gods belongs To morrow.
IX. Another.
UNderneath this Myrtle shade,
On flowery beds supinely laid,
With od'orous Oils my head ore-flowing,
And around it Roses growing,
What should I do but drink away
The Heat, and troubles of the Day?
In this more then Kingly state,
Love himself shall on me wait.
Fill to me, Love, nay fill it up;
And mingled cast into the Cup,
Wit, and Mirth, and noble Fires,
Vigorous Health, and gay Desires.
The Wheel of Life no less will stay
In a smooth then Rugged way.
Since it equally does flee,
Let the Motion pleasant be.
Why do we precious Ointments shower,
Nobler wines why do we pour,
Beauteous Flowers why do we spread,
Upon the Mon'uments of the Dead?
Nothing they but Dust can show,
Or Bones that hasten to be so.
Crown me with Roses whilst I Live,
Now your Wines and Ointments give.
After Death I nothing crave,
Let me Alive my pleasures have,
All are Stoics in the Grave.
X. The Grasshopper.
HAppy Insect, what can be
In happiness compar'ed to Thee?
Fed with nourishment divine,
The dewy Mornings gentle Wine!
Nature waits upon thee still,
And thy verdant Cup does fill,
It Is filled where ever thou do tread,
Nature selfe's thy Ganimed.
Thou do drink, and dance, and sing;
Happier then the happiest King!
All the Fields which thon do see,
All the Plants belong to Thee,
All that Summer Hours produce,
Fertile made with early juice.
Man for thee does sow and plow;
Farmer He, and Landlord Thou!
Thou do innocently joy,
Nor does thy Luxury destroy;
The Shepherd gladly hears thee,
More Harmonious then He.
Thee Country Hindes with gladness hear,
Prophet of the ripened year!
Thee Phoebus loves, and does inspire;
Phoebus is himself thy Sire.
To thee of all things upon earth,
Life is no longer then thy Mirth.
Happy Insect, happy Thou,
Do neither Age, nor Winter know.
But when thou'st drunk, and danc'ed, and sung,
Thy fill, the flowery Leaves among.
(Voluptuous, and Wise with all,
Epicuraean Animal!)
Sated with thy Summer Feast,
Thou retir'est to endless Rest.
XI. The Swallow.
FOolish Prater, what do thou
So early at my window do
With thy tuneless Serenade?
Well t'had been had Tereus made
Thee as Dumb as Philomel;
There his Knife had done but well.
In thy undiscover'ed Nest
Thou do all the winter rest,
And dream'est ore thy summer joys
Free from the stormy seasons noise:
Free from The Will thou'st done to me;
Who disturbs, or seeks out Thee?
Had thou all the charming notes
Of all the woods Poetic Throats,
All thy art could never pay
What thou'st taken from me away;
Cruel Bird, thou'st taken away
A Dream out of my arms to day,
A Dream that never must equaled be
By all that waking Eyes may see.
Thou this damage to repair,
Nothing half so sweet or fair,
Nothing half so good can bring,
Though men say, Thou bring'st the Spring.
ELEGY UPON ANACREON, Who was choked by a GRAPE-STONE.
Spoken by the God of Love.
HOw shall I lament thine end,
My best Servant, and my Friend?
Nay and, if from a Deity
So much Deifi'ed as I,
It sound not too profane and odd,
Oh my Master, and my God!
For it is true, most mighty Poet,
(Though I like not Men should know it)
I Am in naked Nature less,
Less by much then in thy Dress.
All thy Verse is softer far
Then the downy Feathers are,
Of my Wings, or of my Arrows,
Of my Mothers Doves or Sparrows.
Sweet as Lovers freshest kisses,
Or their riper following blisses,
Graceful, cleanly, smooth and round,
All with Venus Girdle bound,
And thy Life was all the while
Kind and gentle as thy Style.
The smooth-pac'ed Hours of ev'ery day
Glided numerously away.
Like thy Verse each Hour did pass,
Sweet and short, like that it was.
Some do but their Youth allow me,
Just what they by Nature owe me,
The Time that is mine, and not their own,
The certain Tribute of my Crown,
When they grow old, they grow to be
Too Busy, or too wise for me.
Thou were wiser, and did know
None too wise for Love can grow,
Love was with thy Life entwined
Close as Heat with Fire is joined,
A powerful Brand prescrib'ed the date
Of thine, like Meleagers Fate.
The Antiperistasis of Age
More enflam'ed thy amorous rage,
Thy silver Hairs yielded me more
Then even golden curls before.
Had I the power of Creation,
As I have of Generation,
Where I the matter must obey,
And cannot work Plate out of Clay,
My Creatures should be all like Thee,
It Is Thou should their Idaea be.
They, like Thee, should thoroughly hate
Bus'iness, Honor, Title, State.
Other wealth they should not know
But what my Living Mines bestow;
The pomp of Kings they should confess
At their Crownings to be less
Then a Lovers humblest guise,
When at his Mistress feet he lies.
Rumor they no more should mind
Then Men safe-landed do the Wind,
Wisdom it self they should not hear
When it presumes to be Severe.
Beauty alone they should admire,
Nor look at Fortunes vain attire,
Nor ask what Parents it can show;
With Dead or Old t'has naught to do.
They should not love yet All, or Any,
But very Much, and very Many.
All their Life should gilded be
With Mirth, and Wit, and Gayetie,
Well remembering, and Applying
The Necessity of Dying.
Their cheerful Heads should always wear
All that crowns the flowery year.
They should always laugh, and sing,
And dance, and strike the harmonious string.
Verse should from their Tongue so flow,
As if it in the Mouth did grow,
As swiftly answering their command,
As tunes obey the artful Hand.
And whilst I do thus discover
Th'ingredients of an happy Lover,
It Is, my Anacreon, for thy sake
I of the Grape no mention make.
Till my' Anacreon by thee fell,
Cursed Plant, I lov'ed thee well.
And 'twas often my wanton use
To dip my Arrows in thy juice.
Cursed Plant, it is true I see,
The Old report that goes of Thee,
That with Giants blood the Earth
Stained and poys'ned gave thee birth,
And now thou wreak'st thy ancient spite
On Men in whom the Gods delight.
Thy Patron Bacchus it is no wonder
Was brought forth in Flames and Thunder,
In rage, in quarrels, and in fights,
Worse then his Tigers he delights,
In all our heaven I think there be
No such ill-natur'ed God as He.
Thou pretendest, Trayt'erous Wine,
To be the Muses friend and Mine.
With Love and Wit thou do begin,
False Fires, alas, to draw us in.
Which, if our course we by them keep,
Misguide to Madness, or to Sleep.
Sleep were well; thou'hast learnt a way
To Death it self now to betray.
It grieves me when I see what Fate
Does on the best of Mankind wait.
Poets or Lovers let them be,
It Is neither Love nor Poesy
Can arm against Deaths smallest dart
The Poets Head, or Lovers Heart.
But when their Life in its decline,
Touches the Inevitable Line,
All the Worlds Mortal to'um then,
And Wine is Aconite to men.
Nay in Deaths Hand the Grape-stone proves
As strong as Thunder is in Jove's.
FINIS.
THE MISTRESS; OR, SEVERAL COPIES OF LOVE-VERSES.

Written by A. COWLEY.

VIRG, Aen. 4. -- Haeret lateri lethalis arundo.
LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

THE MISTRESS OR, SEVERAL COPIES OF Love-Verses.
The Request.
1.
I Have often wished to love; what shall I do?
Me still the cruel Boy does spare;
And I a double task must bear,
First to woo him, and then a Mistress too.
Come at last and strike for shame;
If thou art any thing besides a name.
I Will think Thee else no God to be;
But Poets rather Gods, who first created Thee.
2.
I ask not one in whom all beauties grow,
Let me but love, what ere she be,
She cannot seem deformed to me;
And I would have her seem to others so.
Desire takes wings and strait does fly,
It stays not dully to inquire the Why.
That Happy thing a Lover grown,
I shall not see with others Eyes, scarce with mine own.
3.
If she be coy and scorn my noble fire,
If her chill heart I cannot move,
Why I Will enjoy the very Love,
And make a Mistress of mine own Desire.
Flames their most vigorous heat do hold,
And purest light, if compast round with cold:
So when sharp Winter means most harm,
The springing Plants are by the Snow it self kept warm.
4.
But do not touch my heart, and so be gone;
Strike deep thy burning arrows in:
Lukewarmness I account a sin,
As great in Love, as in Religion.
Come armed with flames, for I would prove
All the extremities of mighty Love.
Th excess of heat is but a fable;
We know the torrid Zone is now found habitable.
5.
Among the Woods and Forests thou art found,
There Bores and Lions thou do tame;
Is not my heart a nobler game?
Let Venus, Men; and Beasts, Diana wound.
Thou do the Birds thy Subjects make;
Thy nimble feathers do their wings overtake:
Thou all the Spring their Songs do hear,
Make me Love too, I Will sing to 'thee all the year.
6.
What service can mute Fishes do to Thee?
Yet against them thy Dart prevails,
Piercing the armor of their Scales;
And still thy Sea-born Mother lives in the Sea.
Do thou deny only to me
The no-great privilege of Captivity?
I beg or challenge here thy Bow;
Either thy pity to me, or else thine anger show.
7.
Come; or I Will teach the world to scorn that Bow:
I Will teach them thousand wholesome arts
Both to resist and cure thy darts,
More then thy skilful Ovid ere did know.
Music of sighs thou shall not hear,
Nor drink one wretched Lovers tasteful Tear:
Nay, unless soon thou woundest me,
My Verses shall not only wound, but murder Thee.
The Thraldom.
1.
I Came, I Saw, and was undon;
Lightning did through my bones and marrow run;
A pointed pain pierced deep my heart;
A swift, cold trembling seized on every part;
My head turned round, nor could it bear
The Poison that was entered there.
2.
So a destroying Angels breath
Blows in the Plague, and with it hasty Death.
Such was the pain, did so begin
To the poor wretch, when Legion entered in.
Forgive me, God, I cried; for I
Flattered my self I was to dye.
3.
But quickly to my Cost I found,
'Twas cruel Love, not Death had made the wound.
Death a more generous rage does use;
Quarter to all he conquers does refuse.
Whilst Love with barbarous mercy saves
The vanquished lives to make them slaves.
4.
I am thy slave then; let me know,
Hard Master, the great task I have to do:
Who pride and scorn do undergo,
In tempests and rough Seas thy Galleys row;
They pant, and groan, and sigh, but find
Their sighs increase the angry wind.
5.
Like an Egyptian Tyrant, some
Thou weariest out, in building but a Tomb.
Others with sad, and tedious art
Labor i'the' Quarries of a stony Heart;
Of all the works thou do assign
To all the several slaves of thine,
Employ me, mighty Love, to dig the Mine.
The Given Love.
1.
I WILL on; for what should hinder me
From Loving, and Enjoying Thee?
Thou can not those exceptions make,
Which thin-sould, under-mortals take;
That my Fate's too mean and low;
'Twere pity I should love thee so,
If that dull cause could hinder me
In Loving, and Enjoying thee.
2.
It does not me a whit displease,
That the rich all honors seize;
That you all Titles make your own,
Are Valiant, Learned, Wise alone.
But if you claim over Women too
The power which over Men ye do;
If you alone must Lovers be;
For that, Sirs, you must pardon me.
3.
Rather then lose what does so near
Concern my Life, and Being here,
I Will some such crooked ways invent,
As you, or your Forefathers went:
I Will flatter or oppose the King,
Turn Puritan, or Any Thing;
I Will force my Mind to arts so new:
Grow Rich, and Love as well as You.
4.
But rather thus let me remain,
As Man in Paradise did reign;
When perfect Love did so agree
With Innocence and Poverty.
Adam did no Ioynture give,
Himself was Ioynture to his Eve:
Untoucht with Av'arice yet or Pride,
The Rib came freely back to 'his side.
5.
A curse upon the man who taught
Women, that Love was to be bought;
Rather dote only on your Gold;
And that with greedy av'arice hold;
For if Woman too submit
To that, and sell her self for it,
Fond Lover, you a Mistress have
Of her, that is but your Fellow-slave.
6.
What should those Poets mean of old
That made their God to woo in Gold?
Of all men sure They had no cause
To bind Love to such costly Laws;
And yet I scarcely blame them now;
For who, alas, would not allow,
That Women should such gifts receive,
Could They, as He, Be what They give.
7.
If thou, my Dear, Thy self should prize,
Alas, what value would suffize?
The Spaniard could not do it, though he
Should to both Indies jointure thee.
Thy beauties therefore wrong will take,
If thou should any bargain make;
To give All will befit thee well;
But not at Under-Rates to sell.
8.
Bestow thy Beauty then on me,
Freely, as Nature gave't to Thee;
It Is an exploded Popish thought
To think that Heaven may be bought.
Frayrs, Hymns; and Praises are the way;
And those my thankful Muse shall pay;
Thy Body in my verse enshrined,
Shall grow immortal as thy Mind.
9.
I Will fix thy title next in fame
To Sacharissas well-sung name.
So faithfully will I declare.
What all thy wondrous beauties are,
That when at the last great Assise,
All Women shall together rise,
Men strait shall cast their eyes on Thee
And know at first that Thou art She.
The Spring.
1.
THough you be absent here, I needs must say
The Trees as beauteous are, and flowers as gay,
As ever they were wont to be*
Nay the Birds rural music too
Is as Melodious and free,
As if they sung to pleasure you:
I saw a Rose-Bud o'pe this morn; I Will swear
The blushing Morning opened not more fair.
2.
How could it be so fair, and you away?
How could the Trees be beauteous, Flowers sogay?
Could they remember but last year,
How you did Them, They you delight,
The sprouting leaves which saw you here,
And called their Fellows to the sight,
Would, looking round for the same sight in vain,
Creep back into their silent Barks again.
3.
Where ere you walked, trees were as reverend made,
As when of old Gods dwelt in every shade.
Is It possible they should not know,
What loss of honor they sustain,
That thus they smile and flourish now,
And still their former pride retain?
Dull Creatures! it is not without Cause that she,
Who fled the God of wit, was made a Tree.
4.
In ancient times sure they much wiser were,
When they rejoiced the Thracian verse to hear;
In vain did Nature bid them stay,
When Orpheus had his song begun,
They called their wondering roots away,
And bad them silent to him run.
How would those learned trees have followed you?
You would have drawn Them, and their Poet too.
5.
But who can tame them now? for, since you're gone,
They Are here the only Fair, and Shine alone.
You did their Natural Rights invade;
Where ever you did walk or sit,
The thickest Bows could make no shade,
Although the Sun had granted it:
The fairest Flowers could please no more, near you,
Then Painted Flowers, set next to them, could do.
6.
When e're then you come hither, that shall be
The time, which this to others is, to Me.
The little joys which here are now
The name of Punishments do bear;
When by their sight they let us Know
How we deprived of greater are.
It Is you the best of Seasons with you bring;
This is for Beasts, and that for Men the Spring.
Written in Juice of Lemmon.
1.
WHilst what I write I do not see,
I dare thus, even to you, write Poetry.
Ah foolish Muse, which do so high aspire,
And know her judgment well
How much it does thy power excel,
Yet dare be read by, thy just doom, the Fire.
2.
Alas, thou think thy self secure,
Because thy form is Innocent and Pure:
Like Hypocrites, which seem unspotted here;
But when they sadly come to die,
And the last Fire their Truth must try,
Scrauld over like thee, and blotted they appear.
3.
Go then, but reverently go,
And, since thou needs must sin, confess it too:
Confes't, and with humility cloth thy shame;
For thou, who else must burned be
An Heretic, if she pardon thee,
May like a Martyr then enjoy the Flame.
4.
But if her wisdom grow severe,
And suffer not her goodness to be there;
If her large mercies cruelly it restrain;
Be not discouraged, but require
A more gentle Ordeal Fire,
And bid her by Loves-Flames read it again.
5.
Strange power of heat, thou yet do show
Like winter earth, naked, or clothed with snow,
But, as the quickening Sun approaching near,
The Plants arise up by degrees,
A sudden paint adorns the trees,
And all kind Natures Characters appear.
6.
So, nothing yet in Thee is seen,
But soon as Genial heat warms thee within,
A new born Wood of various Lines there grows;
Here buds an A, and there a B,
Here sprouts a V, and there a T,
And all the flourishing Letters stand in Rows.
7.
Still, seely Paper, thou will think
That all this might as well be writ with Ink.
Oh no; there is sense in this, and Mystery;
Thou now may change thy Authors name,
And to her Hand lay noble claim;
For as She Reads, she Makes the words in Thee.
8.
Yet if thine own unworthiness
Will still, that thou art mine, not Hers, confess;
Consume thy self with Fire before her Eyes,
And so her Grace or Pity move;
The Gods, though Beasts they do not Love,
Yet like them when they are burnt In Sacrifice.
Inconstancy.
FIve years ago (says Story) I loved you,
For which you call me most Inconstant now;
Pardon me, Madam, you mistake the Man;
For I am not the same, that I was than;
No Flesh is now the same 'twas then in Me;
And that my Mind is changed your self may see.
The same Thoughts to retain still, and Intents
Were more inconstant far; for Accidents
Must of all things most strangely 'Inconstant prove,
If from one Subject they t'another move;
My Members then, the Father Members were
From whence These take their birth, which now are here.
If then this Body love what the other did,
'Twere Incest; which by Nature is forbid.
You might as well this Day inconstant name,
Because the Weather is not still the same,
That it was yesterday: or blame the Year,
Cause the Spring, Flowers; and Autumn, Fruit does bear.
The World's a Scene of Changes, and to be
Constant, in Nature were Inconstancy;
For 'twere to break the Laws her self has made:
Our Substances themselves do fleet, and fade;
The most fixed Being still does move and fly,
Swift as the wings of Time it is measured by.
T'imagine then that Love should never cease
( Love which is but the Ornament of these)
Were quite as senseless, as to wonder why
Beauty and Color stays not when we die.
Not Fair.
It Is very true, I thought you once as fair,
As women in the Idea are.
Whatever here seems beauteous, seemed to be
But a faint Metaphor of Thee.
But then (methoughts) there something shined within,
Which cast this Luster over thy skin.
Nor could I choose but count it the Suns Light,
Which made this Cloud appear so bright.
But since I knew thy falsehood and thy pride,
And all thy thousand faults beside;
A very Moor (methinks) placed near to Thee,
White, as his Teeth, would seem to be.
So men (they say) by hells delusions led,
Have taken a Succu bus to their bed;
Believe it fair, and themselves happy call,
Till the cleft Foot discovers all:
Then they start from't, half Ghosts themselves with fear;
And Devil, as it is, it does appear.
So since against my will I found Thee foul,
Deformed and crooked in thy Soul,
My Reason strait did to my Senses show,
That they might be mistaken too:
Nay when the world but knows how false you are,
There Is not a man will think you fair.
Thy shape will monstrous in their fancies be,
They Will call their Eyes as false as Thee.
Be what thou will; Hate will present thee so,
As Puritans do the Pope, and Papists Luther do.
Platonic Love.
1.
INdeed I must confess,
When Souls mix, it is an Happiness;
But not complete till Bodies too do join,
And both our Wholes into one Whole combine;
But half of Heaven the Souls in glory taste,
'Till by Love in Heaven at last,
Their Bodies too are placed.
2.
In thy immortal part
Man, as well as I, thou art.
But something it is that differs Thee and Me;
And we must one even in that difference be.
I Thee, both as a man, and woman prize;
For a perfect Love implies
Love in all Capacities.
3.
Can that for true love pass,
When a fair woman courts her glass?
Something unlike must in Loves likeness be,
His wonder is, one, and Variety.
For he, whose soul naught but a Soul can move,
Does a new Narcissus prove,
And his own Image love.
4.
That souls do beauty know,
It Is to the Bodies help they ow;
If when they know it, they strait abuse that trust,
And shut the Body from't, it is as injust,
As if I brought my dearest Friend to see
My Mistress, and at the instant He
Should steal her quite from Me.
The Change.
1.
Love in her Sunny Eyes does basking play;
Love walks the pleasant Mazes of her Hair;
Love does on both her Lips for ever stray;
And sows and reaps a thousand kisses there.
In all her outward parts Lov's always seen;
But, oh, He never went within.
2.
Within Loves foes, his greatest foes abide
Malice, Inconstancy and Pride.
So the Earths face, Trees, Herbs and Flowers do dress,
With other beauties numberless:
But at the Center, Darkness is, and Hell;
There wicked Spirits, and there the Damned dwell.
3.
With Me alas, quite contrary it fares;
Darkness and Death lies in my weeping eyes,
Despair, and Paleness in my face appears,
And Grief, and Fear, Loves greatest enemies;
But, like the Persian-Tyrant, Love within
Keeps his proud Court, and never is seen.
4.
Oh take my Heart, and by that means you will prove
Within, too stored enough of Love:
Give me but Yours, I Will by that change so thrive,
That Love in all my parts shall live.
So powerful is this change, it render can,
My outside Woman, and your inside Man.
Clad all in White*
1.
FAirest thing that shines below,
Why in this robe do thou appear?
Would thou a white most perfect show,
Thou must at all no garment wear:
Thou will seem much whiter so,
Then Winter when it is clad with snow.
2.
It Is not the Linen shows so fair:
Her skin shines through, and makes it bright;
So clouds themselves like Suns appear,
When the Sun pierces them with Light:
So Lillies in a glass enclose,
The Glass will seem as white as those.
3.
Thou now one heap of beauty art;
Naught outward, or within is foul:
Condensed beams make every part;
Thy Body's Clothed like thy Soul.
Thy soul, which does it self display,
Like a star placed in the Milky way.
4.
Such robes the Saints departed wear,
Wooven all with Light divine;
Such their exalted Bodies are,
And with such full glory shine.
But they regard not mortals pain;
Men pray, I fear, to both in vain.
5.
Yet seeing thee so gently pure,
My hopes will needs continue still;
Thou would not take this garment sure,
When thou had and intent to kill.
Of Peace and yielding who would doubt,
When the white Flag he sees hung out?
Leaving Me, and then loving Many*
So Men, who once have cast the Truth away,
Forsook by God, do strange wild lusts obey;
So the vain Gentiles, when they left to adore
One Deity, could not stop at thousands more.
Their zeal was senseless strait, and boundless grown;
They worshipped many a Beast, and many a Stone.
Ah fair Apostate! could thou think to flee
From Truth and Goodness, yet keep Unity?
I reigned alone; and my blessed Self could call
The Universal Monarch of her All*
Mine, mine her fair East Indies were above,
Where those Suns rise that cheer the world of Love;
Where beauties shine like gems of richest price;
Where Coral grows, and every breath is spice:
Mine too her rich West Indies were below,
Where Mines of gold and endless treasures grow.
But, as, when the Pellaean Conqueror died,
Many small Princes did his Crown divide,
So, since my Love his vanquished world forsook,
Murdered by poisons from her falsehood took,
An hundred petty Kings claim each their part,
And rend that glorious Empire of her Heart.
My Heart discovered*
HEr body is so gently bright,
Clear, and transparent to the sight,
(Clear as sair Cristal to the view,
Yet soft as that, ere Stone it grew,)
That through her flesh, methinks, is seen
The brighter Soul that dwells within:
Our eyes the subtle covering pass,
And see that Lilie through it is Glass.
I through her Breast her Heart espy,
As Souls in hearts do Souls descry,
I see it with gentle Motions beat;
I see Light in it, but find no Heat.
Within, like Angels in the sky,
A thousand gilded thoughts do fly:
Thoughts of bright and noblest kind,
Fair and chaste, as Mother-Mind.
But, oh, what other Heart is there,
Which sighs and crowds to hers so near?
It Is all on flame, and does like fire,
To that, as to it is Heaven, aspire,
The wounds are many in it and deep;
Still does it bleed, and still does weep.
Whose ever wretched Heart it be,
I cannot choose but grieve to see;
What pity in my Breast does reign?
Methinks I feel too all it is pain.
So torn, and so defaced it lies,
That it could never be known by the eyes;
But, oh, at last I heard it groan,
And knew by the Voice that 'twas mine own.
So poor Alcione, when she saw
A shipwrackt body tow'ards her draw
Beat by the waves, let fall a Tear,
Which only then did Pity wear:
But when the Corpse on shore were cast,
Which she her Husband found at last;
What should the wretched widow do?
Grief changed her strait; away she flew,
Turned to a Bird: and so at last shall I,
Both from my Murdered Heart, and Murderer fly.
Answer to the Platonicks.
SO Angels love; so let them love for me;
When I Am all soul, such shall my Love too be:
Who nothing here but like a Spirit would do,
In a short time (believed) will be one too:
But shall our Love do what in Beasts we see?
E'ven Beasts eat too, but not so well as We.
And you as justly might in thirst refuse
The use of Wine; because Beasts Water use:
They taste those pleasures, as they do their food;
Undrest they take it, devour it raw, and crude:
But to us Men, Love Cooks it at his fire,
And adds the poignant sauce of sharp desire.
Beasts do the same: it is true; but ancient fame
Says, Gods themselves turned Beasts to do the same.
The Thunderer, who, without the female bed,
Could Goddesses bring forth from out his head,
Chose rather Mortals this way to create;
So much he'esteemed his pleasure, 'bove his state.
Ye talk of fires which shine, but never burn;
In this cold world they will hardly serve our turn;
As useless to despairing Lovers grown,
As Lambent flames, to men in the Frigid Zone.
The Sun does his pure fires on earth bestow
With nuptial warmth, to bring forth things below;
Such is Loves noblest and divinest heat,
That warms like his, and does, like his, beget.
Lust you call this; a name to yours more just,
If an Inordinate Desire be Lust:
Pygmalion, loving what none can enjoy,
More lustful was, then the hot youth of Troy.
The vain Love. Loving one first because she could love no body, afterward
loving her with desire.
WHat newfound Witchcraft was in thee,
With thine own Cold to kindle Me?
Strange art! like him that should devise
To make a Burning-Glass of Ice;
When winter, so, the Plants would harm,
Her snow it self does keep them warm;
Fool that I was! who having found
A rich, and sunny Dyamond,
Admired the hardness of the Stone,
But not the Light, with which it shone:
Your brave and haughty scorn of all
Was stately, and Monarchical.
All Gentleness with that esteemed
A dull and slavish virtue seemed;
Should thou have yielded then to me,
Thou Would lost what most I loved in thee;
For who would serve one, whom he sees
That he can Conquer if he please?
It far'ed with me, as if a slave
In Triumph lead, that does perceave
With what a gay majestic pride
His Conqu'eror through the streets does ride,
Should be contented with his woe,
Which makes up such a comely show.
I sought not from thee a return,
But without Hopes or Fears did burn;
My Covetous Passion did approve
The Hoording up, not Use of Love.
My Love a kind of Dream was grown,
A Foolish, but a Pleasant one:
From which I Am wakened now, but, oh,
Prisoners to dye are wakened so.
For now the Effects of Loving are
Nothing, but Longings with Despare:
Despair, whose torments no men sure
But Lovers, and the Damned endure.
Her scorn I doted once upon,
Ill object for Affection,
But since, alas, too much it is proved,
That yet 'twas something that I loved;
Now my desires are worse, and fly
At an Impossibility:
Desires, which whilst so high they soar,
Are Proud as that I love'd before.
What Lover can like me complain,
Who first love'd vainly, next in vain?
The Soul*
1.
IF mine Eyes do e're declare
They have seen a second thing, that is fair;
Or Ears, that they have Music found,
Besides thy Voice, in any Sound;
If my Taste do ever meet,
After thy Kiss, with ought that is sweet;
If my 'abused Touch allow
Ought to be smooth, or soft, but You;
If, what seasonable Springs,
Or the Eastern Summer brings;
Do you Smell persuade at all
Ought Perfume, but thy Breath to call;
If all my senses Objects be
Not contracted into Thee,
And so through Thee more powe'rful pass,
As Beams do through a Burning-Glass;
If all things that in Nature are
Either soft, or sweet, or fair,
Be not in Thee so 'Epitomiz'd,
That naught material's not comprised;
May I as worthless seem to Thee
As all, but Thou, appears to Me.
2.
If I ever Anger know,
Till some wrong be done to You;
If Gods or Kings my Envy move,
Without their Crowns crowned by thy Love;
If ever I an Hope admit,
Without thy Image stamped on it;
Or any Fear, till I begin
To find that You Are concerned therein;
If a Joy ere come to me,
That Tastes of any thing but Thee;
If any Sorrow touch my Mind,
Whilst You are well, and not unkind;
If I a minutes space debate,
Whether I shall curse and hate
The things beneath thy hatred fall,
Though all the World, My self and all;
And for Love; if ever I
Approach to it again so nigh,
As to allow a Toleration
To the least glimmering Inclination;
If thou alone do'est not control
All those Tyrants of my Soul,
And to thy Beauties ty'est them so,
That constant they as Habits grow;
If any Passion of my Heart,
By any force, or any art,
Be brought to move one step from Thee,
May Thou no Passion have for Me.
3.
If my busy 'Imagination
Do not Thee in all things fashion;
So that all fair Species be
Hieroglyphick marks of Thee;
If when She her sports does keep
(The lower Soul being all asleep)
She play one Dream with all her art,
Where Thou have not the longest part.
If ought get place in my Remembrance,
Without some badge of thy resemblance;
So that thy parts become to me
A kind of Art of Memory.
If my Understanding do
Seek any Knowledge but of You,
If she do near thy Body prize
Her Bodies of Philosophies,
If She to the Will do show
Ought desirable but You,
Or if That would not rebel,
Should she' another doctrine tell;
If my Will do not resign
All her Liberty to thine;
If she would not follow Thee,
Though Fate and Thou should disagree;
And if (for I a curse will give,
Such as shall force thee to believe)
My Soul be not entirely Thine;
May thy dear Body never be Mine.
The Passions.
1.
FRom Hate, Fear, Hope, Anger, and Envy free,
And all the Passions else that be,
In vain I boast of Liberty,
In vain this State a Freedom call;
Since I have Love, and Love is all:
Sot that I am, who think it fit to brag,
That I have no Disease besides the Plague!
2.
So in a zeal the Sons of Israel,
Sometimes upon their Idols fell;
And they deposed the powers of Hell,
Baal, and Astarte down they threw,
And Accaron and Molock too:
All this imperfect Piety did no good,
Whilst yet, alas, the Calf of Bethel stood.
3.
Fondly I boast, that I have dressed my vine
With painful art, and that the wine
Is of a taste rich and divine,
Since Love by mixing Poison there,
Has made it worse then vinegere.
Love even the taste of Nectar changes so,
That Gods choose rather water here below.
4.
Fear, Anger, Hope, all Passions else that be,
Drive this one Tyrant out of Me,
And practice all your Tyranny.
The change of ills some good will do:
The Oppressed wretched Indians so,
Be'ing slaves by the great Spanish Monarch made,
Call in the States of Holland to their aid.
Wisdom.
It Is mighty Wise that you would now be thought
With your grave Rules from musty Morals brought:
Through which some streaks too of Divinity ran,
Partly of Monk, and partly Puritan;
With tedious Repetitions too you have taken
Often the name of Vanity in vain.
Things, which, I take it, friend, you would never recite,
Should she I love, but say t'you, Come at night.
The wisest King refused all pleasures quite,
Till Wisdom from above did him enlight.
But when that gift his igno'rance did remove,
Pleasures he chose, and placed them all in Love.
And if by 'event the counsels may be seen,
This wisdom 'twas that brought the Southern Queen.
She came not, like a good old Wife, to know
The wholesome nature of all plants that grow:
Nor did so far from her own Country rome,
To cure scall'd heads, and broken shinns at Home*
She came for that, which more befits all Wives,
The art of Giving, not of Saving Lives.
The Despair.
1.
BEneath this gloomy shade,
By Nature only for my sorrows made,
I Will spend this voice in cries,
In tears I Will wast these eyes
By Love so vainly fed;
So Lust of old the Deluge punished.
Ah wretched youth, said I!
Ah wretched youth! twice did I sadly cry:
Ah wretched youth! the fields and floods reply.
2.
When thoughts of Love I entertain,
I meet no words but Never, and In vain.
Never (alas) that dreadful name,
Which fewels the infernal flame:
Never, my time to come must wast;
In vain, torments the present, and the past.
In vain, in vain! said I;
In vain, in vain! twice did I sadly cry;
In vain, in vain! the fields and floods reply;
3.
No more shall fields or floods do so;
For I to shades more dark and silent go:
All this worlds noise appears to me
A dull ilLacted Comedy:
No comfort to my wounded sight,
In the Suns busy and imperti'nent Light.
Then down I laid my head;
Down on cold earth; and for a while was dead,
And my freed Soul to a strange Somewhere fled.
4.
Ah sottish Soul; said I,
When back to his Cage again I saw it fly:
Fool to resume his broken chain!
And row his Galley here again!
Fool, to that body to return
Where it condemned and destined is to burn!
Once dead, how can it be,
Death should a thing so pleasant seem to Thee,
That thou should come to live it over again in Me?
The Wish.
1.
WEll then; I now do plainly see,
This busy world and I shall never agree;
The very Honey of all earthly joy
Does of all meats the soonest cloy,
And they (methinks) deserve my pity,
Who for it can endure the stings,
The Crowd, and Buz, and Murmurings
Of this great Hive, the City.
2.
Ah, yet, ere I descend to th'grave
May I a small House, and large Garden have!
And a few Friends, and many Books, both true,
Both wise, and both delightful too!
And since Love never will from me flee,
A Mistress moderately fair,
And good as Guardian-Angels are,
Only beloved, and loving me!
3.
Oh, Fountains, when in you shall I
My self, eased of unpeaceful thoughts, espy?
Oh Fields! Oh Woods! when, when shall I be made
The happy Tenant of your shade?
Here Is the Springhead of Pleasures flood;
Where all the Riches lie, that she
Has coined and stamped for good.
4.
Pride and Ambition here,
Only in far fetched Metaphors appear;
Here naught but winds can hurtful Murmurs scatter,
And naught but Echo flatter.
The Gods, when they descended, hither
From heav'en did always choose their way;
And therefore we may boldly say,
That it is the way too thither.
5.
How happy here should I,
And one dear She live, and embracing die?
She who is all the world, and can exclude
In deserts Solitude.
I should have then this only fear,
Lest men, when they my pleasures see,
Should hither throng to live like Me,
And so make a City here.
My Diet.
1.
NOw by my Love, the greatest Oath that is,
None loves you half so well as I:
I do not ask your Love for this;
But for heave'ns sake believe me, or I die.
No Servant ere but did deserve
His Master should believe that he does serve;
And I Will ask no more wages, though I sterve.
2.
It Is no luxurious Diet this, and sure
I shall not by it too Lusty prove;
Yet shall it willingly endure,
If It can but keep together Life and Love.
Being your Priso'ner and your slave,
I do not Feasts and Banquets look to have,
A little Bread and water's all I crave.
3.
O'n a sigh of Pity I a year can live,
One tear will keep me twenty at least,
Fifty a gentle look will give;
An hundred years on one kind word I Will feast:
A thousand more will added be,
If you an Inclination have for Me;
And all beyond is vast Aeternitie.
The Thief.
1.
THou rob'st my Days of business and delights,
Of sleep thou rob'st my Nights;
Ah, lovely Thief what will thou do?
What? rob me of Heaven too?
Thou even my prayers do steal from me.
And I, with wild Idolatry,
Begin, to God, and end them all, to Thee.
2.
Is it a Sin to Love, that it should thus,
Like an ill Conscience torture us?
What ere I do, where ere I go,
(None Guiltless ere was haunted so)
Still, still, methinks thy face I view,
And still thy shape does me pursue,
As if, not you Me, but I had murdered You.
3.
From books I strive some remedy to take,
But thy Name all the Letters make;
What ere it is writ, I find That there,
Like Points and Comma's every where;
Me blessed for this let no man hold;
For I, as Midas did of old,
Perish by turning every thing to Gold.
4.
What do I seek, alas, or why do I
Attempt in vain from thee to fly?
For making thee my Deity,
I gave thee then Ubiquity.
My pains resemble Hell in this;
The Divine presence there too is,
But to torment Men, not to give them bliss.
All-over, Love.
1.
It Is well, it is well with them (say I)
Whose short-lived Passions with themselves can dye:
For none can be unhappy, who
Midst all his ills a time does know
(Though never so long) when he shall not be so.
2.
What ever parts of Me remain,
Those parts will still the Love of thee retain;
For 'twas not only in my Heart,
But like a God by powerful Art,
'Twas all in all, and all in every Part.
3.
My' Affection no more perish can
Then the First Matter that compounds a Man.
Hereafter if one Dust of Me
Mixed with another substance be,
'Twill Leaven that whole Lump with Love of Thee.
4.
Let Nature if she please disperse
My Atoms over all the Universe,
At the last they easi'ly shall
Themselves know, and together call;
For thy Love, like a Mark* is stamped on all.
Love and Life.
1.
NOw sure, within this twelvemonth past,
I'have loved at least some twenty years or more:
The account of Love runs much more fast
Then that, with which our Life does score:
So though my Life be short, yet I may prove
The great Methusalem of Love.
2.
Not that Loves Hours or Minutes are
Shorter then those our Being's measur'ed by:
But they are more close compacted far,
And so in lesser room do ly.
Thin airy things extend themselves in space,
Things solid take up little place.
3.
Yet Love, alas, and Life in Me,
Are not two several things, but purely one,
At once how can there in it be
A double different Motion?
O yes, there may: for so the self same Sun,
At once does slow and swiftly run*
4.
Swiftly his daily journey' he goes,
But treads his Annual with a statelier pace;
And does three hundred Rounds enclose
Within one yearly Circles space.
At once with double course in the same Sphaere,
He runs the Day, and Walks the year.
5.
When Soul does to my self refer,
It Is then my Life, and does but slowly move;
But when it does relate to her,
It swiftly flies, and then is Love.
Love's my Diurnal course, divided right
'Twixt Hope and Fear, my Day and Night.
The Bargain.
1.
TAke heed, take heed, thou lovely Maid,
Nor be by glittering ills betrayed;
Thy self for Money? oh, let no man know
The Price of Beauty fallen so low!
What dangers ought thou not to dread,
When Love that is Blind is by blind Fortune led?
2.
The foolish Indian that sells
His precious Gold for beads and bells,
Does a more wise and gainful traffic hold,
Then thou who sell'st thy self for gold.
What gains in such a bargain are?
He Will in thy Mines dig better Treasures far.
3.
Can Gold, alas, with Thee compare?
The Sun, that makes it is not so fair;
The Sun which can nor make, nor ever see
A thing so beautiful as Thee,
In all the journeys he does pass,
Though the Sea serv'ed him for a Looking-glass.
4.
Bold was the wretch that cheapned Thee,
Since Magus, none so bold as he:
You Are so divine a thing that Thee to buy,
Is to be counted Simony;
Too dear he will find his sordid price,
H'as forfeited that, and the Benefice.
5.
If it be lawful Thee to buy,
There Is none can pay that rate but I*
Nothing on earth a fitting price can be,
But what on earth's most like to Thee.
And that my Heart does only bear;
For there Thy self, Thy very self is there.
6.
So much thy self does in me live,
That when it for thy self I give,
It Is but to change that piece of Gold for this,
Whose stamp and value equal is.
And that full Weight too may be had,
My Soul and Body; two Grains more, I Will add.
The Long Life.
1.
LOve from Times wings has stolen the feathers sure,
He has, and put them to his own;
For Hours of late as long as Days endure,
And very Minutes, Hours are grown.
2.
The various Motions of the turning Year,
Belong not now at all to Me:
Each Summers Night does Lucies now appear,
Each Winters Day St. Barnabie.
3.
How long a space, since first I loved, it is?
To look into a glass I fear;
And am surpised with wonder when I miss,
Grey-hairs and wrinkles there.
4.
The Old Patriarchs age and not their happi'ness too,
Why does hard fate to us restore?
Why does Loves Fire thus to Mankind renew,
What the Flood washed away before?
5.
Sure those are happy people that complain,
OF the shortness of the days of man;
Contract mine, Heaven, and bring them back again
To th'ordinary Span.
6.
If when your gift, long Life, I disapprove,
I too ungrateful seem to be;
Punish me justly, Heaven; make Her to love,
And then 'twill be too short for Me.
Counsel.
1.
GEntly, ah gently, Madam, touch*
The wound, which you your self have made;
That pain must needs be very much,
Which makes me of your hand afraid.
Cordials of Pity give me now,
For I too weak for Purgings grow.
2.
Do but a while with patience stay;
For Counsel yet will do no good,
'Till Time, and Rest, and Heaven allay
The vi'olent burnings of my blood,
For what effect from this can flow,
To chide men drunk, for being so?
3.
Perhaps the Physick's good you give,
But never to me can useful prove;
Medicines may Cure, but not Revive;
And I Am not Sick, but Dead in Love.
In Loves Hell, not his World, am I;
At once I Live, am Dead, and Die.
4.
What new found Rhetoric is thine?
Even thy Diswasions me persuade,
And thy great power does clearest shine,
When thy Commands are disobeyed.
In vain thou bidst me to forbear;
Obedience were Rebellion here.
5.
Thy Tongue comes in, as if it meant
Against thine Eyes t'assist my Heart;
But different far was his intent:
For straight the Traitor took their part.
And by this new foe I Am bereft
Of all that Little which was left.
6.
The act I must confess was wise,
As a dishonest act could be:
Well knew the Tongue (alas) your Eyes
Would be too strong for That, and Me*
And part of the Triumph chose to get,
Rather then be a part of it.
Resolved to be beloved.
1.
It Is true, I'have loved already three or four,
And shall three or four hundred more;
I Will love each fair one that I see,
Till I find one at last that shall love Me.
2.
That shall my Canaan be, the fatal soil,
That ends my wanderings, and my toil.
I Will settle there and happy grow;
The Country does with Milk and Honey flow.
3.
The Needle trembles so, and turns about,
Till it the Northern Point find out:
But constant then and fixed does prove,
Fixed, that his dearest Pole as soon may move.
4.
Then may my Vessel torn and shipwrackt be,
If it put forth again to Sea:
It never more abroad shall rome,
Though It could next voyage bring the Indies home.
5.
But I must sweat in Love, and labor yet,
Till I a Competency get.
They Are slothful fools who leave a Trade,
Till they a moderate Fortune by it have made.
6.
Variety I ask not; give me One
To live perpetually upon.
The person Love does to us fit,
Like Manna, has the Taste of all in it.
The Same.
1.
FOr Heavens sake, what do you mean to do?
Keep me, or let me go, one of the two;
Youth and warm hours let me not idly loose,
The little Time that Love does choose;
If always here I must not stay,
Let me be gone, whilst yet it is day;
Lest I faint, and benighted lose my way.
2.
It Is dismal, One so long to love
In vain, till to love more as vain must prove:
To hunt so long on nimble prey, till we
Too weary to take others be;
Alas, it is folly to remain,
And waste our Army thus in vane,
Before a City which will never be taken.
3.
At several hopes wisely to fly,
Ought not to be esteemed Inconstancy;
It Is more Inconstant always to pursue,
A thing that always flies from you;
For that at last may meet a bound,
But no end can to this be found,
It Is naught but a perpetual fruitless Round.
4*
When it does Hardness meet and Pride,
My Love does then rebound t'another side;
But if it ought that is soft and yielding hit;
It lodges there, and stays in it.
Whatever it is shall first love me,
That it my Heaven may truly be;
I shall be sure to giv't Eternity.
The Discovery.
1.
BY 'Heaven I Will tell her boldly that it is She;
Why should she ashamed or angry be,
To be beloved by Me?
The Gods may give their Altars over;
They Will smoke but seldom any more,
If none but Happy Men must them adore.
2.
The Lightning which tall Oaks oppose in vain,
To strike sometime does not disdain
The humbly Furzes of the Plain.
She being so high, and I so low,
Her power by this does greater show,
Who at such distance gives so sure a blow.
3.
Compared with her all things so worthless prove,
That naught on earth can tow'ards her move,
Till't be exalted by her Love.
Aequal to her, alas, there is none;
She like a Deity is grown;
That must Create, or else must be alone.
4.
If there be man, who thinks himself so high,
As to pretend aequality,
He deserves her less, then I;
For he would cheat for his relief;
And one would give with lesser grief,
To' an undeserving Beggar, then a Thief.
Against Fruition.
NO; you are a fool, I Will swear, if ere thou grant:
Much of my Veneration thou must want,
When once thy kindness puts my Igno'rance out;
For a learned Age is always least devout.
Keep still thy distance; for at once to me
Goddess and Woman too, thou can not be;
You Are Queen of all that sees thee; and as such
Must neither Tyrannize, nor yield too much;
Such freedoms give as may admit Command,
But keep the Forts and Magazines in thine hand.
You Are yet a whole world to me, and do'est fill
My large ambition; but it is dangerous still,
Lest I like the Pellaean Prince should be,
And weep for other worlds hav'ing conquered thee;
When Love has taken all thou have away,
His strength by too much riches will decay.
Thou in my Fancy do much higher stand,
Then Women can be place'd by Natures hand;
And I must needs, I Am sure, a loser be,
To change Thee, as You Are there, for very Thee.
Thy sweetness is so much within me placed,
That should thou Nectar give, it would spoil the taste.
Beauty at first moves wonder, and delight;
It Is Natures juggling trick to cheat the sight,
We 'admire it, whilst unknown, but after more
Admire our selves, for liking it before.
Love, like a greedy Hawk, if we give way,
Does overgorge himself, with his own Prey;
Of very Hopes a surfeit he will sustain,
Unless by Fears he cast them up again:
His spirit and sweetness dangers keep alone;
If once he lose his sting, he grows a Drone.
Love undiscovered.
1.
I; Others may with safety tell
The moderate Flames, which in them dwell;
And either find some Med'icine there,
Or cure themselves ev'en by Despair;
My Love's so great, that it might prove
Dang'erous, to tell her that I Love.
So tender is my wound, it must not bear
Any salute, though of the kindest air.
2.
I would not have her know the pain,
The Torments for her I sustain.
Lest too much goodness make her throw
Her Love upon a Fate too low.
Forbid it Heaven my Life should be
Weighed with her least Conveniencie:
No; let me perish rather with my grief,
Then to her disadvantage find relief.
Yet when I dye, my last breath shall
Grow bold, and plainly tell her all.
Like covetous Men who never descry,
Their dear hid Treasures till they die.
Ah fairest Maid, how will it cheer
My Ghost, to get from Thee a tear!
But take heed; for if me thou Pitiest then,
Twenty to one but I shall live again.
The given Heart.
1.
I Wonder what those Lovers mean, who say,
They have giv'en their Hearts away.
Some good kind Lover tell me how;
For mine is but a Torment to me now.
2.
If so it be, one place both hearts contain,
For what do they complain?
What courtesy can Love do more,
Then to join Hearts, that parted were before?
3.
Woe to her stubborn Heart, if once mine com
Into the self same room;
'Twill tear and blow up all within,
Like a Granado shot into a Magazin.
4.
Then shall Love keep the ashes, and torn parts,
Of both our broken Hearts:
Shall out of both one new one make,
From hers, the Allay; from mine, the Metal take.
5.
For of her heart, he from the flames will find
But little left behind:
Mine only will remain entire;
No dross was there, to perish in the Fire.
The Prophet.
1.
TEach me to Love? go teach thy self more wit;
I chief Professor am of it.
Teach craft to Scots, and thrift to Jews,
Teach boldness to the Stews;
In Tyrants Courts teach supple flattery,
Teach Iesuit's that have traveled far, to Ly.
Teach fire to burn, and winds to blow,
Teach restless fountains how to flow,
Teach the dull earth, fixed, to abide,
Teach Womankind inconstancy and Pride.
See if your diligence here will useful prove;
But, pr'ithee, teach not me to Love.
2.
The God of Love, if such a thing there be,
May learn to love from Me.
He who does boast that he has bin
In every Heart since Adams sin,
I Will lay my Life, nay Mistress on it, that is more;
I Will teach him things he never knew before;
I Will teach him a Receipt to make
Words that weep, and Tears that speak,
I Will teach him Sighs, like those in Death,
At which the Souls go out too with the breath:
Still the Soul stays, yet still does from me run;
As Light and Heat does with the Sun.
3.
It Is I who Loves Columbus am; it is I,
Who must new Worlds in it descry:
Rich Worlds, that yield of Treasure more,
Then all that has bin known before*
And yet like his (I fear) my Fate must be,
To find them out for others; not for Me.
Me Times to come, I know it, shall
Loves last and greatest Prophet call:
But, ah, what is that, if she refuse,
To hear the wholesome Doctrines of my Muse?
If to my share the Prophets fate must come;
Hereafter Fame, here Martyrdom.
The Resolution.
1.
THe Devil take those foolish men,
Who gave you first such powers;
We stood on even grounds till then;
If any odds, Creation made it ours.
2.
For shame let these weak chains be broke;
Let Us our slight bonds, like Sampson, tear;
And nobly cast away that yoke,
Which we nor our Forefathers ere could bear.
3.
French Laws forbid the female Reign;
Yet Love does them to slavery draw,
Alas, if we will our rights maintain,
It Is all Mankind must make a Salique Law.
Called Inconstant.
1.
HA! ha! you think you have killed my fame;
By this not understood, yet common Name:
A Name, that is full and proper when assigned
To Womankind:
But when you call us so,
It can at best but for a Met'aphor go.
2.
Can you the shore Inconstant call,
Which still as Waves pass by, embraces all?
That had as leif the same waves always love,
Did they not from him move?
Or can you fault with Pilots find
For changing course, yet never blame the wind?
3.
Since drunk with vanity you fell:
The things turn round to you that steadfast dwell;
And you your self, who from us take your flight,
Wonder to find us out of sight.
So the same error seizes you,
As Men in motion think the Trees move too.
The Welcome.
1.
GO, let the fatted Calf be killed;
My Prodigal's come home at last;
With noble resolutions filled,
And filled with sorrow for the past.
No more will burn with Love or Wine:
But quite has left his Women and his Swine.
2.
Welcome, ah welcome my poor Heart;
Welcome; I little thought, I Will swear,
('It Is now so long since we did part)
Ever again to see thee here:
Dear Wanderer, since from me you fled,
How often have I heard that Thou were dead.
3.
Have thou not found each woman's breast
(The Lands where thou have traveled)
Either by Savages possessed,
Or wild, and uninhabited?
What joy could take, or what repose
In Countries so unciviliz'd as those?
4.
Lust, the scorching Dog Star, here
Rages with immoderate beat;
Whilst Pride the rugged Northern Bear,
In others makes the Cold too great.
And where these are temperate known,
The Soyl's all barren Sand, or rocky Stone.
5.
When once or twice you chanced to view
A rich, well-governed Heart,
Like China, it admitted You
But to the Frontier-part.
From Par'adise shut for evermore,
What good is it that an Angel kept the Door?
Well fare the Pride, and the Disdain
And Vanities with Beauty joined,
I never had seen this Heart again,
If any Fair one had been kind:
My Dove, but once let loose, I doubt
Would never return, had not the Flood been out.
The Heart fled again.
1.
FAlse, foolish Heart! did thou not say,
That thou would never leave me more?
Behold again it is fled away;
Fled as far from me as before*
I strove to bring it back again,
I cried and hollowed after it in vain.
2.
Even so the gentle Tyrian Dame,
When neither Grief nor Love prevail,
Saw the dear object of her flame,
Th'ingrateful Trojan hoist his sail:
Aloud she called to him to stay;
The wind bore him, and her lost words away.
3.
The doleful Ariadne so,
On the wide shore forsaken, stood:
False Theseus, whither do thou go?
Afar false Theseus cut the flood.
But Bacchus came to her relief;
Bacchus himselfe's too weak to ease my grief.
4.
Ah senseless Heart, to take no rest,
But travel thus eternally!
Thus to be froz'n in every breast!
And to be scorcht in every Eye!
Wandering about like wretched Cain,
Thrust out, ill used by all, but by none slain!
5.
Well; since thou will not here remain,
I Will ev'en to live without Thee try;
My Head shall take the greater pain,
And all thy duties shall supply;
I can more easi'ly live I know
Without Thee, then without a Mistress Thou.
Women's Superstition.
1.
OR I Am a very Dunce, or Womankind
Is a most unintelligible thing:
I can no Sense, nor no Contexture find,
Nor their loose parts to Method bring,
I know not what the Learned may see,
But they are strange Hebrew things to Me.
2.
By Customs and Traditions they live,
And foolish Ceremonies of antic date,
We Lovers, new and better Doctrines give.
Yet they continue obstinate;
Preach we, Loves Prophets, what we will,
Like Jews, they keep their old Law still.
3.
Before their Mothers Gods, they fondly fall,
Vain Idol-Gods that have no Sense nor Mind:
Honor's their Ashtaroth, and Pride their Baal,
The Thundering Baal of Womankind.
With twenty other Devils more,
Which They, as We do Them, adore.
4.
But then, like Men both Covetous and Devout,
Their costly Superstition loath t'omit,
And yet more loath to issue Moneys out,
At their own charge to furnish it.
To these expensive Deities,
The Hearts of Men they sacrifice.
The Soul.
1.
SOme dull Philos'opher when he hears me say,
My Soul is from me fled away;
Nor has of late informed my Body here,
But in another breast does ly,
That neither Is, nor will be I,
As a Form Servient and Assisting there.
2.
Will cry, Absurd! and ask me, how I live:
And Syllogisms against it give;
A curse on all your vain Philosophies,
Which on weak Natures Law depend,
And know not how to comprehend
Love and Religion, those great Mysteries.
3.
Her Body is my Soul; laugh not at this,
For by my Life I swear it is.
It Is that preserves my Being and my Breath,
From that proceeds all that I do,
Nay all my Thoughts and speeches too,
And separation from it is my Death.
Echo.
1.
TIr'ed with the rough denials of my prayer,
From that hard she whom I obey,
I come, and find a Nymph, much gentler here,
That gives consent to all I say.
Ah gentle Nymph who like so well,
In hollow, solitary Caves to dwell,
Her Heart being such, into it go,
And do but once from thence answer me so.
2.
Complaisant Nymph, who do'est thus kindly share
In griefs, whose cause thou do'est not know!
Had thou but Eyes, as well as Tongue and Ear,
How much compassion would thou show!
Thy flame, whilst living, or a flower,
Was of less beauty, and less rav'ishing power;
Alas, I might as easily,
Paint thee to her, as describe Her to Thee.
3.
By repercussion Beams engender Fire,
Shapes by reflection shapes beget;
The voice it self, when stopped, does back retire,
And a new voice is made by it.
Thus things by opposition
The gainers grow; my barren Love alone,
Does from her stony breast rebound,
Producing neither Image, Fire, nor Sound.
The rich Rival.
1.
THey say your angry, and rant mightily,
Because I love the same as you;
Alas! you're very rich; it is true;
But prithee Fool, what is that to Love, and Me?
You' have Land, and Money, let that serve;
And know you' have more by that then you deserve.
2.
When next I see my fair One, she shall know,
How worthless thou art of her bed;
And wretch, I Will strike thee dumb and dead,
With noble verse not understood by you;
Whilst thy sole Rhetoric shall be
Ioynture, and Jewels, and Our Friends agree.
3.
Pox of your friends, that dote and Domineere:
Lovers are better Friends then they:
Let Us those in other things obey;
The Fates, and Stars, and Gods must govern here.
Vain names of Blood! in Love let none
Advise with any Blood, but with their own.
4.
It Is that which bids me this bright Maid adore;
No other thought has had access!
Did she now beg I Would love no less,
And were she'an Empress, I should love no more;
Were she as just and true to Me,
Ah, simple soul, what would become of Thee!
Against Hope.
1.
HOpe, whose weak Being ruined is,
Alike if it succeed, and if it miss;
Whom Good or Ill does aequally confound,
And both the Horns of Fates Dilemma wound,
Vain shadow! which do vanish quite,
Both at full Noon, and perfect Night!
The stars have not a possibility
Of blessing Thee;
If things then from their End we happy call,
It Is Hope is the most Hopeless thing of all.
2.
Hope, thou bold Taster of Delight,
Who whilst thou should but taste, devour'st it quite!
Thou bringst us an Estate, yet leave us Poor,
By clogging it with Legacies before!
The Ioys which we entire should wed,
Come deflowered Virgins to our bed;
Good fortunes without gain imported be,
Such mighty Custom's paid to Thee.
For Joy, like Wine, kept close does better taste;
If it take air before, his spirits waste.
3.
Hope, Fortunes cheating Lotterie!
Where for one prize an hundred blanks there be;
Fond Archer, Hope, who take thy aim so far,
That still or short or wide thine arrows are!
Thin, empty Cloud, which the eye deceives
With shapes that our own Fancy gives!
A Cloud, which gilt and painted now appears,
But must drop presently in tears!
When thy false beams over Reasons light prevail,
By Ignes fatui for North-Stars we sail.
4.
Brother of Fear, more gaily clad!
The merr'ier Fool of the two, yet quite as Mad:
Sire of Repentance, Child of fond Desire!
That blow'st the Chymicks, and the Lovers fire!
Leading them still insensibly 'on
By the strange witchcraft of Anon!
By Thee the one does changing Nature through
Her endless Labyrinths pursue,
And the other chases Woman, whilst She goes
More ways and turns then hunted Nature knows.
For Hope.
1.
HOpe, of all Ills that men endure,
The only cheap and Universal Cure!
Thou Captives freedom, and Thou sick Man's Health!
Thou Losers Victo'ry, and thou Beggars wealth!
Thou Manna, which from Heaven we eat,
To every Taste a several Meat!
Thou strong Retreat! thou sure entailed Estate,
Which naught has power to alienate!
Thou pleasant, honest Flatterer! for none
Flatter unhappy Men, but thou alone!
2.
Hope, thou First Fruits of Happiness!
Thou gentle Dawning of a bright Success!
Thou good Prepar'ative, without which our Joy
Does work too strong, and whilst it cures, destroy*
Who out of Fortunes reach do stand,
And art a blessing still in hand!
Whilst Thee, her Earnest-Money we retain,
We certain are to gain,
Whether she'her bargain break, or else fulfill;
Thou only good, not worse, for ending ill!
3.
Brother of Faith, 'twixt whom and Thee
The joys of Heaven and Earth divided be!
Though Faith be Heir, and have the fixed estate,
Thy Portion yet in Movables is great.
Happiness it self's all one
In Thee, or in possession!
Only the Future's Thine, the present His!
Thine's the more hard and noble bliss;
Best apprehender of our joys, which have
So long a reach, and yet can hold so fast!
4.
Hope, thou sad Lovers only Friend!
Thou Way that may dispute it with the End!
For Love I fear's a fruit that does delight
The taste it self less then the Smell and Sight.
Fruition more deceitful is
Then Thou can be, when thou do miss;
Men leave thee by obtaining, and strait flee
Some other way again to Thee;
And that is a pleasant Country, without doubt,
To which all soon return that travel out.
Loves Ingratitude.
1.
I Little thought, thou fond ungrateful Sin,
When first I let thee in,
And gave thee but a part
In my unwary Heart,
That thou would ere have grown,
So false or strong to make it all thine own.
2.
At mine own breast with care I fed thee still,
Letting thee suck thy fill,
And daintily I nourisht Thee
With Idle thoughts and Poetry!
What ill returns do thou allow?
I fed thee then, and thou do sterve me now.
3.
There was a time, when thou wast cold and chill,
Nor had the power of doing ill;
Into my bosom did I take,
This frozen and benumbed Snake,
Not fearing from it any harm;
But now it stings that breast which made it warm.
4.
What cursed weed's this Love! but one grain sow,
And the whole field 'twill overgrow;
Strait will it choke up and devour
Each wholesome herb and beauteous flour!
Nay unless something soon I do,
'Twill kill I fear my very Laurel too.
5.
But now all is gone, I now, alas, complain,
Declare, protest and threat in vain.
Since by my own unforced consent,
The Traitor has my Government,
And is so settled in the Throne,
That 'twere Rebellion now to claim mine own.
The Frailty,
1.
I Know it is sordid, and it is low;
(All this as well as you I know)
Which I so hotly now pursue;
(I know all this as well as you)
But whilst this cursed flesh I bear,
And all the Weakness, and the Baseness there,
Alas, alas, it will be always so.
2.
In vain, exceedingly in vain
I rage sometimes, and bite my Chain;
For to what purpose do I bite
With Teeth which never will break it quite?
For if the chiefest Christian Head,
Was by this sturdy Tyrant buffeted,
What wonder is it, if weak I be stain?
Coldness.
1.
AS water fluid is, till it do grow
Solid and fixed by Cold;
So in warm Seasons Love does loosely flow,
Frost only can it hold.
A Woman's rigor, and disdain,
Does his swift course restrain,
2.
Though constant, and consistent now it be,
Yet, when kind beams appear,
It melts, and glides apace into the Sea,
And loses it self there.
So the Suns amorous play,
Kisses the Ice away.
3.
You may in Vulgar Loves find always this;
But my Substantial Love
Of a more firm, and perfect Nature is;
No weathers can it move:
Though Heat dissolve the Ice again,
The Crystal solid does remain.
The Enjoyment.
1.
THen like some wealthy Island thou shall ly;
And like the Sea about it, I;
Thou like fair Albion, to the Sailors Sight,
Spreading her beauteous Bosom all in White:
Like the kind Ocean I will be,
With loving Arms for ever clasping Thee.
2.
But I Will embrace Thee gentli'er far then so;
As their fresh Banks soft Rivers do,
Nor shall the proudest Planet boast a power
Of making my full Love to ebb one hour;
It never dry or low can prove,
Whilst thy unwasted Fountain feeds my Love.
3.
Such Heat and Vigor shall our Kisses bear,
As if like Doves we'engendred there.
No bound nor rule my pleasures shall endure,
In Love there is none too much an Epicure.
Naught shall my hands or Lips control;
I Will kiss Thee through, I Will kiss thy very Soul.
4.
Yet nothing, but the Night our sports shall know;
Night that is both blind and silent too.
Alpheus found not a more secret trace,
His loved S^canian Fountain to embrace,
Creeping so far beneath the Sea,
Then I will do to enjoy, and feast on Thee.
5.
Men, out of Wisdom; Women, out of Pride,
The pleasant Thefts of Love do hide.
That may secure thee; but thou'hast yet from Me
A more infallible Security.
For there is no danger I should tell
The Ioys, which are to Me unspeakable.
Sleep.
1.
IN vain, thou drousie God, I thee invoak;
For thou, who do from fumes arise,
Thou, who Man's Soul do overshade
With a thick Cloud by Vapors made,
Can have no power to shut his eyes,
Or passage of his Spi'rits to choke,
Whose flame's so pure, that it sends up no smoke.
2.
Yet how do Tears but from some Vapors rise?
Tears, that bewinter all my Year?
The fate of Egypt I sustain,
And never feel the dew of Rain,
From Clouds which in the Head appear,
But all my too much Moisture ow,
To overflowings of the Heart below.
3.
Thou, who do Men (as Nights to Colors do)
Bring all to an Equality:
Come, thou just God; and aequal me
A while to my disdainful She;
In that condition let me ly;
Till Love does the same favor show;
Love aequals all a better way then You.
4.
Then never more shall thou be'invoakt by me;
Watchful as Spirits, and Gods I Will prove:
Let her but grant, and then will I,
Thee and thy Kinsman Death defy.
For betwixt Thee and them that love,
Never will an agreement be;
Thou scorn st the Unhappy; and the Happy, Thee.
Beauty.
1.
BEauty, thou wild fantastic Ape,
Who do in every Country change thy shape!
Here black, there brown, here tawny, and there white;
Thou Flatt'rer which compli'st with every sight!
Thou Babel which confoundst the Ey
With unintelligible variety!
Who have no certain What, nor Where,
But vary'st still, and do thy self declare
Inconstant, as thy she-Possessors are.
2.
Beauty, Loves Scene and Maskerade,
So gay by well-plac'd Lights, and Distance made;
False Coin, with which the Impostor cheats us still;
The stamp and Color good, but Metal ill!
Which Light, or Base we find, when we
Weigh by enjoyment and examine Thee!
For though thy Being be but show,
It Is chiefly Night which men to Thee allow:
And choose to enjoy Thee, when Thou lest art Thou.
3.
Beauty, Thou active, passive Ill!
Which dy'st thy self as fast as thou do kill!
Thou Tulip, who thy stock in paint do waste,
Neither for Physic good, nor Smell, nor Taste.
Beauty, whose Flames but Meteors are,
Short-lived and low, though thou would seem a Star,
Who dar st not thine own Home descry,
Pretending to dwell richly in the Eye,
When thou, alas, do in the Fancy lie.
4.
Beauty, whose Conquests still are made
Over Hearts by Cowards kept; or else betrayed!
Weak Victor! who thy self destroyed must be
When sickness storms, or Time besieges Thee!
Thou'unwholesome Thaw to frozen Age!
Thou strong wine, which youths Fever do enrage,
Thou Tyrant which leave no man free!
Thou subtle thief, from whom naught safe can be!
Thou Murderer which have killed, and Devil which would Damn me.
The Parting.
1.
AS Men in Groen-land left beheld the Sun
From their Horizon run;
And thought upon the lad half year
Of Cold and Darkness they must suffer there.
2.
So on my parting Mistress did I look,
With such swollen eyes my farewell took;
Ah, my fair Star! said I;
Ah those blessed Lands to which bright Thou do fly!
3.
In vain the Men of Learning comfort me;
And say I Am in a warm degree;
Say what they please; I say and swear
It Is beyond eighty at least, if you are not here.
4.
It is, it is; I tremble with the Frost,
And know that I the Day have lost;
And those wild things which Men they call,
I find to be but Bears or Foxes all*
5.
Return, return, gay Planet of mine East,
Of all that shines Thou much the Best!
And as thou now descend'st to Sea;
More fair and fresh rise up from thence to Me.
6.
Thou, who in many a Propriety,
So truly art the Sun to Me,
Add one more likeness, which I Am sure you can,
And let Me and my Sun beget a Man.
My Picture.
1.
HEre, take my Likeness with you, whilst it is so;
For when from hence you go,
The next Suns rising will behold
Me pale, and lean, and old.
The Man who did this Picture draw,
Will swear next day my face he never saw.
2.
I really believe, within a while,
If you upon this shadow smile,
Your presence will such vigor give,
(Your presence which makes all things live)
And absence so much alter Me,
This will the substance, I the shadow be.
3.
When from your well-wrought Cabinet you take it,
And your bright looks awake it;
Ah be not frighted, if you see,
The new-sould Picture gaze on Thee,
And hear it breath a sigh or two;
For those are the first things that it will do.
4*
My Rival-Image will be then thought blessed,
And laugh at me as dispossessed;
But Thou, who (if I know thee right)
In The substance do not much delight,
Wilt rather send again for Me.
Who then shall but my Pictures Picture be.
The Concealment.
1*
NO; to what purpose should I speak?
No, wretched Heart, swell till you break!
She cannot love me if she would;
And to say truth, 'twere pity that she should.
No, to the Grave thy sorrows bear,
As silent, as they will be there:
Since that loved hand this mortal wound does give,
So handsomely the thing contrive,
That she may guiltless of it live.
So perish, that her killing Thee
May a Chance-Medley, and no Murder be.
2.
It Is nobler much for me, that I
By'her Beauty, not her Anger die;
This will look justly, and become
An Execution; that, a Martyrdom.
The censuring world will never refrain
From judging men by Thunder slain.
She must be angry sure, if I should be
So bold to ask her to make me
By being hers, happi'er then she.
I will not; it is a milder fate
To fall by her not Loving, then her Hate.
3.
And yet this death of mine, I fear,
Will ominous to her appear:
When, sound in every other part,
Her Sacrifice is found without an Heart.
For the last Tempest of my death
Shall sigh out that too, with my breath.
Then shall the world my noble ruin see,
Some pity, and some envy Me,
Then She herself, the mighty She,
Shall grace my fun'rals with this truth;
It Was only Love destroyed the gentle Youth.
The Monopoly.
1.
WHat Mines of Sulphur in my breast do ly,
That feed th'aeternal burnings of my heart?
Not Aetna flames more fierce or constantly,
The sounding shop of Vulcans smoaky art;
Vulcan his shop has placed there,
And Cupids Forge is set up here.
2*
Here all those Arrows mortal Heads are made,
That fly so thick unseen through yielding air;
The Cyclops here, which labor at the trade
Are Jealousy, Fear, Sadness and Despair.
Ah cruel God! and why to me
Gave you this cursed Monopoly?
3.
I have the trouble, not the gains of it;
Give me but the disposal of one Dart;
And then (I Will ask no other benefit)
Heat as you please your furnace in my Heart.
So sweet's Revenge to me, that I
Upon my foe would gladly die.
4.
Deep into'her bosom would I strike the dart;
Deeper then Woman e're was struck by Thee;
Thou giv'st them small wounds, and so far from the Heart,
They flutter still about, inconstantly.
Curse on thy Goodness, whom we find
Civil to none but Womankind!
5.
Vain God! who women do thy self adore!
Their wounded Hearts do still retain the powers*
To travel, and to wander as before;
Thy broken Arrows 'twixt that sex and ours
So'unjustly are distributed;
They take the Feathers, we the Head.
The Distance*
1.
I'Have followed thee a year at least,
And never stopped my self to rest.
But yet can thee overtake no more,
Then this Day can the Day that went before.
2.
In this our fortunes aequal prove
To Stars, which govern them above;
Our Stars that move for ever round,
With the same Distance still betwixt them found.
3.
In vain, alas, in vain I strive
The wheel of Fate faster to drive;
Since if a round it swiftlier fly,
She in it mends her pace as much as I.
4.
Hearts by Love, strangely shuffled are,
That there can never meet a Pare!
Tamelier then Worms are Lovers slain;
The wounded Heart never turns to wound again*
The Increase*
1.
I Thought, I Will swear, I could have loved no more
Then I had done before;
But you as easi'ly might account
'Till to the top of Numbers you amount,
As cast up my Loves score.
Ten thousand millions was the sum;
Millions of endless Millions are to com.
2.
I Am sure her Beauties cannot greater grow;
Why should my Love do so?
A real cause at first did move;
But mine own Fancy now drives on my Love,
With shadows from it self that flow.
My Love, as we in Numbers see,
By Ciphers is encreast aeternallie.
3.
So the new-made, and untride Sphaeres above,
Took their first turn from the hand of Jove;
But are since that beginning found
By their own Forms to move for ever round.
All violent Motions short do prove,
But by the length it is plain to see
That Love's a Motion Natural to Me.
Loves Visibility.
1*
WIth much of pain, and all the Art I knew
Have I endeavored hitherto
To hide my Love, and yet all will not do*
2.
The world perceives it, and it may be, she;
Though so discreet and good she be,
By hiding it, to teach that skill to Me.
3.
Men without Love have often so cunning grown,
That something like it they have shown,
But none who had it ever seemed t have none.
4.
Love's of a strangely open, simple kind,
Can no arts or disguises find,
But thinks none sees it 'cause it self is blind.
5.
The very Eye betrays our inward smart;
Love of himself left there a part,
When through it he past into the Heart.
6.
Or if by chance the Face betray not it,
But keep the secret wisely, yet,
Like Drunkenness, into the Tongue it will get.
Looking on, and discoursing with his Mistress.
1.
THese full two hours now have I gazing been,
What comfort by it can I gain?
To look on Heav'en with mighty Gulfs between
Was the great Misers greatest pain:
So near was he to Heavens delight,
As with the blessed converse he might,
Yet could not get one drop of water by it.
2.
Ah wretch! I seem to touch her now; but, oh,
What boundless spaces do us part?
Fortune, and Friends, and all earths empty show,
My Lowness, and her high Desert:
But these might conquerable prove;
Nothing does me so far remove,
As her hard Souls aversion from my Love.
3.
So Travelers, that lose their way by night,
If from afar they chance t'espy
The Uncertain glimmerings of a Tapers light,
Take flattering hopes, and think it nigh;
Till wearied with the fruitless pain,
They sit them down, and weep in vain,
And there in Darkness, and Despair remain.
Resolved to Love.
1.
I Wonder what the Grave and Wise
Think of all us that Love;
Whether our pretty Fooleries
Their Mirth or Anger move;
They understand not Breath, that Words does want;
Our Sighs to them are unsignificant.
2.
One of them saw me the other day,
Touch the dear hand, which I admire;
My Soul was melting strait away,
And dropped before the Fire.
This silly Wiseman, who pretends to know,
Asked why I looked so pale, and trembled so?
3.
Another from my Mistress'dore
Saw me with eyes all watery com;
Nor could the hidden cause explore,
But thought some smoke was in the room;
Such Igno'rance from unwounded Learning came;
He knew Tears made by Smoke, but not by Flame.
If learned in other things you be,
And have in Love no skill,
For Gods sake keep your arts from me,
For I Will be ign'orant still.
Study or Action others may embrace;
My Love's my Business, and my Books her Face.
5.
These are but Trifles, I confess,
Which me, weak Mortal, move;
Nor is your busy Seriousness
Less trifling then my Love.
The wisest King who from his sacred breast
Pronounced all Van'ity, chose it for the best.
My Fate*
1.
GO bid the Needle his deer North forsake,
To which with trembling rev'erence it does bend;
Go bid the Stones a journey upwards make;
Go bid the ambitious Flame no more t'ascend:
And when these false to their old Motions prove,
Then shall I cease Thee, Thee alone to Love.
2.
The fast-link'd Chain of everlasting Fate
Does nothing tie more strong, then Me to You;
My fixed Love hangs not on your Love or Hate;
But will be still the same, what e're you do.
You cannot kill my Love with your disdain,
Wound it you may, and make it live in pain.
3.
Me, mine example let the Stoics use,
Their sad and cruel doctrine to maintain,
Let all Praedestinators me produce,
Who struggle with aeternal bonds in vain.
This Fire I Am born to, but it is she must tell,
Whether't be Beams of Heav'en, or Flames of Hell.
4.
You, who men's fortunes in their faces read,
To find out mine, look not, alas, on Me;
But mark her Face, and all the features heed;
For only there is writ my Destiny.
Or if stars show it, gaze not on the skies;
But study the Astrol'ogy of her Eyes.
5.
If thou find there kind and propitious rays,
What Mars or Saturn threaten I Will not fear;
I well believe the Fate of mortal days
Is writ in Heav'en; but, oh my heav'en is there.
What can men learn from stars they 'scarce can see?
Two great Lights rule the world; and her two, Me.
The Heart- breaking.
1.
IT gave a piteous groan, and so it broke;
In vain it something would have spoke:
The Love within too strong for it was,
Like Poison put into a Venice-Glass.
2.
I thought that this some Remedy might prove,
But, oh, the mighty Serpent Love,
Cut by this chance in pieces small,
In all still lived, and still it stung in all.
3.
And now (alas) each little broken part
Feels the whole pain of all my Heart:
And every smallest corner still
Lives with that torment which the Whole did kill.
4.
Even so rude Armies when the field they quit,
And into several Quarters get;
Each Troop does spoil and ruin more,
Then all joined in one Body did before.
5*
How many Loves reign in my bosom now?
How many Loves, yet all of you?
Thus have I changed with evil fate
My Monarch-Love into a Tyrant State.
The Usurpation.
1.
THou'hadst to my Soul no title or pretense;
I was mine own, and free*
Till I had given my self to Thee;
But thou have kept me Slave and Prisoner since.
Well, since so insolent you are grown,
Fond Tyrant, I Will depose thee from thy throne;
Such outrages must not admitted be
In an Elective Monarchy.
2.
Part of my Heart by Gift did to Thee fall;
My Country, Kindred, and my best
Acquaintance were to share the rest;
But thou, their Cov'etous Neighbor, drav'est out all:
Nay more; thou make me worship Thee,
And would the rule of my Religion be;
Was ever Tyrant claimed* such power as you,
To be both Emperor, and Pope too?
3.
The public Mise'ries, and my private fate
Deserve some tears: but greedy Thou
(Insatiate Maid!) wilt not allow
That I one drop from thee should alienate.
Nor will thou grant my sins a part,
Though the sole cause of most of them thou art,
Counting my Tears thy Tribute and thy Due,
Since first mine Eyes I gave to You.
4.
Thou all my Ioys and all my Hopes do claim,
Thou ragest like a Fire in me,
Converting all things into Thee;
Naught can resist, or not increase the Flame.
Nay every Grief and every Fear.
Thou do devour, unless thy stamp it bear.
Thy presence, like the crowned Basilisks breath,
All other Serpents puts to death.
5*
As men in Hell are from Diseases free,
So from all other ills am I;
Free from their known Formality:
But all pains Eminently lie in Thee:
Alas, alas, I hope in vain
My conquered Soul from out thine hands to gain,
Since all the Natives there thou'st overthrown,
And planted Gar'isons of thine own.
Maidenhead.
1.
THou worst estate even of the sex that is worst;
Therefore by Nature made at first,
To Attend the weakness of our birth!
Slight, outward Curtain to the Nuptial Bed!
Thou Case to buildings not yet finished!
Who like the Center of the Earth,
Do heaviest things attract to thee,
Though Thou a point imaginary be.
2:
A thing God thought for Mankind so unfit,
That his first Blessing ruined it.
Cold frozen Nurse of fiercest fires!
Who, like the parched plains of Africks sand,
(A steril, and a wild unlovely Land)
Art always scorcht with hot desires,
Yet barren quite, did thou not bring
Monsters and Serpents forth thy self to sting!
3:
Thou that bewitchest men, whilst thou do dwell
Like a close Conj'urer in his Cell!
And fear the days discovering Eye!
No wonder'tis at all that thou should be
Such tedious and unpleasant Company,
Who liv'st so Melancholily!
Thou thing of subtle, slippery kind,
Which Women lose, and yet no Man can find!
4:
Although I think thou never found wilt be,
Yet I Am resolved to search for thee;
The search it self rewards the pains.
So, though the Chymick his great secret miss,
(For neither it in Art nor Nature is)
Yet things well worth his toil he gains:
And does his Charge and Labor pay
With good unsought exper'iments by the way.
5.
Say what thou will, Chastity is no more,
Thee, then a Porter is his Door.
In vain to honor they pretend,
Who guard themselves with Ramparts and with Walls,
Them only fame the truly valiant calls,
Who can an open breach defend.
Of thy quick loss can be no doubt,
Within so Hated, and so Loved without.
Impossibilities.
1.
IMpossibilities? oh no, there is none;
Could mine bring thy Heart Captive home;
As eas'ily other dangers were o'rethrowne,
As Caesar after vanquished Rome,
His little Asian foes did overcome.
2*
True Lovers often by Fortune are envied*
Often Earth and Hell against them strive;
But Providence engages on their side,
And a good end at* last does give;
At last Just Men and Lovers always thrive.
3.
As stars (not powerful else) when they conjoyne,
Change, as they please, the Worlds estate;
So thy Heart in Conjunction with mine,
Shall our own fortunes regulate;
And to our Stars themselves prescribe a Fate.
4.
'Twould grieve me much to find some bold Romance,
That should two kind examples show,
Which before us in wonders did advance;
Not, that I thought that story true,
But none should Fancy more, then I would Do.
5.
Through spite of our worst Enemies, thy Friends,
Through Local Banishment from Thee;
Through the loud thoughts of less-concerning Ends,
As easy shall my passage be,
As was the Amo'rous Youth's ore Helles Sea.
6.
In vain the Winds, in vain the Billows rore;
In vain the Stars their aid denied:
He saw the Sestian Tower on the other shore;
Shall the Hellespont our Loves divide?
No, not the Atlantic Oceans boundless Tide.
7.
Such Seas betwixt us easily conquered are;
But, gentle Maid, do not deny
To let thy Beams shine on me from afar;
And still that Taper let me'espy:
For when thy Light goes out, I sink, and die*
Silence.
1.
CUrse on this Tongue, that has my Heart betrayed,
And his great Secret open laid!
For of all persons chiefly She,
Should not the ills I suffer know;
Since it is a thing might dangerous grow,
Only in Her to Pity Me:
Since it is for Me to lose my Life more fit,
Then it is for Her to save and ransom it.
2.
Ah, never more shall thy unwilling ear
My helpless story hear.
Discourse and talk awake does keep
The rude unquiet pain,
That in my Breast does reign;
Silence perhaps may make it sleep:
I Will bind that Sore up, I did ill reveal*
The Wound, if once it Close, may chance to Heal.
3.
No, 'twill never heal; my Love will never dye,
Though it should speechless lie.
A River, ere it meet the Sea,
As well might stay it is source,
As my Love can his course,
Unless it join and mix with Thee.
If any end or stop of it be found,
We know the Flood runs still, though underground.
The Dissembler.
1.
UNhurt, untoucht did I complain;
And terrified all others with the pain:
But now I feel the mighty evil;
Ah, there is no fooling with the Devil!
So wanton men, whilst others they would fright,
Themselves have met a real Spright.
2.
I thought, I Will swear, an handsome ly
Had been no sin at all in Poetry:
But now I suffer an Arrest,
For words were spoke by me in jest.
Dull, sottish God of Love, and can it be
Thou understand'st not Raillerie?
3.
Darts, and Wounds, and Flame, and Heat,
I named but for the Rhyme, or the Conceit.
Nor meant my verse should raised be,
To this sad fame of Prophecy;
Truth gives a dull Propriety to my style,
And all the Metaphors does spoil:
4.
In things, where Fancy much does reign,
It Is dangerous too cunningly to feign.
The Play at last a Truth does grow,
And Custom into Nature go.
By this cursed art of begging I became
Lame, with counterfeiting Lame.
5.
My Lines of amorous desire
I wrote to kindle and blow others fire:
And 'twas a barbarous delight
My Fancy promise'd from the sight;
But now, by Love, the mighty Phalaris, I
My burning Bull the first do try.
The Inconstant.
1.
I Never yet could see that face
Which had no dart for me;
From fifteen years, to fifties space,
They all victorious be.
Love you are a Devil; if I may call thee One,
For sure in Me thy name is Legion.
2.
Color, or Shape, good Limbs, or Face,
Goodness or Wit in all I find.
In Motion or in Speech a grace,
If all fail, yet it is Womankind;
And I Am so weak, the Pistol need not be
Double or treble charged to murder Me.
3.
If Tall, the Name of Proper slays;
If Fair, she is pleasant as the Light;
If Low, her Prettiness does please;
If Black, what Lover loves not Night?
If yellow hair'd, I Love, lest it should be
Th'excuse to others for not loving Me.
4.
The Fat, like Plenty, fills my heart;
The Lean, with Love makes me too so.
If Straight, her Body's Cupids Dart
To me; if Crooked, it is his Bow.
Nay Age it self does me to rage incline,
And strength to Women gives, as well as Wine.
5.
Just half as large as Charity
My richly-landed Love's become;
And judged aright is Constancy,
Though it take up a larger room:
Him, who loves always one, why should they call
More Constant, then the Man loves Always All?
6.
Thus with unwearied wings I flee
Through all Loves Gardens and his Fields;
And, like the wise, industrious Be,
No Weed but Honey to me yields!
Honey still spent this diligence still supplies,
Though I return not home with laden Thighs.
7.
My Soul at first indeed did prove
Of pretty strength against a Dart;
Till I this Habit got of Love;
But my consumed and wasted Heart
Once burnt to Tinder with a strong Desire,
Since that by every Spark is set on Fire.
The Constant.
1.
GReat, and wise Conqu'rour, who where ere
Thou come, do fortify, and settle there!
Who can defend as well as get;
And never had one Quarter beat up yet;
Now thou art in, Thou never wilt part
With one inch of my vanquished Heart;
For since thou took'st it by assault from Me,
It Is Garrisoned so strong with Thoughts of Thee,
It fears no beauteous Enemy.
2.
Had thy charming strength been less,
I'had served ere this an hundred Mistresses.
I Am better thus, nor would compound
To leave my Pris'on to be a Vagabound.
A Pr'ison in which I still would be,
Though every door stood op'e to Me.
In spite both of thy Coldness and thy Pride,
All Love is Marriage on thy Lovers side,
For only Death can them divide.
3.
Close, narrow Chain, yet soft and kind,
As that which Spi'rits above to good does bind,
Gentle, and sweet Necessity,
Which does not force, but guide our Liberty!
Your love on Me were spent in vain,
Since my Love still could but remain
Just as it is; for what, alas can be
Added to that which has Infinity
Both in Extent, and Quality?
Her Name.
1.
WIth more then Jewish Reverence as yet
Do I the Sacred Name conceal;
When, ye kind Stars, ah when will it be fit
This Gentle Myst'ery to reveal?
When will our Love be Named, and we possess
That Christning as a Badge of Happiness?
2.
So bold as yet no verse of mine has been,
To wear that Gem on any Line;
Nor, til the happy Nuptial Muse be seen,
Shall any Stanza with it shine.
Rest, mighty Name, till then; for thou must be
Laid down by Her, e're taken up by Me.
3.
Then all the fields and woods shall with it ring;
Then Echoes burden it shall be;
Then all the Birds in sev'eral notes shall sing,
And all the Rivers murmur Thee;
Then ever'y wind the Sound shall upwards bear,
And softly whisper't to some Angels Ear.
4.
Then shall thy Name through all my Verse be spread,
Thick as the flowers in Meadows lie,
And, when in future times they shall be read,
(As sure, I think, they will not dye)
If any Critic doubt that They be mine,
Men by that Stamp shall quickly know the Coin.
5.
Mean while I will not dare to make a Name
To represent thee by;
Adam (Gods Nomenclator) could not frame
One that enough should signify.
Astraea' or Caelia as unfit would prove
For Thee, as it is to call the Deity, Jove.
Weeping.
1.
SEE where she sits, and in what comely wise,
Drops Tears more fair then others Eyes!
Ah, charming Maid, let not ill Fortune see
Th'attire thy sorrow wears,
Nor know the beauty of thy Tears:
For she will still come to dress her self in Thee.
2.
As stars reflect on waters, so I spy
In every drop (methinks) her Eye.
The Baby, which lives there, and always plays
In that illustrious sphaere,
Like a Narcissus does appear,
Whilst in his flood the lovely Boy did gaze.
3.
Nere yet did I behold so glorious weather,
As this Sunshine and Rain together.
Pray Heav'en her Forehead, that pure Hill of snow,
(For some such Fountain we must find,
To waters of so fair a kind)
Melt not, to feed that beauteous stream below.
4.
Ah* mighty Love, that it were inward Heat
Which made this precious Limbeck sweat!
But what, alas, ah what does it avail
That she weeps Tears so wondrous cold,
As scarce the Asses hoof can hold,
So cold, that I admire they fall not Hail.
Discretion.
1.
DIscreet? what means this word Discreet?
A Curse on all Discretion!
This barbarous term you will not meet
In all Loves-Lexicon.
2.
Ioynture* Portion, Gold, Estate,
Houses, Household Stuff, or Land,
(The Low Conveniences of Fate)
Are Greek no Lovers understand.
3.
Believe me, beauteous one, when Love
Enters into a breast,
The two first things it does remove,
Are Friends and Interest.
4.
Passion's half blind, nor can endure
The careful, scrup'lous Eyes,
Or else I could not love, I Am sure,
One who in Love were wise.
5.
Men, in such tempests tossed about,
Will without grief or pain,
Cast all their goods and riches out,
Themselves their Port to gain.
6.
As well might Martyrs, who do choose,
That sacred Death to take,
Mourn for the Clothes which they must lose,
When they are bound naked to the Stake.
The Waiting-Maid.
1.
THy Maid? ah, find some nobler theme
Whereon thy doubts to place;
Nor by a low suspect blaspheme
The glories of thy face.
2.
Alas, she makes Thee shine so fair,
So exquisitely bright,
That her dim Lamp must disappear
Before thy potent Light.
3.
Three hours each morn in dressing Thee,
Maliciously are spent;
And make that Beauty Tyranny,
That Is else a Civil Government.
4.
The'adorning thee with so much art,
Is but a barb'arous skill;
It Is like the poys'oning of a Dart
Too apt before to kill.
5.
The Mini'string Angels none can see;
It Is not their beauty'or face,
For which by men they worshipped be;
But their high office and their place.
Thou art my Goddess, my Saint, She;
I pray to Her, only to pray to Thee.
Counsel.
1.
AH! what advice can I receive?
No, satisfy me first;
For who would Physick-potions give
To one that dies with Thirst?
2.
A little puff of breath we find,
Small fires can quench and kill;
But when they are great, the adverse wind
Does make them greater still.
3.
Now whilst you speak, it moves me much;
But strait I Am just the same;
Alas, the effect must needs be such
Of Cutting through a Flame.
The Cure.
1.
COme, Doctor, use thy roughest art,
Thou can not cruel prove;
Cut, burn, and torture every part,
To heal me of my Love.
2.
There is no danger, if the pain
Should me to'a Fever bring;
Compared with Heats I now sustain,
A Fever is so Cool a thing,
(Like drink which feverish men desire)
That I should hope 'twould almost quench my Fire:
The Separation.
1.
ASk me not what my Love shall do or be
(Love which is Soul to Body, and Soul of Me)
When I am sep'arated from thee;
Alas, I might as easily show,
What after Death the Soul will do;
Twill last, I Am sure, and that is all we know.
2.
The thing calle'd soul will never stir nor move,
But all that while a liveless Carcass prove,
For it is the Body of my Love;
Not that my Love will fly away,
But still continue, as, they say,
Sad troubled Ghosts about their Graves do stray.
The Tree.
1.
I Chose the flour'ishingst Tree in all the Park,
With freshest Boughs, and fairest head;
I cut my Love into his gentle Bark*
And in three days, behold, it is dead;
My very written flames so vi'olent be,
They'have burnt and withere'd up the Tree.
2.
How should I live my self, whose Heart is found
Deeply graven every where
With the large History of many a wound,
Larger then thy Trunk can bear?
With art as strange, as Homer in the Nut,
Love in my Heart has Volumes put.
3.
What a few words from thy rich stock did take
The Leaves and Beauties all?
As a strong Poison with one drop does make
The Nails and Hairs to fall:
Love (I see now) a kind of Witchcraft is,
Or Characters could never do this.
4.
Pardon ye Birds and Nymphs who loved this Shade;
And pardon me, thou gentle Tree;
I thought her name would thee have happy made,
And blessed Omens hoped from Thee;
Notes of my Love, thrive here (said I) and grow;
And with ye let my Love do so.
5.
Alas poor youth, thy love will never thrive!
This blasted Tree Predestines it;
Go tie the dismal Knot (why should thou live?)
And by the Lines thou there have writ
Deform'dly hanging, the sad Picture be
To that unlucky History.
Her Unbelief.
1*
It Is a strange kind of Igno'rance this in you!
That you your Victories should not spy,
Victories gotten by your Eye!
That your bright Beams, as those of Comets do,
Should kill, but not know How, nor Who.
2.
That truly you my Idol might appear,
Whilst all the People smell and see
The odorous flames, I offer thee,
Thou sit'st, and do nor see, nor smell, nor hear
Thy constant zealous worshipper.
3.
They see it too well who at my fires repine;
Nay th'unconcern'd themselves do prove
Quick-Ey'd enough to spy my Love;
Nor does the Cause in thy Face clearlier shine,
Then the Effect appears in mine.
4:
Fair Infidel! by what unjust decree
Must I, who with such restless care
Would make this truth to thee appear,
Must I, who preach it, and pray for it, be,
Damned by thy incredulity?
5.
I by thy Unbelief am guiltless slain;
Oh have but Faith, and then that you
May know that Faith for to be true,
It shall it self by' a Miracle maintain,
And raise me from the Dead again.
6.
Mean while my Hopes may seem to be o'rthrown;
But Lovers Hopes are full of Art,
And thus dispute, that since my heart
Though in thy Breast, yet is not by thee known,
Perhaps thou may not know thine Own.
The Gazers.
1.
COme let us go on, where Love and Youth does call;
I Have seen too much, if this be all.
Alas, how far more wealthy might I be
With a contented Ign'orant Poverty?
To show such stores, and nothing grant,
Is to enrage and vex my want.
For Love to Dye an Infant's lesser ill,
Then to Live long, yet live in Childhood still.
2.
We'have both sat gazing only hitherto,
As Man and Wife in Picture do.
The richest crop of Joy is still behind,
And He who only Sees, in Love is Blind.
So at first Pigmalion loved.
But the Amor at last improved:
The Statue' it self at last a woman grew,
And so at last, my Dear, should you do too.
3.
Beauty to man the greatest Torture is,
Unless it lead to farther bliss
Beyond the tyran'ous pleasures of the Eye.
It grows too serious a Cruelty,
Unless it Heal, as well as strike;
I would not, Salamander-like,
In scortching heats always to Live desire,
But like a Martyr, pass to Heav'en through Fire.
4.
Mark how the lusty Sun salutes the Spring,
And gently kisses every thing.
His loving Beams unlock each maiden flower,
Search all the Treasures, all the Sweets devower.
Then on the earth with Bridegroom-Heat,
He does still new Flowers beget.
The Sun himself, although all Eye he be,
Can find in Love more Pleasure then to see.
The Incurable.
1.
I Tried if Books would cure my Love, but found
Love made them Nonsense all.
I'apply'd Receipts of Business to my wound,
But stirring did the pain recall.
2.
As well might men who in a fever fry,
Mathematique doubts debate,
As well might men, who mad in darkness ly
Write the Dispatches of a State.
3.
I tried Devotion, Sermons, frequent Prayer,
But those did worse then useless prove;
For Prayers are turned to Sin in those who are
Out of Charity, or in Love.
4*
I tried in Wine to drown the mighty care;
But Wine, alas, was Oil to the fire.
Like Drunkards eyes, my troubled Fancy there
Did double the Desire.
5*
I tried what Mirth, and Gayety would do,
And mixed with pleasant Companies;
My Mirth did graceless and insipid grow,
And 'bove a Clinch it could not rise.
6.
Nay, God forgive me for it, at last I tried
Against this some new desire to stir,
And loved again, but 'twas where I espied
Some faint Resemblances of Her.
7.
The Physic made me worse with which I strove
This Mortal Ill t'expell,
As wholesome Med'icines the Disease improve,
There where they work not well.
Honor
1*
SHE Loves, and she confesses too;
There Is then at last, no more to do.
The happy work's entirely done;
Enter the Town which thou have won;
The fruits of Conquest now begin;
Io Triumph! Enter in.
2.
What Is this, ye Gods, what can it be?
Remains there still an Enemy?
Bold Honor stands up in the Gate,
And would yet Capitulate;
Have I overcome all real foes,
And shall this Phantome me oppose?
3.
Noisy Nothing! Stalking shade!
Py what Witchcraft were thou made?
Empty cause of Solid harms!
But I shall find out Counter-charms
Thy airy Devi'lship to remove
From this Circle here of Love.
4.
Sure I shall rid my self of Thee
By the Nights obscurity,
And obscurer secrecy.
Unlike to every other spright,
Thou attempt'st not men t'affright,
Nor appear'st but in the Light.
The Innocent Ill.
1*
THough all thy gestures and discourses be
Coined and stamp't by Modesty,
Though from thy Tongue nere slipped away
One word which Nuns at the Altar might not say,
Yet such a sweetness, such a grace
In all thy speech appear,
That what to the Eye a beauteous face,
That thy Tongue is to the Ear.
So cunningly it wounds the heart,
It strikes such heat through ev'ery part,
That thou a Tempter worse then Satan art.
2.
Though in thy thoughts scarce any Tracks have bin
So much as of Original Sin,
Such charms thy Beauty wears as might
Desires in dying confessed Saints excite.
Thou with strange Adultery
Do in each breast a Brothel keep;
Awake all men do lust for thee,
And some enjoy Thee when they sleep.
Ne re before did Woman live,
Who to such Multitudes did give
The Root and cause of Sin, but only Eve.
3.
Though in thy breast so quick a Pity be,
That a Flies Death's a wound to thee.
Though savage, and rock-hearted those
Appear, that weep not ev'en Romances woes.
Yet never before was Tyrant known,
Whose rage was of so large extent,
The ills thou do are whole thine own,
You Are Principal and Instrument,
In all the deaths that come from you,
You do the treble office do
Of Judge, of Tort'erer, and of weapon too.
4:
Thou lovely Instrument of angry Fate,
Which God did for our faults create!
Thou Pleasant, universal Ill,
Which sweet as Health, yet like a Plague do kill!
Thou kind, well- natur'ed Tyranny!
Thou chaste committer of a Rape!
Thou voluntary Destiny,
Which no man Can, or Would escape!
So gentle, and so glad to spare,
So wondrous good, and wondrous fair,
(We know) e'ven the Destroying Angels are.
DIALOGUE. After Enjoyment.
She. 1.
WHat have we done? what cruel passion moved thee,
Thus to ruin her that loved Thee?
Me thou'hast robb'ed, but what art thou
Thy Self the richer now?
Shame succeeds the short lived pleasure;
So soon is spent, and gone, this thy Ill-gotten Treasure.

He. 2.
We'have done no harm; nor was it Theft in me,
But noblest Charity in Thee.
I Will the well-gotten Pleasure
Safe in my Mem'orie Treasure;
What though the Flower it self do wast,
The Essence from it drawn does long and sweeter last.

She. 3.
No: I Am undone; my Honor Thou have slain,
And nothing can restore't again.
Art and Labor to bestow,
Upon the Carcass of it now,
Is but t'embalm a body dead,
The Figure may remain, the Life and Beautie's fled.

He. 4.
Never, my dear, was Honor yet undone,
By Love, but Indiscretion.
To the wise it all things does allow;
And cares not What we do; but How.
Like Tapers shut in ancient Urns,
Unless it let in air, for ever shines and burns.

She. 5.
Thou first perhaps who did the fault commit,
Wilt make thy wicked boast of it.
For Men, with Roman pride, above
The Conquest, do the Triumph love:
Nor think a perfect Victo'ry gained,
Unless they through the streets their Captive lead enchain'd.

He. 6.
Who e're his secret joys has open laid,
The Baud to his own Wife is made.
Beside what boast is left for me,
Whose whole wealth's a Gift from Thee?
It Is you the Conqu'eror are, it is you
Who have not only taken, but bound, and gagged me too.

She. 7.
Though public pun'ishment we escape, the Sin
Will rack and torture us within:
Guilt and Sin our bosom bears;
And though fair, yet the Fruit appears,
That Worm which now the Core does wast,
When long t'has gnawed within will break the skin at last.

He. 8.
That Thirsty Drink, that Hungry Food I sought,
That wounded Balm, is all my fault.
And Thou in pity did apply,
The kind and only remedy:
The Cause absolves the Crime; since Me
So mighty Force did move, so mighty Goodness Thee.

She. 9*
Curse on thine Arts! methinks I Hate thee now;
And yet I Am sure I love Thee too!
I Am angry, but my wrath will prove,
More Innocent then did thy Love.
Thou have this day undone me quite;
Yet wilt undo me more, should thou not come at Night.

Verses lost upon a Wager.
1.
AS soon hereafter will I wagers lay,
Against what an Oracle shall say,
Fool, that I was, to venture to deny
A Tongue so used to victory!
A Tongue so blessed by Nature and by Art,
That never yet it spoke but gained an Heart:
Though what you said, had not been true
If spoke by any else but you*
Your speech will govern Destiny,
And Fate will change rather then you should Ly.
2.
It Is true If Humane Reason were the Guide,
Reason, methinks, was on my side,
But that is a Guide, alas, we must resign,
When the Authoritie's Divine.
She said, she said herself it would be so;
And I, bold unbeliever answered No,
Never so justly sure before
Error the name of Blindness bore,
For whatsoever the Question be,
There Is no man that has eyes would bet for Me.
3.
If Truth it self (as other Angels do
When they descend to humane view)
In a Material Form would daign to shine,
'Twould imitate or borrow Thine,
So daz'eling bright, yet so transparent clear,
So well proportioned would the parts appear;
Happy the eye which Truth could see
Clothed in a shape like Thee,
But happier far the eye
Which could thy shape naked like Truth espy!
4.
Yet this lost wager costs me nothing more
Then what I ow'ed to thee before.
Who would not venture for that debt to play
Which He were bound howere to pay?
If Nature gave me power to write in verse,
She gave it me thy praises to rehearse.
Thy wondrous Beauty and Thy Wit
Has such a Sov'eraign Right to it,
That no Man's Muse for public vent is free,
Till she has paid her Customs first to Thee.
Bathing in the River.
1.
THe fish around her crowded, as they do
To the false light that treach'erous Fishers show,
And all with as much ease might taken be,
As she at first took me*
For never did Light so clear
Among the waves appear,
Though ev'ery night the Sun himself set there.
2.
Why to Mute Fish should thou thy self discover,
And not to me thy no less silent Lover?
As some from Men their buried Gold commit
To Ghosts that have no use of it!
Half their rich treasures so
Maids bury; and for ought we know
(Poor Ignorants) they are Mermaids all below.
3.
The amo'rous Waves would fain about her stay,
But still new am'orous waves drive them away,
And with swift current to those joys they haste,
That do as swiftly waste,
I laughed the wanton play to view,
But it is, alas, at Land so too,
And still old Lovers yield the place to new.
4.
Kiss her, and as you part, you am'orous waves
(My happier Rivals, and my fellow slaves)
Point to your flowery banks, and to her show
The good your Bounties do;
Then tell her what your Pride does cost,
And, how your use and beauty's lost,
When rig'orous Winter binds you up with Frost.
5.
Tell her, her Beauties and her Youth, like Thee
Have without stop to a devouring sea;
Where they will mixed and undistinguisht ly
With all the meanest things that die.
As in the Ocean Thou,
No privilege do know,
Above the impurest streams that thither flow.
6.
Tell her, kind flood, when this has made her sad,
Tell her there is yet one Rem'edy to be had;
Show her how thou, though long since past, do find
Thy self yet still behind,
Marriage (say to her) will bring
About the self-same thing,
But she, fond Maid, shuts and seals up the spring.
Love given over.
1.
IT is enough; enough of time, and pain
Have thou consumed in vain;
Leave, wretched Cowley, leave
Thy self with shadows to deceave;
Think that already lost which thou must never gain.
2.
Three of thy lustiest and thy freshest years,
(Tossed in storms of Hopes and Fears)
Like helpless Ships that be
Set on fire in the midst of the Sea,
Have all been burnt in Love, and all been drowned in Tears.
3.
Resolve then on it, and by force or art
Free thy unlucky Heart;
Since Fate does disapprove
The Ambition of thy Love.
And not one Star in heaven offers to take thy part.
4.
If ere I clear my Heart from this desire,
If ere it home to'his breast retire,
It never shall wander more about,
Though thousand beauties called it out:
A Lover Burnt like me for ever dreads the fire.
5.
The Pox, the Plague, and every small disease,
May come as often as ill Fate please;
But Death and Love are never found
To give a Second Wound,
We Are by those Serpents bit, but we are devoured by these.
6.
Alas, what comfort is it that I am grown
Secure of be'ing again orethrown?
Since such an Enemy needs not fear
Least any else should quarter there,
Who has not only Sacked, but quite burnt down the Town.
FINIS.
Pindarique ODES, Written in Imitation of the STYLE and MANNER OF THE ODES OF
PINDAR.

By A. COWLEY.

HOR. EP. L. 1. 3. Pindarici fontis qui non expalluit haustus.
LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the sign of the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

PREFACE.
IF a man should undertake to translate Pindar word for word, it would be
thought that one Madman had translated another; as may appear, when a person
who understands not the Original, reads the verbal. Traduction of him into
Latin Prose, then which nothing seems more Raving. And sure, Rhyme, without the
addition of Wit, and the Spirit of Poetry (quod nequio monstrate and sentio
tantum) would but make it ten times more Distracted then it is in Prose. We
must consider in Pindar the great difference of time betwixt his age and ours,
which changes, as in Pictures* at least the Colors of Poetry, the no less
difference betwixt the Religions and Customs of our Countries, and a thousand
particularities of places* persons, and manners, which do but confusedly appear
to our eyes at so great a distance. And lastly, (which were enough alone for my
purpose) we must consider that our Ears are strangers to the Music of his
Numbers, which some times (especially in Songs and Odes) almost without any
thing else, makes an excellent Poet; for though the Grammarians and Critics
have labored to reduce his Verses into regular feet and measures (as they have
also those of the Greek and Latin Comedies) yet in effect they are little
better then Prose to our Ears. And I would gladly know what applause our best
pieces of English Poesy could expect from a Frenchman or Italian, if converted
faithfully, and word for word, into French or Italian Prose. And when we have
considered all this, we must needs confess, that after all these losses
sustained by Pindar, all we can add to him by our wit or invention (not
deserting still his subject) is not like to make him a Richer man then he was
in his own Country. This is in some measure to be applied to all Translations;
and the not observing of it, is the cause that all which ever I yet saw, are so
much inferior to their Originals. The like happens too in Pictures, from the
same root of exact Imitation; which being a vile and unworthy kind of
Servitude, is incapable of producing any thing good or noble. I have seen
Originals both in Painting and Poesy, much more beautiful then their natural
Objects; but I never saw a Copy better then the Original, which indeed cannot
be otherwise; for men resolving in no case to shoot beyond the Mark, it is a
thousand to one if they shoot not short of it. It does not at all trouble me
that the Grammarians perhaps will not suffer this libertine way of rendering
foreign Authors, to be called Translation; for I am not so much enamoured of
the Name Translator, as not to wish rather to be Something Better, though it
want yet a Name. I speak not so much all this, in defense of my manner of
Translating, or Imitating (or what other Title they please) the two ensuing
Odes of Pindar; for that would not deserve half these words, as by this
occasion to rectify the opinion of diverse men upon this matter. The Psalms of
David, (which I believe to have been in their Original, to the Hebrews of his
time, though not to our Hebrews of Buxtorfius his making, the most exalted
pieces of Poesy) are a great example of what I have said; all the Translators
of which (even Mr. Sands himself; for in despite of popular error, I will be
bold not to except him) for this very reason, that they have not sought to
supply the lost Excellencies of another Language with new ones in their own;
are so far from doing honor, or at least justice to that Divine Poet, that,
methinks, they revile him worse then Shimei. And Bucanan himself (though much
the best of them all, and indeed a great Person) comes in my opinion no less
short of David, then his Country does of Iudaea. Upon this ground, I have in
these two Odes of Pindar taken, left out, and added what I please; nor make it
so much my aim to let the Reader know precisely what he spoke, as what was his
way and manner of speaking; which has not been yet (that I know of) introduced
into English, though it be the noblest and highest kind of writing in Verse;
and which might, perhaps, be put into the List of Pancirollus, among the lost
Inventions of Antiquity. This Essay is but to try how it will look in an
English habit: for which experiment, I have chosen one of his Olympique, and
another of his Nemeaean Odes; which are as follows.

THE SECOND Olympique Ode OF PINDAR.
Written in praise of Thereon Prince of Agrigentum (a famous City in Sicily
built by his Ancestors) who in the seventy seventh Olympique won the
Chariot-prize. He is commended from the Nobility of his Race (whose story is
often touched upon) from his great Riches (an ordinary Commonplace in Pindar)
from his Hospitality, Munificence, and other Virtues. The Ode (according to the
constant custom of the Poet) consists more in Digressions, then in the main
subject: And the Reader must not be chocqued to hear him speak so often of his
own Muse; for that is a Liberty which this kind of Poetry can hardly live
without.

ODE.
1.
1 QUeen of all Harmonious things,
Dancing Words, and Speaking Strings,
2 What God, what Hero will thou sing?
What happy Man to equal glories bring?
Begin, begin thy noble choice,
And let the Hills around reflect the Image of thy Voice.
3 Pisa does to Jove belong,
Jove and Pisa claim thy Song.
4 The fair First Fruits of War, the Olympique Games,
Alcides offered up to Jove;
Alcides too thy strings may move;
But, Oh, what Man to join with these can worthy prove?
Ioyn Thereon boldly to their sacred Names;
Thereon the next honor claims;
Thereon to no man gives place,
Is first in Pisa's, and in Virtues Race;
Thereon there, and he alone,
Ev'en his own swift Forefathers has outgone.
2.
1 They through rough ways, ore many stops they past,
Till on the fatal bank at last
2 They Agrigentum built, the beauteous Eye
Of fair-fac'ed Sicilie,
Which does it self in the River by
With Pride and Joy espy.
Then cheerful Notes their Painted Years did sing,
And Wealth was one, and Honor the other Wing.
Their genuine Virtues did more sweet and clear,
In Fortunes graceful dress appear.
3 To which great Son of Rhea, say
The Firm Word which forbids things to Decay.
If in Olympus Top, where Thou
Sitst to behold thy Sacred Show,
4 If in Alpheus silver flight,
If in my Verse thou do delight,
My Verse, O Rhea's Son, which is
Lofty as that, and smooth as This.
3.
For the past sufferings of this noble Race
(Since things once past, and fled out of thine hand,
Hearken no more to thy command)
Let present joys fill up their place,
1 And with oblivions silent stroke deface
Of foregone Ills the very trace.
In no illustrious line
Do these happy changes shine
More brightly Thereon then in thine.
2 So in the Crystal Palaces
Of the blew-ey'd Nereides
Ino her endless youth does please,
And thanks her fall into the seas.
3 Beauteous Semele does no less
Her cruel Midwife Thunder bless,
Whilst sporting with the Gods on high,
4 She'enjoys secure, their Company,
Plays with Lightnings as they fly,
Nor trembles at the bright Embraces of the Deity.
4.
But Death did them from future dangers free,
What God (alas) will Caution be
For Living Man's security,
Or will ensure our Vessel in this faithless Sea?
Never did the Sun as yet
So healthful a fair day beget,
1 That Traveling Mortals might rely on it.
But Fortunes favor and her Spite
Roll with alternate Waves like Day and Night.
Vicissitudes which thy great race pursue,
2 Ere since the fatal Son his Father slew,
And did old Oracles fulfill
Of Gods that cannot Lie, for they foretell but their own Will.
5.
1 Erynnis saw't, and made in her own seed
The innocent Parricide to bleed,
2 She slew his wrathful Sons with mutual blows;
But better things did then succeed,
3 And brave Thersander in amends for what was past arose.
Brave Thersander was by none
In war, or warlike sports out done.
4 Thou Thereon his great virtues do revive,
He in my Verse and Thee again does live.
Loud Olympus happy Thee,
5 Isthmus and Nemea does twice happy see.
For the well-natur'ed honor there
Which with thy Brother thou did share,
Was to thee double grown
By not being all thine Own.
And those kind pious glories do deface
The old Fraternal quarrel of thy Race.
6.
1 Greatness of Mind and Fortune too
The' Olympique Trophies show.
Both their several parts must do
In the noble Chase of Fame,
This without that is Blind, that without this is Lame.
Nor is fair Virtues Picture seen aright
But in Fortunes golden light.
Riches alone are of uncertain date,
And on short-Man long cannot wait.
The Virtuous make of them the best,
And put them out to Fame for Interest.
With a frail good they wisely buy
The solid Purchase of Eternity.
They whilst Life's air they breath, consider well and know
The Account they must hereafter give below.
Whereas the unjust and Covetous above,
In deep unlovely vaults,
By the just decrees of Jove
2 Unrelenting torments prove,
The heavy Necessary effects of Voluntary Faults.
7.
1 Whilst in the Lands of unexhausted Light
Ore which the God-like Suns unwearied sight,
Nere Sinks in Clouds, or Sleeps in Night,
An endless Spring of Age the Good enjoy,
Where neither Want does pinch, nor Plenty cloy.
There neither Earth nor Sea they plow,
Nor ought to Labor ow
For Food, that whilst it nour'ishes does decay,
And in the Lamp of Life consumes away.
2 Thrice had these men through mortal bodies past,
Did thrice the trial undergo,
Till all their little Dross was purg'ed at last,
The Furnace had no more to do.
Then in rich Saturns peaceful state
3 Were they for sacred Treasures plac'ed,
The Muse-discovered World of Islands Fortunate.
8.
Soft-footed Winds with tuneful voices there
Dance through the perfumed Air.
There Silver Rivers through enameld Meadows glide,
And golden Trees enrich their side.
The illustrious Leaves no dropping Autumn fear,
And Jewels for their fruit they bear.
Which by the Blessed are gathered
For Bracelets to the Arm, and Guirlands to the Head.
Here all the Hero's, and their Poets live,
1 Wife Rhadamanthus did the Sentence give,
Who for his justice was thought fit
With Sovereign Saturn on the Bench to sit.
Peleus here, and Cadmus reign,
Here great Achilles wrathful now no more,
Since his blessed Mother (who before
Had try'ed it on his Body' in vain)
Dipped now his Soul in Stygian Lake,
Which did from thence a divine Hardness take,
That does from Passion and from Vice Invulnerable make.
9.
To Thereon, Muse, bring back thy wandering Song,
Whom those bright Troops expect impatiently;
And may they do so long.
1 How, noble Archer, do thy wanton Arrows fly
At all the Game that does but cross thine Eye?
Shoot, and spare not, for I see
Thy sounding Quiver can nere emptied be;
Let Art use Method and good Husbandry,
Art lives on Natures Alms, is weak and poor;
Nature herself has unexhausted store,
Wallows in Wealth, and runs a turning Maze,
That no vulgar Eye can trace.
Art instead of mounting high,
About her humble Food does hov'ering fly,
2 Like the ignoble Crow, rapine and noise does love,
Whilst Nature, like the sacred Bird of Jove,
3 Now bears loud Thunder, and anon with silent joy
The beauteous Phrygian Boy,
Defeats the Strong, oretakes the Flying prey;
4 And sometimes basks in the open Flames of Day,
And sometimes too he shrowds,
His soaring wings among the Clouds.
10.
Leave, wanton Muse, thy roving flight,
To thy loud String the well-fletcht Arrow put,
Let Agrigentum be the But,
And Thereon be the White.
And lest the Name of Verse should give
Malicious men pretext to misbelieve,
By the Castalian waters swear,
(A sacred Oath no Poets dare
To take in vain,
1 No more then Gods do that of Styx profane)
Swear in no City ere before,
A better man, or greater-soul'd was born,
Swear that Thereon sure has sworn
No man near him should be poor.
Swear that none ere had such a graceful art,
Fortunes free gifts as freely to impart
With an Unenvious hand, and an unbounded Heart.
11.
But in this thankless world the Givers
Are envi'ed ev'en by the Receivers.
It Is now the cheap and frugal fashion,
Rather to Hide then Pay the Obligation.
nay worser much then so
It now an Artifice does grow,
Wrongs and outrages to do,
Lest men should think we ow.
Such Monsters, Thereon, has thy Virtue found,
But all the malice they profess,
Thy secure Honor cannot wound:
For thy vast Bounties are so numberless,
That them or to Conceal, or else to Tell,
Is equally Impossible.
NOTES.
1.


Hymni-dominantes Cytharae, quem Deum, quem Heroem. quem Virum celebraimus?
Pisa quidem Iovis est, Olympicum autem certamen instituit Hercules, primitias
belli, sed Theronem ob cursum in quadrigis victorem sonare oportet voce, justum
and hospitalem, columen Agrigenti, laudatorum progenitorum florem* rectorem
urbium.

1. Whereas Pindar addresses himself to his Song, I change it to his Muse;
which, methinks, is better called (...), then the Ode which she makes. Some
interpret (...) passively ( i.) as subjects of the Harp; but the other sense is
more Grammatical.

2. Horace translates this beginning, Lib. 1. Ode 12. Quem virum aut Heroa Lyra
vel acri Tibia sumes celebrare Clio. Quem Deum cujus resonet jocosa Nomen
Imago? The latter part of which I have added to Pindar. Horace inverts the
order; but the other is more natural, to begin with the God, and end with the
Man.

3. Pisa, a Town in Elis, where the Olympique Games were celebrated every fifth
year by the Institution of Hercules, after he had slain Augias Prince of Elis,
in honor of Jupiter, surnamed Olympicus from the Mountain Olympus, which is
just by Pisa.

4. (...). First Fruits, from (...) the Top, and (...) an Heap, because they
were taken from the Top of the Heap of Corn, etc. Some interpret it, the spoils
of war dedicated to the Gods; so the old Greek Scholiast* I think the Olympique
Games are so called, because they were sacred exercises that disposed and
improved men for the war, a Sacred bloodless war, dedicated to the Gods.

2.
Siciliaeque fuerunt oculus, Vitaque insequebatur foelix, divitias and gratiam
afferns nativis virtutibus. Verum O Saturnie fili Rheae, sedem Olympi habitans,
and certaminum summitatem, viamque Alphei, delectatus Hymnis, benevolus, arvum
patrium adhuc ipsis cura and postero generi.

1. They say, that Aemon the Son of Polydorus, the Son of Cadmus, having slain
one of his fellow Citizens as he was hunting, fled from Thebes to Athens,
afterward to Rhodes, and from thence into Sicilie, where he built Agrigentum;
and from him to Thereon, are reckoned many generations; but the progenitors of
Thereon in a right line, came not thither till a long time after.

2. I rather choose to call Agrigentum, then Therons Ancestors (as Pindar does)
the Eye of Sicilie. The Metaphor in this sense is more natural. So Julian terms
Damascus, (...) The Eye of all the East. So Catullus, Sirmion, Insularum
ocellum, The Eye of Islands. Agrigentum took the name from the River Acragas.
or Agragas, upon which it stands, that from (...) and g as it were Primaria
terra, An especial soil; or from (...) and (...) Land good for the plow. I know
very well, that it is not certain that this Town was built by Therons
Ancestors; neither do the words of Pindar import more then their dwelling
there: nevertheless, the thing being doubtful, I make bold to take that sense
which pleases me best.

3. Iuppiter.

4. The River of Elis, by the side of which the Olympique Games were celebrated.

3.
Tempus quidem omnium pater possit reddere operum finem. Sed Oblivio cum sort
prospera fiat. Bonis enim a gaudiis malum molestum domitum perit, quando divina
sors mittit de coelo altas divitias. Convenit hic sermo Cadmi filiabus bono
solio collocatis, illae passae sunt magna (mala) sed gravis luctus opprimitur a
potioribus bonis. Vivit quidem in coelo mortua fragore fulminis capillis*
passis Semele* Pallas autem illam amat, and maxim Jupiter and filius ejus
hederiger. Aiunt etiam in mari cum filiabus Nerei marinis Inoni vitam
immortalem constitutam esse per omne tempus.

1. Eurip. says excellently well of Oblivion to this purpose, (...)
(...)
O Oblivion the wise Disposer of Evils, and the Goddess propitious to unhappy
men!

2. For the examples of the change of great misfortunes into greater
felicities, he makes use of the Stories of Ino and Semele; because they were
both of Therons race, being the Daughters of Cadmus. Ino, after her husband
Athamas in his madness had slain Learchus, be'lieving him to be a wild beast,
fled with her other son Melicerta, in her arms, to a Rock, and from thence cast
herself into the sea; where, at the desire of Venus, Neptune made the child a
God, and her a Goddess of the sea; him by the name of Palaemon, and her of
Leucothea. See Ovid. Metam. l. 4. The Blew-ey'd Nereides (i.) The Sea-Nymphs,
who were the Daughters of Nereus and Doris. Nereus was the son of Oceanus and
Thetis, and is taken figuratively by the Poets for the sea it self.

3. A known Fable. See Ovid. Metam. l. 3. Semele having made Jupiter promise,
that he would deny her nothing, asked that he would lie with her in all his
Majesty of the Thunderer, and as he was wont to do with Juno; which her mortal
nature not being able to endure, she was burnt to death with his Thunder and
Lightning; but Bacchus her child, by Jupiter, then in the womb, was saved; for
which reason, I call it her Midwife Thunder.

4. Secure. Without fear of being burnt again.

4.
filium Solis, stabili cum bono finiemus. Sed fluxus alias alii cum
voluptatibus and laboribus homines invadunt. Sic and fatum, quod paternam hanc
habet jucundam sortem cum divitiis a Deo profedite, aliquam etiam cladem
contrariam adducit alio tempore, ex quo fatalis filius occurrens interfecit
Laium, and in Pythone editum Oraculum vetus perfecit.

1. Not men that go a journey, but all men, who in this life are termed
Viatores, Travelers.

2. Oedipus. Fatal, because of the Predictions. Laius King of Thebes being
married to Iocasta the daughter of Creon, enquired of the Oracle concerning his
Issue, and was told that he should be slain by it. Whereupon he commanded
Iocasta to put to death whatsoever she should bring forth; but she moved with
natural compassion, and the great beauty of the Infant, caused one of her
servants to expose it in the woods, who making an hole through the feet, hung
it by them upon a Tree (from which wound in his feet, he was called Oedipus)
and so left it. But Phorbas, chief Herdsman of Polybius; King of Corinth
passing by, found the Child, and presented it to the Queen his Mistress; who
having none of her own, looked upon it as one given her by the Gods, and bred
it up as her son; who being come to man's age, and desirous to know the truth of
his birth, enquired it of the Oracle; and was answered, that he should meet his
father in Phocis; whither he went, and there in a tumult ignorantly slew Laius,
and after married his Mother Iocasta, by whom he had Eteocles and Polynices,
the latter Therons ancestor.

5.
Erinnys interfecit ei per mutuam caedem prolem martiam, at relictus est
Thersander interfecto Polynici juvenilibus and in certaminibus and in pugnis
belli honoratus, germen auxiliare Adrastidum domui, a quo seminis habentem
radicem decet filium Aenesidami encomiastica carmina lyrasque consequi, nam
apud Olympiam ipse praemium accepit, apud Pythonam autem etc. Isthmum communes
gratiae ad fratrem ejusdem sortis participem flores attulerunt quadrigarum
duodecim cursus conficientium.

1. One may ask, Why he makes mention of these tragical accidents and actions
of Oedipus and his Sons, in an Ode dedicated to the praise of Thereon and his
Ancestors? I answer, That they were so notorious, that it was better to excuse
then conceal them; for which cause, he attributes them to Fatality; and to
mitigate the thing yet more, I add, The innocent Parricide.

2. Eteocles and Polynices: The war of which two Brethren, and their slaughter
of one another, is made so famous by Statius his most excellent Poem, that it
is needless to tell their History.

3. Thersander, the Son of Polynices by Argia, together with Diomedes, brought
an Army against Thebes, to revenge their Fathers deaths, and took it: After
that, he carried fifty ships to the siege of Troy, and was at last chosen for
his valor to be one of the persons that were shut up in the belly of the
wooden Horse, and so entered the Town. Virg. l. 2. Aen. -- Laeti se robore
promunt,
Thersandrus, Stheneleusque Duces, and dirus Ulysses.


4. There are several great actions of Therons mentioned in History, besides
his successes in the public Games, which were in that age, no less honorable
then Victories in War; as that he expelled Terillus out of Hymera, which he had
usurped, and defeated Hamilcar, General of the Carthaginians in Sicilie, the
same day that the Greeks overthrew the Persians in that memorable battle of
Salamis, Herod. l. 7.

5. Because in the Olympique Games he obtained the victory alone, in those of
Nemea and Isthmus jointly with his Brother, who had shared with him in the
expense of setting forth the Chariots.

6.


Successus certaminis dispellit molestias, divitiae autem virtutibus ornatae
afferunt (hujas rei) opportunitatem indagatricem, sustinentes profundam
sollicitudinem. (O Divitiae) stella praefulgida, verum homini lumen! qui eas
habet, etiam futurum novit, quod mortuorum hic intractabiles mentes poenas
luunt, and quae fiant in hoc Iovis imperio scelera judicat aliquis, inimica
sententiam pronuntians necessitate.

1. The Connection of this Stanza is very obscure in the Greek, and could not be
rendered without much Paraphrase.

2. This is not a Translation of (...), etc. for that is rendered by (Above) but
an innocent addition to the Poet, which does no harm, nor I fear, much Good.

7.


At aequaliter noctu semper, aequaliter interdiu Solemn habentes non laboriosam
boni degunt vitam, neque terram neque marinam aquam vexantes robore manuum
inopem propter victum, sed apud honoratos deos (vel, Cum its qui honorantur a
Diis) illi qui gaudebant fidelitate, illachrymabili fruuntur aevo, alii autem
intolerabilem visu patiuntur cruciatum. Quicunque sustinuerunt ter commorati
continere animam ab omnibus injustis peregerunt Iovis viam ad Saturni urbem.

1. A description of the Fortunate Islands, or Elysian Fields, so often
mentioned by the Poets, and much after this manner. Valor. Hic Lucet via late
Igne Dei, donec silvas and amaena piorum Deveniant, camposque ubi Sol, totumque
per annum Durat aprica dies. Virg. Aen. 6. Devenere locos laetos and amaena
vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum sedesque beatas,
Largior hic campos ether, and lumine vestit
Purpureo, Solemque suum, sua sidera norunt.


In which Homer shows the way to Pindar, and all. Odyss. 4. '(...)
'(...),
*(...),
'(...),
'(...)
(...).


2. According to the opinion of Pythagoras, which was much followed by the
Poets, and became them better, that souls past still from one body to another,
till by length of time, and many pennances, they had purged away all their
imperfections. Virg. Aen. 6. -- Pauci laeta arva tenemus,
Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb,
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aetherium sensum atque aurai simplicis ignem.
And a little before, -- Animae quibus altera fato
Corpora debentur.
But the restriction of this to the third Metempsychosis, I do not remember any
where else. It may be thrice is taken here indefinitely for several times, as
is most frequent among the Poets.

3. Saturn is said to govern here, because the Golden-Age was under his reign,
from the resemblance of the condition of mankind then, to that of the Blessed
now in the other World.

8.


Vbi beatorum Insulam Oceanides aurae perflant, floresque auri coruscant, alii
quidem in humo ab illustribus arboribus, alios autem aqua educat, quorum
monilibus manus implicant and corollis (capita) juxta recta decreta
Rhadamanthi, quem pater Saturnus maritus Rheae omnium supremum habentis solium,
dignum sibi habet Assessorem, Peleus and Cadmus inter hos recensentur,
Achillemque eo transtulit matter, postquam Iovis animum precibus flexit. There
follows a Description of Achilles, from the slaughter of Hector, Cygnus, and
Memnon, which I thought better to leave out; and instead of it, to add by what
means Thetis made his Soul, that was before so tainted with Anger, Pride and
Cruelty, capable of being admitted into this place; which I believed it not
improper to attribute to her dipping of it in Styx, as she had formerly done
his body, all but his heel, by which she held him, and which was therefore the
only part where he was Vulnerable. That the water of Styx might have the like
effects upon his soul, I am authorized to feign, by the common Tradition of the
water of Lethe, whose power upon the Soul is no less.

1. Of the three Judges of the Dead, he names only one, Virg. Aen. 6. Gnossius
haec Rhadamanthus habet durissima regna, etc. And the Grammarians derive his
name from (...) and (...), from taming men by the severity of his justice.
Cadmus was chosen to be named here for one of the Heroes, by an apparent
reason, Thereon being descended from him; as for Peleus and Achilles, there is
no particular cause. The Poets imitate sometimes the Divine proceeding, and
will have mercy on whom they will have mercy, without any reflecting upon any
peculiar merit. It was not hard indeed for those two to be admitted here; for
Aeacus, one of the three Judges, was Father to the one* and Grandfather to the
other. I make bold to add, that the Poets are there too, for Pindars honor,
that I may not say, for mine own.



Multae mihi sub cubito celeres Sagittae intra Pharetram sunt sonantes
prudentibus, apud vulgus autem interpretibus egent. Sapiens est qui multa novit
naturae viribus, qui disciplina utuntur vehementes garrulitate sicut Corvi
irrita clamant adversus Iovis Avem divinam.

1. The Connection in the Poet is very obscure. This Metaphor of Quiver and
Arrows does much delight him. Olymp. 13. (...). Me autem rectum telorum
mittentem, turbinem praeter scopum non oportet multa tela dirigere manibus. The
like is in the first Olympique, and diverse other places. Horace in imitation.
Pro me reconditum Thalia telum, etc.

2. Pindar falls frequently into this common place of preferring Nature before
Art, as in the first Nemeaean Ode, etc. The Scholiast says, he does it in
derogation from his adversary Bacchilides. The comparison of Art to a Crow, and
Nature to an Eagle, is very nobly extravagant, but it was necessary to enlarge
it.

3. The Poets feigned, that the Eagle carried Jove's Thunder, because of the
strength, courage and swiftness of that Bird. They likewise feigned, that
Jupiter falling in love with Ganymedes* the Son of Tros, a most beautiful Boy,
carried him up to heaven upon the back of an Eagle, there to fill Nectar to him
when he feasted, and for a more ungodly use. Hor. Expertus fidelem Jupiter in
Ganymede flavo.

4. Nothing but the Eagle is said to be able to look full right into the Sun,
and to make that trial of her young ones, breeding up none but those that can
do so.

10.


Intend^ nunc arcum in scopum; agedum anime mi; Quem petimus ex molli mente
gloriosas sagittas mittentes? In Agrigentum dirigens proferam veraci mente
jusjurandum peperisse nullam centum annis civitatem vtrum amicis magis
benevolum pectore, and minus invidum manu.

1. Virg. -- Stygiamque poludem
Dii cujus jurare timent and fallere numen.
Castalian waters. A fountain in Phocis, at the foot of Parnassus, dedicated to
Apollo and the Muses; so called from the Virgin Castalia, who flying from
Apollo* was there turned into a Fountain.

11:


Sed Invidia laudem invasit injuste occurrens, a furiosis viris tumultuari
volens, and occultare beneficia injuriis* Siquidem arena numerum refugit, ille
quot gaudia aliis contulerit quis recensere poterit?

THE FIRST Nemeaen Ode OF PINDAR.
Chromius, the Son of Agesidamus, a young Gentleman of Sicilie, is celebrated
for having won the prize of the Chariot-Race in the Nemeaen Games (a Solemnity
instituted first to celebrate the Funerals of Opheltes, as is at large
described by Statius; and afterward continued every third year, with an
extraordinrry conflux of all Greece, and with incredible honor to the
Conquerors in all the exercises there practiced) upon which occasion, the Poet
begins with the commendation of his Country, which I take to have been Ortygia
(an Island blonging to Sicilie, and a part of Syracuse, being joined to it by a
Bridge) though the title of the Ode call him Aetnaean Chromius, perhaps because
he was made Governor of that Town by Hieron. From thence he falls into the
praise of Chromius his person, which he draws from his great endowments of
Mind and Body, and most especially from his Hospitality, and the worthy, use
of his riches. He likeneth his beginning to that of Hercules, and according to
his usual manner of being transported with any good Hint that meets him in his
way, passing into a Digression of Hercules his slaying the two Serpents in his
Cradle, concludes the Ode with that History.

ODE.
1.
BEauteous Ortygia, the first breathing place
1 Of great Alpheus close and amorous race,
2 Fair Delos Sister, the Childe-Bed
3 Of bright Latona, where she bred
4 The Original New Mood,
Who saw her tender Forehead ere the Horns were grown.
5 Who like a gentle Scion, newly started out,
From Syracusa's side do sprout.
Thee first my Song does greet
With numbers smooth and fleet,
As thine own Horses airy feet
When they young Chromius Chariot drew,
6 And ore the ^emeaean race triumphant flew.
Jove will approve my Song and Me,
7 Jove is concerned in Nemea, and in Thee.
2*
1 With Jove, my Song; this happy man,
Young Chromius too with Jove began;
From hence came his success,
Nor ought he therefore like it less,
Since the best Fame is that of Happiness.
For whom should we esteem above
The Men whom Gods do love.
It Is them alone the Muse too does approve.
Lo how it makes this victory shine
2 Ore all the fruitful Isle of Proserpine!
The Torches which her Mother brought
When the ravished Maid she sought,
Appeared not half so bright,
But cast a weaker light
Through earth, and air, and Seas, and up to the heavenly Vauls*
3*
1 To thee, O Proserpine, this Isle I give,
Said Jove, and as he said,
2 Smiled, and bent his gracious Head.
And thou, O Isle, said he, for ever thrive,
And keep the value of our Gift alive.
As Heaven with Stars, so let
The Country thick with Towns be set,
And numberless as Stars
Let all the Towns be then
Replenisht thick with Men,
Wise in Peace, and Bold in Wars.
Of thousand glorious Towns the Nation,
Of thousand glorious Men each Towns a Constellation.
Nor let their warlike Laurel scorn,
3 With the Olympique Olive to be worn,
Whose gentler Honors do so well the Brows of Peace adorn.
4.
1 Go to great Syracuse, my Muse, and wait
At Chromius Hospitable Gate.
'Twill open wide to let thee in,
When thy Lyres voice shall but begin.
Joy, Plenty, and free Welcome dwells within.
The Tyrian Beds thou shall find ready dressed,
The Ivory Table crowded with a Feast.
The Table which is free for every Guest,
No doubt will thee admit,
And feast more upon Thee, then Thou on it.
Cromius and Thou art met aright,
2 For as by Nature thou do Write,
So he by Nature Loves, and does by Nature Fight.
5.
1 Nature herself, whilst in the womb he was,
Sowed Strength and Beauty through the forming Mass,
They mov'ed the vital Lump in every part,
And carv'ed the Members out with wondrous art.
She filled his Mind with Courage, and with Wit,
And a vast Bounty, apt and fit
For the great Dowre which Fortune made to it.
It Is Madness sure Treasures to hoord,
And make them useless, as in Mines, remain,
To lose the Occasion Fortune does afford
Fame, and public Love to gain.
Even for self-concerning ends;
It Is wiser much to hoord up Friends.
Though Happy men the present goods possess,
The Unhappy have their share in future Hopes no less.
6.
How early has young Chromius begun
The Race of Virtue, and how swiftly run,
And born the noble Prize away,
Whilst other youths yet at the Barriere stay?
1 None but Alcides ere set earlier forth then He;
The God, his Fathers, Blood naught could restrain,
'Twas ripe at first, and did disdain
The slow advance of dull Humanity,
The big-limm'ed Babe in his huge Cradle lay,
Too weighty to be rockt by Nurses hands,
Wrapped in purple swadling-bands.
When, Lo, by jealous Juno's fierce commands,
Two dreadful Serpents come
Rolling and hissing loud into the room.
To the bold Babe they trace their bidden way,
Forth from their flaming eyes dread Lightnings went,
Their gaping Mouths did forked Tongues like Thunderbolts present*
7.
1 Some of the amazed Women dropped down dead
With fear, some wildely fled
About the room, some into corners crept,
Where silently they shook and wept.
All naked from her bed the passionate Mother lept
To save or perish with her Child,
She trembled, and she cry'ed, the mighty Infant smiled.
2 The mighty Infant seemed well pleas'ed
At his gay gilded foes,
And as their spotted necks up to the Cradle rose,
With his young warlike hands on both he seis'ed;
In vain they raged, in vain they hist,
In vain their armed Tails they twist,
And angry Circles cast about,
Black Blood, and fiery Breath, and poys'onous Soul he squeezes out.
8.
1 With their drawn Swords
In ran Amphitryo, and the Theban Lords,
2 With doubting Wonder, and with troubled joy
They saw the conquering Boy
Laugh, and point downwards to his prey,
Where in deaths pangs, and their own gore they folding lay.
3 When wise Tiresias this beginning knew,
He told with ease the things t'ensue,
4 From what Monsters he should free
5 The Earth, the Air, and Sea,
6 What mighty Tyrants he should slay,
More Monsters far then They.
7 How much at Phlaegras field the distressed Gods should owe
To their great Offspring here below,
And how his Club should there outdo,
8 Apollos silver Bow, and his own Fathers Thunder too.
9.
1 And that the grateful Gods at last,
The race of his laborious Virtue past,
Heaven, which he sav'ed, should to him give,
2 Where marry'ed to aeternal Youth he should for ever live;
Drink Nectar with the Gods, and all his senses please
In their harmonious golden Palaces.
Walk with ineffable Delight
Through the thick Groves of never-withering Light,
And as he walks affright
3 The Lion and the Bear,
Bull, Centaur, Scorpion, all the radiant Monsters there.
NOTES.
1. (...). Respiramen reverendum Alphei. Alpheus was a River in Elis, which the
Poets feigned to have fallen in love with the Nymph Arethusa, whom when he was
ready to ravish, Diana turned her into a Fountain; which lest her Lover should
mix his waters with hers, fled by secret ways under ground, and under the Sea
into Sicilie, rising up in the Island Ortygia, whither Alpheus also followed,
and there mingled with her.

2. (...). Deli soror. The Commentator says, because Delos too was called
Ortygia. I think, because Apollo was born in Delos, and Diana in Ortygia;
therefore by a figure he calls the Islands too, where they were born Sisters.
Hom. Hymn. (...)
(...)
(...).
Which for Pindars sake, I am content to take for this Ortygia, and not that
Island among the Cyclades of the same name.

3. (...). Cubile Artemidis. Because she was born there, I therefore chose
rather to call it, Latona's Childebed, then her Bed.

4. Because other New Moons seem but returns of Diana (which is the same with
the Goddess Luna) then she had her beginning.

5. (...). Germen inclytarum Syracusarum, for the reason mentioned in the
Argument.

6. (...). A te ^^a^iloquus Hymn^^s cum impetu aggreditur exponere magnam
laudem procellipedum equorum in Iovis Aetnaei gratiam, Currus etiam Chromii and
Nemea* me incitant ut adjungam meum laudatorium melos triumphantibus
(certaminum) laboribus.

7. In Nemea; because Hercules having slain the Nemeaean Lion, did sacrifice
Iovi Nem^ao* and dedicate the Games to him. In Thee: For having given this
Island to Proserpine, for Ceres sake, for the birth of Diana; for being himself
surnamed (as before) Aetnaean Jupiter, from Aetna, where his Thunder was
likewise forged.

2.
1. (...)

Prooemia sumpta sunt a Diis etc. illius viri faelicibus virtutibus, est enim
in felicitate summum fastigium omnis gloriae.

2. Of these Torches which Ceres lighted at Aetna, and carried with her all
about the world in the search of Proserpine, Claudian speaks thus, L. 3. de R.
Proserp. Quacunque it, in aequore fulvis
Adnatat umbra fretis, extremaque lucis imago
Italiam Lybiamque ferit, clarescit Hetruscum
Littus, and accenso resplendent aequore Syrtes.
At Enna, where Ceres was most religiously worshipped, her Statue was made with
Torches in her hands. See Tull* 4. Act. in Verr.

3.
1. (...)

Nunc excita splendorem aliquem Insulae quam Olympi Dominus Jupiter dedit
Proserpinae and annuit capillis se principem fertilis soli Siciliam pinguem
exaltaturum celebribus fastigiis civitatum, deditque eis Saturnius populum
equis gaudentem, and memorem ferrei belli qui spe etiam foliis aureis
Olympiacarum Olivarum se immisceret.

2. (...). Is very eloquent in the Greek, but I knew not how to render it but
by Head. Homer expresses the same sense most excellently. Il. 1. (...)
(...)
(...).


3. Pindar in his third Olympique, by a great Geographical Error (but
pardonable in those times) says, that Hercules obtained of the Hyperboreans at
the Fountain of Ister, or the Danube Plants of wilde-Olive, to set about the
Temple of Jupiter in Pisa; and ordained, that the Conquerors in those Games
should always be crowned with Garlands of the said Olives, It may be asked, in
the celebration of a Nemeaean Victory, why he rather mentions the Olympique
Prizes, born away by the Sicilians, then those of Nemea? Some say, that in the
Nemeaean Games too, the like Olive-Garlands were used at first before those of
Apium; which I hardly believe, if the Institution of them was to celebrate a
funeral, as the general opinion is. I think he chooses the Olympique Games,
only because they were the most famous of all.

4.
1. (...).


Steti autem in vestibulo viri hospitalis egregie cantans, ubi mihi conveniens
coena adornata est, neque enim frequentium peregrinorum ignarae sunt aedes ejus.

2. (...). Alias aliorum arts sunt, sed oportet rectis in viis ambulantem
natura pugnare.

5.
1. (...). Auxiliatur enim operi quidem robur, consiliis autem men's, quibus
naturalis est futurorum providentia, Tuis autem in moribus, o Agesidami fili,
horum and illorum est usus. Non cupio multas in aedibus divitias absconditas
habere, sed ex iis quae adsunt bona percipere, and been audire amicis
subveniens, communes enim veniunt spes aerumnosor^m.

6.
1. (...), etc.

Ego autem Herculem amplector libenter in cacuminibus virtutum maximis antiquum
proferens sermonem, etc.

Pindar, according to his manner, leaves the Reader to find as he can, the
connection between Chromius and the story of Hercules, which it seemed to me
necessary to make a little more perspicuous.

7.
1. (...).

Intolerabilis metus percussit mulieres quae inserviebant Alcmenae lecto, quin
etiam ipsa sine vestibus prosiliens pedibus e lecto propulsavit injuriam
bestiarum.

2. (...). In thalami penetralia lata venerunt pueris celeres malas
circumplicare gestientes, sed ille rectum extendit caput, and specimen primum
pugnae edidit. I leave out the mention of his Brother Iphiclus, who lay in the
same cradle, because it would but embroil the story, and adds nothing to the
simlitude. Pherecides writes, that Amphitryo himself put these Serpents into
the Chamber, to try which was his, and which Jupiters Son.

1. (...). Confestim autem Cadmaeorum duces aereis cum armis accurrerunt,
Amphitryo quoque nudum vagina ensem quatiens venit acutis doloribus saucius. I
leave out a sentence that follows; which is a wise saying, but, methinks, to no
great purpose in that place.

2. This is excellently expressed in the Greek, (...). Constitit autem stupore
a cerbo delectabiliq, permixtus.

3. (...). Vicinum itaque advocavit Iovis altissimi Prophetam eximium vera
vaticinantem Tiresiam, hic autem ei dixit totique turbae in quibus versaturus
esset fortunis.

4. (...). Quot in terra interfecturus esset quot in mari belluas perniciosas,
and cuinam hominum cum obliqua insolentia incedenti, inimicissimo mortem daret,
quinetiam cum Dii cum Gyantibus in campo Phlegrae praelio concurrerent, telorum
illius impetu praeclaram pulveri commixtum iri illorum comam. Where I have
ventured to change what he says of his Darts, into his Club, that being his
most famous weapon.

5. The Earth; as the Erymanthian Bore, the Nemeaean Lions. The Air, as the
Stymphalian Birds. And the Sea, as the Whale, which the Scholiast says he slew,
and cites Homer for the Story.

6. As Antaeus, Busiris, Augias, etc.

7. The place of the battle between the Gods and the Giants, was Phlegra, a
Town in Thrace, where the Earth pronounced an Oracle, that the Giants could not
be destroyed, but by the help of two Heroes, or Half-Gods; for which purpose,
the Gods made choice of Hercules and Bacchus, and by their assistance got the
victory. Phlegra is called so, (...), To burn; perhaps, because of the Giants
being destroyed there chiefly by Thunder; or, as others, from Bathes of
Hot-water which arise there. Eustathius says, it was likewise called Pallene,
and gave occasion to the fable of the Giants fight, from the wickedness of the
Inhabitants.

8. According to Homers ordinary Epithete of Apollo, (...). Silver-bow'd.

9:
1. (...). Ipsum vero in pace omne tempus deinceps acturum, tranquillitatem
magnorum laborum praemium eximium consequutum, recepta in beatis aedibus Hebe
coniuge florente, and nuptiis celebratis in domo Iovis venerandi quam ipse
admiratione videret.

3. The Names of Constellations, so called first by the Poets, and since
retained by the Astronomers. They might be frighted by Hercules, because he was
the famous Monster-killer.

The Praise of Pindar. In Imitation of Horace his second Ode, B. 4. Pindarum
quisquis studet aemulari, etc.
1.
1 PIndar is imitable by none;
The Phoenix Pindar is a vast Species alone.
Who ere but Daedalus with waxen wings could fly,
And neither sink too low, nor soar too high?
What could he who followed claim,
But of vain boldness the unhappy fame,
And by his fall a Sea to name?
Pindars unnavigable Song
Like a swollen Flood from some steep Mountain pours along.
The Ocean meets with such a Voice
From his enlarged Mouth, as drowns the Oceans noise.
2.
So Pindar does new Words and Figures roll
1 Down his impetuous Dithyrambique Tide,
Which in no Channel deigns to abide,
2 Which neither Banks nor Dikes control.
Whether the Immortal Gods he sings
In a no less Immortal strain,
3 Or the great Acts of God-descended Kings,
Who in his Numbers still survive and Reign.
Each rich embroidered Line,
Which their triumphant Brows around,
By his sacred Hand is bound,
4 Does all their starry Diadems outshine.
3.
Whether at Pisa's race he please
1 To carve in polisht Verse the Conquer'ors Images,
2 Whether the Swift, the Skilful, or the Strong,
Be crowned in his Nimble, Artful, Vigorous Song:
3 Whether some brave young man's untimely fate
In words worth Dying for he celebrate,
Such mournful, and such pleasing words,
As joy to'his Mothers and his Mistress grief affords:
He bids him Live and Grow in fame,
4 Among the Stars he sticks his Name:
The Grave can but the Dross of him devour,
So small is Deaths, so great the Poets power.
4.
Lo, how th'obsequious Wind, and swelling Air
1 The Theban Swan does upwards bear
Into the walks of Clouds, where he does play,
And with extended Wings opens his liquid way.
Whilst, alas, my tim'erous Muse
Unambitious tracks pursues;
Does with weak unballast wings,
About the mossy Brooks and Springs;
About the Trees new-blossom'ed Heads,
About the Gardens painted Beds,
About the Fields and flowery Meads,
And all inferior beauteous things
Like the laborious Be,
For little drops of Honey flee,
And there with Humble Sweets contents her Industry.
NOTES.
1.
1. PIndar was incredibly admired and honored among the Ancients, even to that
degree that we may believe, they saw more in him then we do now: Insomuch, that
long after his death, when Thebes was quite burnt and destroyed (by the
Lacedaemonians, and by Alexander the Great) both times the House wherein he had
lived was along preserved by public Authority, as a place sacred and
inviolable. Among the very many Elogies of him, I will only cite that of
Quinctilian (then whom no man perhaps ever living was a better Judge) L. 10. c.
1. Novem Lyricorum long Pindarus princeps, spiritus magnificentia, sententiis,
figuris beatissimus, rerum verborumque copia and velut quodam eloquentiae
flumine, propter quae Horatius nemini credit eum imitabilem. Where he applys
Horace his similitudes of a River to his Wit; but it is such a River, as when
Poetical Fury, Tanquam fera diluvies quietum
Irritat annem.
Hor. And like the rest of that description of the River. Nunc pace delabentis
Hetrusc^m
In mare, nunc lapides ades^s
Stirpesque raptas and pecus and domos
Volventis un^ non ^ine montium
Clamore vicinaeque silvae.
For which reason, I term his Song Vnnavigable; for it is able to drown any
Head that is not strong built and well ballasted. Horace in another place calls
it a Fountain; from the unexhausted abundance of his Invention.

2.
1. There are none of Pindars Dithyrambiques extant. Dithyrambiques were Hymus
made in honor of Bacchus, who did, (...), came into the world through two
Doors, his Mother Semeles Womb, and his Father Jupiters Thigh. Others think,
that Dithyrambus was the name of a Theban Poet, who invented that kind of
verse, which others also attribute to Arion. Pindar himself in the 13. Olymp.
seems to give the Invention to the Corinthians, (...). Vnde Bacchi exortae sunt
venustates cum Boves agente Dithyrambo. For it seems an Ox was given in reward
to the Poet; but others interpret (...), from the loud repeating or singing of
them. It was a bold, free, enthysiastical kind of Poetry, as of men inspired by
Bacchus, that is, Half-Drunk, from whence came the Greek Proverb. (...)
You are as mad as a Dithyrambique Poet.
And another, (...)
There are no Dithyrambiques made by drinking water.
Something like this kind (but I believe with less Liberty) is Horace his 19
Ode of the 2. B. Bacchum in remotis carmina r^pibus
Vidi docentem, etc.
And nearer yet to it comes his 25 Ode of the 4. B. Quo me Bacche rapis tui
plenum? quae n^mora, aut quos agor in specus, Velooc men^^ nov^? For he is
presently half-mad, and promises I know not what, Dicam insigne recens,
Indictum ^re alio. And,
Nil parvum a^t humili modo,
Nil mortale loquar.
And then he ends like a man ranting in his drink, that falls suddenly asleep.

Banks, natural; Dikes, artificial. It will neither be bounded and
circumscribed by Nature, nor by Art.

3. Almost all the ancient Kings to make themselves more venerable to their
subjects, derived their pedigree from some God, but at last that would not
content them, and they made themselves Gods, as some of the Roman Emperors.

4. Diadems (which were used by the ancient Kings, as Crowns are now, for the
Mark of Royalty, and were much more convenient) were bindings of white Ribban
about the head, set and adorned with precious stones; which is the reason I
call them Starry Diadems. The word comes (...), To bind about.

3.
1. The Conquerors in the Olympique Games, were not only Crowned with a
Garland of Wilde-Olive, but also had a Statue erected to them.

2. The chief Exercises there were Running, Leaping, Wrestling, the Discus,
which was the casting of a great round Stone, or Ball, made of Iron or Brass;
The Ce^tus, or Whorle-bats, Horse-races, and Chariot-races.

3. For he wrote Threni; or Funeral Elegies: but they are all lost, as well as
his Hymns, Tragedies, Encomid, and several other works.

4. So Hor. 1. 4. Od. 25. Stellis inserere, and concilio Iovis.


4.
1. From the Fabulous, but universally received Tradition of Swans singing most
sweetly before their Death (though the truth is Geese and They are alike
Melodious) the Poets have assumed to themselves the title of Swans, Hor. 1. 2.
Od. 20. would be believed to be Metamorphosed into one, Iam jam, residunt
cruribus asperae Pelles, and album mutor in alitem Superne (or Superna)
nascunturque leves Per digitos humerosque plumae. The Anthologie gives the same
name to Pindar, (...). Sweet-tongued Pindar the Heliconian Swan of Thebes. So
Virgil is called, Mantuanus olor, The Swan of of Mantua; Theocritus terms the
Poets, (...), The Birds of the Muses; which the Commentators say, is in
allusion to Swans; to which Callimachus gives the name of (...); and in another
place calls them, (...). A bold word, which I know not how to render: but they
were consecrated to Apollo, and consequently beloved by the Muses and Poets.

The Resurrection.
1.
1 NOt Winds to Voyagers at sea,
Nor Showers to Earth more necessary be,
( Heav'ens vital seed cast on the womb of Earth
To give the fruitful Year a Birth)
Then Verse to Virtue, which does do
The Midwifes Office, and the Nurses too;
It feeds it strongly, and it clothes it gay,
And when it dies, with comely pride
Embalms it, and erects a Pyramide
That never will decay
Till Heaven it self shall melt away,
And naught behind it stay.
2.
Begin the Song, and strike the Living Lyre;
Lo how the Years to come, a numerous and well-fitted Quire,
All hand in hand do decently advance,
And to my Song with smooth and equal measures dance.
1 Whilst the Dance lasts, how long so ere it be,
My Musicks voice shall bear it company.
Till all gentle Notes be drowned
In the last Trumpets dreadful sound.
That to the Spheres themselves shall silence bring,
Untune the Universal string.
Then all the wide extended Sky,
And all the harmonious Worlds on high,
And Virgils sacred work shall die.
3 And he himself shall see in one Fire shine
Rich Natures ancient Troy, though built by Hands Divine.
3.
1 Whom Thunders dismal noise,
And all that Prophets and Apostles louder spoke,
And all the Creatures plain conspiring voice,
Could not whilst they liv'ed, awake,
This mightier sound shall make
When Dead t'arise,
And open Tombs, and open Eyes
2 To the long Sluggards of five thousand years.
This mightier Sound shall make its Hearers Ears.
Then shall the scatter'ed Atoms crowding come
Back to their Ancient Home,
Some from Birds, from Fishes some,
Some from Earth, and some from Seas,
Some from Beasts, and some from Trees.
Some descend from Clouds on high,
Some from Metals upwards fly,
And where the attending Soul naked, and shivering stands,
Meet, falute, and join their hands.
As dispersed Soldiers at the Trumpets call,
Haste to their Colors all.
Unhappy most, like Tortur'ed Men,
Their Joints new set, to be new rackt again.
To Mountains they for shelter pray,
The Mountains shake, and run about no less confus'ed then They.
4.
Stop, stop, my Muse, allay thy vig'orous heat,
Kindled at a Hint so Great.
Hold thy Pindarique Pegasus closely in,
Which does to rage begin,
And this steep Hill would gallop up with violent course,
It Is an unruly, and a hard-mouthed Horse,
Fierce, and unbroken yet,
Impatient of the Spur or Bit.
Now praunces stately, and anon flies or the place,
Disdains the servile Law of any settled pace,
Conscious and proud of his own natural force.
'Twill no unskilful Touch endure,
But flings Writer and Reader too that sits not sure.
NOTES.
1.
1. THis Ode is truly Pindarical, falling from one thing into another, after
his Enthysiastical manner, and he gives a Hint for the beginning of it in his
14. Olymp. (...) Est aliquando hominibus ventoru^^ usus, aliquando aquarum
(...) filtarum nubis, sed siquis cum labor recl^e faciat dulces Hymni lli
(...) sunt futur^ a g^oriae, and ^oedus ^idele faciunt cum magnis virtutibus.

1. Whilst the Motion of Time lasts, which is compared to a Dance, from the
regular measures of it. 2. According to the ancient opinion of the
Pythagoreans, which does much better befit Poetry, then it did Philosophy.

3. Shall see the whole world burnt to ashes like Troy, the destruction of
which was so excellently written by him* though it was built like Troy too, by
Divine hands. The walls of Troy were said to be built by Apollo and Neptune.

3.
1. No natural effect gives such impressions of Divine fear, as Thunder; as we
may see by the examples of some wicked Emperors, who though they were Atheists,
and made themselves Gods, yet confessed a greater divine power when they heard
it, by trembling and hiding themselves, Horat. Coelo Tonantem Credidimus Iovem.
And Lucret* speaks it of Epicurus, as a thing extraordinary and peculiar of
him, that the very sound of Thunder did not make him superstitious, Quem neque
fama Deum, neque fu^^nina, hec minitanti
Murmr compr^ssit coelum, etc.
Yet the Prophets and Apostles voice is truly termed Louder; for as S. Paul
says, the voice of the Gospel was heard over all the habitable world, (...).

2. The ordinary Traditional opinion is, that the world is to last six thousand
years (...) and that the Seventh Thousand is to be the Rest or Sabbath of
Thousands: but I could not say, Sluggards of Six thousand years, because some
then would be found alive, who had not so much as slept at all. The next
Perfect Number (and Verse will admit of no Broken ones) was Five Thousand.

The Muse.
1.
1 GO, the rich Chariot instantly prepare;
The Queen, my Muse, will take the air,
Unruly Fancy with strong Judgment trace,
Put in nimble-footed Wit,
Smooth-pac'ed Eloquence join with it,
Sound Memory with young Invention place,
Harness all the winged race.
Let the P^stillian Nature mount, and let
The Coachman Art be set.
And let the airy Footmen running all beside,
Make a long row of goodly pride.
Figures, Conceits, Raptures, and Sentences
In a well-worded dress.
And innocent Loves, and pleasant Truths, and useful Lies,
In all their gaudy Liveries.
Mount, glorious Queen, thy traveling Throne,
And bid it to put on;
For long, though cheerful, is the way,
And Life, alas, allows but one ill winters Day.
2.
Where never Foot of Man, or Hoof of Beast,
The passage pressed,
1 Where never Fish did fly,
And with short silver wings cut the low liquid Sky.
2 Where Bird with painted Oars did n'ere
Row through the trackless Ocean of the Air.
Where never yet did pry
The busy Mornings curious Ey.
The Wheels of thy bold Coach pass quick and free;
And all is an open Road to Thee.
Whatever God did Say,
3 Is all thy plain and smooth, uninterrupted way.
Nay even beyond his works thy Voyages are known,
Thou'hast thousand worlds too of thine own.
Thou speakst, great Queen, in the same style as He,
And a New world leaps forth when Thou say, Let it Be.
3.
1 Thou fadom'est the deep Gulf of Ages past,
And can pluck up with ease
The years which Thou do please,
Like shipwrackt Treasures by rude Tempests cast
Long since into the Sea,
Brought up again to light and public Use by Thee.
Nor do thou only Dive so low,
But Fly
With an unwearied Wing the other way on high,
2 Where Fates among the Stars do grow;
There into the close Nests of Time do'est peep,
And there with piercing Eye,
Through the firm Shell, and the thick White do spy,
Years to come a forming lie,
Close in their sacred Secundine asleep,
Till hatched by the Suns vital heat
Which ore them yet does brooding set
They Life and Motion get,
And ripe at last with vigorous might
3 Break through the Shell, and take their everlasting Flight.
4.
And sure we may
The same too of the Present say,
If Past, and Future Times do thee obey.
Thou stopst this Current, and do make
This running River settle like a Lake,
1 Thy certain hand holds fast this slippery Snake.
The fruit which does so quickly waste,
Men scarce can see it, much less taste,
Thou Comfitest in Sweets to make it last.
2 This shining piece of Ice
Which melts so soon away
With the Suns ray,
Thy verse does solidate and Chrystallize.
Till it a lasting Mirror be;
Nay thy Immortal Rhyme
Makes this once short Point of Time,
3 To fill up half the Orb of Round Eternity.
NOTES.
1.
1. Pindar in the 6. Olymp. has a Fancy somewhat of this kind; where he says,
(...). Sed, ^ Phinty, junge jam mihi robur Mularum quibus celeritas est, ut
(...) ducamus ^urrum. Where by the Name of Phintis, he speaks to his own Soul.
O, my Soul, join me the strong and swift Mul^s together, that I may drive the
Chariot in this fair waysome make (...) to be a Dialect for (...): as if he
should say. Oh my friend: Others (whom I rather believe) take it for the proper
Name of some famous Chariot-driver. The Aurea Carm. use the same Metaphor,
(...). Auriga superne constituta optima ratione; Making right Reason the
Chariot-driver of the Soul. Porphyrius calls the Spirits, (...), The Chariot of
the Soul.

2.
1. For Fins do the same Office to Fish, that Wings do to Birds; and the
Scripture it self gives authority to my calling the Sea the Low Sky; where it
says, Genesis 1. 6. Let there be a firmament in the midst of waters, and let it
divide the waters from the waters.

2. This Metaphor was used by the ancient Poets, Virg. Aen. 1. Volat ille per
era magnum Remigio alarm.
And elsewhere Lucret. before him, L. 6. Remigii oblitae pennarum.
Ovid in his Epistic applies the same to Men's Arms. Ramis ego corporis utar.
I Will use the Bodies Oars.


3. (i.) Whatsoever God made; for his saying, Let it be, made all things. The
meaning is that Poetry treats not only of all things that are, or can be, but
makes Creatures of her own, as Centaures, Satyrs, Fairies, etc. makes persons
and actions of her own, as in Fables and Romances, makes Beasts, Trees, Waters,
and other irrational and insensible things to act above the possibility of
their natures, as to understand and speak, nay makes what Gods it pleases too
without Idolatry, and varies all these into innumerable Systemes, or Worlds of
Invention.

1. That is, The subject of Poetry is all Past, Future and Present Times; and
for the Past* it makes what choice it pleases out of the wrack of Time of
things that it will save from Oblivion.

2. According to the vulgar (but false) opinion of the Influence of the Stars
over men's actions and Fortunes. There is no difficulty, I think, in the
Metaphor of making a year to come like an Egg that is not yet hatched, but a
brooding.

3. The thin Film with which an Infant is covered in the womb, so called,
because it follows the Child. In Latin Secundae, as in the 9. Epistle of
Seneca, where he says most admirably. Sed ut ex barb^ capillos detonsos
negligimus, it^ divinus ille animus ^gressurus ho^ine^ quo receptaculum suum
referatur, ignis illud exurat, an ferae distrabant, an terra c^nteg^t non (...)
ad se pertinere judicat quam Secund as ad editum infantem.

1. A Snake with the Tail in the Mouth of it, was the ancient Hieroglyphique of
the year.

2. Because the course of the Sun seems to consume Time, as the Beams of it do
Ice.

3. There are two sorts of Eternity; from the Present backwards to Eternity,
and from the Present forwards, called by the Schoolmen Aeternitas a part ante,
and Aeternitas a part post. These two make up the whole Circle of Eternity,
which the Present Time curs like a Diameter, but Poetry makes it extend to all
Eternity to come, which is the Half-Circle.

To Mr. Hobs.
1.
VAst Bodies of Philosophy
I often have seen, and read,
But all are Bodies Dead,
Or Bodies by Art fashioned;
I never yet the Living Soul could see,
But in thy Books and Thee.
It Is only God can know
Whether the fair Idea thou do show
Agree entirely with his own or no:
This I dare boldly tell,
Till so like Truth 'twill serve our turn as well.
Just, as in Nature thy Proportions be,
As full of Concord their Variety,
As firm the parts upon their Center rest,
And all so Solid are that they at least
As much as Nature, Emptiness detest.
2.
1 Long did the mighty Stagirite retain
The Universal Intellectual reign,
2 Saw his own Countries short-liv'ed Leopard slain;
3 The stronger Roman-Eagle did out-fly,
Oftener renewed his Age, and saw that Die.
4 Mecha it self, in spite of Mahumet possessed,
And chas'ed by a wild Deluge from the East,
His Monarchy new planted in the West.
But as in time each great imperial race,
Degenerates, and gives some new one place:
So did this noble Empire wast,
Sunk by degrees from glories past,
And in the Schoolmens hands it perished quite at last.
Then naught but Words it grew,
And those all Barb'arous too.
It perished, and it vanished there,
The Life and Soul breathed out, became but empty Air.
3.
The Fields which answered well the Ancients Plow,
Spent and out-worn return no Harvest now,
In barren Age wild and unglorious lie,
And boast of past Fertility,
The poor relief of Present Poverty.
Food and Fruit we now must want
Unless new Lands we plant.
We break up Tombs with Sacrilegious bands;
Old Rubbish we remove;
To walk in Ruins, like vain Ghosts, we love,
1 And with fond Divining Wands
We search among the Dead
For Treasures Buried,
Whilst still the Liberal Earth does hold
So many Virgin Mines of undiscover'ed Gold.
4.
1 The Baltique, Euxin, and the Caspian,
And slender-limb'ed Mediterranean,
Seem narrow Creeks to Thee, and only fit
For the poor wretched Fisher-Boats of Wit.
Thy nobler Vessel the vast Ocean tries,
And nothing sees but Seas and Skies,
Till unknown Regions it descries,
Thou great Columbus of the Golden Lands of new Philosophies.
Thy task was harder much then his,
For thy learned America is
Not only found out first by Thee,
And rudely left to Future Industry,
But thy Eloquence and thy Wit,
Has planted, peopled, built, and civilized it.
5.
I little thought before,
(Nor being my own self so poor
Could comprehend so vast a store)
1 That all the Wardrobe of rich Eloquence,
Could have afforded half enuff,
Of bright, of new, and lasting stuff,
To cloth the mighty Limbs of thy Gigantique Sense.
2 Thy solid Reason like the shield from heaven
To the Trojan Hero given,
Too strong to take a mark from any mortal dart,
Yet shines with Gold and Gems in every part,
And Wonders on it grave'd by the learned hand of Art,
A shield that gives delight
Even to the enemies sight,
Then when they are sure to lose the Gombate by it.
6.
Nor can the Snow which now cold Age does shed
Upon thy reverend Head,
Quench or allay the noble Fires within,
But all which thou have bin,
And all that Youth can be you are yet,
So fully still do Thou
Enjoy the Manhood, and the Bloom of Wit,
And all the Natural Heat, but not the Fever too.
So Contraries on Aetna's top conspire,
Here hoary Frosts, and by them breaks out Fire.
A secure peace the faithful Neighbors keep,
Th'emboldned Snow next to the Flame does sleep.
And if we weigh, like Thee,
Nature, and Causes, we shall see
That thus it needs must be,
To things Immortal Time can do no wrong,
1 And that which never is to Dye, forever must be Young.
NOTES.
2.
1. ARistotle; So called from the Town of Stagira, where he was born, situated
near the Bay of Strimon in Matedonia.

2. Outlasted the Grecian Empire, which in the Visions of Daniel, is
represented by a Leopard, with four wings upon the back, and four Heads, Chap.
7. v. 6.

3. Was received even beyond the bounds of the Roman Empire, and outlived it.

4. For Aristotle's philosophy was in great esteem among the Arabians or
Saracens, witness those many excellent Books upon him, or according to his
principles, written by Averroes, Avicenna, Avempace, and diverse others. In
spite of Mahumet: because his Law, being adapted to the barbarous humor of
those people he had first to deal withal, and aiming only at greatness of
Empire by the sword, forbids all the studies of Learning; which (nevertheless)
flourished admirably under the Saracen Monarchy, and continued so, till it was
extinguished with that Empire, by the Inundation of the Turks, and other
Nations. Mecha, is the Town in Arabia where Mahumet was born.

2.
1. Virgula Divina; or a Divining Wand is a two-forked branch of an Hazel-tree,
which is used for the finding out either of Veins, or hidden Treasures of Gold
or Silver; and being carried about, bends downwards (or rather is said to do
so) when it comes to the place where they lie.

4.
1. All the Navigation of the Ancients was in these Seas: they seldom ventured
into the Ocean; and when they did, did only Littus leger^, coast about near
the shore.

5.
1. The meaning is, that his Notions are so New, and so Great, that I did not
think it had been possible to have found out words to express them clearly; as
no Wardrobe can furnish Clothes to fit a Body taller and bigger then ever any
was before for the Clothes were made according to some Measure that then was.

2. See the excellent description of this Shield, made by Vulcan at the request
of Venus, for her Son Aeneas, at the end of the 8 Book of Aen. -- Et ^lypei non
enarrabile textum,
Whereon was graven all the Roman History; and withal, it was so strong, that
in the ^2 B. when Turnus struck with all his force (which was not small you may
be sure in a Poetical Hero) -- Corpore toto
Alie sublatum consurgit Turnus in ensem.
Insomuch, that it frighted all Aeneas his friends. (Exclament Troes trepidique
Latini)
Instead of piercing through these arms, Perfidus ensis
Frangitur, in medioque ardentem deserit ictu,
Ni fuga subsidio subeat.
Which is just the case of men's arguing against Solid, and that is, Divine
Reason; for when their argumentation is broken, they are forced to save
themselves by flight, that is, by evasions, and seeking still new ground; and
this Sword did Turnus good service upon the rest of the Trojans. Isq, diu, dum
terga dabant palantia Teucri
Suffecit, postquam arma Dei ad Vulcania ventum est.
Mortalis Mucr^ glaciet cum fusilis ictu
Dissiluit.
It broke like a piece of Ice, when it met with the Arms of Vulcan.

6.
1. The Description of the Neighborhood of Fire and Snow upon Aetna (but not
the application of it) is imitated out of Claud. L. 1. De Raptu Pros. Sed
quamvis nimio servens exuberet aestu,
Scit nivibus servare fidem, pariterque favilia
Durescit glacies, tanti secuta vaporia
Arcano defensa gelu, fumoque fideli
Lambit contiguit innoxia flamma pristinas:
Where, methinks, is somewhat of that which Seneca objects to Ovid. Nescivit
quod been cessit relinquere. When he met with a Phrase that pleased him, he
could not find in his heart to quit, or ever to have done with it. Tacinus has
the like expression of Mount Libanus, Pracipuum montium Libanum, mirum dictu,
tantos inter ardores opacum, fid^mque rivibus. Shady among such great heats,
and faithful to the Snow; which is too Poetical for the Prose even of a
Romance, much more of an Historian. Sil. Italic. of Aene. L. 14. Summo cana
jugo cohibet (mirabile dictu)
Vicinam flammis glaciem, aeternoque rigore
Ardentes horrent scopuli, stat vertice celsi
Collis hyems, calid^que nivem regit (...) favill^.
See likewise Seneca, Epist. 79.

Destiny.
Hoc quoque Fatale est sic ipsum expendere Fatum. Manil.
1.
1 STrange and unnatural! lets stay and see
This Pageant of a Prodigy.
Lo, of themselves th'enlivened Chesmen move,
Lo, the unbred, ill-organ'd Pieces prove,
As full of Art, and Industry,
Of Courage and of Policy,
As we our selves who think there is nothing Wise but We.
2 Here a proud Pawn I'admire
That still advancing higher
At top of all became
Another Thing and Name.
Here I Am amaz'ed at th'actions of a Knight,
That does bold wonders in the fight.
Here I the losing party blame
3 For those false Moves that break the Game,
That to their Grave the Bag, the conquered Pieces bring.
And above all, the ill Conduct of the Mated King.
2.
What ere these seem, what ere Philosophy
And Sense or Reason tell (said I)
These Things have Life, Election, Liberty;
It Is their own Wisdom molds their State,
Their Faults and Virtues make their Fate.
They do, they do (said I) but strait
Lo from my'enlightned Eyes the Mists and shadows fell
That hinder Spirits from being Visible.
And, lo, I saw two Angels played the Mate.
With Man, alas, no otherwise it proves,
An un seen Hand makes all their Moves.
And some are Great, and some are Small,
Some climb to good, some from good Fortune fall,
Some Wisemen, and some Fools we call,
1 Figures, alas, of Speech, Destiny plays us all.
3.
Me from the womb the Midwife Muse did take:
She cut my Navel, washed me, and mine Head
With her own Hands she Fashioned;
She did a Covenant with me make,
And circumcis ed my tender Soul, and thus she spoke,
Thou of my Church shall be,
Hate and renounce (said she)
Wealth, Honor, Pleasures, all the World for Me.
Thou neither great at Court, nor in the war,
Nor at the Exchange shall be, nor at the wrangling Bar.
Content thy self with the small Barren Praise,
That neglected Verse does raise.
She spoke, and all my years to come
Took their unlucky Doom.
Their several ways of Life let others choose,
Their several pleasures let them use,
But I was born for Love, and for a Muse.
4.
With Fate what boots it to contend*
Such I began, such am, and so must end.
The Star that did my Being frame,
Was but a Lambent Flame,
And some small Light it did dispense,
But neither Heat nor Influence.
No Matter, Cowley; let proud Fortune see,
That thou can her despise no less then she does Thee.
Let all her gifts the portion be
Of Folly, Lust, and Flattery,
Fraud, Extortion, Calumny,
Murder, Infidelity,
Rebellion and Hypocrisy.
Do Thou nor grieve nor blush to be,
As all th'inspired tuneful Men,
And all thy great Forefathers were from Homer down to Ben.
NOTES.
1.
1. THis Ode is written upon an extravagant suppositon of two Angels playing a
Game at Chess; which if they did, the spectators would have reason as much to
believe, that the pieces moved themselves, as we can have for thinking the same
of Mankind, when we see them exercise so many, and so different actions. It
was of old said by Plautus, Dii nos quasi Pilas homines habent. We are but
Tennis Balls for the Gods to play withal, which they strike away at last, and
still call for new ones: And S. Paul says, We are but the Clay in the hands of
the Potter.

2. For a Pawn being the least of the pieces, if it can get up to such a
degree, grows the greatest, and then has both another name, and other Motions
and Powers; for it becomes a Queen, which it could never have done, if it had
not been removed, and carried to such an height,

3. Manum injicientibus fatis (says Amm. Marcellin.) hebetantur sensus hominum
and obtund^^tur. When the Fates lay hold on a Man, when they arrest him, he is
confounded, and loses his wits. And Vell. Paterc. speaking of the defeat of
Quinctil. Varus. Praevalebant jam fata consiliis omnemque animi vim
perstri^xerant, quippe it^^ seres habet* ^ut qui fortunam m^taturus sit, etiam
consilia corrumpat. Fatality grew too strong for Humane Counsels and dazzled the
sight of his judgment, for so it also happens, that the designs and counsels
are corrupted of the Man that is to perish.

2.
1. (...). The Dice of the Gods neverfling out. Thucydid. says, with admirable
shortness and weight, (...): Which Sallust imitating, renders yet shorter; and
beats him, as Seneca says, at his own weapon. Ress^cundae mire vitiis sunt
obtentui. Faults are not visible through Prosperity: and therefore the old
Greek Verse is not much mistaken, that says, (...).
I had rather have a Drop of good fortune, then a whole Tun of Wisdom.

Brutus.
1.
EXcellent Brutus, of all humane race,
The best till Nature was improv'ed by Grace,
Till men above themselves Faith raised more
Then Reason above Beasts before.
Virtue was thy Life's Center, and from thence
Did silently and constantly dispense
The gentle vigorous Influence
To all the wide and fair Circumference,
And all the parts upon it leaned so easily,
Obeyed the mighty force so willingly
That none could discord or disorder see
In all their Contrariety.
Each had his motion natural and free,
And the Whole no more mov'ed then the whole world could be.
2.
From thy strict rule some think that thou did swerve
( Mistaken Honest men) in Caesar's blood;
What Mercy could the Tyrants Life deserve,
From him who killed Himself rather then serve?
The Heroic Exaltations of Good
Are so far from Understood.
We count it Vice, alas our Sight's so ill,
That things which swiftest Move seem to stand still,
We look not upon Virtue in her height,
On her supreme Idea, brave and bright
In the Original Light
But as her Beams reflected pass
Through our own Nature or ill Customs Glass.
And it is no wonder so,
If with dejected Ey
In standing Pools we seek the sky,
That Stars so high above should seem to us below.
3.
Can we stand by and see
Our Mother robb'ed, and bound, and ravished be,
Yet not to her assistance stir,
Pleased with the Strength and Beauty of the Ravisher?
Or shall we fear to kill him, if before
The cancelled Name of Friend he bore?
Ungrateful Brutus do they call?
Ungrateful Caesar who could Rome enthral!
And act more barbarous and unnatural
(In th'exact balance of true Virtue try'de)
Then his Successor Nero's Parricide!
There Is none but Brutus could deserve
That all men else should wish to serve,
And Caesar's usurpt place to him should proffer;
None can deserve't but he who would refuse the offer.
4.
Ill Fate assum'ed a Body thee t'affright,
And wrapped it self in the terrors of the night,
I Will meet thee at Philippi, said the Spright;
I Will meet thee there, said Thou,
With such a voice, and such a brow,
As put the trembling Ghost to sudden flight,
It vanished as a Tapers light
Goes out when Spirits appear in sight*
One would have thought to had heard the morning crow,
Or seen her well-appointed Star
Come marching up the Eastern Hill afar,
Nor durst it in Philippi's field appear,
But unseen attaqu'ed thee there.
Had it presum'ed in any shape thee to oppose,
Thou would have forc'ed it back upon thy foes:
Or slain't like Caesar, though it be
A Conqu'eror and a Monarch mightier far then He.
5.
What joy can humane things to us afford,
When we see perish thus by odd events,
Ill men, and wretched Accidents,
The best Cause and best Man that ever drew a Sword?
When we see
The false Octavius, and wild Antonie,
God-like Brutus, conquer Thee?
What can we say but thine own Tragic Word,
That Virtue, which had worshipped been by thee
As the most solid Good, and greatest Deity,
By this fatal proof became
An Idol only, and a Name,
Hold noble Brutus and restrain
The bold voice of thy generous Disdain:
These mighty Gulphs are yet
Too deep for all thy Judgment and thy Wit.
The Time's set forth already which shall quell
Stiff Reason, when it offers to Rebel.
Which these great Secrets shall unseal,
And new Philosophies reveal.
A few years more, so soon had thou not dy'ed,
Would have confounded Humane Virtues pride,
And showed thee a God crucifi'ed.
To Dr. Scarborough.
HOw long, alas, has our mad Nation been
Of Epidemick War the Tragic Scene,
Whilst Slaughter all the while
Seemed like its Sea, to embrace round the Isle,
With Tempests, and red waves, Noise, and Affright?
Albion no more, nor to be nam'ed from white!
What Province, or what City did it spare?
It, like a Plague, infected all the Air.
Sure the unpeopled Land
Would now untilled, desert, and naked stand,
Had Gods All-mighty hand
At the same time let loose Diseases rage
Their Civil Wars in Man to wage.
But Thou by heaven were sent
This Desolation to prevent,
A Medicine and a Counter-poyson to the Age,
Scarce could the Sword dispatch more to the Grave
Then Thou did save;
By wondrous Art, and by successful care
The Ruins of a Civil War thou do alone repair.
2.
1 The Inundations of all Liquid pain,
And Deluge Dropsy thou do'est drain.
Fevers so hot that one would say
Thou might as soon Hell-fires allay
(The Damned scarce more incurable then They)
2 Thou do so temper, that we find
Like Gold the Body but refined;
No unhealthful dross behind.
The subtle Ague, that for sureness sake
Takes his own times the assault to make,
And at each battery the whole Fort does shake,
When thy strong Guards, and works it spies,
Trembles for it self, and flies.
The cruel Stone that restless pain
That Is sometimes rolled away in vain,
3 But still, like Sisyphus his stone, returns again,
Thou break'st and meltest by learned Iuyces force,
(A greater work, though short the way appear,
4 Then Hannibals by Vinegar)
Oppressed Natures necessary course
It stops in vain, like Moses, Thou
S'trik'st but the Rock, and straight the Waters freely flow.
3.
The Indian Son of Lust, that foul Disease
Which did on this his newfound World, but lately sease;
Yet since a Tyranny has planted here,
As wide and Cruel as the Spaniard there,
Is so quite rooted out by Thee,
That thy Patients seem to be
Restor'ed not to Health only, but Virginity,
The Plague himself, that proud Imperial Ill
Which destroys Towns, and does whole Armies kill,
If thou but succor the besieged Heart,
Calls all his poisons forth, and does depart,
As if he feared no less thy Art,
Then Aarons Incense, or then Phineas dart.
What need there here repeated be by me
The vast and barbarous Lexicon
Of Man's Infirmity?
At thy strong charms it must be gone
Though a Disease, as well as Devil, were called Legion.
4.
From creeping Moss to soaring Cedar thou,
Do all the powers and several Portions know,
Which Father-Sun, and Mother-Earth below
On their green Infants here bestow.
Can all those Magic Virtues from them draw,
That keep Disease, and Death in aw.
Who whilst thy wondrous skill in Plants they see,
Fear lest the Tree of Life should be found out by Thee.
And Thy well-travell'd knowledge too does give
No less account of the Empire Sensitive,
Chiefly of Man, whose Body is
That active Souls Metropolis.
1 As the great Artist* in his Sphere of Glass
Saw the whole Scene of Heav'enly Motions pass,
So thou know all so well that is done within,
As if some living Crystal Man thou would seen.
5.
Nor does this Science make thy Crown alone,
1 But whole Apollo is thine own.
His gentler Arts, belov'ed in vain by Me,
Are wedded and enjoyed by Thee.
You Are by this noble Mixture free
From the Physicians frequent Malady,
Fantastic Incivilitie,
There are who all their Patients chagrin have,
As if they took each morn worse potions then they gave.
And this great race of Learning thou have run,
Ere that of Life be half yet done.
Thou see thy self still fresh and strong,
And like to enjoy thy Conquests long.
2 The first fam'ed Aphorism thy great Master spoke,
Did he live now he would revoke,
And better things of Man report;
For thou do'est make Life long, and Art but short.
6.
Ah, learned friend, it grieves me, when I think*
That Thou with all thy Art must die
As certainly as I.
1 And all thy noble Reparations sink
Into the sure-wrought Mine of treacherous Mortality,
Like Archimedes, honorably in vain,
2 Thou holdst out Towns that must at last be taken
And Thou thy self their great Defendor slain.
Let Us ev'en compound, and for the Present Live,
It Is all the Ready Money Fate can give,
Unbend sometimes thy restless care;
And let Thy Friends so happy be
To Enjoy at once their Health and Thee.
Some hours at least to thine own pleasures spare.
Since the whole stock may soon exhausted be,
Bestow't not all in Charity.
Let Nature, and let Art do what they please,
When all is done, Life is an Incurable Disease.
NOTES.
2.
1. GOwts, and such kind of Diseases proceeding from moisture, and affecting
one or some parts of the Body, whereas the Dropsy swells the whole. Inundation
signifies a less overflowing then Deluge.

2. Find, Refind: These kind of Rhymes the French delight in, and call Rich
Rhymes; but I do not allow of them in English, nor would use them at all in any
other but this free kind of Poetry, and here too very sparingly, hardly at all
without a third Rhyme to answer to both; as in the ninth slaffe of the Nemeaan
Ode, Delight, Light, Affright. In the third staff to Mr. Hobs, Ly, Fertility,
Poetry. They are very frequent in Chaucer, and our old Poets, but that is not
good authority for us now. There can be no Music with only one Note.

3. The Fable of Sisiphus is so known, that it deserves not to be repeated. He
was in his life a most famous Cozener and Robber. Ovid. Metam. 13. Quid
sanguine cretus
Sisiphio, furtis ac fraud simillimus illi?
For which he was slain by Theseus, and condemned in Hell to thrust eternally,
a great rolling stone up and hill, which still fell down again upon him,
alluding perhaps to the ill success of all his subtilties and wicked
enterprises, in which he labored incessantly to no purpose.

4. Hannibal not being able to march with his Army over some Rocks in his
passage on the Alps, made fires upon them, and when the stone was very hot,
poured a great quantity of Vinegar upon it, by which it being softened and
putrified, the Soldiers by that means were enabled to cut a way through it.
See Livy the I. Book of the 3. Decade. Iuven. Et montem rupit aceto.


4.
1. Archimedes: of which Sphere see Claudines Epigram: The like Sphere of Glass
one of the Kings of Persia is said to have had, and sitting in the middle of
it, as upon the Earth, to have seen round about him all the Revolutions and
Motions of the heavenly Bodies.

5.
1. For Apollo is not only the God of Physic, but of Poetry, and all kind of
Florid Letters.

2. The first Aphorism in Hippocrates, Ars Longa, vita brevis. Known to all men.

6.
1. For whilst we are repairing the outward seeming Breaches, Nature is
undermining the very foundations of life, and draining the Radical M^isture,
which is the Well that the Town lives by.

2. The great City of Syracuse (which Tully calls in his fourth against Verres,
Vrbem omnium pulcherrimam atque ornatissimam) sustained a Siege of three years
against Marcellus and the Roman Forces, almost only by the art and industry of
the wonderful Mathematician Archimedes; but at last, by the treason of some
Commanders, it was entered and taken by the Romans, and in the confusion of the
Sack, Archimedes, the honorable Defendor of it so long, being found in his
study drawing Mathematical Lines for the making of some new Engines to preserve
the Town, was slain by a common Soldier, who knew him not; for there had been
particular order given by the Roman General to save him. See this at large in
Plut. the life of Marcellus and Livy 5 B. of the 3. Dec.

Life and Fame.
1.
1 OH Life, thou Nothings younger Brother!
So like, that one might take One for the other!
2 What Is Some Body, or No Body?
3 In all the Cobwebs of the Schoolmens trade,
We no such nice Distinction woven see,
As it is To be, or Not to Be.
4 Dream of a Shadow! a Reflection made
From the false glories of the gay reflected Bow,
Is a more solid thing then Thou.
5 Vain weak-built Isthmus, which do proudly rise
Up betwixt two Eternities;
Yet can nor Wave nor Wind sustain,
But broken and orewhelm'd the endless Oceans meet again.
2.
1 And with what rare Inventions do we strive,
Our selves then to survive?
Wise, subtle Arts, and such as well befit
2 That Nothing Man's no Wit.
3 Some with vast costly Tombs would purchase it,
And by the proofs of Death pretend to Live.
4 Here lies the Great -- False Marble, where?
Nothing but small and sordid Dust lies there.
Some build enormous Mountain Palaces,
The Fools and Architects to please.
A lasting Life in well-hew'en Stone they rear,
1 So he who on the Egyptian shore,
Was slain so many hundred years before,
Lives still (Oh Life most happy and most dear!
2 Oh Life that Epicures envy to hear!)
Lives in the dropping Ruins of his Amphitheater.
3.
1 His Father in Law an higher place does claim
2 In the Seraphique Entity of Fame.
He since that Toy his Death,
Does fill all Mouths, and breathes in all men's Breath.
It Is true, the two Immortal Syllables remain,
But, Oh ye learned men, explain,
What Essence, what Existence this,
What Substance, what Subsistence, what Hypostasis
In Six poor Letters is?
In those alone does the Great Caesar live,
It Is all the Conquered World could give.
We Poets madder yet then all,
With a refin'ed Fantastic Vanity,
Think we not only Have, but Give Eternity.
Fain would I see that Prodigal,
Who his Tomorrow would bestow,
For all old Homers Life ere since he Dy'ed till now.
NOTES.
1.
1. BEcause Nothing preceded it, as Privation does all Being; which perhaps is
the sense of the Distinction of Days in the story of the Creation, Night
signifying the Privation, and Day, the subsequent Being, from whence the
Evening is placed first, Genesis 1. 5. And the Evening and the Morning were the
first day.

2. (...). Pindar, Quid est Aliquis, aut quid est Neme? Somnium Vmbrae*Homo est.

3. The Distinctions of the Schoolmen may be likened to Cobwebs (I mean many of
them. for some are better woven) either because of the too much fineness of the
work which makes it slight, and able to catch only little Creatures; or
because they take not the materials from Nature, but spin it out of Themselves.

4. The Rainbow is in it self of No Color; those that appear are but
Reflections of the Suns light received differently, Mill trahit varios adverso
Sole Colores.
As is evident by artificial Rainbows; And yet this shadow, this almost Nothing
makes sometimes another Rainbow (but not so distinct or beautiful) by
Reflection.

5. Isthmus is a neck of Land that divides a Peninsula from the Continent, and
is betwixt two Seas, (...). In which manner this narrow passage of Life divides
the Past Time from the Future, and is at last swallowed up into Eternity.

2.
1. Pompey the Great.

2. An Irony; that is, Oh Life which Epicures laugh at and contemn.

3.
1. Caesar, whose Daughter Iulia was married to Pompey; an Alliance fatal to
the Commonwealth; which as Tully says, ought never to have been made, or never
ended.

2. Supernatural, Intellectual, Unintelligible Being.

The Ecstasy.
1.
I Leave Mortality, and things below;
I have no time in Complements to waste,
Farewell to'ye all in haste,
For I am called to go.
A Whirlwind bears up my dull Feet,
Th'officious Clouds beneath them meet.
And (Lo!) I mount, and (Lo!)
How small the biggest Parts of Earths proud Tittle show!
2.
Where shall I find the noble British Land?
Lo, I at last a Northern Spec epsy,
Which in the Sea does lie,
And seems a Grain of the Sand!
For this will any sin, or Bleed?
Of Civil Wars is this the Meed?
And is it this, alas, which we
(Oh Irony of Words!) we call Great Britainie*
3.
I pass by th'arched Magazins, which hold
The Eternal stores of Frost, and Rain, and Snow;
Dry, and secure I go,
Nor shake with Fear, or Cold.
Without affright or wonder
I meet Clouds charged with Thunder,
And Lightnings in my way
Like harmless Lambent Fires about my Temples play.
4.
Now into'a gentle Sea of rolling Flame
I plunge my' ascents, and still mount higher there,
As Flames mount up through air.
So perfect, yet so tame,
So great, so pure, so bright a fire
Was that unfortunate desire,
My faithful Breast did cover,
Then, when I was of late a wretched Mortal Lover.
5.
Through several Orbs which one fair Planet bear,
Where I behold distinctly as I pass
The Hints of Galilaeos Glass,
I touch at last the spangled Sphaere.
Here all th'extended Sky
Is but one Galaxie,
It Is all so bright and gay,
And the joint Eyes of Night make up a perfect Day.
6.
Where am I now? Angels and God is here;
An unexhausted Ocean of delight
Swallows my senses quite,
And drowns all What, or How, or Where.
Not Paul, who first did thither pass,
And this great Worlds Columbus was,
The tyrannous pleasure could express.
Oh it is too much for Man! but let it nere be less.
7.
The mighty' Elijah mounted so on high,
That second Man, who leapt the Ditch where all
The rest of Mankind fall,
And went not downwards to the sky.
With much of pomp and show
(As Conquering Kings in Triumph go)
Did he to Heav'en approach,
And wondrous was his Way, and wondrous was his Coach.
8.
'Twas gaudy all, and rich in every part,
Of Essences of Gems, and Spirit of Gold
Was its substantial mold;
Drawn forth by Chymique Angels art.
Here with Moon-beams 'twas silvered bright,
There double- gilt with the Suns light
And mystique Shapes cut round in it,
Figures that did transcend a Vulgar Angels wit.
9.
The Horses were of tempered Lightning made,
Of all that in Heav'ens beauteous Pastures feed,
The noblest, sprightfulst breed,
And flaming Mains their Necks arrayed.
They all were shod with Diamond,
Not such as here are found,
But such light solid ones as shine
On the Transparent Rocks of the Heaven Chrystalline.
10.
Thus mounted the great Prophet to the skies;
Astonished Men who often had seen Stars fall,
Or that which so they call,
Wondered from hence to see one rise.
The soft Clouds melted him a way,
The Snow and Frosts which in it lay
A while the sacred footsteps bore,
The Wheels and Horses Hoofs hizz d as they past them ore.
11.
He past by the Moon, and Planets, and did fright
All the Worlds there which at this Meteor gaz'ed,
And their Astrologers amazed
With th'unexampled sight.
But where he stopped will nere be known,
Till Phoenix Nature aged grown
To'a better Being do aspire,
And mount herself, like Him, to' Eternity in Fire.
To the New Year.
1.
1 GReat Ianus, who do sure my Mistress view
With all thine eyes, yet think them all too few:
If thy Fore-face do see
No better things prepar'ed for me,
Then did thy Face behind,
If still her Breast must shut against me be
2 (For it is not Peace that Temples Gate does bind)
Oh let my Life, if thou so many deaths a coming find,
With thine old year its voyage take
Born down, that stream of Time which no return can make.
2.
Alas, what need I thus to pray?
The Old avaritious year
Whether I would or no, will bear
At least a part of Me away.
His well-horst Troops, the Months* and Days, and Hours,
Though never any where they stay,
Make in their passage all their pray.
The Months, Days, Hours that march in the Rear can find
Naught of Value left behind.
All the good Wine of Life our drunken youth devours;
Sowreness and Lees, which to the bottom sink,
Remain for latter years to Drink.
Until some one offended with the taste
The Vessel breaks, and out the wretched Relics run at last.
3.
If then, young year, thou needs must come,
(For in Times fruitful womb
The Birth beyond his Time can never tarry,
Nor never can miscarry)
Choose thy Attendants well; for it is not Thee
We fear, but it is thy Company,
Let neither Loss of Friends, or Fame, or Liberty,
Nor pining Sickness, nor tormenting Pain,
Nor Sadness, nor uncleanly Poverty,
Be seen among thy Train,
Nor let thy Livery be
Either black Sin, or gaudy vanity;
Nay, if thou lov'est me, gentle Year,
Let not so much as Love be there:
Vain fruitless Love, I mean; for, gentle Year,
Although I fear,
There Is of this Caution little need,
Yet, gentle Year, take heed
How thou do make
Such a Mistake.
Such Love I mean alone
As by thy cruel Predecessors has been shown,
For though I'have too much cause to doubt it,
I fain would try for once if Life can Live without it.
4.
Into the Future Times why do we pry,
And seek to Antidate our Misery?
Like Jealous men why are we longing still
To See the thing which only seeing makes an Ill?
It Is well the Face is veiled; for 'twere a Sight*
That would even Happiest men affright,
And something still they would spy that would destroy
The past and Present Joy
In whatsoever Character;
The Book of Fate is writ,
It Is well we understand not it,
We should grow Mad with little Learning there.
Upon the Brink of every Ill we did Foresee,
Undecently and foolishlie
We should stand shivering, and but slowly venture
The Fatal Flood to enter,
Since willing, or unwilling we must do it,
They feel least cold and pain who plunge at once into it.
NOTES:
1.
1. IAnus was the God to whom the Year was dedicated, and therefore it began
with his Festival; and the first Month was denominated from him; for which
cause he was represented with two Faces, to show that he looked both Backward
upon the time past, and Forward upon the time to come; and sometimes with four
Faces, to signify (perhaps, for I know other Reasons are given) the four
Seasons of the year, Annorum niditique sator pulcherrime Mundi,
Publica quem primum vota prec^sque canunt. Mart.


2. This alludes to that most notorious custom of Shutting up Ianus his Temple
in time of an universal peace; as was thrice done from Numa to Augustus his
reign: and when any War began it was opened again with great Ceremony by the
chief Magistrate; from which opening and shutting of his Temple gates, Ianus is
called Clu^ius and Patulcius, and esteemed Deus belli ac pacis arbiter.

Life.
Nascentes Morimur* Manil.
1 VVE're ill by these Grammarians used;
We are abused by Words, grossly abused;
From the Maternal Tomb,
To the Graves fruitful Womb,
We call here Life; but Life's a name
That nothing here can truly claim:
This wretched Inn, where we scarce stay to bait,
We call our Dewlling Place;
We call one Step a Race:
But Angels in their full enlightened state,
Angels who Live, and know what it is to Be,
2 Who all the nonsense of our Language see,
Who speak Things, and our Words, their ill-drawn Pictures scorn,
When we by'a foolish Figure say,
3 Behold an old man Dead! then they
Speak properly, and cry, Behold a man-child born.
2.
My Eyes are opened, and I see
Through the Transparent Fallacy:
Because we seem wisely to talk
Like men of business; and for business walk
From place to place,
And mighty voyages we take,
And mighty Iourneys seem to make,
1 Ore Sea and Land, the little Point that has no space.
Because we fight, and Battles gain;
Some Captives call, and say, the rest are slain.
Because we heap up yellow Earth, and so,
Rich, valiant, wise, and virtuous seem to grow;
Because we draw a long Nobility
From Hieroglyphick proofs of Heraldrie,
And impudently talk of a Posterity,
2 And, like Egyptian Chroniclers,
Who write of twenty thousand years,
With Marauedies make the' account,
3 That single Time might to a sum amount,
4 We grow at last by Custom to believe,
That really we Live.
Whilst all these Shadows that for Things we take,
Are but the empty Dreams within Deaths sleep we make.
3.
But these fantastique errors of our Dream,
Lead us to solid wrong*
We pray God* our Friends torments to prolong,
And wish uncharitably for them,
To be as long as Dying as Methusalem.
The ripened Soul longs from his pris*on to come,
But we would seal, and sow up, if we could, the Womb.
We seek to close and plaster up by Art
The cracks and breaches of the' extended Shell,
And in that narrow Cell
Would rudely force to dwell,
The noble vigorous Bird already winged to part.
NOTES:
1.
1. PLato in Timaeus makes this distinction: That which Is, but is not
generated; and That which is generated, but Is not, (...). This he took from
Trismegistus. whose Sentence of God was written in the Egyptian Temples, (...)*
I am all that Was, Is, or shall be. And he drew this from the very fountain
where he calls himself, Exodus 3. 12. (...), I am that I am, or, That which is.
This doctrine of Plato, that nothing truly Is but God, is approved by all the
Fathers. Simplicius explains it thus, That which has more degrees of Privation,
or Not-Being then of Being (which is the case of all Creatures) is not properly
said to Be; and again, That which is in a perpetual Fieri or Making, never is
quite Made; and therefore never properly Is. Now because this perperual Flux of
Being is not in Angels, or Scparated Spirits, I allow them the Title of Being
and Living, and carry not the Figure (for in truth it is no other) so far as
Plato.

2. That the Gods call things by other names then we do, was the fancy of
Homer, (...),
(...)
(...).
And the like in several other places, as also in other Authors, Athenaeus, l.
7. c. 9. Ovid. Metam. etc. and this is likewise drawn from Scripture; for
Isaiah (Chap. 40. v. 36.) makes it a Property of God, that he calls the Stars
by their Names.

3. So Euripid. (...)
(...).
Who knows whether to Live, be not to Die; and to Dye to Live?

2.
1. Isa. 40. 26. Behold the Nations are as the drop of a Bucket, and are
counted as the small Dust of the Balance, etc.

2. Because Heraldry consists in the Figures of Beasts, Stars, Flowers, and
such like, as the Hieroglyphics did of the ancient Egyptians.

3. An uncertain Number for a Certain. The Egyptian Kingdom, according to
Manethon, had 31 Dynasties before Alexanders time, 5355 years; others content
not themselves with so small a Number; for Diod. says, lib. 1. from Osyris to
Alexander, they reckon above ten thousand years; or as others will have it,
little less then 23 thousand. See the Egyptian Priests discourse to Solon in
Plato's Timaeus. But these vast accounts arose from the aequivocal term of a
year among them, which sometimes they made Solar, sometimes of Four, sometimes
of Three, nay, Two, or One Month. Xenoph. de Tempor. Aquin. Solin. c. 7. Plin.
l. 7. c. 11. Macrob. in Somn. Scipion. etc.

4. A Spanish Coin, one of the least that is.

The 34 Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah.
1.
1 AWake, and with attention hear,
Thou drowsy World, for it concerns thee near;
Awake, I say, and listen well,
To what from God, I, his loud Prophet, tell.
Bid both the Poles suppress their stormy noise,
And bid the roaring Sea contain his voice.
Be still thou Sea, be still thou Air and Earth,
2 Still, as old Chaos, before Motions birth,
A dreadful Host of Judgments is gone out;
In strength and number more
Then ere was raised by God before,
To scourge the Rebel World, and march it round about.
2.
1 I see the Sword of God brandisht above;
And from it streams a dismal ray;
2 I see the Scabbard cast away.
How red anon with Slaughter will it prove!
How will it sweat and reek in blood!
3 How will the Scarlet Glutton be oregorged with his food!
And devour all the mighty Feast!
Nothing soon but Bones will rest.
God does a solemn Sacrifice prepare;
4 But not of Oxen, nor of Rams,
Not of Kids, nor of their Dams,
Not of Heifers, nor of Lams.
The Altar all the Land, and all Men in it the Victims are,
Since wicked Men's more guilty blood to spare,
The Beasts so long have sacrificed bin,
Since Men their Birthright forfeit still by Sin,
5 It Is fit at last Beasts their Revenge should have,
And Sacrificed Men their better Brethren save.
3.
So will they fall, so will they flee;
Such will the Creatures wild distraction be,
When at the final Doom,
Nature and Time shall both be Slain,
Shall struggle with Deaths pangs in vain,
And the whole world their Funeral Pile become.
Scrowl of Heaven, which we,
1 Immortal as the Deity think,
2 With all the beauteous Characters that in it
With such deep Sense by Gods own Hand were writ,
Whose Eloquence though we understand not, we admire,
Shall crackle, and the parts together shrink
3 Like Parchment in a fire.
4 Th'exhausted Sun to the Moon no more shall lend;
But truly then headlong into the Sea descend.
The glittering Host, now in such fair array,
So proud, so well appointed, and so gay,
Like fearful Troops in some strong Ambush taken,
5 Shall some fly routed, and some fall slain,
6 Thick as ripe Fruit, or yellow Leaves in Autumn fall,
With such a violent Storm as blows down Tree and all.
4.
And Thou, O cursed Land,
Which wilt not see the Precipice where thou do stand,
Though thou standst just upon the brink;
Thou of this poisoned Bowl the bitter Dregs shall drink:
Thy Rivers and thy Lakes shall so
With humane blood oreflow.
That they shall fetch the slaughtered corpse away,
Which in the fields around unburied lay,
And rob the Beasts and Birds to give the Fish their prey.
The rotting corpse shall so infect the air;
Beget such Plagues, and putrid Venomes there,
That by thine own Dead shall be slain,
All thy few Living that remain.
1 As one who buys, Surveys a ground,
So the Destroying Angel measures it around.
So careful and so strict he is,
Lest any Nook or Corner he should miss.
He walks about the perishing Nation,
Ruin behind him stalks and empty Desolation.
5.
1 Then shall the Market and the Pleading-place
Be choakt with Brambles and oregrown with grass.
The Serpents through thy Streets shall roll,
And in thy lower rooms the Wolves shall howl,
2 And thy gilt Chambers lodge the Raven and the Owl,
And all the winged Ill-Omens of the air,
Though no new-Ills can be fore-boded there.
The Lion then shall to the Leopard say,
Brother Leopard come away;
Behold a Land which God has giv'en us in prey!
Behold a Land from whence we see
Mankind expulst, His and Our common Enemy!
3 The Brother Leopard shakes himself, and does not stay.
6.
2 The glutted Vulturs shall expect in vain
New Armies to be slain.
Shall find at last the business done,
Leave their consumed Quarters, and be gone.
3 Th'unburied Ghosts shall sadly moan,
The Satyrs laugh to hear them groan.
The Evil Spirits that delight
To dance and revel in the Mask of Night,
The Moon and Stars, their sole Spectators shall affright.
And if of lost Mankind
Ought happen to be left behind,
If any Relics but remain,
They in the Dens shall lurk, Beasts in the Palaces shall reign.
NOTES.
1:
1. COme near ye Nations to hear, Isa ch: 34. v. 1.
Terra and plenitudo ejus, and hearken ye people, let the Earth hear, and all
that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. 2. For the
Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all their
Armies; he has utterly destroyed them, he has delivered them to the slaughter.

The manner of the Prophets writing, especially of Isaiah, seems to me very
like that of Pindar; they pass from one thing to another with almost Invisible
connexions, and are full of words and expressions of the highest and boldest
flights of Poetry, as may be seen in this Chapter. Where there are as
extraordinary Figures as can be found in any Poet whatsoever; and the connection
is so difficult, that I am forced to add a little, and leave out a great deal
to make it seem Sense to us, who are not used to that elevated way of
expression. The Commentators differ, and some would have it to be a Prediction
of the destruction of Judea, as Hugo, Lyran, and others; the rest understand it
as a Prophecy of the Day of Judgment. The design of it to me seems to be
this, first to denounce great desolations and ruins to all Countries, and then
to do it more particularly to Iudaea, as which was to suffer a greater measure
of them then the rest of the world; as it has done, I think, much more then any
other Land under the Sun; and to illustrate these confusions by the similitude
of them to those of the last Day, though in the Text there be no Transition
from the subject to the similitude; for the old fashion of writing, was like
Disputing in Enthymemes, where half is left out to be supplied by the Hearer:
ours is like Syllogisms, where all that is meant is express.

2. For as soon as Motion began, it ceased to be Chaos, this being all
Confusion, but Natural Motion is regular: I think I have read it somewhere
called (...). The Scripture says, And darkness was upon the face of the earth,
and the spirit of God moved upon the waters. So that the first Motion, was that
of the Spirit of God upon Chaos, to which succeeded the Motion in Chaos. And
God said (that is, the Motion of the Spirit of God, for it is a Procession of
his will to an outward Effect) let there be light, and there was light (that
is, the first Motion of Chaos.)

2.
1. Ver. 5. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven, behold it shall come down
upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse to Judgment. 6. The sword of God
is filled with blood, it s made fat with fatness, and with the blood of Lambs,
and Goats, with the fat of the Kidneys of Rams; for the Lord has a Sacrifice in
Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the Land of Idumea. Quoniam inebriatus est in
coelo gladius meus, and sup. populum interfectiones meae ad judicium.
Incrassatus est adipe.

I have left out the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth Verses; in which, where
the Prophet says Unicorns and Bulls, I take that to be a Metaphor only of
Great Tyrants, and men of the mightiest power; the Horn signifying that in
Hebrew, and other Languages too; as Horace, Addet cornua pauperi, etc. And the
year of recompenses for the controversy of Sion, Annus retributionis judicii
Sion. This makes Vatabl. Montan. Sanchez, and diverse other interpret, Iudicium
Sionis, the Judgment which God shall exercise against the Idumaeans in revenge
of Sion; but I take it rather to be, This is the year when Sion shall be judged
for her Judgment; that is, for the condemnation and execution of her Messiah,
who likewise foretells the same things; as Isaiah, concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, and even in the same manner, part of the threatenings seeming to
belong particularly to Jerusalem, and part being only applicable to the Day of
Judgment. Observe this remarkable conformity in the 24 of Matthew.

2. As not intending to put it up again, or to be ever reconciled; in which
sense it was said, as I take it, to the great Duke of Guise, that he who draws
his sword against his Prince, should fling away the Scabbard.

3. For the Text says, it is made drunk with blood, and made fat with flesh.
Like the rich Glutton in the Gospel, who is described to be clothed with
Purple.

4. The Text seems to say quite contrary to this, It shall be made fat with
fatness, and with the blood of Lambs and Goats, and kidney of Rams, etc. But
the names of Beasts in that place must necessarily be understood, as put for
Men; all sorts of Men. Cornel. a Lap. says, that by Lambs are signified the
Common People; by Goats, the Captains and Princes; by Rams, the Magistrates.
But these two last interpretations of Goats and Rams, seem very slight and
forced; the meaning is, that all sorts of men shall be sacrificed to Gods
justice, as Lambs, Goats, and Rams were wont to be. It may be asked, Why Idumaea
and Bozra (the Metropolis of it) are here particularly mentioned? Is it not
with allusion to the Names? for Idumaea (or Edom) signifies Red, a Country
that shall be red with bloodshed; and Bozra signifies a Strong fortified Place.
So that in the 108. Psalm, v. 10. where we read, Who will bring me into the
Strong City; the Hebrew is, Who will bring me into Bozra? From which word too
by a Metathesis of the Letters, some derive Byrsa, the strong Castle of
Carthage, which was founded by the Phaenicians, and therefore it is more likely
the Castle should have a Phaenician (which Language is said to have been little
different from the Hebrew) then a Grecian name, to wit, from (...), an Hide,
because Dido is reported to have bought of Iarbas as much ground as could be
compast with an Oxes hide, which cut into very narrow thongs, took up the whole
space where she built the Castle. Virg. Mercatique solum facti de nomine Byrsam,
Taurino quantum possent circumdare tergo.
Wherefore under the name of Bozra, the Prophet threatens all strong Places,
and more especially of Iudaea, which God will make an Edom, or red, or bloody
Country.

5. Though Beasts were first created in time, yet because Man was first and
chiefly designed, and they only in order to him, the right of Primogeniture
belongs to him; and therefore all Beasts at first obeyed and feared him. We
need not be angry, or ashamed to have them called our Brethren; for they are
literally so, having the same Creator or Father; and the Scripture gives us a
much worse kindred; I have said to Corruption, thou art my Father; and to the
worm, thou art my mother and my sister. Job 17. v. 14.

3.
And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved,* and the heavens shall be
rolled together as a scroull, and all their Host shall fall down as the leaf
falls from the vine, and as a falling fig from the Fig Tree. * Et
complicabuntur sicut Liber Coeli, etc. D. Thomas Hug. and diverse others,
interpret this to be an Hyperbolical expression of the calamities of those
times; which shall be so great, that men shall think the world at an end, and
shall be so distracted, that the heavens shall seem to be rolled together, and
the stars to fall. But, methinks, it is more naturally taken for a real
description of the end of the world, but by way of a Similitude, to illustrate
the confusions that are foretold.

1. The vulgar opinion, and that of Aristotle, and most Philosophers, has
always been, that the Heavens are Immutable and Incorruptible, nay, even
Immaterial; in which, though experience it self of visible Mutations in them
(as: the production and extinction two years after of the New-star in
Cassiopaea (...) might sufficiently by natural reason convince them, yet some
men are so given up even to the most reprobate senses of Aristotle, that not so
much as the Divine Authority can draw them from it; as in this point Suarez,
and many others, are so far from the opinion of the Heavens being now
Corruptible and Mutable, that they will allow them to be changed only
Accidentally (as they call it) and not Substantially at the last Day. Of which
Maldon. upon S. Matthew. says well, That he had rather believe Christ who affirms
it, then Aristotle who denies it.

2. The Stars may well be termed Characters or Letters, where the Heavens are
called a Scroul, or Book, in which perhaps Men's fortunes, Gods Glory is
certainly written; and in this sense the Psalmist speaks, The heavens shall
declare his righteousness. Origin cites a Book of great authority in his days,
called Narratio Joseph, in which Jacob says to his Sons, Legi^ in tabulis coeli
quaecunque contingent vobis and filiis vestris.

3. The Text is, rolled up like a Scroul, or rather Book; for the ancient Books
were not like ours, divided into leaves; but made of sheets, of skins, or
parchment, and rolled upon a Cilinder, after the fashion of our Maps. So that
when they had read them, they rolled them up again, as God will the Heavens,
when he has done with them. But I thought that this comparison of Parchment
that shrivels up in the fire does more represent the violence of their
destruction, which is to be by burning.

4. He supplies now the Moon and Stars that shine by reflection from him, but
then shall want light for himself. In those days the Sun shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light. Mat. 24. Where I take Her to have an
Emphasis; even her own little Light: for I believe the Moon and Stars not to be
totally opaque and dark bodies.

Truly, is Emphatical; for according to the fables, whenever he sets, he
descends into the Sea, but now he really does so; that is, he will be mingled
with the Sea and Earth, and all other things that must then be dissolved: And
the Heathens had both this opinion of the end of the world, and fell almost
into the same expressions. As Lucan. Mistis Sidera sideribus concurrent, Ignea
pontum
Astra petent --
St. Matthew and Mark, And the stars of heaven shall fall; and here, Their host
shall fall down etc. Sen. ad Marc. Sidera sideribus incurrent, and omni
flagrante materia, uno igne, quicquid nunc ex disposito lucet, ardebit. And one
might cast up a pedantical heap of authorities to the same purpose.

5. It is, I hope, needless to admonish any tolerable Reader, that it was not
negligence or ignorance of Number, that produced this Stumbling Verse, no more
then the other before, And truly then headlong into the Sea descend. And
several others in my book of the like kind.

6. That of the wind is added to the Text here, but taken out of another just
like it in the Revelations, Chap. 6. v. 13. And the stars of heaven fell unto
the earth, even as a fig tree casts her untimely figs when she is shaken of a
mighty wind. And there follows too the similitude of the Scroll.

4.
1. Verse 11. And he shall stretch out upon it the Line of confusion, and the
Stones of Emptiness. The Latin very differently, Et extendetur super eam
mensura, ut redigatur ad nihil, and perpendiculum in desolationem. The Metaphor
is, that as a Carpenter draws a Line to mark exactly the space that he is to
build, so God does here, to mark that which he is to destroy.

Our Translation follows Vatabl. Extendet super eam regulam inanitatis, and
lapides vacuitatis. Which stones of emptiness may have two interpretations,
either making the Stones, Termini, that is Bound-stones of Desolation, as if he
should say, This is the land of Desolation, and I have set these bounds and
limits to circumscribe it. Or else he says, the Stones of Emptiness, is an
effect of Desolation; for when a ground is uncultivated and abandoned, it grows
stony. According to the vulgar Latin Translation it is very like another Text
of Isaiah, Chapter 28. v. 17. Judgment also will I lay to the Line, and
righteousness to the Plummet. Which is no more in plain language, then, I will
be exact in Judgment and Righteousness. There is a much harder Text with the
same Metaphor in 2 Samuel 8. Chapter 2. Verse. And he smote Moab, and measured them
with a Line, casting them down to the ground, even with two lines measured he
to put to Death, and with one full Line to keep alive; And so the Moabites
became David's servants, and brought gifts, Which some interpret, that he put
two parts of them to the sword, and saved the third, who became his servants.
And that he did this, not by a just account, or polling of them (for the number
was too great) but by measuring out the Land into three parts, and destroying
two of them, 2 King. 21. 13. I will stretch over Jerusalem the Line of Samaria,
and the Plummet of the House of Abab, and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth
a dish wiping and turning it upside down. The Latin, Pondus domus Achab: and
instead of a dish* uses a more noble Metaphor of a Table Book. Delebo Jerusalem
sicut deleri solent Tabula, and delens vertam. and ducam crebrius stilum super
faciem ejus.

5.
1. Verse 11. The Cormorant and the Bittern shall possess it, the Owl and the
Raven shall dwell in it. V. 15. And thorns shall come up in her Palaces, and
Brambles in the fortresses thereof; and it shall be an habitation for Dragons,
and a Court for Owls.

Et possidebunt illam Onocrotalus and Ericius, Ibis and Corvus habitabunt in
ea, V. 13. Et orientur in domibus ejus spinae and urticae, and paliurus in
munitionibus ejus, and erit cubile Draconum and pascua struthionum. The
Cormorant is called Onocrotalus, from (...) an Ass, and (...), Noise* because
it makes a noise like the braying of an Ass. I know not whether we are in the
right, who translate it a Bittern, or the Latin, which calls it Ericius, an
Hedgehog. Ericius among the Classick Authors, signifies an Instrument of war,
made with iron pikes, like Palissadees sticking out of it. Some think a
Percullis, from the similitude of which, Echinus was in the time of corrupted
Latin, called Ericius. Ibis is a Bird like a Stork most known in Egypt, and
worshipped there, because it kills multitudes of Serpents, which would else
infest the Country. We erroneously translate it Owl, for mention of Owls is
made afterward. I do nor use the same names of Beasts and Birds exactly which
the Prophet does; nor is that material; for the meaning only is, that the Land
shall be possessed by Beasts instead of Men.

2. Of Birds from which the Ancients took auguries: Some were called Oscines,
from whose voices they drew their divinations, and other Praepetes, from their
manner of flight, Crows, Swallows, Kites, Owls, and such like, were counted
inauspicious Birds; and others (as Vulturs) in some cases portended good, and
in others evil.

3. Though the Lion might call any Beast Brother, yet it may more properly the
Leopard; for the Leopard is begot of a Lyoness, and a he- Panther, which is
called Pardus.

6.
The wild beasts of the Desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the
Islands, and the Satyr shall cry to his fellow; the Skrichowl shall also rest
there, and find for her self a place of rest. V. 15. There shall the great Owl
make her nest, and lay, and nest, and gather under her shadow; There shall the
Vulturs also be gathered every one with her Mate. V. 14. Et occurrent Daemonia
Onocentauris, and Pilosus clamabit alter ad alterum; Ibi cubavit Lamia, and
invenit sibi requiem. V. 15. Ibi habuit foveam Ericius, and enutrivit catulos,
and circumfodit, and fovit in umbra ejus; illuc congregari sunt Milvi, alter ad
alterum.

Here is a great difference between the two Translations; and it appears,
methinks, that none perfectly understood the Hebrew, neither in this nor many
other places. From whence they give the fabulous Greek names, as those of
Satyrs, Lamiae, Onocentaurs, Unicorns, Dragons, Orion, Pleiades, and the like,
to several Hebrew words, whose true signification was lost; which is no wonder,
for even in the Greek and Latin we have much ado to translate all the names of
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, and Herbs, etc. and I am afraid we are often mistaken in
them. So the Septuag. in Job 42. v. 14. translate the name of Jobs third
Daughter, The Horn of Amalthaea, alluding to a Grecian fable born long after
Jobs time. (...), which the Latin Cornu stibii, the Horn of Antimony, perhaps
because Antimony is accounted by some the Mother of Metals. We (I know not why)
name her Kerenhappuch, not according to the signification, but the word of the
Hebrew. It seems by the Greek, that Jobs three Daughters names signified
Sweetness; Light, or Beauty; Plenty, or Fruitfulness. So in the 15 of Judith it
is translated; Nec filii Titan percusserunt eum: when the meaning is, They were
not the sons of Giants that slew him, but, etc. Not great strong men, but a
weak woman.

2. The Latin says Milvi: which Translation is best I know not, nor does it
import. The Vultures from their devouring of dead Bodies, were called (...),
Living Tombs. They are said to assemble themselves together by a natural
Divinatory Instinct in the places where any great slaughters are to be made;
which Tradition arises, because they use to follow Armies; not as foreseeing
the day of Battle, but because even in the marches of Armies there are always a
great many men, horses, and other beasts, that fall here and there by the way.
Job has the like description of the Eagle, Chapter 39. 1. 30. And where the slain
are, there is she.

3. The English mentions only Satyrs, the Latin besides that (for Pilosi, are
the same) Daemonia, and Lamiae, Hobgoblings. The Hebrew is said to signify
Nocturnum spectrum, An appearance of something in the Night. From whence the
Chald. Transl^ it An Owl, the English a Skrichowl. Whether there be any such
creatures in Nature as Satyrs, etc. I will not determine. S. Antony seeking S.
Paul the Hermit is reported by Athanasius to have met with a Monster half Man,
and Beast, which he drove away with the sign of the Cross; and S. Hierom in the
Life of the Hermit, says that such a kind of Monster was in his time brought
to Alexandria. Pliny testifies, that he himself saw an Hippocentaur, the body
of which was preserved in honey, and brought to (...) but I am sorry he does
not describe the form of it, Lib. 7. Cap. 3.

The Plagues of Egypt.
1.
IS this thy Brav'ery Man, is this thy Pride?
Rebel to God, and Slave to all beside!
Captiv'ed by every thing! and only Free
To fly from thine own Liberty!
All Creatures the Creator said Were Thine;
No Creature but might since, say, Man is Mine!
In black Egyptian Slavery we lie;
And sweat and toil in the vile Drudgerie
Of Tyrant Sin;
To which we Trophies raise, and wear out all our Breath,
In building up the Monuments of Death;
We, the choice Race, to God and Angels Kin!
In vain the Prophets and Apostles come
To call us home,
Home to the promis'ed Canaan above,
Which does with nourishing Milk, and pleasant Honey flow;
And ev'en i'th'way to which we should be fed
With Angels tasteful Bread:
But, we, alas, the Fleshpots love,
We love the very Leeks and sordid roots below.
2.
In vain we Judgments feel, and Wonders see;
In vain did God to descend hither da'ine,
He was his own Ambassador in vain,
Our Moses and our Guide himself to be.
We will not let our selves to go,
And with worse hardened hearts do our own Pharaohs grow;
Ah, lest at last we perish so!
Think, stubborn Man, think of the Egyptian Prince,
(Hard of Belief and Will, but not so hard as Thou)
Think with what dreadful proofs God did convince
The feeble arguments that humane pow'e^ could show;
Think what Plagues attend on Thee.
Who Moses God do now refuse, more often then Moses He.
3.
If from some God you come (said the proud King)
1 With half a smile and half a Frovvn;
2 (But what God can to Egypt be unknown?)
3 What Sign, what Powers, what Credence do you bring?
Behold his Seal, behold his Hand,
Cries Moses, and casts down the Almighty Wand.
The Almighty Wand scarce touched the Earth,
When with an undiscerned birth
4 The Almighty Wand a Serpent grew
And his long half in painted folds behind him drew.
Upwards his threatening Tail he threw;
Upwards he cast his threatening Head,
He gap'ed and hist aloud;
With flaming Eyes surveyed the trembling crowd,
And like a Basilisk almost looked The Assembly dead;
5 Swift fled the Amazed King, the Guards before him fled.
4.
1 Iannes and Iambres stop their flight,
And with proud words allayed th'affright.
The God of Slaves (said they) how can he be
More powerful then their Masters Deity*
And down they cast their Rods,
2 And mutter'ed secret sounds that charm the servile Gods,
The evil Spirits their charms obey*
And in a subtle cloud they snatch the Rods away,
3 And Serpents in their place the airy Iuglers lay.
Serpents in Egypts monstrous land,
Were never not at hand,
And ready all at the Old Serpents first command.
And they too gap'ed, and they too hist,
And they their threatening Tails did twist,
But strait on both the Hebrew-Serpent flew*
Broke both their active Backs, and both it slew,
And both almost at once devour'ed,
So much was over-powere'd
By Gods miraculous Creation
His Servant Natures slightly-wrought, and feeble Generation.
5.
1 On the fame'd bank the Prophets stood,
Touched with their Rod, and wounded all the Flood;
Flood now no more, but a long Vein of putrid Blood*
The helpless Fish were found
In their strange Current drowned,
The Herbs and Trees washed by the mortal Tide
About it blushed and dye'd.
The Amazed Crocodiles made haste to ground;
From their vast trunks the dropping gore they spied,
Thought it their Own, and dreadfully aloud they cried.
2 Nor all thy Priests, nor Thou
Oh King, could ever show
From whence thy wandering Nile begins his course;
Of this new Nile thou see the sacred Sourse;
And as thy Land that does oreflow,
Take heed lest this do so.
3 What Plague more just could on thy Waters fall?
The Hebrew Infants Murder stains them all.
The kind, instructing Punishment enjoy;
Whom the Red River cannot Mend, the Red Sea shall Destroy.
6.
The River yet gave one Instruction more,
1 And from the rotting Fish and unconcocted Gore,
Which was but Water just before,
A loathsome Host was quickly made,
That scale'd the Banks, and with loud noise did all the Country invade.
As Nilus when he quits his sacred Bed
2 (But like a Friend he visits all the Land
With welcome presents in his hand)
So did this Living Tide the Fields orespread.
In vain th'alarmed Country tries
To kill their noisome Enemies,
From th'unexhausted Sourse still new Recruits arise.
Nor does the Earth these greedy Troops suffice,
The Towns and Houses they posses,
The Temples and the Palaces,
Nor Pharaoh, nor his Gods they fear;
Both their importune croakings hear.
Unsatiate yet they mount up higher,
Where never Sun-born Frog durst to aspire;
And in the silken Beds their slimy Members place;
A Luxury unknown before to all the Watery Race.
7.
The Water thus her Wonders did produce;
But both were to no use.
As yet the Sorcerers mimick power serv'ed for excuse.
Try what the Earth will do (said God) and, Lo?
They stroke the Earth a fertile blow.
And all the Dust did strait to stir begin;
One would have thought some sudden Wind t'had bin;
But, Lo, 'twas nimble Life was got within!
And all the little Springs did move,
And every Dust did an arm'ed Vermin prove,
Of an unknown and new-created kind,
Such as the Magick-Gods could neither make nor find.
The wretched shameful Foe allow'ed no rest
Either to Man or Beast.
Not Pharaoh from th'unquiet Plague could be,
With all his change of Rayments free;
The Devils themselves confessed
This was Gods Hand; and 'twas but just
1 To punish thus man's pride, to punish Dust with Dust.
8.
Lo the third Element does his Plagues prepare,
And swarming Clouds of Insects fill the Air.
With sullen noise they take their flight,
And march in Bodies infinite;
In vain it is Day above, it is still beneath them Night.
1 Of harmful Flies the Nations numberless,
Compos'ed this mighty Armies spacious boast;
Of different Manners, different Languages;
And different Habits too they wore,
And different Arms they bore.
And some, like Scythians, liv'ed on Blood,
And Some on Green, and some on Flowery Food,
2 And Accaron, the Airy Prince, led on this various Host.
Houses secure not Men, the populous ill
Did all the Houses fill.
The Country, all around,
3 Did with the cries of tortured Cattle sound;
About the fields enrag'ed they flew,
And wished the Plague that was t'ensue.
9.
1 From poisonous Stars a mortal Influence came
(The mingled Malice of their Flame)
A skilful Angel did th'Ingredients take,
And with just hands the sad Composure make,
And over all the Land did the full viol shake.
Thirst, Giddiness, Faintness, and putrid Heats,
And pining Pains, and Shivering Sweats,
On all the Cattle, all the Beasts did fall;
With deform'ed Death the Countrey's covered all.
The laboring Ox drops down before the Plow;
The crowned Victims to the Altar led
Sink, and prevent the lifted blow:
The generous Horse from the full Manger turns his Head;
Does his Lov'ed Floods and Pastures scorn,
Hates the shrill Trumpet and the Horn,
Nor can his lifeless Nostril please,
With the once-ravishing smell of all his dappled Mistresses.
The starving Sheep refuse to feed,
They bleat their innocent Souls out into air;
The faithful Dogs lie gasping by them there;
Th'astonisht Shepherd weeps, and breaks his tuneful Reed.
10.
Thus did the Beasts for Man's Rebellion die,
God did on Man a Gentler Medicine try,
And a Disease for Physic did apply.
Warm ashes from the Furnace Moses took;
The Sorcerers did with wonder on him look;
And smil'ed at th'unaccustom'ed Spell
1 Which no Egyptian Rituals tell.
He flings the pregnant Ashes through the Air,
And speaks a mighty Prayer,
Both which the Ministering Winds around all Egypt bear.
As gentle western Blasts with downy wings
Hatching the tender Springs
To the'unborn Buds with vital whispers say,
Ye living Buds why do ye stay?
The passionate Buds break through the Bark their way.
So wheresoere this tainted Wind but blew,
Swelling Pains and Ulcers grew;
It from the body call'ed all sleeping Poisons out,
And to them added new;
2 A noisome Spring of Sores, as thick as Leaves did sprout.
11.
Heaven it self is angry next;
Woe to Man, when Heav'en is vexed.
With sullen brow it frowned,
And murmur'ed first in an imperfect sound.
Till Moses lifting up his hand,
Waves the expected Signal of his Wand,
And all the full-charg'ed clouds in ranged Squadrons move,
And fill the spacious Plains above.
Through which the rolling Thunder first does play,
And opens wide the Tempests noisy way.
And straight a stony shower
Of monstrous Hail does downwards power,
Such as never Winter yet brought forth
From all her stormy Magazins of the North.
It all the Beasts and Men abroad did slay,
1 Ore the defaced corpse, like Monuments, lay,
The houses and strong-body'ed Trees it broke,
Nor asked aid from the Thunders stroke.
The Thunder but for Terror through it flew,
2 The Hail alone the work could do.
The dismal Lightnings all around,
Some flying through the Air, some running on the ground,
Some swimming ore the waters face,
Filled with bright Horror every place.
One would have thought their dreadful Day to have seen,
The very Hail, and Rain it self had kindled been.
12.
1 The Infant Corn, which yet did scarce appear,
Escap'ed this general Massacer
Of every thing that grew,
And the well-stored Egyptian year
Began to cloth her Fields and Trees anew.
2 When, Lo, a scortching wind from the burnt Countries blew,
And endless Legions with it drew
3 Of greedy Locusts, who where ere
With sounding wings they flew,
Left all the Earth depopulate and bare,
As if Winter it self had marched by there.
What ere the Sun and Nile
Gave with large Bounty to the thankful soil,
The wretched Pillagers bore away,
And the whole Summer was their Prey.
Till Moses with a prayer
Breathed forth a violent Western wind,
Which all these living clouds did headlong bear
(No Stragglers left behind)
4 Into the purple Sea, and there bestow
On the luxurious Fish a Feast they nere did know.
With untaught joy, Pharaoh the News does hear,
And little thinks their Fate attends on Him, and His so near.
13.
What blindeness or what Darkness did there ere
Like this undocile King's appear*
What ere but that which now does represent
And paint the Crime out in the Punishment?
1 From the deep, baleful Caves of Hell below,
Where the old Mother Night does grow,
Substantial Night, that does disclaim,
Privation's empty Name,
Through secret conduits monstrous shades arose,
Such as the Suns whole force could not oppose,
They with a Solid Cloud
All Heavens Eclypsed Face did shroud.
Seemed with large Wings spread ore the Sea and Earth
To brood up a new Chaos his deformed birth.
2 And every Lamp, and every Fire
Did at the dreadful sight wink and expire,
To the Empyrean Sourse all streams of Light seemed to retire.
The living Men were in their standing- houses buried;
But the long Night no slumber knows,
But the short Death finds no repose.
Ten thousand terrors through the darkness fled,
And Ghosts complained, and Spirits murmured.
And Fancies multiplying sight
Viewed all the Scenes Invisible of Night.
14.
Of Gods dreadful anger these
Were but the first light Skirmishes;
The Shock and bloody battle now begins,
The plenteous Harvest of full-riponed Sins.
1 It was the time, when the still Moon
Was mounted softly to her Noon,
And dewy sleep, which from Nights secret springs arose,
Gently as Nile the land oreflows.
2 When (Lo!) from the high Countries of refined Day,
The Golden Heaven without allay,
Whose dross in the Credtion purg'ed away,
Made up the Suns adulterace ray,
3 Michael, the warlike Prince, does downwards fly
Swift as the jorneys of the Sight,
Swift as the race of Light,
And with his Winged Will cuts through the yielding sky.
He past through many a Star, and as he past,
Shone (like a star in them) more brightly there,
Then they did in their Sphere
On a tall Pyramids pointed Head he stopped at last,
And a mild look of sacred Pity cast
Down on the sinful Land where he was sent
T'inflict the tardy panishment.
Ah! yet (said He) yet stubborn King repent;
Whilst thus unarm'ed I stand,
Ere the keen Sword of God fill my commanded Hand;
Suffer but yet Thy self, and Thine to live;
Who would, alas! believe
That it for Man (said He)
So hard to be Forgiven should be,
And yet for God so easy to Forgive!
15.
He spoke, and downwards flew,
And ore his shining Form a well-cut cloud he threw
Made of the blackest Fleece of Night,
And close-wrought to keep in the powerful Light,
Yet wrought so fine it hindered not his Flight.
But through the Key-holes and the chinks of doors,
And through the narrow'est Walks of crooked Pores,
1 He past more swift and free,
Then in wide air the wanton Swallows flee.
He took a pointed Pestilence in his hand,
The Spirits of thousand mortal poisons made
The strongly tempered Blade,
The sharpest Sword that ere was laid
Up in the Magazins of God to scourge a wicked Land.
Through Egypts wicked Land his march he took.
2 And as he marched the sacred First born struck
Of every womb; none did he spare;
3 None from the meanest Beast to Cenchres purple Heir.
16.
The swift approach of endless Night,
Breaks open the wounded Sleepers rolling Eyes*
They'awake the rest with dying cries,
And Darkness doubles the affright.
The mixed sounds of scattered Deaths they hear,
And lose their parted Souls 'twixt Grief and Fear,
Louder then all the shreiking Women's voice
Pierces this Chaos of confused noise
As brighter Lightning cots a way
Clear, and distinguished, through the Day
1 With less complaints the Zoan Templess sound,
2 When the adored Haifer's drowned,
And no true marked Successor to be found,
Whilst Health, and Strength, and Oladuess does possess
The festal Hebrew Cottages;
The blessed Destroyer comes not there
To interrupt the sacred cheer
3 That new begins their well reformed* Year.
Upon their doors he read, and understood.
Gods Protection writ in Blood,
Well was he skild in the Character Divine*
And though he past by it in haste,
He bowed and worshipped as he past,
The mighty Mystery through its humble Sign.
17.
The Sword strikes now too deep and near,
Longer with it is edge to play;
No Diligence or Cost they spare
To haste the Hebrews now away,
Pharaoh himself chides their delay;
So kind and bountiful is Fear!
But, oh, the Bounty which to Fear we owe,
Is but like Fire struck out of stone.
So hardly got, and quickly gone,
That it scarce out-lives the Blow.
Sorrow and fear soon quit the Tyrants breast;
Rage and Revenge their place possessed
With a vast Host of Chariots and of Horse,
And all his powerful Kingdoms ready force
The traveling Nation he pursues;
Ten times overcome, he still the unequal war renewes,
Filled with proud hopes, At least (said he)
The Egyptian Gods from Syrian Magic free
Will now revenge Themselves and Me;
Behold what passless Rocks on either hand
Like Prison walls about them stand!
Whilst the Sea bounds their Flight before,
And in our injur'ed justice they must find
A worser stop then Rocks and Seas behind.
Which shall with crimson gore
1 New paint the Waters Name, and double dye the shore.
18.
He spoke; and all his Host
Approv'ed with shouts the unhappy boast,
A bidden wind bore his vain words away,
And drowned them in the neighboring Sea.
No means t'escape the faithless Travelers spy,
And with degenerous fear to die,
Curse their new-gotten Liberty.
But the great Guide well knew he led them right,
And saw a Fath hid yet from humane sight.
He strikes the raging waves, the waves on either side
Unloose their close Embraces, and divide;
And backwards press, as in some solemn show
The crowding People do
(Though just before no space was seen)
To let the admired Triumph pass between.
The wondering Army saw on either hand
The no less wondering Waves, like Rocks of Crystal stand.
They marched betwixt, and boldly trod
The secret paths of God.
And here and there all scattered in their way
The Seas old spoils, and gaping Fishes lay
Deserted on the sandy plain,
The Sun did with astonishment behold
The inmost Chambers of the opened Main,
For whatsoere of old
By his own Priests the Poets has been said,
He never sunk till then into the Oceans Bed.
19.
Led cheerfully by a bright Captain Flame,
To the other shore at Morning Dawn they came,
And saw behind th'unguided Foe
March disorderly and slow.
The Prophet straight from the Idimaean strand
Shakes his Imperious Wand.
The upper waves, that highest crowded lie,
The beckning Wand epsy.
Straight their first right hand files begin to move,
And with a murmuring wind
Give the word March to all behind.
The left hand Squadrons no less ready prove,
But with a joyful louder noise
Answer their distant fellows voice,
And haste to meet them make,
As several Troops do all at once a common Signal take.
What tongue th'amazment and th'affright can tell
1 Which on the Chamian Army fell,
When on both sides they saw the roaring Maine
Broke loose from his Invisible Chain?
They saw the monstrous Death and watery war
Come rolling down loud Ruin from afar.
In vain some backward, and some forwards fly
With helpless haste; in vain they cry
2 To their Celestial Beasts for aid;
In vain their guilty King they'upbraid,
In vain on Moses he, and Moses God does call,
With a Repentance true too late;
They Are compast round with a devouring Fate
That draws, like a strong Net, the mighty Sea upon them All.
NOTES.
3:
1. LIke that of Virgil, Subridens mista Mezentius ira. And Mezentius was like
Pharaoh in his contempt of the Deity, contemptorque Deum Mezentius, Exodus 5. 2.
And (Pharaoh) answered, who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let
Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

2. For no Nation under the Sun worshipped so many Gods as Egypt; so that
probably Pharaoh would have known the name of any God but the true one, Jehovah.

3. That Pharaoh asked a sign; appears by Exodus 7. 9. And when Pharaoh shall say
to you, Show me a sign, etc.

4. Almighty, as it was the Instrument of the Almighty in doing wonders; for
which it is called the Rod of the Lord, as well as of Moses and Aaron; and in
this sense Fortune is rightly called by Virgil Omnipotens.

5. We may well suppose that the King and his Guards fled for fear at the
sight, since Moses himself did so at first, Exodus 4. 2. And it was turned into
a Serpent, so that Moses fled from it.

4.
1. So the Apostle calls the chief of Pharaohs Magicians, 2 Timothy 3. 8. but S.
Hieron. translates their names Johannes and Mambres; and they say there is a
Tradition in the Talmud, that Iuhani And Mamre, chief of Pharaohs Magicians,
said to Moses, Thou bring straw into Aepraim, which was where abundance of
corn grew; as if they should have said, to Bring your magical Arts hither, is
to as much purpose, as to bring water to Nilus. Iannes was famous even among
heathen Authors. Pliu. lib. 3. c. 1. Est and alia Magices factio, a Mose, and
Ianne and Iotape Iudaeis pendens. and Numenius the Pythagorean names him in
Eusebius. 1. 9. Prapaerat. Evang. They here are called by several names, in
several Translations, by the Septuag, (...) Venefici, Poisoners, and (...)
Incantatores, Enchanters; by Sulpitius Severus, Chaldaans, that is,
Astrologers; by others, Sapientes and Malefici, Wisemen (that is, Men esteemed
so among the Egyptians) Philosophers and Witches.

2. Fecerunt etiam ipsi per incantationes Aegyptiacos and arcana quaedam
similiter. Their Gods may well be called Servile, for in all Enchantments we
fiade them threatened by the Conjurers, and forced whether they will or no, by
the power of Spelli, to do what they are commanded. Tiresias in the 4 Theb.
because they did not obey him at first word, speaks to them like a
Schoolmaster, with a rod in his hand, -- Et nobis saevire facultas:
-- An Scythicis quoties armata venenis
Colchis aget trepido pallebunt Tartara motu,
Nostri cura minor? etc.
And Lucan says of Erichtho, Omne nefas superi prima jam voce precantis
Concedunt, carmenque timent audire secundum.
And the Witches used always some obscure murmurings in their charms. So of
Erichth, Tum vox Lethaeos cunctis pollentior herbis
Excantare Deos, confundit murmura primum
Dissona, and humanae multum discordia Linguae.


3. There are four opinions concerning this action of the Magicians; the first,
that their Rods appeared Serpents by an Illusion of the sight. This was
Josephus his opinion; for he says, (...) and Tertullian, Hierom, Gregory
Nyssen, are cited for it too. Sedulius in lib. 4. Carm. -- Sed imagine falsa
Visibus human is magicos tribuere figuras.
This I like not, by no means; for if the appearance of the Serpents was an
Illusion, so was the devouring of them too by Moses his Serpent. Therefore the
second opinion to salve this difficulty, says, that the Devil for the
Magicians, did really on the sudden, make up some bodies that looked like true
Serpents, but were not so, and those bodies were truly devoured by Moses his
true Serpent. But it does not fully answer the objection; and besides, by this
Deceit, they might as well have imitated the other miracles. The third is,
Thom. Aquinor, and Cajetans, and Delrios, and diverse others, That they were
true Serpents, not Created in an instant by the Devil (for that is granted by
all to exceed his power) but Generated in a moment of Time by application of
all things required to the generation of Serpents, which is Spontaneous
sometimes. The fourth is of Peretius, Abulensis, and many more, that the Devil
snatched away the Rods. and had true Serpents there in readiness to put in their
place, and this agrees better with the swiftness of the action, for which, and
some other reasons, I follow it.

5:
1. The Bank of Nilus, which is incomparably the most famous River in the
world, whether we consider the greatness and length of it (for it runs about
900 German miles) or the things that it produces, or the miraculous flowing and
ebbing of it. It is therefore called absolutely in the Scripture, Machal
Misraim, The River of Egypt. From whence the word Nile is not unnaturally
derived Nahal, Naal, Neel, Neil; as Bahal, Baal, Bell, lo: and Pompon. Mela
reports, 1. 5. c. 10. That the fountain of Nilus is called Nachul by the
Ethiopians. Now whereas God says to Moses, Go to Pharaoh in the morning, when
he shall go forth to the Water: I believe, as the Perfians worshipped every
morning the rising Sun, so the Egyptians did Nile; and that this going forth of
the King to the River, was a constant act of Devotion, Theodoret (...) Nay I
doubt whether Osyris (their great Deity) be not worshipped for Nilus. Seld. de
Dils Syris.

2. The fountain of Nilus is now known to be in the mountains called
Lunaemontes, and one of the Titles of Prester John is, King of Goyome. Where
Nile begins; but the ancients were totally ignorant of it, insomuch, that this
was reckoned among the famous proprieties of Nilus, that it concealed its
Spring, Fontium quicelat origines; of which see Lucan in the 10. Book; where,
among other things, he says most admirably of Nilus. -- Vbicunque videris,
Quaereris, and multi contingit gloria genti
Vt Nilo sit laeta suo.


3. Theodoret upon Exodus, says thus of this change of Nilus, (...) Being
changed into Blood, it accused the Egyptians of the Insants murder; and the
Book of Wisdom in Chap. 11. makes the same observation.

6.
1. Computruit fluvius; and before the Septuag. (...) where the vulgar Edition
says, Computrescent aqua; that is, fervebit, vel effervescet fluvius, relating
perhaps to Blood, which when it corrupts Boils, and burns as it were in the
veins: when the water had been corrupted in this manner, it is no wonder if it
produced a great number of Frogs; but the wonder consists in that the number
was so infinite, in that it was so suddenly produced upon the action of Aaron,
and that contrary to their nature, they came to molest the Egyptians in their
very houses. The like judgment with this we find in prosane Histories, and to
be attributed to the same hand of God, though the Rod was Invisible. Athenaeus
in his 8 Book, and 2 Chapter reports, that in Paonia and Dardanium (now called
Bulgarie) there rained down so many Frogs from heaven (that is, perhaps they
were suddenly produced after great showers) that they filled all the public
ways, and even private houses, that their domestical furniture was convered
with them, that they found them in the very pots where they boiled their meat;
and that what with the trouble of the Living, and the smell of the Deadones,
they were forced at last to forsake their Country. And Pliny reports in his 8.
B. Ch, 29. That a whole City in Gallia has been driven away by Frogs, and
another in Afrique by Locusts; and many examples of this kind might be
collected.

2. Sen lib. 4. Quaest. Nature. c. 11. Nilus brings both Water and Earth too to
the thirsty and sandy soil; for flowing thick and troubled, he leaves all his
Lees, as it were, in the Clests of the parched ground, and covers the dry
places with the fatness which he brought with him, so that he does good to the
Country two ways, both by over flowing, and by manuring it. So that Herod.
calls it (...), The Husbandman. Tibul. Te propter nullos Tellus tua postulat
imbres, Arida necpluvio supplicat herba Iovi; for which reason Lucan says, that
Egypt has no need of Jupiter, -- Nihil indiga mercis
Aut Iovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nile.
And one in Athenaus bolder, yet calls Nilus excellently well, (...) thou
Egyptian Jupiter: nay, it was termed by the Egyptians themselves, (...) The
River that emulates and contends with Heaven.

7.
1. What kind of Creature this was, no man can tell certainly. The Sept.
translate it both here, and in the Psaim 105. (...). And so Philo, and the
vulgar edition retains the word, Sciniphes, Ciniphes, or Kniphes, seem to come
from the word, (...), which signifies to Prick, and they were a kind of Gnat:
and Pliny renders them Culices muliones, and sometimes simply Culices; as
likewise Columella. Dioscorid. cap. 112. terms them, (...) And Hesych. (...) So
Isidor. 1. 12. Origin. and Oros. 7, 8. and so Origin. Yet Iunius and Tremell.
and the French, and the English, and diverse other Translations, render it by
Lice, and Lice too might have wings; for Diod. Sicul. 1. 3. c. 3. speaking of
the Acridophagi, or carer: of Locusts, says, that when they grow old, their
bodies breed a kind of uinged Lice, by which they are devoured. It seems to me
most probab c, that it was some new kind of creature, called analogically by
an old known name, which is Pererius his conjecture, and is approved by River:
And this I take to be the reason why the Magicians could not counterseit this
miracle, as it was easy for them to do those of the Serpents, the Blood and
the Frogs, which were things to be had every where. This I think may pass for a
more probable cause then the pleasant sincy of the Hebrews, who say, that the
Devils power is bounded to the producing of no creature less then a grain of
Barley, or then S. Augustines allegorical reason, and too poetical even for
Poetry, who affirms, that the Magicians sailed in the ibird Plague, to show the
defect of humane Philosophy, when it comes to the mystery of the Trinity but,
such pitiful allusions do more hurt then good in Divinity.

8.
1. A grievous Swarm of Flies -- So our English Translation; St. Hier Omne
genus muscarum. All sorts of Flies. The Septuag. (...) Canina Musca, a
particular kind of Fly, called a Dog-Fly, from his biting. If it be not to be
read (...), which may signify Aquila's, (...). Some translate this place, A
mixture of Beasts. The French, une mes^^e de bestes. Iun. and Tremell.
Colluviem: and it should seem that Josephus understood it of several sorts of
wild Beasts that infested The Country. For he says, (...); and Pagninus, Omne
genus serarum; which is not very probable, for the punishments yet were rather
troublesome then mortal, and even this punishment of Infinite numbers of small
Tormentors, is so great a one, that God calls them his Army, Joel, 2. 25. nay,
his Great Army, The Locust, the canker-worm, and the catterpillar, and the
palmer worm, my great Army, which I sent among you.

2. The God of Flies, Beelzebub, a Deity worshipped at Accaron, Jupiter, (...),
either from bringing or diving away of Swarms of Flies, Plin. lib. ^^ c. 28.
Those of Cyrene worship the God Achor, great multitudes of Flies causing there
a Pestilence, which presently dye upon the sacrificing to this God; where
Achor, I conceive, to be the same with Accaron, most of the sea-coasta of
Afrique, being ancient Colonies of the Phoenicians. Clement reports, that in
Acarnania at the Temple of Actian Apollo, they sacrificed an Ox to Flies, And
Aelian, (...) de Animal c. 8. (...). Both, as I suppose, meaning that they
sacrifiecd the Ox, not to the flies themselves, but to Apollo or Jupiter (...),
(...), Pausan. l. ^ (...) The Eleans sacrifice to Jupiter (...) for the driving
away of Flies, from the Country of (...). The Romans called this God not
Jupiter, but Hercules Apomyius, though we read not of the killing of Flies
among his Labors. Plin. 1. 29. c. 6. No living creature has less of
understanding, or is less (...) (then flies) which makes it the more wonderful,
that at the Olympique Games, upon the sacrificing of an Ox to the God whom they
call Myiodes, whole clouds of them fly out of the Territory. And among the
Trachinians, we read of Hercules. (...) the Driver away of Gnats with the
Erythraeans of Hercules (...) the killer of worms, that hurt the Vines and many
more Deities of the like honorable employment are to be found among the
ancients.

3. Many sorts of Flies molest the Castle, none so as the Afilus or Oestrus
(the Gad-Fly) Virg. Georg. 3. Oestrum, Graeci vertere vacantes,
Asper, acerba sonans, quo tota exterrita silvis
Diffugiunt armenta
With the plague that was to ensue; that is, not in the sense that Claudian
speaks of Pluto's Horses, Crastina venturae exspectantes gaudia praeda For how
(as Scaliger says) could they know it) but simply, Wished for death.

9.
1. (i.) Poisoning: The conjunction of which produce Poisons (1) Infectious
diseases, according to the received opinion of Astrologers. Virgil says, By the
sick, or Diseased Heaven; that is, which causes diseases, but Heaven is there
perhaps taken for the Air, Hic quondam Morbo coeli miseranda coorta est
Tempestaa, totoque Autumni incanduit aestu, etc.
Where see his most incomparable description of a Pestilence.

10.
1. No Books or Writings of the Rites of Magic amongst the Egyptians.

2. It is called by Moses, Chap 9, 10. Vicus inflationum Germinans in homine,
etc. Sptou'lng out with blains, etc. which Iun. and Tremel. Erumpens multis
pustulis. This in Deuteronomy is one of the curses with which the disobedience
to God is threatened, Chap. 18. 27. The Lord shall smite thee with the botch of
Egypt, etc. From hence, I believe, came the calumny, that Trog. Pompeius, Diod.
Siculus, Tacitus, and other heathens cast upon the Hebrews, to wit, that they
were expelled out of Egypt for being scabbed and leprous, which mistake was
easy, instead of being dismissed for having brought those diseases upon the
Egyptians.

11.
1. Not each one like a Monument, for that Metaphor would be too big; but many
of them together, like a Monument, and the most ancient Monuments, we know,
were heaps of stones, not great Tomb-stones.

12.
1. (i.) The Wheat and Rye. See Chap. 9. v. 32.

2. Chapter 10. v. 13. Our Translation has East Wind: And the Lord brought an
East Wind upon the Lord all that day, and all the night, etc. The vulgar has
Ventum urentem. The Septuagint a Southwind. and Eugub. says, There is no doubt
but it was a South wind; which opinion I follow (though the Jews unanimously
will have it to be an East Wind) because the Southern parts of Afrique were
most insested with Locusts, where they are in some places, the chief sood of
the inhabitants: so that from thence they might easily be sercht; for I cannot
agree with some, who imagine, that the hot wind blowing all day and night,
produced them.

3. Wonderful are the things which Authors report of these kind of Armies of
Locusts, and of the order and regularity of their marches. Aldroandus and
Fincelius (as I find them cited) say thus, That in the year 8 yr. they were
seen to fly over twenty miles in Germany in a day, in manner of a formed Army,
divided into several squadrons, and having their quarters apart when they
rested. That the Captains, with some few, marched a days journey before the
rest, to choose the most opportune places for their camp. That they never
removed till Sunrising, and just then went away in as much order as an Army of
men could do. That at last having done great mischief wheresover they past;
after prayers made to God, they were driven by a violent wind into the Belgique
Ocean, and there drowned, but being cast again by the sea, upon the shore,
caused a great pestilence in the Country. Some add, that they covered an
hundred and sorty Acres at a time. St. Hier. upon Joel, speaks thus. When the
armies of Locusts came lately into these parts, and filled all the air, they
flew in so great order, that slates in a pavement cannot be laid more
regularly, neither did they ever stir one inch out of their ranks and files.
There are reckoned thirty several sorts of Locusts, some in India (if we dare
believe Plimy) three soot long. The same Author adds, of Locusts (Lib. 11. cap.
29.) That they pass in troops over great seas, enduring hunger for many days
together in the search of foreign food. They are believed to be brought by the
anger of the Gods; for they are seen sometimes very great. and make such a
noise with their wings in flying, that they might be taken for Birds. They
overcast the Sun, whilst people stand gazing with terror, lest they should fall
upon their lands -- out of Afrique chiefly they infest Italy. and the people
are forced to have recourse to the Sybils Books, to enquire for a remedy. In
the Country of Cyrene there is a Law to make war against them thrice a year,
first by breaking their eggs, then by killing the young ones, and lastly, the
old ones, etc.

4. The Red sea, which, methinks, I may better be allowed to call Purple, then
Homer and Virgil to term any sea so. (...)
Virg. In Mare purpureum violentior influit amnis.
Pliny says, Purpuram irati maris faciem refer and Theophr. (...).

13.
1. Chap. v. Even darkness that may be felt. The Vulgar, Tam densae (tenebrae)
ut palpari queant. Whether this darkness was really in the air, or only in
their eyes, which might be blinded for the time: Or whether a suspension of
Light from the act of Illumination in that Country; or whether it were by some
black, thick, and damp vapor which possessed all the air, it is impossible to
determine. I fancy that the darkness of Hell below, which is called Utter
Darkness, arose and overshadowed the Land; and I am authorized by the Wisdom of
Solom. Chap. 17. v. 14. where he calls it a night that came upon them out of
the bottoms of inevitable Hell, and therefore was the more proper to be (as he
says after) An Image of that darkness which should afterward receive them.

2. That all Fires and Lights went out, is to be plainly collected from the
Text; for else how could it be truly said, that they could not see one another?
and is confirmed by the Wisdom of Solony. Chap. 17. 5. No power of the fire
might give them light. 3. See the above cited, Chap. 17.

14.
1. Midnight, called also by the Latins Meridies noctis.

2. It is very much disputed what that Light was that was created the first
day. That it was the Empyraean heaven, seems to me the most probable opinion,
out of which the Sun, Moon and Stars were made the fourth day: and therefore
before I say, that all Light seemed to be returned to the Empyrean or highest
heaven from whence it came at first.

3. Some think that God inflicted this plague upon the Egyptions immediately
himself, because he says, Chap. 11. v. 4. About midnight will I go out into the
midst of Egypt. And to the same effect, Chap. 12. 12. but it is an ordinary
manner of speech, to attribute that to God, which is done by one of his Angels;
and that this was an Angel, appears out of Chap. 12. 23. The Lord will pass
over the door, and will not suffer the Destroyer to come into your houses to
smite you. From which place, and Psalm 78. v. 49. where it is said (of the
Egyptians) He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and
indignation, and trouble, by sending evil Angels among them; Some collect, that
God used here the ministry of an Evil or Evil Angels; but I cannot believe,
that God and the Magicians had the same Agents, and that Text of the Psalm is
perhaps ill translated. Iun. and Tremel. understand by it Moses and Aaron, as
Nuntios Malorum; and if we interpret it (as others) of Angels, it were better
rendered in English, Destroying or Punishing Angels. Infficters of Evil upon
them. I attribute this infliction to the Archangel Michael: first, because it
was he (by name) who sought with the Dragon, and smore him and his Angels,
Revel. 12. 7. Secondly, because in Daniel too he is mentioned as an Angel of
War, Chap. 10. v. 13. And lastly, because the very name is said to signify
Percussio Dei. The Smiting of God. The Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 18. v. 14. 15.
16. gives a little hint of the fancy of this Stance: For whilst all things were
in quiet silence, and that the night was in the midst of her swist course,
Thine Almighty Word, leapt down from heaven out of thy royal at Throne. as a
fierce man of war into the midst of a Land of destruction: And brought thine
unfergned command as a sharp sword, and standing up, filled all things with
death, etc.

15.
1. That this Plague was a pestilence, is the opinion of Josephus, and most
Interpreters.

2. The Law of consecrating all first-borns to God, seems Exodus the 13. to be
grounded upon this slaughter of the Egyptian Firstborn. But that was rather
the addition of a new cause why the Hebrews should exactly observe it, then
that it was the whole reason of it; for even by natural right, the Firstborn,
and First Fruits of all things are Sacred to God; and therefore anciently, not
only among the Jews, but also other Nations, the Priesthood belonged to the
Eldest Sons.

3. The Name of that Pharaoh who was drowned in the Red Sea There is great
confusion in the succession of the Egyptian Kings, and diverse named by some
Chronologers, that are quite omitted by others; as Amenophis, whom Mercator,
and some others, will have to be the King drowned in the Red sea; but that it
was Cenchres, is the most probable, and most received opinion.

16.
1. That Zoan, or Tzoan, was the place where Moses did his miracles, and
consequently the City where Pharaoh Cenchres lived, we have the authority of
Psalm 78. 12. It was likewise called Tanis (by the Graecians) and from it that
mouth of the Nile near which it stood, Ostium Taniticum. So that they are
mistaken, who make Noph, or Moph, that is, Memphis, the place where Pharaoh
kept his Court, for that was built afterward, and lies more Southward.

2. The Adored Heifer. Apis, and Serapis, and Osyris (who was Misraim) I
conceive to have been the same Deity among the Egyptians, known by other
Nations by the names of Mithra, Baal, Tamuz, Adonis, etc. and signifying the
Sun, the great lamentations for the disappearing or loss of Osyris, Tamuz, and
Adonis, and rejoicing for their return, signifying nothing but the Elongation
by Winter, and re-approach of the Sun by Summer. The Egyptians under Apis, or
Osyris, did likewise worship Nilus; and their (...) and (...) signified the
overflowing of Nilus, and return of it to the channel. Now owing all their
sustenance to the Sun and Nilus for that reason they figured both under the
shape of an Ox; and not, I believe, as Vossius, and some other learned men
imagine, to represent Joseph, who fed them in the time of the famine: Besides,
the Images of this Ox (like that which Aaron made for the children of Israel,
in the imitation of the Egyptian Idolatry) they kept a living one, and
worshipped it with great reverence, and made infinite lamentations at the death
of it, till another was found with the like marks, and then they thought that
the old one was only returned from the bottom of Nilus, whither they fancied
it to retreat at the death or disappearing, -- Quo se gurgite Nili
Condat adoratus trepidis pastoribus Apis.
Stat. The Marks were these. It was to be a black Bull, with a white streak
along the back, a white mark like an Half Moon on his right shoulder, two hairs
only growing on his tail, with a square blaze in his forehead, and a bunch,
called Cantharus, under his Tongue: By what art the Priests made these marks,
is hard to guess. It is indifferently named Ox, Calf, or Heifer, both by the
Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins. So that which Exodus terms a Calf, Psalm 106.
renders an Ox.

3. See Chap. 12. 2. From this time the Heorews had two computations of the
beginning of the year; the one common, the other Sacred: The Common began in
Tisri, which answers to our September, at the Autumnal Aequinoctial; and all
civil matters were regulated according to this, which was the old account of
the year. The Sacred, to which all Festivals, and all Religious matters had
relation, began at the vernal Aequinoctial, and was in stitured in
commemoration of this deliverance.

17.
1. (i.) Give a new occasion for it to be called the Red Sea. Concerning the
name of which, the opinions are very different; that which seems to me most
probable is, that it is denominated from Idumaea, and that from Edom, or Esau,
that signifies Red; and the King Erithra, or Erythrun, from whence the
Graecians derive it was Esau, and Erythraea his Country, Idumaea, both
signifying the same thing in Hebrew and in Greek; but because that opinion of
the Redness of the shore in some places, has bin most received, and is
confirmed even to this day by some Travelers, and sounds most poetically, I
allude to it here, whether it be true or not.

18.
1. Plutarch de Is. and Osyr. testifies, that (...) was an ancient name of
Egypt, and that it was called so long after by the most skilful of the Egyptian
Priests; that is, the Country of Cham: As also, the Scripture terms it, Psalm
105. Et Jacob peregrinus fuit in terra Cham. From whose son it was afterward
named Misraim, and by the Arabians Mesre to this day.

2. Beasts that were deified by the Egyptians, who chose at first the figures
of Beasts for the Symbols or Hieroglyphical signs of their Gods, perhaps no
otherwise then as the Poets make them of Constellations, but in time the
worship came even to be terminated in them.

FINIS.
Davideis, A SACRED POEM OF THE TROUBLES OF DAVID.

In FOUR BOOKS.

VIRG. GEORG. 2: Me vero primum dulces ante omnia Musae,
Quarum sacra fero ingenti percussus amore,
Accipiant, Coelique vias ac Sidera monstrent.
LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Proposition. The Invocation. The entrance into the History from a new
agreement betwixt Saul and David. A description of Hell. The Devils Speech.
Envys reply to him. Her appearing to Saul in the shape of Benjamin, her speech
and Saul's to himself after she was vanished. A description of Heaven. Gods
Speech: he sends an Angel to David, the Angels Message to him. David sent for
to play before Saul. A Digression concerning Music. David's Psalm. Saul
attempts to kill him. His escape to his own house, from whence being pursued by
the Kings Guard, by the artifice of his wife Michol he escapes, and flies to
Naioh, the Prophets College at Ramah. Saul's speech, and rage at his escape. A
long Digression describing the Prophets College, and their manner of life
there, and the ordinary subjects of their Poetry. Saul's Guards pursue David
thither, and prophecy. Saul among the Prophets. He is compared to Balaam,
whose Song concludes the Book.

DAVIDEIS The first Book.
1, 2 I Sing the Man who Iudahs Scepter bore
In that right hand which held the Crook before;
Who from best Poet, best of Kings did grow;
The two chief Gifts Heaven could on Man bestow.
Much danger first, much toil did he sustain,
Whilst Saul and Hell crossed his strong fate in vain.
Nor did his Crown less painful work afford;
Less exercise his Patience, or his Sword;
So long her Conque'ror Fortunes spite pursu'ed;
Till with unwearied Virtue he subdue'd
All homebred Malice, and all foreign boasts;
Their strength was Armies, his the Lord of Hosts.
Thou, Ioh. 8. 58.
who did David's royal stem adorn,
And gav'st him birth from whom thy self was it born.
Who did in Triumph at Deaths Court appear,
And slew'st him with thy Nails, thy Cross and Spear,
Whilst Hells black Tyrant trembled to behold,
The glorious light he forfeited of old,
Who Heav'ens glad burden now, and justest pride,
Sitst high enthron'ed next thy great Fathers side,
(Where hallowed Flames help to adorn that Head
Which once the blushing Thorns environed,
Till crimson drops of precious blood hung down
Like Rubies to enrich thine humble Crown.)
Ev'en Thou my breast with such blessed rage inspire,
As mov'ed the tuneful strings of David's Lyre,
Guide my bold steps with thine old trav'elling Flame, Exodus 13. 21.

3 In these untrodden paths to Sacred Fame;
Lo, with pure hands thy heav'enly Fires to take,
My well-chang'ed Muse I a chaste Vestal make!
From earths vain joys, and loves soft witchcraft free,
I consecrate my Magdalene to Thee!
Lo, this great work, a Temple to thy praise,
On polisht Pillars of strong Verse I raise!
A Temple, where if Thou vouchfafe to dwell,
4. It Solomon's, and Herod's shall excel.
Too long the Muses-Lands have Heathen bin;
Their Gods too long were Dev'ils, and Virtues Sin;
But Thou, Eternal Word, have call'ed forth Me
5. The Apostle, to convert that World to Thee;
T'unbind the charms that in flight Fables lie,
And teach that Truth is truest Poesy.
The malice now of jealous Saul grew less,
Overcome by constant Virtue, and Success;
6 He grew at last more weary to command
New dangers, then young David to withstand
Or Conquer them; he feared his mastring Fate,
And envy'ed him a Kings unpowerful Hate.
Well did he know how Palms by'oppression speed,
7. Victorious, and the Victors sacred Meed!
The Burden lifts them higher. Well did he know,
How a tame stream does wild and dangerous grow
By unjust force; he now with wanton play,
Kisses the smiling Banks, and glides away.
But his known channel stopped, begins to roar,
8. And swell with rage, and buffet the dull shore.
His mutinous waters hurry to the war,
And Troops of Waves come rolling from afar.
Then scorns he such weak stops to his free source,
And overruns the neighboring fields with violent course.
This knew the Tyrant, and this useful thought
His wounded mind to health and temper brought.
He old kind vows to David did renew,
Swore constancy, and meant his oath for true.
A general joy at this glad news appeared,
For David all men lov'ed, and Saul they feared.
Angels and Men did Peace, and David love,
But Hell did neither Him, nor That approve;
From Man's agreement fierce Alarms they take;
And Quiet here, does there new Business make.
Beneath the silent chambers of the earth,
Where the Suns fruitful beams give metals birth,
Where he the growth of fatal Gold does see,
Gold which above more Influence has then He.
9 Beneath the dens where unfletcht Tempests lie,
And infant Winds their tender Voices try,
Beneath the mighty Oceans wealthy caves,
10. Beneath th'aeternal Fountain of all Waves,
Where their vast Court the Mother-waters keep,
And undisturbed by Moons in silence sleep,
There is a place deep, wondrous deep below,
Which genuine Night and Horror does overflow;
11 No bound controls th'unwearied space, but Hell
Endless as those dire pains that in it dwell.
Here no dear glimpse of the Suns lovely face,
Strikes through the Solid darkness of the place;
No dawning Morn does her kind reds display;
One slight weak beam would here be thought the Day.
No gentle stars with their fair Gems of Light
Offend the tyr'annous and unquestioned Night.
Here Lucifer, the mighty Captive, reigns,
Proud, midst his Woes, and Tyrant in his Chains.
Once General of a gilded Host of Sprights,
Like Hesper, leading forth the spangled Nights.
But down like Lightning, which him struck, he came;
And roard at his first plunge into the Flame.
Myriads of Spirits fell wounded round him there;
With dropping Lights thick shone the singed Air.
Since when the dismal Solace of their woe,
Has only been weak Mankind to undo;
Themselves at first against themselves they'excite,
(Their dearest Conquest, and most proud delight)
And if those Mines of secret Treason fail,
With open force man's Virtue they assail;
Unable to corrupt, seek to destroy;
And where their Poisons miss, the Sword employ.
Thus sought the Tyrant Fiend young David's fall;
And against him armed the powerful rage of Saul.
He saw the beauties of his shape and face,
His female sweetness, 1 Samuel 16. 12.
and his manly grace,
He saw the nobler wonders of his Mind,
Great Gifts, which for great works he knew designed.
He saw (t'ashame the strength of Man and Hell) 1 Samuel 17.

How by's young hands their Gathite Champion fell.
He saw the reverend Prophet boldly shed
12. The royal drops round his enlarged Head. 1 Samuel 16. 13.

13 And well he knew what Legacy did place, Genesis 49. 10.

The sacred Scepter in blessed Iudahs race,
From which the aeternal Shilo was to spring;
A Knowledge which new Hells to Hell did bring!
And though no less he knew himself too weak
The smallest Link of strong-wrought Fate to break;
Yet would he rage, and struggle with the Chain;
Lov'ed to Rebel though sure that 'twas in vain.
And now it broke his formed design, to find
The gentle change of Saul's recov'ering Mind.
He trusted much in Saul, and rag'ed and grieved
(The great Deceiver) to be Himself Deceived.
Thrice did he knock his iron teeth, thrice howl,
And into frowns his wrathful forehead roll.
His eyes dart forth red flames which scare the night,
And with worse fires the trembling Ghosts affright.
A troop of ghastly Fiends compass him round,
And greedily catch at his lips feared sound.
Are we such Nothings then (said He) Our will
Crossed by a Shepherds Boy? and you yet still
Play with your idle Serpents here? dares none
Attempt what becomes Furies? are ye grown
Benumbed with Fear, or Virtues sprightless cold,
You, who were once (I Am sure) so brave and bold?
Oh my ill-chang'ed condition! oh my fate!
14 Did I lose Heav'en for this?
With that, with his long tail he lasht his breast,
And horribly spoke out in Looks the rest.
The quaking Pow'ers of Night stood in amaze,
And at each other first could only gaze.
A dreadful Silence filled the hollow place,
Doubling the native terror of Hells face;
Rivers of slaming Brimstone, which before
So loudly rag'ed, crept softly by the shore;
No hiss of Snakes, no clanck of Chains was known;
The Souls amidst their Tortures durst not groan.
Envy at last crawls forth from that dire throng,
Of all the direfulst; her black locks hung long,
Attir'ed with curling Serpents; her pale skin
Was almost dropped from the sharp bones within,
And at her breast stuck Vipers which did prey
Upon her panting heart, both night and day
Sucking black blood from thence, which to repair
Both night and day they left fresh poisons there.
Her garments were deep stained in humane gore,
And torn by her own hands, in which she bore
A knotted whip, and bowl, that to the brim
Did with green gall, and juice of wormwood swim.
With which when she was drunk, she furious grew
And lasht herself; thus from th'accursed crew,
Envy, the worst of Fiends, herself presents,
Envy, good only when she'herself torments.
Spend not, great King, thy precious rage (said she)
Upon so poor a cause; shall Mighty We
The glory of our wrath to him afford?
Are We not Furies still? and you our Lord?
At thy dread anger the fixed World shall shake,
And frighted Nature her own Laws forsake.
Do Thou but threat, loud storms shall make reply,
And Thunder eccho'it to the trembling Sky,
Whilst raging Seas swell to so bold an height,
As shall the Fires proud Element affright.
The Old drudging Sun from his long-beaten way,
Shall at thy Voice start, and misguid the day.
The jocond Orbs shall break their measure'd pace,
And stubborn Poles change their allotted place.
Heav'ens gilded Troops shall flutter here and there,
Leaving their boasting songs tun'ed to a Sphaere;
15. Nay their God too -- for fear he did, when We
Took noble Arms against his Tyranny,
So noble Arms, and in a Cause so great,
That Triumphs they deserve for their Defeat.
There was a Day! oh might I see it agin
Though he had worser flames to thrust us in!
And can such pow'ers be by a Child withstood?
Will Slings, alas, or Peebles do him good?
What th'untam'ed. Lion, whet with hunger too,
And Giants could not, that my Word shall do;
I Will soon dissolve this Peace; were Saul's new Love
(But Saul we know) great as my Hate shall prove,
Before their Sun twice more be gone about,
I, and my faithful Snakes would drive it out.
16. By Me Cain offered up his Brothers gore, Genesis 4. 8

A Sacrifice far worse then that before;
I saw him fling the stone, as if he meant,
At once his Murder, and his Monument,
And laughed to see (for 'twas a goodly show)
The Earth by her first Tiller fatned so. Ib. v. 2. Exodus 14 23.

I drove proud Pharaoh to the parted sea;
He, and his Host drank up cold death by Me;
By Me rebellious arms fierce Corah took,
And Moses (curse upon that Name!) Number. 16. 1
forsook;
17. Hither (ye know) almost alive he came
Through the cleft Earth; Ib. 31.
Ours was his Fun'eral Flame.
By Me -- but I lose time, methinks, and should
Perform new acts whilst I relate the old;
David's the next our fury must enjoy;
It Is not thy God himself shall save thee, Boy;
No, if he do, may the whole World have Peace;
May all ill Actions, all ill Fortune cease,
And banished from this potent Court below,
May I a ragged, contemned Virtue grow.
She spoke; all star'ed at first, and made a pause;
But strait the general murmur of applause
Ran through Deaths Courts; she frowned still, and begun
To envy at the praise herself had won.
18. Great Beelzebub starts from his burning throne
To'embrace the Fiend, but she now furious grown
To act her part; thrice bowed, and thence she fled;
The Snakes all hist, the Fiends all murmured.
It was the time when silent night began
T'enchain with sleep the busy spirits of Man;
And Saul himself, though in his troubled breast
The weight of Empire lay, took gentle rest:
So did not Envy; but with haste arose;
And as through Israel's stately Towns she goes,
She frowns and shakes her head; thine own (says she)
Ruins ere long shall your sole Mon'uments be.
The silver Moon with terror paler grew,
And neighbring Hermon sweated flow^y dew;
Swift Jordan started, and straight backward fled,
Hiding among thick reeds his aged head;
19 Lo, at her entrance Saul's strong Palace shook;
And nimbly there the reverend shape she took
of Father Benjamin; so long her beard,
So large her limbs, so grave her looks appeared:
20 Just like his statue which bestrid Saul's gate,
And seemed to Guard the race it did create.
In this known form she'approacht the Tyrants side;
And thus her words the sacred Form belied.
Arise, lost King of Isra'el; can thou lie
Dead in this sleep, and yet thy Last so nigh?
If King thou be'est, if Iesses race as yet
Sit not on Isreal's Throne! and shall he sit?
Did ye for this from fruitful Egypt fly?
From the mild Brickhils nobler slavery?
For this did Seas your pow'erful Rod obey?
Did Wonders guide, and feed you on your way?
Could ye not there great Pharaohs bondage bear,
You who can serve a Boy, and Minstrel here?
Forbid it God, if thou be'st just; this shame
Cast not on Saul's, on mine, and Isreal's Name.
Why was I else from Canaans Famine lead?
Hapyy, Genesis 43.
thrice happy had I there been dead
Ere my full Loins discharg'ed this num'erous race,
This luckless Tribe, ev'en Crowned to their Disgrace!
Ah Saul, thy Servants Vassal must thou live?
Place to his Harp must thy dread Scepter give?
What wants he now but that? can thou forget
(If thou be'st man thou can not) how they met
The Youth with Songs? ^. Sam. 18. 7.
Alas, poor Monarch! you
Your thousand only, he ten thousand slew!
Him Isra'el loves, him neighbring Countries fear;
You but the Name, and empty Title bear;
And yet the Traitor lives, lives in thy Court;
The Court that must be his; where he shall sport
Himself with all thy Concubines, thy Gold,
Thy costly robes, thy Crown; Were thou not told
This by proud Samuel, 1 Samuel 13. 13.
when at Gilgal he
With bold false threats from God affronted Thee?
The dotard ly'd; God said it not I know;
Not Baal or Moloch would have used thee so;
Was not the choice his own? did not thy worth
Exact the royal Lot, 1 Samuel 19. 21.
and call it forth?
Have thou not since (my best and greatest Son)
To Him, and to his perishing Nation done
Such lasting ben'efits as may justly claim
A Scepter as aeternal as thy Fame?
Poor Prince, whom Madmen, Priests, and Boys invade!
By thine own Flesh thy ungrateful Son betrayed!
Unnat'ural Fool, who can thus cheated be!
By Friendships Name against a Crown and Thee!
Betray not too thy self; take courage, call
21 Thy'enchanted Virtues forth, and be Whole Saul.
Lo, this great cause makes thy dead Fathers rise,
Breaks the firm Seals of their closed Tombs and Eyes.
Nor can their jealous Ashes, whilst this Boy
Survives, the Priv'iledge of their Graves enjoy.
Rise quickly Saul, and take that Rebels breath
Which troubles thus thy Life, and ev'en our Death.
Kill him, and you are secure; it is only He
That Is boldly interpos'ed 'twixt God and Thee,
As Earths low Globe robs the High Noon of Light;
When this Eclypse is past, thy Fate's all bright.
Trust me, dear Son, and credit what I tell;
I'have seen thy royal Stars, and know them well.
Hence Fears and dull Delays! Is not thy Breast
(Yes, Saul it is) with noble thoughts possessed?
May they beget like Acts. With that she takes
One of her worst, her best beloved Snakes,
Softly, dear Worm, soft and unseen (said she)
Into his bosom steal, and in it be
My Viceroy. At that word she took her flight,
And her loose shape dissolv'ed into the Night.
The infected King leapt from his bed amaz'ed,
Scarce knew himself at first, but round him gazed,
And started back at piec'ed-up shapes, which fear
And his distracted Fancy painted there.
Terror froze up his hair, and on his face
Show'ers of cold sweat rolled trembling down apace.
Then knocking with his angry hands his breast,
Earth with his feet; He cries, Oh it is confessed;
22 I'have been a pious fool, a Woman-King;
Wronged by a Seer, a Boy, every thing.
23 Eight hundred years of Death is not so deep,
So unconcerned as my Lethargick sleep.
My Patience ev'en a Sacrilege becomes,
Disturbs the Dead, and opes their sacred Tombs.
Ah Benjamin, kind Father! who for me
This cursed World endur'est again to see!
All thou have said, Great Vision, is so true,
That all which thou command'st and more I Will do:
Kill him? yes mighty Ghost the wretch shall die,
Though every Star in heav'en should it deny;
Nor mock thassault of our just wrath again,
Had he ten times his fame'd ten thousand slain.
Should that bold popular Madman, 1 Samuel 8. 19.
whose design
Is to revenge his own disgrace by Mine,
Should my ungrateful Son oppose the intent,
Should mine own heart grow scrup'ulous and relent.
Curse me, just Heaven (by which this truth I swear)
If I that Seer, my Son, or Self do spare.
No gentle Ghost, return to thy still home;
Thither this day mine, and thy Foe shall come.
If that cursed object longer vex my sight,
It must have learnt to appear as Thou to night.
Whilst thus his wrath with threats the Tyrant fed,
The threatened youth slept fearless on his bed;
Sleep on, rest quiet as thy Conscience take,
For though Thou sleep'st thy self, thy God's awake.
24 Above the subtle foldings of the Sky,
Above the well-set Orbs soft Harmony,
Above those petty Lamps that guild the Night;
There is a place o'reslown with hallowed Light;
Where Heaven, as if it left it self behind,
Is stretched out far, nor its own bounds can find:
Here peaceful Flames swell up the sacred place,
25 Nor can the glory contain it self in th'endless space.
For there no twilight of the Suns dull ray,
Glimmers upon the pure and native day.
No pale-fac'ed Moon does in stolen beams appear,
Or with dim Taper scatters darkness there.
On no smooth Sphere the restless seasons slide,
No circling Motion does swift Time divide;
Nothing is there To come, and nothing Past,
26 But an Eternal Now does always last.
There sits the Almighty, First of all, and End;
Whom nothing but Himself can comprehend.
Who with his Word commanded All to Be,
And All obeyed him, for that Word was He.
Only he spoke, and every thing that Is
From out the womb of Fertile Nothing ris.
Oh who shall tell, who shall describe thy throne,
Thou Great Three-One?
There Thou thy self do in full presence show,
Not absent from these meaner Worlds below;
No, if thou were, the Elements League would cease,
And all thy Creatures break thy Natures peace*
The Sun would stop his course, or gallop back,
The stars drop out, the Poles themselves would crack:
Earths strong foundations would be torn in twain,
And this vast work all ravel out again
To its first Nothing; For his Spirit contains
27 The well-knit Mass, from him each creature gains
Being and Motion, which he still bestows;
From him the effect of our weak Action flows.
28 Round him vast Armies of swift Angels stand,
Which seven triumphant Generals command,
They sing loud anthemes of his endless praise,
And with fixed eyes drink in immortal rays.
29 Of these he called out one; all Heav'en did shake,
And silence kept whilst its Creator spoke.
Are we forgotten then so soon? can He
Look on his Crown, and not remember Me
That gave it? can he think we did not hear
(Fond Man!) his threats? and have we made the Ear
To be accounted deaf? No, Saul, we heard;
And it will cost thee dear; the ills thou'st feared,
Practiced, or thought on, I Will all double send;
Have we not spoke it, and dares Man contend!
Alas, poor dust! did st thou but know the day
When thou must lie in blood at Gilboa, 1 Samuel 31.

Thou, and thy Sons, thou would not threaten still,
Thy trembling Tongue would stop against thy will.
Then shall thine Head fixed in cursed Temples be,
And all their foolish Gods shall laugh at Thee.
That hand which now on David's Life would prey,
Shall then turn just, and its own Master slay;
He, whom thou hat'est, on thy lov'ed Throne shall sit,
And expiate the disgrace thou do'est to it.
Have then; tell David what his King has sworn,
Tell him whose blood must paint this rising Morn.
Yet bid him go securely when he sends;
30 It Is Saul that is his Foe, and we his Friends.
The Man who has his God no aid can lack,
And we who bid him Go, will bring him back.
He spoke; the Heavens seemed decently to bow,
With all their bright Inhabitants; and now
The jocond Sphaeres began again to play,
Again each Spirit sung Halleluia.
Only that Angel was strait gone; Ev'en so
(But not so swift) the morning Glories flow
At once from the bright Sun, and strike the ground;
So winged Lightning the soft air does wound.
Slow Time admires, and knows not what to call
The Motion, having no Account so small.
So flew this Agel, till to David's bed
He came, and thus his sacred Message said,
31 Awake, young Man, hear what thy King has sworn;
He swore thy blood should paint this rising Morn.
Yet to him go securely when he sends;
It Is Saul that is your Foe, and God your Friends.
The Man who has his God, no aid can lack;
And he who bids thee Go, will bring thee back.
Up leapt Iessides, and did round him stare;
But could see naught; for naught was left but air,
Whilst this great Vision labors in his thought,
Lo, the short Prophecy to effect is brought.
In treacherous haste he is sent for to the King,
And with him bid his charmful Lyre to bring. 1 Samuel 18. 10. and 19. 9.

The King, they say, lies raging in a Fit,
Which does no cure but sacred tunes admit;
32 And true it was, 1 Samuel 16. 23.
soft music did appease
Th'obscure fantastic rage of Saul's disease.
33 Tell me, oh Muse (for Thou, or none can tell
The mystic pow'ers that in blessed Numbers dwell,
Thou their great Nature know, nor is it fit
This noblest Gem of thine own Crown t'omit)
Tell me from whence these heavenly charms arise;
Teach the dull world t'admire what they despise,
As first a various unformed Hint we find
Rise in some god-like Poets fertile Mind,
Till all the parts and words their places take,
And with just marches verse and music make;
34 Such was Gods Poem, this Worlds new Essay;
So wild and rude in its first draught it lay;
Th'ungovern'd parts no Correspondence knew,
An artless war from thwarting Motions grew;
Till they to Number and fixed rules were brought
By the aeternal minds Poetic Thought.
35 Water and Air he for the Tenor chose,
Earth made the Base, the Treble Flame arose,
36 To th'active Moon a quick brisk stroke he gave,
To Saturns string a quick brisk stroke he grave,
The motions Strait, and Round, and Swift, and Slow,
And Short and Long, were mixed and woven so,
Did in such artful Figures smoothly fall,
As made this decent measur'ed Dance of All.
And this is Music; Sounds that charm our ears,
Is but one Dressing that rich Science wears.
Though no man hear't, though no man it rehearse,
Yet will there still be music in my Verse.
In this Great World so much of it we see;
37 The Lesser, Man, is all over Harmony.
Storechouse of all Proportions! single Quire!
Which first Gods Breath did tunefully inspire!
From hence blessed Musicks heav'enly charms arise,
From sympathy which Them and Man allies.
Thus they our souls, thus they our Bodies win,
Not by their Force, but Party that is within.
38 Thus the strange Cure on our spilt Blood applied,
Sympathy to the distant Wound does guide.
39 Thus when two Brethren strings are set alike,
To move them both, but one of them we strike.
Thus David's Lyre did Saul's wild rage control,
40 And tuned the harsh disorders of his Soul.
41 When Isra'el was from bondage led, Psalm. 114. 41

Led by the Almighties hand
From out a foreign land,
The great Sea beheld, and fled.
As men pursu'ed, when that fear past they find,
Stop on some higher ground to look behind,
So whilst through wondrous ways
The sacred Army went,
The waves afar stood up to gaze,
And their own Rocks did represent,
Solid as Waters are above the Firmament.
Old Iordans waters to their spring
Start back with sudden fright;
The spring amaz'ed at sight,
Asks what News from Sea they bring.
The Mountains shook; and to the Mountains side,
The little Hills leapt round themselves to hide;
As young affrighted Lambs
When they ought dreadful spy,
Run trembling to their helpless Dams;
The mighty Sea and River by,
Were glad for their excuse to see the Hills to fly.
What ailed the mighty Sea to flee?
Or why did Iordans tide
Back to his fountain glide?
Iordans Tide, what ailed Thee?
Why leapt the Hills? why did the Mountains shake?
What ailed them their fixed Natures to forsake?
Fly where thou will, O Sea!
And Iordans current cease;
Jordan there is no need of thee,
For at Gods word, when e're he please,
The Rocks shall weep new Waters forth instead of these. Exo. 17. 6. Number. 20.
11.

Thus sung the great Musician to his Lyre;
And Saul's black rage grew softly to retire;
But Envys serpent still with him remained,
42 And the wise Charmers healthful voice disdained. Psa. 58. 5.

Th'unthankful King cur'ed truly of his fit,
Seems to lie drowned and buried still in it.
From his past madness draws this wicked use,
To sin disguis'ed, and murder with excuse:
For whilst the fearless youth his cure pursues,
And the soft Medicine with kind art renews;
The barb'arous Patient casts at him his spear, 1 Samuel 18. 11. and 19. 10.

(The usual Scepter that rough hand did bear)
Casts it with violent strength, but into th'roome
An Arm more strong and sure then his was come;
An Angel whose unseen and easy might
Put by the weapon, and misled it right.
How vain Man's pow'er is! unless God command,
The weapon disobeys his Masters hand!
Happy was now the error of the blow;
At Gilboa it will not serve him so.
One would have thought, Saul's sudden rage to have seen,
He had himself by David wounded been.
He scorned to leave what he did ill begin,
And thought his Honor now engag'ed in the Sin.
A bloody Troop of his own Guards he sends
( Slaves to his Will, and falsely call'ed his Friends)
To mend his error by a surer blow,
So Saul ordain'ed, but God ordain'ed not so.
Home flies the Prince, and to his trembling Wife
Relates the new-past hazard of his life,
Which she with decent passion hears him tell;
For not her own fair Eyes she lov'ed so well.
43 Upon their Palace top beneath a row
Of Lemon Trees, which there did proudly grow,
And with bright stores of golden fruit repay
The Light they drank from the Suns neighboring ray,
(A small, but artful Paradise) they walked;
And hand in hand sad gentle things they talked.
Here Michol first an armed Troop espies
(So faithful and so quick are loving Eyes)
Which marched, and often glister'd through a wood,
That on right hand of her fair Palace stood; 1 Samuel 19. 11.

She saw them; and cried out; They Are come to kill
My dearest Lord; Saul's spear pursues thee still.
Behold his wicked Guards; Haste quickly, fly,
For heavens sake haste; My dear Lord, do not die.
Ah cruel Father, whose ill-natur'ed rage
Neither thy Worth, nor Marriage can assuage!
Will he part those he joined so late before?
Were the two-hundred Foreskins worth no more?
He shall not part us; 1 Samuel 18. 27.
(Then she wept between)
At yonder Window thou may escape unseen;
This hand shall let thee down; stay not, but have;
It Is not my Use to send thee hence so fast.
Best of all women, he replies -- and this
Scarce* spoke, she stops his answer with a Kiss;
Throw not away (said she) thy precious breath,
Thou stay'st too long within the reach of death.
Timely he'obeys her wise advice, and streit
44 To unjust Force she' opposes just deceit. 1 Samuel 19 13.

She meets the Murd'erers with a virtuous Ly,
And good dissembling Tears; May he not die
In quiet then? 1 Samuel 19* 14.
(said she) will they not give
That freedom who so fear least he should Live?
Even fate does with your cruelty conspire,
And spares your guilt, yet does what you desire.
Must he not live? for that ye need not sin;
My much-wrong'd Husband speechless lies within,
And has too little left of vital breath
To know his Murderers, or to feel his Death.
One hour will do your work --
Here her well-governed Tears dropped down apace;
Beauty and Sorrow mingled in one face
Has such resistless charms that they believe,
And an unwilling aptness find to grieve
At what they came for; A pale Statues head
In linen wrapped appeared on David's bed;
Two servants mournful stand and silent by,
And on the table med'cinal relics ly;
In the close room a wel-plac'ed Tapers light,
Adds a becoming horror to the sight.
And for th Impression God prepar'ed their Sense;
They saw, believed all this, and parted thence.
How vain attempts Saul's unblest anger tryes,
By his own hands deceived, and servants Eyes!
It cannot be (said he) no, can it? shall
Our great ten thousand Slayer idly fall?
The silly rout thinks God protects him still;
But God, alas, guards not the bad from ill.
Oh may he guard him! may his members be
In as full strength, and well-set harmony
As the fresh body of the first made Man
Ere Sin, or Sins just meed, Disease began.
He will be else too small for our vast Hate;
And we must share in our revenge with fate.
No; let us have him Whole; we else may seem
To' have snatched away but some few days from him
And cut that Thread which would have dropped in two;
Will our great anger learn to stoop so low?
I know it cannot, will not; him we prize
Of our just wrath the solemn Sacrifize,
45 That must not blemished be; let him remain
Secure, and grow up to our stroke again.
'Twill be some pleasure then to take his breath,
When he shall strive, and wrestle with his death;
Go, let him live -- And yet -- shall I then stay
So long? good and great actions hate delay.
Some foolish piety perhaps, or He
That has been still mine honors Enemy,
Samuel may change or cross my just intent,
And I this Formal Pity soon repent.
Besides Fate gives him me, and whispers this,
That he can fly no more, if we should miss;
Miss? can we miss again; go, bring him strait,
Though gasping out his Soul; 1 Samuel 19. 15.
if the wished date
Of his accursed life be almost past,
Some Joy 'twill be to see him breath his last:
The Troop returned, of their short Virtue' ashame'd,
Saul's courage praised, and their own weakness blam'ed,
But when the pious fraud they understood,
Scarce the respect due to Saul's sacred blood,
Due to the sacred beauty in it reign'ed,
From Michols murder their wild rage restrain'ed.
She'alleag'ed the holiest chains that bind a wife,
Duty and Love; 1 Samuel 19. 17.
she alleag'ed that her own Life,
Had she refus'ed that safety to her Lord,
Would have incurred just danger from his sword.
Now was Saul's wrath full grown; he takes no rest;
A violent Flame rolls in his troubled breast,
And in fierce Lightning from his Eye does break;
Not his own fav'orites, and best friends dare speak,
Or look on him; but mute and trembling all,
Fear where this Cloud will burst, and Thunder fall.
So when the pride and terror of the Wood,
A Lion pricked with rage and want of food,
Espies out from afar some well-fed beast,
And brustles up preparing for his feast;
If that by swiftness escape his gaping jaws;
His bloody eyes he hurls round, his sharp paws
Tear up the ground; then runs he wild about,
Lashing his angry tail, and roaring out.
Beasts creep into their dens, and tremble there;
Trees, though no wind be stirring, shake with fear;
Silence and horror fill the place around;
Echo it self dares scarce repeat the sound.
46 Midst a large Wood that joins fair Ramahs Town
(The neighborhood fair Rama's chief renown)
47 A College stands, 1 Samuel 19. 19.
where at great Prophets feet
The Prophets Sons with silent dilig'ence meet,
By Samuel built, and mod'erately endow'ed,
Yet more to'his lib'eral Tongue then Hands they ow'ed.
There himself taught, and his blessed voice to hear,
Teachers themselves lay proud beneath him there.
The House was a large Square; but plain and low;
Wise Natures use Art strove not to outgo.
An inward Square by well-rang'd Trees was made;
And midst the friendly covert of their shade,
A pure, well-tasted, wholesome Fountain rose;
Which no vain cost of Marble did enclose;
Nor through carved shapes did the forc'ed waters pass,
Shapes gazing on themselves in the liquid glass.
Yet the chaste stream that among loose peebles fell
48 For Cleanness, Thirst, Religion served as well.
49 The Scholars, Doctors* and Companions here,
Lodg'ed all apart in neat small chambers were:
Well-furnisht Chambers, for in each there stood,
50 A narrow Couch, Table and Chair of wood;
More is but clog where use does bound delight;
And those are rich whose Wealth's proportion'ed right
To their Life's Form; more goods would but become
A burden to the man contracts his room.
A second Court more sacred stood behind,
Built fairer, and to nobler use designed:
The Hall and Schools one side of it possessed;
The Library and Synagogue the rest.
Tables of plain-cut Fur adorn'ed the Hall;
51 And with beasts skins the beds were cov'red all.
52 The reverend Doctors take their seats on high,
The Elect Companions in their bosoms ly.
The Scholars far below upon the ground,
On fresh-strew'd rushes place themselves around*
With more respect the wise and ancient lay;
But eat not choicer Herbs or Bread then they,
Nor purer Waters drank, their constant feast;
But by great days, and Sacrifice encreast.
The Schools built round and higher, at the end
With their fair circle did this side extend;
To which their Synagogue on the other side,
And to the Hall their Library replide.
The midst tow'ards their large Gardens open lay,
To'admit the joys of Spring and early day.
In The Library a few choice Authors stood;
Yet 'twas well stor'ed, for that small store was good;
Writing, Man's Spir'itual Physic was not then
It self, as now, grown a Disease of Men.
Learning (young Virgin) but few Suitors knew;
The common Prostitute she lately grew,
And with her spurious brood loads now the press;
Laborious effects of Idleness!
Here all the various forms one might behold
How Letters save'd themselves from Death of old;
53 Some painfully engrav'ed in thin wrought plates,
Some cut in wood, some lightlier trac'ed on slates;
54 Some drawn on fair Palm leaves, with short-live'd toil,
Had not their friend the Cedar lent his Oil.
55 Some wrought in Silks, some writ in tender barks;
Some the sharp Style in waxen Tables marks;
56 Some in beasts skins, and some in Biblos reed;
Both new rude arts, which age and growth did need.
The Schools were painted well with useful skill;
Stars, Maps, and Stories the learned wall did fill.
Wise wholesome Proverbs mixed around the room*
57 Some writ, and in Egyptian Figures some.
Here all the noblest Wits of men inspir'ed,
From earths slight joys, and worthless toils retire'd,
Whom Samuels Fame and Bounty thither lead,
Each day by turns their solid knowledge read.
58 The course and power of Stars great Nathan taught,
And home to man those distant wonders brought,
How toward both Poles the Suns fixed journey bends,
And how the Year his crooked walk attends.
By what just steps the wandering Lights advance,
And what aeternal measures guide their dance.
Himself a Prophet; but his Lectures shew'ed
How little of that Art to them he owed.
Mahol th'inferior worlds fantastic face,
Though all the turns of Matters Maze did trace,
Great Natures well-set Clock in pieces took;
On all the Springs and smallest Wheels did look
Of Life and Motion; and with equal art
Made up again the Whole of every Part.
The Prophet Gad in learned Dust designs
The Immortal solid rules of fanci'ed Lines.
Of Numbers too the unnumbred wealth he shows,
And with them far their endless journey goes.
59 Numbers which still increase more high and wide
From One, the root of their turned Pyramide.
Of Men, and Ages past Seraiah read;
Embalmed in long-live'd History the Dead.
Showed the steep falls, and slow ascent of States;
What Wisdom and what Follies make their Fates.
Samuel himself did Gods rich Law display;
Taught doubting men with Judgment to obey.
And often his ravished Soul with sudden flight
Soared above present Times, and humane sight.
These Arts but welcome strangers might appear,
Music and Verse seemed born and bred up here;
Scarce the blessed Heav'en that rings with Angels voice,
Does with more constant Harmony rejoice.
The sacred Muse does here each breast inspire;
Heman, and sweet-mouth'd Asaph rule their Quire:
Both charming Poets, and all strains they played,
By artful Breath, or nimble Fingers made.
The Synagogue was dressed with care and cost,
(The only place where that they'esteem'd not lost)
The glittering roof with gold did daze the view,
60 The sides refresh't with silks of sacred blew.
Here thrice each day they read their perfect Law,
Thrice pray'ers from willing Heav'en a blessing draw;
Thrice in glad Hymns swelled with the Great Ones praise,
61 The plyant Voice on her sev'en steps they raise,
Whilst all the enlivened Instruments around
To the just feet with various concord sound;
Such things were Muses then, contemned low earth;
Decently p^oud, and mindful of their birth.
'Twas God himself that here tun'ed every Tongue;
And gratefully of him alone they sung.
62 They sung how God spoke out the worlds vast ball;
From Nothing, and from No where called forth All.
No Nature yet, or place for it to possess,
But an unbottom'ed Gulf of Emptiness.
Full of Himself, the Almighty sat, his own
63 Palace, and without Solitude Alone.
But he was Goodness whole, and all things willed;
Which ere they were, his active word fulfilled;
And their astonished heads of the sudden rear'ed;
An unshap'ed kind of Something first appeared,
Confessing its new Being, and undrest
As if it stepped in haste before the rest.
Yet buried in this Matters darksome womb,
Lay the rich Seeds of ev'ery thing to com.
From hence the cheerful Flame leapt up so high;
Close at its heels the nimble Air did fly;
Dull Earth with his own weight did downwards pierce
To the fixed Navel of the Universe,
And was quite lost in waters: till God said
To the proud Sea, shrink in your ins'olent head,
See how the gaping Earth has made you place;
That durst not murmr, but shrunk in apace.
Since when his bounds are set, at which in vain
He foams, and rages, and turns back again.
With richer stuff he bad Heav'ens fabric shine,
And from him a quick spring of Light divine
Swelled up the Sun, from whence his cher'ishing flame
Fills the whole world, like Him from whom it came.
He smoothed the rough-cast Moons imperfect mold,
And comb'ed her beamy locks with sacred gold;
Be Thou (said he) Queen of the mournful night,
And as he spoke, she'arose clad over in Light,
With thousand stars attending on her train;
With her they rise, with her they set again.
Then Herbs peep'ed forth, new Trees admiring stood,
And smelling Flow'ers painted the infant wood.
Then flocks of Birds through the glad air did flee,
Joyful, and safe before Man's Luxury,
Teaching their Maker in their untaught lays:
Nay the mute Fish witness no less his praise.
For those he made, and clothed with silver scales;
From Minoes to those living Islands, Whales.
Beasts too were his command: what could he more?
Yes, Man he could, the bond of all before;
In him he all things with strange order hurled;
In him, that full Abridgement of the World.
This, and much more of Gods great works they told;
His mercies, and some judgments too of old:
How when all earth was deeply stained in sin;
With an impetuous noise the waves came rushing in.
Where birds ere while dwelt, and securely sung;
There Fish (an unknown Net) entangled hung.
The face of shipwrackt Nature naked lay;
The Sun peeped forth, and beheld naught but Sea.
This men forgot, and burnt in lust again;
Till showers, strange as their Sin, of fiery rain,
And scalding brimstone, dropped on Sodoms head;
Alive they felt those Flames they fry in Dead.
No better end rash Pharaohs pride befell
When wind and Sea wag'ed war for Israel.
In his gilt chariots amaz'ed fishes sat,
And grew with corpse of wretched Princes fat.
The waves and rocks half-eaten bodies stain;
Nor was it since called the Red sea in vain.
Much too they told of faithful Abrams fame,
64 To whose blessed passage they owe still their Name:
Of Moses much, and the great seed of Nun;
What wonders they performed, what lands they won.
How many Kings they slew or Captive brought;
They held the Swords, but God and Angels fought.
Thus gained they the wise spending of their days*
And their whole Life was their dear Makers praise.
No minutes rest, no swiftest thought they sold
To that beloved Plague of Mankind, Gold.
Gold for which all mankind with greater pains
Labor toward Hell, then those who dig its vains.
Their wealth was the Contempt of it; which more
They valued then rich fools the shining Ore.
The Silk-worm's precious, death they scorned to wear,
And Tyrian Die appeared but sordid there.
Honor, which since the price of Souls became,
Seemed to these great ones a low idle Name.
Instead of Down, hard beds they chose to have,
Such as might bid them not forget their Grave.
Their Board dispeopled no full Element,
Free Natures bounty thriftily they spent
And spar'ed the Stock; nor could their bodies say
We owe this Crudeness t'Excess yesterday.
Thus Souls live cleanly, and no soiling fear,
But entertain their welcome Maker there.
The Senses perform nimbly what they are bid,
And honestly, nor are by Reason chid.
And when the Down of sleep does softly fall,
65 Their Dreams are heavenly then, and mystical.
With hasty wings Time present they outfly,
And tread the doubtful Maze of Destiny.
There walk and sport among the years to come;
And with quick Eye pierce ev'ery Causes womb:
Thus these wise Saints enjoyed their Little All;
Free from the spite of much-mistaken Saul:
For if man's Life we in just balance weigh,
David deserved his Envy less then They.
Of this retreat the hunted Prince makes choice,
Adds to their Quire his nobler Lyre and Voice.
But long unknown even here he could not lie;
So bright his Luster, so quick Envies Eye!
The Offended Troop, 1 Samuel 19. 20.
whom he escap'ed before,
Pursue him here, and fear mistakes no more;
Belov'ed revenge fresh rage to them affords;
Some part of him all promise to their Swords:
They came, but a new spirit their hearts possessed,
Scattering a sacred calm through every breast:
The furrows of their brow, so rough erewhile,
Sink down into the dimples of a Smile.
Their cooler veins swell with a peaceful tide,
And the chaste streams with even current glide.
A sudden day breaks gently through their eyes,
And Morning-b^ushes in their cheeks arise.
The thoughts of war, of blood, and murder cease;
In peaceful tunes they adore the God of Peace.
New Messengers twice more the Tyrant sent, Ib. v. 21.

And was twice more mocked with the same event.
His heightened rage no longer brooks delay;
It sends him there himself; Ib. v. 23.
but on the way
His foolish Anger a wise Fury grew,
And Blessings from his mouth unbidden flew.
His Kingly robes he laid at Naioth down,
Began to understand and scorn his Crown;
Employed his mounting thoughts on nobler things;
And felt more solid joys then Empire brings.
Embrac'ed his wondering Son, and on his head
The balm of all past wounds, kind Tears he shed.
So cov'etous Balam with a fond intent
Of cursing the blessed Seed, Number. 22.
to Moab went.
But as he went his fatal tongue to sell;
His Ass taught him to speak, God to speak well. Ib. v. 28.

How comely are thy Tents, Number, 24. 5.
oh Israel!
(Thus he began) what conquests they foretell!
Less fair are Orchards in their autumn pride,
Adorned with Trees on some fair Rivers side.
Less fair are Valleys their green mantles spread!
Or Mountains with tall Cedars on their head!
'Twas God himself (thy God who must not fear?)
Brought thee from Bondage to be Master here.
Slaughter shall wear out these; new weapons get;
And Death in triumph on thy darts shall sit.
When Iudahs Lion starts up to his prey,
The beasts shall hang their ears, and creep away.
When he lies down, the Woods shall silence keep,
And dreadful Tigers tremble at his sleep.
Thy Cursers, Jacob, shall twice cursed be;
And he shall bless himself that blesses Thee.
NOTES UPON THE FIRST BOOK.
1. THe custom of beginning all Poems, with a Proposition of the whole work,
and an Invocation of some God for his assistance to go through with it, is so
Solemnly and religiously observed by all the ancient Poets, that though I could
have found out a better way, I should not (I think) have ventured upon it. But
there can be, I believe, none better; and that part, of the Invocation, if it
became a Heathen, is no less then Necessary for a Christian Poet. A Jove
principium, Musae; and it follows then very naturally, Iovis omnia plena. The
whole work may reasonably hope to be filled with a Divine Spirit, when it
begins with a Prayer to be so. The Grecians built this Portal with less state,
and made but one part of these Two; in which, and almost all things else, I
prefer the judgment of the Latins; though generally they abused the Prayer,
by converting it from the Deity, to the worst of Men, their Princes: as Lucan
addresses it to Nero, and Statius to Domitian; both imitating therein (but not
equalling) Virgil, who in his Georgicks chooses Augustus for the Object of his
Invocation, a God little superior to the other two.

2. I call it Judah's, rather then Israel's Scepter (though in the notion of
distinct Kingdoms, Israel was very much the greater) First, because David
himself was of that Tribe. Secondly, because he was first made King of Judah,
and this Poem was designed no farther then to bring him to his Inauguration at
Hebron. Thirdly, because the Monarchy of Judah lasted longer, not only in his
Race, but out-lasted all the several races of the Kings of Israel. And lastly,
and chiefly, because our Savior descended from him in that Tribe, which makes
it infinitely more considerable then all the rest.

3. I hope this kind of boast (which I have been taught by almost all the old
Poets) will not seem immodest; for though some in other Languages have
attempted the writing a Divine Poem; yet none, that I know of, has in English:
So Virgil says in the 3 of his Georgicks Sed me Parnassi deserta per ardua
dulcis
Raptat amor, juvat ire jugis, qua nulla priorum
Castaliam molli divertitur orbita clivo.
Because none in Latin had written of that subject. So Horace, Libera, per
vacuum posui vestigia princeps,
Non aliena meo pressi pede. --
And before them both Lucretius, Avia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius ante
Trita solo, juvat integros accedere fontes
Atque haurire --
And so Nemessarius, -- Ducitque per avia, qua sola nunquam
Trita rotis --
Though there he does wrong to Gratius, who treated of the same argument before
him. And so Oppian, 1o Ven. (...). My own allusion here is to the passage of
the Israelites through the Wilderness, in which they were guided by a Pillar of
Flame.

4. Though there have been three Temples at Jerusalem, the first built by
Solomon, the second by Zorobabel, and the third by Herod (for it appears by
Josephus, that Herod plucked down the old Temple, and built a new one) yet I
mention only the first, and last, which were very much superior to that of
Zorobabel in riches and magnificence, though that was forty six years a
building, whereas Herod's was but eight, and Solomon's seven; of all three the
last was the most stately; and in that, and not Zorobabels Temple, was
fulfilled the Prophecy of Hagai, that the glory of the last House should be
greater then of the first.

5. To be made an Apostle for the conversion of Poetry to Christianity, as S.
Paul was for the conversion of the Gentiles; which was done not only by the
Word, as Christ was the Eternal Word of his Father; but by his becoming a
Particular Word or Call to him. This is more fully explained in the Latin
Translation.

6. It was the same case with Hercules; and therefore I am not afraid to apply
to this subject that which Seneca makes Juno speak of him in Hercul. Fur.
Superat, and crescit malis,
Iraque nostra fruitur, in lauds suas
Mea vertit odia, dum nimis saeva impero.
Patrem probavi; gloriae feci locum.
And a little after, Minorque labor est Herculi jussa exequi,
Quam mihi jubere --


7. In the public Games of Greece, Palm was made the sign and reward of
Victory, because it is the nature of that Tree to resist, overcome, and thrive
the better for all pressures, -- Palmaque nobilis
Terrarum dominos evehit ad Deos. Hor. Od. 1.
From whence Palma is taken frequently by the Poets, and Orators too, for the
Victory it self. And the Greek Grammarians say, that (...) (to overcome) is
derived from the same sense, (...), a non cedendo.

8. Shore is properly spoken of the Sea, and Banks of Rivers: and the same
difference is between Littus and Ripa; but yet Littus is frequently taken among
the best Latin Authors for Ripa, as I do here Shore for Bank; Virgil Littora
quae dulces auras diffunditis agris,
Speaking of Mineius.

9. That the Matter of winds is an Exhalation arising out of the
conconcavities, of the Earth, is the opinion of Aristotle, and almost all
Philosophers since him, except some few who follow Hippocrates his doctrine,
who defined the wind to be Air in motion, or flux. In those concavities when
the Exhalations (which Seneca calls (Subterranean Clouds) overcharge the place,
the moist ones turn into water, and the dry ones into Winds; and these are the
secret Treasuries, out of which God is in the Scripture said to bring them.
This was also meant by the Poets, who feigned that they were kept by Aeolus,
imprisoned in deep caves, -- Hic vasto Rex Aeolus antro
Luct antes ventos tempestatesque sonoras
Imperio premit, ac vinclis and carcere fraenat.
Upon which methinks, Seneca is too critical, when he says, Non intoller it,
nec id quod clausum est, esse adhuc ventum, nec id quod ventus est, posse
claudi; nam quod in clause est, quiescit, and aeris statio est, emnis in fuga
ventus est: For though it get not yet out, it is wind as soon as it stirs
within, and attempts to do so. However, my Epithete of unfletcht Tempests might
pass with him; for as soon as the wings are grown, it either flies away, or in
case of extreme resistance (if it be very strong) causes an Earthquake. Iuvenal
Sat. 5. expresses very well the South wind, in one of these dens. -- Dum se
continet Auster,
Dum sedet, and siccat madidas in carcere pennas.


10. To give a probable reason of the perpetual supply of waters to Fountains
and Rivers, it is necessary to establish an Abyss or deep gulf of waters, into
which the Sea discharges it self, as Rivers do into the Sea; all which maintain
a perpetual Circulation of water, like that of Blood in man's body: For to refer
the original of all Fountains to condensation, and afterward dissolution of
vapors under the earth, is one of the most unphilosophical opinions in all
Aristotle. And this Abyss of waters is very agreeable to the Scriptures. Jacob
blesses Joseph with the Blessings of the heavens above, and with the Blessings
of the Deep beneath; that is, with the dew and rain of heaven, and with the
fountains and rivers that arise from the Deep; and Esdras conformably to this,
asks, What habitations are in the heart of the Sea, and what veins in the root
of the Abyss? So at the end of the Deluge, Moses says, that God stopped the
windows of heaven, and the fountains of the Abyss.

And undisturbed by Moons in silence sleep. For I suppose the Moon to be the
principal, if not sole cause of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, but to have
no effect upon the waters that are beneath the Sea it self.

11. This must be taken in a Poetical sense; for else, making Hell to be in the
Center of the Earth, it is far from infinitely large, or deep; yet, on my
conscience, where ere it be, it is not so strait, as that Crowding and sweating
should be one of the Torments of it, as is pleasantly fancied by Bellarmin.
Lessius in his Book de Morib. Divinis, as if he had been there to survey it,
determines the Diameter to be just a Dutch mile. But Ribera, upon (and out of
the Apocalypse) allows Pluto a little more elbow-room, and extends it to 1600
furlongs, that is 200 Italian miles. Virgil (as good a Divine for this matter
as any of them both) says it is twice as deep as the distance betwixt heaven
and earth: Bis patet in praeceps tantum. tenditque sub umbras
Quantus ad aethereum coeli supectus Olympum.
Hesiod is more moderate: (...). Statius puts it very low, but is not so
punctual in the distance: He finds out an Hell beneath the vulgar one,
Indespecta tenet vebis qui Tartara, quorum
Vos est is superi --
Which sure Aeschylus meant too by what he calls (...), the Scripture terms it
Utter Darkness, (...), and (...)

12. There are two opinions concerning Samuels anointing of David: one (which
is Josephus his) that he did it privately, and that it was kept as a secret
from David's Father and Brethren; the other, that it was done before them, which
I rather follow; and therefore we use the word Boldly: nay, I believe, that
most of the people, and Jonathan, and Saul himself knew it, for so it seems by
Saul's great jealousy of his being appointed to succeed him; and Jonathan avows
his knowledge of it to David himself; and therefore makes a Covenant with him,
that he should use his family kindly when he came to be King. Anointing did
properly belong to the Inauguration of High Priests; and was applied to Kings
(and likewise even to Prophets) as they were a kind of extraordinary High
Priests, and did often exercise the duties of their function, which makes me
believe that Saul was so severely reproved and punished; not so much for
offering Sacrifice (as an usurpation of the Priests office) as for his
infidelity in not staying longer for Samuel, as he was appointed by Samuel;
that is, by God himself. But there is a Tradition out of the Rabbis, that the
manner of anointing Priests and Kings was different; as, that the Oil was
poured in a Cross (decussatim, like the figure of Ten X) upon the Priests
heads, and Round in fashion of a Crown upon their Kings; which I follow here,
because it sounds more poetically (The royal drops round his enlarged head) not
that I have any faith in the authority of those Authors.

13. The Prophecy of Jacob at his death concerning all his Sons, Genesis 49. v.
10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his
fect, till Shilo come, and to him shall belong the assembling of Nations. All
Interpreters agree, that by Shilo is meant the Messiah; but almost all
translate it differently. The Septuagint, Donec veniant, (...), quae reposita
sunt ei. Tertullian, and some other Fathers, Donec veniat cui repositum est.
The vulgar Edition, Qui mittendus est; some of the Rabbis, Filius ejus;
others, Filius mulieris others, Rex Messiah; others, Sospitator, or
Tranquillator; ours, and the French Translation retain the word Shilo, which I
choose to follow.

14. Though none of the English Poets, nor indeed of the ancient Latin, have
imitated Virgil in leaving sometimes half verses (where the sense seem to
invite a man to that liberty) yet his authority alone is sufficient, especially
in a thing that looks so naturally and gracefully: and I am far from their
opinion, who think that Virgil himself intended to have filled up those broken
Hemistiques: There are some places in him, which I dare almost swear have been
made up since his death by the putid officiousness of some Grammarians; as that
of Dido, -- Moriamur inultae?
Sed moriamur, ait. --
Here I am confident Virgil broke off; and indeed what could be more proper for
the passion she was then in, then to conclude abruptly with that resolution?
nothing could there be well added; but if there were a necessity of it, yet
that which follows, is of all things that could have been thought on, the most
improper, and the most false, Sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras;
Which is contrary to her sense; for to have dyed revenged, would have been
Sic, sic juvat ire sub umbras.
Shall we dye (says she) unrevenged? That Is all that can make death unpleasant
to us: but however it is necessary to dye. I remember, when I made once this
exception to a friend of mine, he could not tell how to answer it, but by
correcting the Print, and putting a note of Intorrogation after the first Sic.
Sic? sic juvat ire sub umbras:
Which does indeed a little mend the sense; but then the expression (to make an
Interrogation of Sic alone) is lame, and not like the Latin of Virgil, or of
that age: But of this enough. Though the Ancients did not (as I said) imitate
Virgil in the use of these broken verses; yet that they approved it, appears by
Ovid, who (as Seneca reports in the 16 Controversy) upon these two verses of
Varro. Desierant latrare canes, urbesque silebant,
Omnia noctis erant placida composta quiet,
Said they would have been much better, if the latter part of the second verse
had been left out; and that it had ended, Omnia noctis erant --
Which it is pity that Ovid saw not in some of his own verses, as most
remarkably in that, Omnia pontus erant, deerant quoque littora ponto,
All things was Sea, nor had the Sea a Shore.
Where he might have ended excellently with Omnia pontus erat --
But the addition is superfluous, even to ridiculousness.

15. An Aposiopoesis, like Virgils Quos ego -- Sed motos praestat componere
fluctus.
This would ill befit the mouth of any thing but a Fury; but it were improper
for a Devil to make a whole speech without some lies in it; such are those
precedent exaltations of the Devils power, which are most of them false, but
not All, for that were too much even for a Fury; nor are her boasts more false,
then her threatenings vain, where she says afterward, It Is not thy God himself
-- yet Seneca ventures to make a man say as much in Her. Fur. Amplectere aras,
nullus eripiet Deus
Te m^hi --


16. Cain was the first and greatest example of Envy in this world; who slew
his Brother, because his Sacrifice was more acceptable to God then his own; at
which the Scripture says, He was sorely angered, and his countenance cast down.
It is hard to guess what it was in Cains Sacrifice that displeased God; the
Septuagint make it to be a defect in the Quality, or Quantity of the Offering,
(...); If thou have offered right, but not rightly divided, have thou not
sinned? but this Translation, neither the Vulgar Edition, nor ours, nor almost
any follows. We must therefore be content to be ignorant of the cause, since it
has pleased God not to declare it; neither is it declared in what manner he
slew his Brother: And therefore I had the Liberty to choose that which I
thought most probable; which is, that he knocked him on the head with some great
stone, which was one of the first ordinary and most natural weapons of Anger.
That this stone was big enough to be the Monument or Tombstone of Abel, is not
so Hyperbolical, as what Virgil says in the same kind of Turnus, -- Saxum
circumspicit ingens,
Saxum antiquum ingens, campo qui forte jacebat
Limes agro positus, litem ut discerneret agris,
Vix illud lecti bis sex cervice subirent,
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus,
Ille manu raptum trepida torquebat in hostem:
Which he takes from Homer, but adds to the Hyperbole, (...). Il. 21. Ovid is
no less bold, Metamorph. 12. Codice qui misso quem vix juga bina moverent
Iuncta, Phololeniden a summo vertice fregit.


17. Though the Jews used to buty, and not to Burn the Dead, yet it is very
probable that some Nations, even so anciently, practiced Burning of them, and
that is enough to make it allowable for the Fury here to allude to that custom:
which if we believe Statius, was received even among the Graecians before the
Theban War.

18. Beelzebub. That one evil Spirit presided over the others, was not only the
received opinion of the ancients, both Jews and Gentiles; but appears out of
the Scriptures, where he is called, Prince of this world* John 12. 31. Prince
of this age, Corinth. 11. 6. Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 11. 2.
Prince of Devils, Mat. 12. 24. by the express name of Beelzebub, which is the
reason why I use it here. Porphyrius says his name is Serapis, (...). According
to which Statius calls him Triplicis mundi summum; but names him not: for he
adds, Quem scire nefastum est. This is the Spirit to whom the two verses,
cited by the same Porphyry address themselves, (...)
(...).
O thou Spirit that have the command of guilty souls, beneath the vaults of the
air, and above those of the eatth; which I should rather read (...); And
beneath the vaults of the earth too.

Now for the name of Beelzebub, it signifies the Lord of Flies; which some think
to be a name of scorn given by the Jews to this great Jupiter of the Syrians,
whom they called (...), id est, (...), because the Sacrifices in his Temple
were infested with multitudes of Flies, which by a peculiar privilege,
notwithstanding the darly great number of Sacrifices, never came (for such is
the Tradition) into the Temple at Jerusalem. But others believe it was no
mock-name, but a Surname of Baal, as he was worshipped at Ekron, either from
bringing or driving away swarms of Flies, with which the Eastern Countries were
often molested; and their reason is, because Ahaziah in the time of his
sickness (when it is likely he would not railly with the God from whom he hoped
for relief) sends to him under this name of Beelzebub.

19. That even insensible things are affected with horror at the presence of
Devils, is a frequent exaggeration of stories of that kind; and could not well
be omitted at the appearance of Poetical Spirits, Tartaream intendit vocem, qua
protinus omne
Contremuit nemus, and sylvae intonuere profundae.
Audiit and Triviae long lacus, etc. -- Virg. Aeneid. 7.
And Seneca nearer to my purpose in Thyestes: Sensit introitus tuos Domus, and
nefando tota contactu horruit -- Iam tuum moestiae pedem Terrae gravantur,
Cernis ut fontes liquor Introrsus actus linquat, ut regio vacent, etc: And
after, Imo mugit e fundo solum, Tonat dies serenus ac totis domus ut fracta
tectis crepuit, and moti Lares vertere vultum. When Statius makes the Ghost of
Laius to come to Eteocles to encourage him to the war with his Brother, I
cannot understand why he makes him assume the shape of Tiresias, Longaevi vatis
opacos Induitur vultus, vocemque and vellera, since at his going away he
discovers him to be Laius, -- Ramos, ac vellera fronti
Diripuit confessus avum --
Neither do I more approve in this point of Virgils method, who in the 7
Aeneid, brings Alecto to Turnus at first in the shape of a Priestes^, Fit
Calybe Iunonis anus; --
But at her leaving of him, makes her take upon her, her own figure of a Fury,
and so speak to him* which might have been done, methinks, as well at first, or
indeed better not done at all; for no person is so imp^oper to persuade man to
any undertaking, as the Devil without a disguise: which is the reason why I
make him here both come in, and go out too in the likeness of Benjamin, who as
the first and chief of Saul's Progenitors, might the most probably seem
concerned for his welfare, and the easiliest be believed and obeyed.

20. I fancy here that the statue of Benjamin stood in manner of a Co^ossus over
Saul's gate; for which perhaps I shall have some Critics fall severely upon me;
it being the common opinion, that the use of all statues, nay, even pictures,
or other representations of things to the sight, was forbidden the Jews. I know
very well, that in latter ages, when they were most rigid in observing of the
Letter of the Law (which they began to be about the time when they should have
left it) even the civil use of Images was not allowed, as now among the
Mahumetans. But I believe that at first it was otherwise: And first, the words
of the Decalogue forbid the making of Images, not absolutely, but with relation
to the end of bowing down, or worshipping them; and if the Commandment had
employed more, it would bind us Christians as well as the Jews, for it is a
Moral one. Secondly, we have several examples in the Bible, which show that
statues were in use among the Hebrews, nay, appointed by God to be so, as those
of the Cherubins, and diverse other Figures, for the ornament of the Tabernacle
and Temple; as that likewise of the Brazen Serpent, and the Lions upon Solomon's
Throne, and the statue of David, placed by Michol in his Bed, to deceive the
Soldiers who came to murder him; of which more particularly hereafter. Vasques
says, that such Images only were unlawful, as were Erectae aut constitutae
modo accommodato adorationi, made, erected, or constituted in a Manner proper
for Adoration; which Modus accommodatus adorationis, he defines to be, when the
Image is made or erected Per se, for its own sake, and not as an Appendix or
addition for the ornament of some other thing; as for example, Statues are
Idols, when Temples are made for them; when they are only made for Temples,
they are but Civil Ornaments.

21. Enchanted Virtues. That is, whose operation is stopped, as it were, by some
Enchantment. Like that Fascination called by the French, Nouement
d'esguillette, which hinders the natural faculty of generation.

22. So Homer, (...)* And Virg. O vere Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges!

23. The number of years from Benjamin to Saul's reign; not exactly: but this is
the next whole number, and Poetry will not admit of broken ones: and indeed,
though it were in prose, in so passionate a speech it were not natural to be
punctual.

24. In this, and some like places, I would not have the Reader judge of my
opinion by what I say; no more then before in diverse expressions about Hell,
the Devil, and Envy. It is enough that the Doctrine of the Orbs, and the Music
made by their motion had been received very anciently, and probably came from
the Eastern parts; for Pythagoras (who first brought this into Greece) learnt
there most of his Philosophy. And to speak according to common opinion, though
it be false, is so far from being a fault in Poetry, that it is the custom even
of the Scripture to do so; and that not only in the Poetical pieces of it; as
where it attributes the members and passions of mankind to Devils, Angels, and
God himself; where it calls the Sun and Moon the two Great Lights, whereas the
latter is in truth one of the smallest; but is spoken of, as it seems, not as
it Is, and in too many other places to be collected here. Seneca upon Virgils
Verse, Tarda venit seris factura nepotibus umbram, Says in his 86 Epistle, That
the Tree will easily grow up to give shade to the Planter: but that Virgil did
not look upon, what might be spoken most Truly, but what most gracefully; and
aimed more at Delighting his Readers, then at instructing Husbandmen: Infinite
are the examples of this kind among the Poets; one there is, that all have from
their Master Homer; it is in the description of a Tempest (a common place that
they all ambitiously labor in) where they make all the four winds blow at
once, to be sure to have enough to swell up their Verse, Una Eurusque Notusque
ruunt, creberque procellis
And so all the rest. Of this kind I take those Verses to be of Statius to
Sleep in his fist Sylva, which are much commended, even by Scaliger himself, --
Iacet omne pecus, volucresque feraeque,
Et simulant fessos curvata cacumina somnos.
Hitherto there is no scruple; for he says only, The bowing Mountains seem to
nod. He adds, Nec trucibus fluviis idem sonus, occidit horror
Aequoris, and terris maria inclinata quie scunt;


Which is false, but so well said, that it were ill changed for the Truth.

25. I am sorry that it is necessary to admonish the most part of Readers, that
it is not by negligence that this verse is so loose, long, and, as it were,
Vast; it is to paint in the number the nature of the thing which it describes,
which I would have observed in diverse other places of this Poem, that else will
pass for very careless verses: as before, And over-runs the neighboring fields
with violent course. In the second Book, Down a praecipice deep, down he casts
them all -- and, And fell adown his shoulders with loose care. In the 3. Brass
was his Helmet, his Boots brass, and ore his breast a thick plate of strong
brass he wore. In the 4. Like some fair Pine ore-looking all th'ignobler Wood;
and, Some from the Rocks cast themselves down headlong; and many more: but it
is enough to instance in a few. The thing is, that the disposition of words and
numbers should be such, as that out of the order and found of them, the things
themselves may be represented. This the Greeks were not so accurate as to bind
themselves to; neither have our English Poets observed it, for ought I can
find. The Latins (qui Musas colunt severiores) sometimes did it, and their
Prince, Virgil, always. In whom the examples are innumerable, and taken notice
of by all judicious men, so that it is superfluous to collect them.

26. Eternity is defined by Boet. Lib. 5. de Consolat. Interminabilis vitoe
tota simul and perfecta possessio. The whole and perfect possession, ever all
at once, of a being without beginning or ending. Which Definition is followed
by Tho: Aquin, and all the Schoolmen; who therefore call Eternity Nunc stans, a
standing Now, to distinguish it from that Now, which is a difference of time,
and is always in Fluxu.

27. Seneca, methinks, in his 58 Epist. expresses this more divinely then any
of the Divines: Manent enim cuncta, non quia aeterna sunt, sed quia defenduntur
cura regent is, Immortalia tutore non egent, haec conservat Artifex,
fragilitatem materiae vi sua vincens. And the Schoolmen all agree (except, I
think, Durandus) that an immediate Concurse of God is required as well now for
the Conservation, as at first it was necessary for the Creation of the world,
and that the nature of things is not left to it self to produce any action,
without a concurrent act of God; which when he was pleased to omit, or suspend,
the fire could not burn the three young men in the red-hot furnace.

28. The Book of Tobias speaks of Seven Angels superior to all the rest; and
this has been constantly believed according to the Letter, by the ancient Jews
and Christians. Clem. Alex and, Stromat. 6. (...). The Seven that have the
greatest power, the Firstborn Angels; Tob. 12. 15. I am Raphael, one of the
Seven holy Angels, which present the prayers of the Saints, and which go in and
out before the glory of the Holy one; and this Daniel may very well be thought
to mean, when he says, Chap. 10. 13. Lo Michael, one of the chief Princes came
to help me. That some Angels were under the command of others, may be collected
out of Zechar. 2. 3. where one Angel commands another; Run, speak to this young
man, etc. and out of Rev. 12. 7. where Michael and his Angels, fought with the
Dragon and his Angels. The number of just seven supreme Angels, Grotius
conceived to be drawn from the seven chief Princes of the Persian Empire; but I
doubt whether the seven there were so ancient as this Tradition. Three names of
these seven the Scripture affords, Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael; but for the
other four, Oriphiel, Zachariel, Samael, and Anael, let the Authors of them
answer, as likewise for their presiding over the Seven Planets.

The Verses attributed to Orpheus has an expression very like this of the
Angels, (...)
(...)
So Gabriel is called Luke 1. 19. (...). He that stands before the face of God.
And Daniel had his vision interpreted by one, (...), of the standers before God.

29. The Poets are so civil to Jupiter, as to say no less when he either Spoke,
or so much as Nodded. Hom. -- (...).
Virgil. Annuit, and totum nutu tremefecit Olympum.
Stat. -- Placido quatiens tamen omnia vultu.


30. Friends in the plural, as an intimation of the Trinity; for which cause he
uses sometimes We, and sometimes I, and Me.

31. I do not like Homers repeating of long messages just in the same words:
but here I thought it necessary, the message coming from God, from whose words
no creature ought to vary, and being delivered by an Angel, who was capable of
doing it punctually. To have made him say a long, eloquent, or figurative
speech, like that before of Envy to Saul, would have pleased perhaps some
Readers, but would have been a crime against (...), that is, Decency.

32. That Timotheus by Music enflamed and appeased Alexander to what degrees
he pleased, that a Musician in Denmark by the same art enraged King Ericus,
even to the striking of all his friends about him, that Pythagoras taught by
the same means a woman to stop the fury of a young man, who came to set her
house on fire; that his Scholar Empedocles hindered another from murdering his
father, when the sword was drawn for that purpose; that the fierceness of
Achilles his nature was allayed by playing on the harp (for which cause Homer
gives him nothing else out of the spoils of Eetion: that Damon by it reduced
wild and drunken youths; and Asclepiades, even seditious multitudes to temper
and reason; that the Corybantes and effeminate Priests of Cybele, could be
animated by it to cut their own flesh (with many more examples of the like
kind) is well known to all men conversant among Authors. Neither is it so
wonderful, that sudden passions should be raised or suppressed (for which cause
Pindar says to his Harp, (...). Thou quenchest the raging Thunder. But that it
should cure settled diseases in the body, we should hardly believe, it we had
not both Humane and Divine testimony for it. Plin. Lib. 28. cap. I. Dixit
Homerus profluvinm sanguinis vulnerato femine Ulyssem inhibuisse carmine,
Theophrastus Ischiadicos sanari, Cato prodidit luxatis membris carmen
auxiliari. Mar. Varro Podagris; Where Carmen is to be understood as joined with
musical notes. For the cure of the Sciatick, Theophrastus commends the Phrygian
Music upon the Pipe, and A. Gell. for giving ease to it, Ut memoriae proditum
est, as it is (says he) reported. Apollon. in his Book de Miris speaks thus. It
is worthy admiration, that which Theophrastus writes in his Treatise of
Enthysiasm, that Music cures many passions and diseases, both of the Mind and
Body, (...). And the same Author witnesses, that many in his time, especially
the Thebans, used the Pipe for the cure of several sicknesses, which Galen
calls (...), Super loco affecto tibia canere; or, Loca dolentia decantare. So
Zenocrates is said to have cured Mad men, Terpander and Arion diverse other
Maladies. But if it were not for this example of David, we should hardly be
convinced of this Physic, unless it be in the particular cure of the
Tarantism, the experiments of which are too notorious to be denied or eluded,
and afford a probable argument that other diseases might naturally be expelled
so-too, but that we have either lost, or not found out yet the Art. For the
explication of the reason of these cures, the Magicians fly to their Colcodea;
the Platoniques, to their Anima Mundi; the Rabbis to Fables and Prodigies not
worth the repeating. Baptista Porta in his Natural Magic, seems to attribute
it to the Magical Power of the Instrument, rather then of the Music; for he
says, that Madness is to be cured by the harmony of a Pipe made of Hellebore,
because the Juice of that plant is held good for that purpose; and the
Sciatique by a Musical Instrument made of Poplar, because of the virtue of the
Oil of that Tree to mitigate those kind of pains. But these, and many
Sympathetical experiments are so false, that I wonder at the negligence or
impudence of the Relators. Picus Mirand says, That Music moves the Spirits to
act upon the Soul, as Medicines do to operate upon the body, and that it cures
the body by the Soul, as Physic does the Soul by the Body. I conceive the true
natural reason to be, that in the same manner as Musical sounds move the
outward air, so that does the Inward, and that the Spirits, and they the Humors
(which are the seat of Diseases) by Condensation, Rarefaction, Dissipation, or
Expulsion of Vapors, and by Virtue of that Sympathy of Proportion, which I
express afterward in Verse. For the producing of the effect desired, Athan.
Kercherus requires four conditions: 1. Harmony. 2. Number and Proportion. 3.
Efficacious and pathetical words joined with the Harmony (which (by the way)
were fully and distinctly understood in the Music of the Ancients.) And 4. An
adapting of all these to the Constitution, Disposition, and Inclinations of the
Patient. Of which, and all things on this subject, he is well worth the
diligent reading, Liber de Art magna Consoni and Dissoni.

33. Scaliger in his Hypercrit. blames Claudian for his excursion concerning
the burning of Aetna, and for enquiring the cause of it in his own person. If
he had brought in, says he, any other person making the relation, I should
endure it. I think he is too Hypercritical upon so short a Digression; however,
I choose here upon this new occasion, by the by to make a new short Invocation
of the Muse, and that which follows, As first a various unform'ed, and is to be
understood as from the person of the Muse. For this second Invocation upon a
particular matter, I have the authority of Homer and Virgil; which nevertheless
I should have omitted, had the digression been upon any subject but Music.
Hom. Il. 2. (...).
(...).
(...).
And Virgil twice in the same Book (Aen. 7.) Nunc age qui Reges, Erato --
Tu Vatem tu Diva moan, etc. --
And a little after, Pandite nunc Helicona Deae, cantusque ciete --
Et meministis enim Divae, and memorare potestis,
Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur auras.


34. I have seen an excellent saying of S. Augustines, cited to this purpose,
Ordinem saeculorum tanquam pulcherrimum Carmen ex quibusdam quasi antithet is
honestavit Deus -- sicut contraria contrariis opposita sermonis pulchritudinem
reddunt, ita quadam non verborum sed rerum eloquentia contrariorum oppositione
soeculi pulchritudo componitur. And the Scripture witnesses, that the World was
made in Number. Weight, and Measure; which are all qualities of a good Poem.
This order and proportion of things is the true Music of the world, and not
that which Pythagoras, Plato, Tully, Macrob. and many of the Fathers imagined,
to arise audibly from the circumvolution of the Heavens. This is their musical
and loud voice, of which David speaks, Psalm. 19. The heavens declare the glory
of the Lord -- There is no Speech nor Language where their voice is not heard.
Their sound is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end of
the world -- Or as our Translation nearer the Hebrew (they say) renders it,
Their Line is gone out, Linea, vel amuss is eorum. To show the exactness of
their proportion.

35. Even this distinction of sounds in the art of Music, is thought by some
to have been invented from the consideration of the elementary qualities: In
imitation of which, Orpheus is said to have formed an Harp with four strings,
and set them to different Tunes: The first to Hypate, to answer to the Fire.
The second to Parhypate, for the Water. The third to Paranete, for the Air. And
the fourth to Nete, for the Earth.

36. Because the Moon is but 28 days, and Saturn above 29 years in finishing
his course.

37. There is so much to be said of this subject, that the best way is to say
nothing of it. See at large Kercherus in his 10 Book de Art Consoni and
Dissoni.

38. The Weapon salve.

39. The common Experiment of Sympathy in two Unisons, which is most easily
perceived by laying a straw upon one of the strings, which will presently move
upon touching the other.

40. Here may seem to want connection between this verse and the Psalm. It is an
Elleipsis, or leaving something to be understood by the Reader; to wit; That
David sung to his Harp, before Saul, the ensuing Psalm. Of this kind is that in
Virgil, Iungimus hospitio dextras, and tecta subimus.
Templa Dei saxo venerabar structa vetusto.
Da propriam Thymbrae domum, etc. --
Where is understood Et venerans dixi, or some such words, which, methinks; are
more gracefully omitted, then they could have been supplied by any care. Though
Scaliger be of another mind in the 4 Book of Poesy, where he says, that there
are some places in Virgil, where the sense is discontinued and interrupted by
the leaving out of some verses, through the overmuch severity of his judgment
( morosissimo judicio) with an intent of putting in better in their place; and
he instances in these, where for my part I should be sorry that Virgil himself
had filled up the gap. The like Elleipsis is in his 5 Book, upon the death of
Palinurus, Multa gemens casuque animum percussus amici,
O nimium coelo and pelago confise sereno,
Nudus in ignota Palinure jacebis arena:
And such is that in Statius, 2 Theb. -- Ni tu Tritonia Virgo
Consilio dignata virum. -- Sat gente superbi
Oeneos, absentes cui dudum vincere Thebas
Annuimus --
And why do I instance in these, since the examples are so frequent in all
Poets?

41. For this liberty of inserting an Ode into an Heroic Poem, I have no
authority or example; and therefore like men who venture upon a new coast, I
must run the hazard of it. We must sometimes be bold to innovate, Nec minimum
meruere decus vestigia Graeca
Ausi deserere -- Hor.


42. Psalm. 58. 5. They are like the deaf Adder, that stops her ear, which
will not hearken to the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. So
Ierem. 8. 17. Behold I will send Serpents, Cockatrices among you, which will
not be charmed. Serpents Regulos quibus non est Incantatio: which Texts are
ill produced by the Magick-mongers for a proof of the power of Charms. For the
first is plainly against them, Adder being there taken for Serpent in general,
not for one Species of Serpents, which alone had a quality of resisting
Incantations. And the other is no more then if the Prophet should have said,
Though you practice Magic Arts, like other Nations; and think like them, that
you can charm the very Serpents, yet you shall find with all your Magic, no
remedy against those which I shall send among you; for nothing in all the whole
humane, or diabolical Illusion of Magic was so much boasted of as the power of
Spells upon Serpents, they being the creatures most antipathetical and terrible
to humane nature. Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis. Virg.
Vipereas rumpo verbis and carmine fauces. Ovid.
Inque pruinoso coluber distenditur arvo,
Viperei coeunt abrupto corpore nodi,
Humanoque cadit Serpens afflata veneno. Lucan.


43. Nothing is more notorious (for it was accounted one of the wonders of the
World) then the (...), rendered by the Latins, Hortus pensilis at Babylon,
which was planted on the top of prodigious buildings, made for that purpose,
fifty cubits high, foursquare, and each side containing four Acres of ground.
It was planted with all sorts of Trees, even the greatest, and adorned with
many Banquetting-houses. The particular description see in Diodor. Sicul. l.
11. and out of him in Qu. Curt. 1. 5. It was built, they say, by a Syrian King
(to wit, Nabucodonosar, for so Josephus, l 10. and Suidas expressly say) in
favor of a Persian Wife of his, who as Q. Curt. speaks, Desiderio nemorum
sylvarumque in campestribus locis virum compulit naturae genium amoenitate
hujus operis imitari. And D. Chrysostom mentions another of the like kind at
Susae, in his Sermon of Riches, (...). These were miracles of their kind; but
the use of Gardens made upon the top of Palaces, was very frequent among the
ancients, Seneca, Trag. Act. 3. Thyest.

Nulla culminibus meis Imposita nutat sylva. Sen. Epist. 122. Non vivunt contra
naturam qui pomaria in summis turribus serunt? quorum silvae in tect is domorum
ac fastigiis nutant, inde ortis radicibus, quo improbande cacumina egissent.
Plin. In tecta olim Romae scandebant silvae; Which luxury, as all others, came
out of Asia into Europe; and that it was in familiar use among the Hebrews,
even in David's time, several Texts of Scripture make me conjecture, 2 Samuel 26.
22. They spread for Absalom a Tent upon the Top of the House, and Absalom went
unto his fathers concubines in the sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 11. 2. And it
came to pass in an evening, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon
the roof of the Kings house; and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself.
And 1 Samuel 9. 25. Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house. And
again, verse 26.

44. 1 Samuel 19. 13. And Michol took an image, and put it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats hair for his ^olster, and covered it with a cloth. An Image,
the Hebrew is Theraphim, a word much disputed of, and hardly ever used in a
good sense but here. The Images that Rachel stole from Laban, are so called;
which there the Septuagint translate by (...), in other places by (...) or
(...), sometimes by (...), here by (...), the most improperly of all, Hearse or
the representations of the Dead, laid upon Herses. The Latin uses Simulachrum,
or Statua, and Aquila, (...). The fancy of Josephus is extraordinarily
Rabbinical. He says, that Michol put between the clothes the Liver of a she
Goat, newly cut out, and showed the palpitation of it under the coverlet to the
Soldiers saying that it was David, and that he had not slept all night: How
come such men as he to have such odd dreams? Ribera upon Hosea says thus, What
Statue was it that she placed in the bed? Certainly no Idol, for those were not
to be found in the house of David; nor any Astronomical Image, made for the
reception of celestial influences, which R. Abraham believes, for those were
not allowable among the Jews; but she made some figure like a man, out of
several clothes, which she stuffed with other things, like Scar-crows, or those
figures presented to wild Bulls in the Theaters, or those that are placed upon
great men's Herses. And she put the skin of a sheGoat about his head, to
represent his red hair; which last is most ridiculous, and all before only
improbable: For what time had she to make up such a Puppet? I do therefore
believe, that she had a statue of David in the house, and laid that in the bed,
pretending that he was speechless; and even this deceit I am forced to help,
with all the circumstances I could imagine, especially with that most material
one, And for the impression God prepared their sense. And now concerning the
Civil use of Images among the Jews, I have declared my opinion before, which
whether it be true or no, is not of importance in Poetry, as long as it has
any appearance of probability.

45. It was a necessary condition required in all Sacrifices, that they should
be without Blemish. See Levit. 1. and this was observed too among the Heathen.

46. Rama, or Ramatha, and Naioth, were not several Towns, but Naioth was a
place in, or close by Rama, where there were wont to be solemn Religious
meetings. Adricom.

47. The Description of the Prophets College at Naioth, looks at first sight,
as if I had taken the pattern of it from ours at the Universities; but the truth
is, ours (as many other Christian customs) were formed after the example of the
Jews. They were not properly called Prophets, or foretellers of future things,
but Religious persons, who separated themselves from the business of the world,
to employ their time in the contemplation and praise of God; their manner of
praising him was by singing of Hymns, and playing upon Musical Instruments: for
which cause in 1 Samuel 10. 5. they carried with them a Psaltery, Tabret, Pipe,
and Harp; These it is probable were instituted by Samuel; for the 19, and 20.
they saw the the company of Prophets prophesying (that is, saw them together in
Divine Service) and Samuel standing, as appointed over them, Stantem super cos;
which the Chaldee interprets Stantem docentem eos, Preaching to them. These are
the first Religious Orders heard of in Antiquity, for whom David afterward
composed Psalms. They are called by the Chaldee Scribes, because they labored
in reading, writing, learning and teaching the Scriptures; and they are called
Filii Prophetarum, as 2 King. 2. 3. The Sons of the Prophets that were at
Bethel; and v. 5. the Sons of the Prophets that were at Jericho: out of which
may be collected, that Colleges of them were founded in several Towns. They
are thus named ( Sons of the Prophets) either because they were taught by
Samuel, Elias, Elisha, or some of the great and properly called Prophets, or in
the sense that the Greeks term Physicians, (...), The Sons of the Physicians;
and the Hebrews Men, the Sons of Men, but I rather believe the former, and that
none but the young Scholars or Students are meant by this appellation. To this
alludes S. Matthew. 11. 19. Wisdom is justified of her Children. And the Masters
were called Fathers, as Elisha to Elijah, 2 King. 2. 12. My Father, my Father,
etc.

48. For the several Sprinklings and Purifications by water, commanded in the
Law of Moses, and so often mentioned in the Books of Exodus Levit. Numb. and
Deuteron. the omission of which, in some cases was punished with no less then
Death, Exodus 30. 20.

49. I have learned much of my Masters, or Rabbis, more of my Companions, most
of my Scholars, was the speech of an ancient Rabbi; from whence we may collect
this distinction, of Scholars, Companions, and Rabbis, or Doctors. The chief
Doctors fate in the Synagogues, or Schools, in high chairs (perhaps like
Pulpits) the Companions upon Benches below them, and the Scholars on the ground
at the feet of their Teachers, from whence S. Paul is said to be brought up at
the feet of Gamaliel; and Mary sat at Jesus his feet, and heard his word, Luke
10. 39. After the Scholars had made good progress in learning, they were
Elected and made, by imposition of hands, Companions to the Rabbis, like our
Fellows of Colleges to the Masters, which makes me call them The Elect
Companions.

50. The Furniture of the Prophet Elisha's chamber, 2 Kings 4. 10.

51. It was the ancient custom to cover the Seats and Table-Beds with Beasts
skins: So Eumaeus places Ulysses, Odyss. 14. (...).
Collocavit super pellem villosoe silvestris caprae.
So Euander Aeneas, 8 Aeneid. Praecipuumque, toro and villosi pelle Leonis
Accipit Aeneam. --
Ovid. Qui poterat pelles addere, dives erat.


52. There is a great dispute among the Learned, concerning the antiquity of
this custom of Lying down at meat; and most of the Critiques are against me,
who make it here so ancient. That the Romans at first used sitting at Table, is
affirmed by Pliny; that the Graecians did so too, appears by Athenaeus, l. 7.
c. 15. That in our Saviors time (long before which the Romans and Graecians
had changed sitting into lying) the Jews lay down is plain from the several
words used in the New Testament upon this occasion, as (...), Luke 22. (...),
Matthew. 26. (...), Luke 14. (...), Mat. 14. so John is said to lean on Jesus
bosom, Ioh. 13. 23. that is, lay next to him at the feast; and alluding to this
custom, Christ is said to be in the bosom of his Father, and the Saints in the
bosom of Abraham. Some think the Jews took this fashion from the Romans after
they were subdued by them, but that is a mistake; for the Romans rather took it
from the Eastern people: even in the Prophets time we have testimony of this
custom, Ezekiel. 23. 41. Thou satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared
before it, Amos 2. 8. They lay themselves upon clothes laid to pledge by every
Altar; that is, They used garments laid to pledge instead of Beds, when at the
Altars they eat things sacrificed to Idols. What was the fashion in Samuels
time, is not certain; it is probable enough for my turn, that Discubation was
then in practice, and long before; for the plucking off their shoes when they
went to Table, seems to imply it, that being done to preserve the Beds clean.
And why had the Jews a strict particular command to have their shoes on their
feet at the eating of the Passover, but because they were wont to have their
shoes off at other meals?

53. There is no matter capable of receiving the marks of Letters, that has
not been made use of by the ancients for that purpose. The twelve Tables of the
Roman Laws were engraven in Brass; so was the League made with the Latins,
Live. Dec. j. Lib. 2. and Tatus among the Cretans was seigned to be a Man made
of Brass by Vulcan (of whom they report many ridiculous stories) because he
carried about in that Country the Laws graven in brass, and put them severely
in execution. Pausan. in Boethius makes mention of the whole Book of Hesiods
(...), written in Lead; which kind of plates, Sueton. in Nerone calls Chartam
plumbeam, Leaden paper. This fashion was in use before Jobs time; for he says,
Job 19. 23, 24. Oh that my words were graven with an Iron pen and Lead in the
rock for ever. Rock, that is, the Leaden plates should be placed upon Rocks or
Pillars. They likewise anciently engraved the very pillars themselves; as those
two famous ones of Enoch, one of which was extant even in Iasephus his days.
And Iamblicus avows, that he took the principles of his mystical Philosophy
from the Pillars of Mercury. Plin. l. 7. 56. reports, that the Babylonians and
Assyrians write their Laws in Coctis lateribus, that is, Pillars of Brick.
Moses his in Stone. Horace, Non incisa not is marmor a publicis.
But of this kind of writing, I was not to make mention in a private Library.
They used also of old Plates or Leaves of Ivory; from whence they were termed
Libri Elephantini; not as some conceive, from their bigness. Mart. Nigra tibi
niveum littera pingat ebur.
As for Wood and Slates, we may easily believe, that they and all other capable
materials were written upon. Of thin shavings of wood the Longobards at their
first coming into Italy, made Leaves to write on; some of which Pancirollus had
seen and read in his time.

54. See Plin. l. 13. 11. From whence Letters are called Phoenicean, not from
the Country, but from (...), a Palm Tree. But Guiland. de Papyro thinks that
Phoenicea in Pliny is not the same with (...), and has a long discourse to
prove that Palm Leaves were not in use for writing, and that we should read
Malvarum instead of Palmarum, which is a bold correction upon very slight
grounds. It is true, they did anciently write too upon Mallows, as appears by
Isidor. and the Epigram of Cinna cited by him: Haec tibi Arateis multum
invigilata lucernis
Carmina queis ignes novimus aethereos,
Laevis in aridulo Malvoe descripta libello
Prusiaca vexi munera navicula.
But this was a raritie; for Mallows are too soft to be proper for that use. At
Athens the names of those who were expelled the Senate, were written in some
kind of Leaf, from whence this sentence was called (...), as the names of those
banished by the people were in Shells; but at Syracuse, it was in Olive Leaves,
and called (...). And in this manner wrote Virgils Sybilla, Foliis tantum ne
carmina manda.


Pliny testifies that the Books of Numa continued so long a time under ground
unperished, by having been rubbed over with the Oil of Cedar. Horace, de Ar.
Po. -- Speramus carmina fingi
Posse linenda cedro, aut laevi servanda Cupresso?
Ovid. -- Nec Cedro charta notetur; and,
-- Cedro digna locutus;
Who speaks things worthy to be preserved always by Cedar Oil; which was
likewise used in the Embalming of dead Bodies.

55. Of Linen Books Livy makes often mention: They were called Libri Lintei,
and were Public Records; by others termed too Linteae Mappae, and Carbasina
volumina, Silken Volumns, Claud. de B. Get. -- Quid carmine poscat
Fatidico custos Romani carbasus aev^.
And Sym. l. 4. Epist. Monitus Cumanos lintea texta sumpserunt. And Pliny says,
the Parthians used to have Letters woven in their clothes.

56. Tender Barks. The thin kind of skin between the outward Bark and the body
of the Tree. The paper used to this day in China, and some part of the Indies,
seems to be made of the same kind of stuff. The name of Liber, a Book, comes
from hence.

Some the sharp style, etc. These waxen Table-books were very ancient, though I
am not sure there were any of them in the Library at Naioth. Iliad. 6. Proetus
sent a Letter in such Tablebooks by Bellerophon. The Style or Pen with which
they wrote, was at first made of Iron, but afterward that was forbid at Rome,
and they used styles of Bone; it was made sharp at one end to cut the Letters,
and flat at the other to deface them; from whence stylum vertere. Pliny says,
that Paper (so called from the Name of the Reed of which it was made) or Charta
(termed so of a Town of that name in the Marshes of Egypt) was not found out
till after the building of Alexandria; and Parchment, not till Eumenes his
time, from whose royal City of Pergamus it was denominated Pergamena. In both
which he is deceived; for Herod. in Terps. says, That the Ionians still call
paper skins, because formerly when they wanted Paper, they were forced to make
use of skins instead of it. See Melch. Guiland. de Pap. upon this argument. And
the Diptherae of the Graecians were nothing else but the skins of Beasts; that
wherein Jupiter is feigned to keep his Memorials of all things was made of the
she-goat that gave him milk. And many are of opinion, that the famous
Golden-Fleece was nothing but a Book written in a Sheep. skin. Diod. Sicul. l.
2. affirms that the Persian Annals were written in the like Books; and many
more Authorities, if needful, might be produced: however, I call Parchment and
the Paper of Egypt new Arts here, because they were later then the other.

57. Hieroglyphics. The use of which it is very likely the Jews had from
Egypt, where they had lived so long, Lucan. l. 3. Nondum flumineas Memphis
contexere Biblos
Noverat, and saxis tantum volucresque fereaeque
Sculptaque servabant magicas animalia linguas.


58. Nathan and Gad were famous Prophets in David's time; and therefore it is
probable they might have lived with Samuel in his College, for their particular
Professorships, the one of Astronomy, the other of Mathematics, that is a
voluntary gift of mine to them, and I suppose the places were very lawfully at
my disposing. Seraia was afterward Scribe or Secretary to David, called 1
King. 42. Sisha, and 1 Chronicles. 18. 16. Shausha. Mahol the Reader of Natural
Philosophy, is mentioned, 1 King. 4. 31. Heman and Asaph are often spoken of in
the Scripture, 1 King. 4. 1 Chronicles. 15. 17, 19. and 16. 5. and 37. 41, 42. and
25.

59. A Pyramide is a figure broad beneath, and smaller and sharper by degrees
upward, till it end in a point, like our Spire-Steeples. It is so called from
(...), Fire, because Flame ascends in that Figure. Number is here called a
Turned Pyramide, because the bottom of it is the point One (which is the
beginning of Number, not properly Number, as a Point is of Magnitude) from
whence it goes up still larger and larger, just contrary to the nature of
Pyramidical Ascension.

60. Sacred Blew. Because of the use of it in the Curtains of the Tabernacle,
the curtain for the door, the Vail, the Priests Ephod, Breast Plate, and
briefly all sacred Ornaments. The reason of choosing Blew, I suppose to have
been in the Tabernacle, to represent the seat of God, that is, the Heavens, of
which the Ta'ernacle was an Emblem, Numb. 15. 38. The Jews are commanded to
make that lace or ribband of Blew, wherewith their fringes are bound to their
clothes; and they have now left off the very wearing of Fringes, because, they
say, the art is lost of dying that kind of Blew, which was the perfectest
sky-colour. Coeruleus is derived by some, Quasi coeluleus.

61. Virg. 1. 6. Aen. Obloquitur numer is Septem discrimina vocum.
From which Pancirollus conjectures that, as we have now six notes in Music,
Ut. Re. Mi. Fa. So. La. (invented by a Monk from the Hymn to St. John,
beginning every line with those syllables) so the ancients had seven; according
to which Apollo too instituted the Lyre with 7 strings; And Pindar calls it
(...), his Interpreter, (...), and the Argives forbad under a penalty, the use
of more strings.

62. Porphyrius affirmed, as he is cited by Eusebius, 3. Praepar. Evang. that
the Egyptians (that is, the Thebans in Egypt) believed but one God, whom they
called (...) (whom Plutarch also names the Is. and Osyr. and Strabo, l. 17.
Cnuphis) and that the image of that God was made with an Egg coming out of his
Mouth, to show that he spoke out the world, that is, made it with his word; for
an Egg with the Egyptians was the symbol of the world. So was it too in the
mystical Ceremonies of Bacchus, instituted by Orpheus, as Plut. Sympos. l. 11.
Quaest. 3. and Macrob. l. 7. c 16. whence Iroclus says upon Timaeus, To (...)
to be the same things. Vess. de Idol.

63. Theophil. l. 2. adversus Gent. (...) God is in no place, but is the Place
of all things and Philo, (...). Which is the same with the expression here.

64. Genesis 14. 13. And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the
Hebrew, etc. which Text has raised a great controversy among the Learned,
about the derivation of the name of the Hebrews: The general opinion received
of old was, that it came from Eber; which is not improbable, and defended by
many learned men, particularly of late by Rivet upon Genesis 11. The other, which
is more followed by the late Critiques, as Arpennius, Grotius, and our Seldom,
is, that the name came from Abraham's passage over Euphrates into Canaan (as the
name of Welsh is said to signify no more then strangers, which they were
called by the people amongst whom they came, and ever after retained it) which
opinion is chiefly grounded upon the Septuagint Translation in this Text, who
render Abram the Hebrew, (...), The Passenger; and Aquila, (...).

65. For even these Sons of the Prophets that were Students in Colleges did
sometimes likewise foretell future things, as to Elisha the taking up of Elijah,
2 King. 2. 3, etc.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Friendship betwixt Jonathan and David; and upon that occasion a digression
concerning the nature of Love. A discourse between Jonathan and David, upon
which the latter absents himself from Court, and the former goes thither, to
inform himself of Saul's resolution. The Feast of the New Mood, the manner of
the Celebration of it; and therein a Digression of the History of Abraham.
Saul's Speech upon David's absence from the Feast, and his anger against with
Jonathan. David's resolution to fly away; he parts with Jonathan, and falls
asleep under a tree. A Description of Fancy; an Angel makes up a Vision in
David's head; the Vision it self, which is, A Prophecy of all the succession of
his race till Christ's time, with their most remarkable actions. At his awaking,
Gabriel assumes an humane shape, and confirms to him the truth of his Vision.

Davideis, The second Book.
BUt now the early Birds began to call
The morning forth; up rose the Sun and Saul;
Both, as men thought, rose fresh from sweet repose;
But both, alas, from restless labors rose.
For in Saul's breast, Envy, the toilsome Sin,
Had all that night active and tyr'annous bin,
She'expell'd all forms of Kindness, Virtue, Grace;
Of the past day no footstep left or trace.
The new-blown sparks of his old rage appear,
Nor could his Love dwell longer with his fear.
So near a storm wise David would not stay,
Nor trust the glittering of a faithless Day.
He saw the Sun call in his beams apace,
And angry Clouds march up into their place.
The Sea it self smooths his rough brow awhile,
Flattering the greedy Merchant with a smile;
But he, whose ship-wrackt Barque it drank before,
Sees the deceit, and knows it would have more.
Such is the Sea, and such was Saul.
But Jonathan, his Son, and Only Good,
Was gentle as fair Iordans useful Flood.
Whose innocent stream as it in silence goes,
1 Fresh Honors, and a sudden spring bestows
On both his banks to every flower and tree;
The manner How lies hid, the effect we see.
But more then all, more then Himself he lov'ed
The man whose worth his Fathers Hatred mov'ed.
For when the noble youth at Dammin stood
Adorned with sweat, and painted gay with Blood,
Jonathan pierce'd him through with greedy Eye
And understood the future Majesty
Then destin'ed in the glories of his look; 1 Samuel 18. 1.

He saw, and strait was with amazement struck,
To see the strength, the feature, and the grace
Of his young limbs; he saw his comely face
Where Love and Reverence so well mingled were;
2 And Head, already crowned with golden hair.
He saw what Mildness his bold Spi'rit did tame,
Gentler then Light, yet powerful as a Flame.
He saw his Valor by their Safety prov'ed;
He saw all this, and as he saw, he Lov'ed.
What art thou, Love, thou great mysterious thing?
From what hid stock does thy strange Nature spring?
It Is thou that mov'est the world through every part
And holdst the vast frame close, that nothing start
From the due Place and Office first ordained.
3 By Thee were all things Made, and are sustained.
Sometimes we see thee fully, and can say
From hence thou took'est thy Rise, and went that way;
But oftener the short beams of Reasons Eye,
See only, There thou art, not How, nor Why.
How is the Loadstone, Natures subtle pride,
By the rude Iron wooed, and made a Bride?
How was the Weapon wounded? what hid Flame
The strong and conqu'ering Metal overcame?
4 Love (this Worlds Grace) exalts his Natural state;
He feels thee, Love, and feels no more his Weight.
5 Ye learned Heads, whom Joy guirlands grace,
Why does that twining plant the Oak embrace?
The Oak for courtship most of all unfit,
And rough as are the Winds that fight with it?
How does the absent Pole the Needle move?
How does his Cold and Ice beget hot Love?
Which are the Wings of Lightness to ascend?
Or why does Weight to the Center downwards bend?
Thus Creatures void of Life obey thy Laws,
And seldom We, They never know the Cause.
In thy large state, Life gives the next degree,
6 Where Sense, and Good Apparent places thee;
But thy chief Palace is Man's Heart alone,
Here are thy Triumphs, and full glories shown,
7 Handsome Desires, and Rest about thee flee,
Union, Inhaerence, Zeal, and Ecstasy.
Thousand bright Ioys cluster around thine head,
Over which a gall-less Dove her wings does spread,
A gentle Lamb, purer and whiter far
Then Consciences of thine own Martyrs are,
Lies at thy feet; and thy right hand does hold
The mystic Scepter of a Cross of Gold.
Thus do'est thou sit (like Man e're sin had fram'ed
A guilty blush) Naked, but not Asham'ed.
What cause then did the fab'ulous Ancients find,
When first their superstition made thee blind?
'Twas They, alas, 'twas They who could not see,
When they mistook that Monster, Lust, for Thee.
Thou art a bright, but not consuming Flame;
Such in the amazed Bush to Moses came; Exo. 3 2.

When that secure its'new-crown'd head did rear,
And child the trembling Branches needless fear.
Thy Darts of healthful Gold, and downwards fall
Soft as the Feathers that they are fletcht withal.
Such, and no other, were those secret Darts,
Which sweetly touched this noblest pair of Hearts.
Still to one end they both so justly drew,
As courteous Doves together yoked would do.
No weight of Birth did on one side prevail,
Two Twins less even lie in Natures Scale.
They mingled Fates, and both in each did share,
They both were Servants, they both Princes were.
If any Joy to one of them was sent,
It was most his, to whom it least was meant,
And fortunes malice betwixt both was crossed,
For striking one, it wounded the other most.
Never did Marriage such true Union find,
Or men's desires with so glad violence bind;
For there is still some tincture left of Sin,
And still the Sex will needs be stealing in.
Those joys are full of dross, and thicker far,
These, without matter, clear and liquid are.
Such sacred Love does he'aveus bright Spirits fill,
Where Love is but to Understand and Will,
With swift and unseen Motions; such as We
Somewhat express in heightened Charity.
O ye blessed One! whose Love on earth became
So pure that still in He'aven it is but the same!
There now ye sit, and with mixed souls embrace,
Gazing upon great Loves mysterious Face,
And pity this base world, where Friendship's made
A bait for sin, or else at best a Trade.
Ah wondrous Prince! who a true Friend could be,
When a Crown Flatter'ed, and Saul threatened Thee!
Who held'st him dear, whose Stars thy birth did cross!
And bought'st him nobly at a Kingdoms loss!
Isra'els bright Scepter far less glory brings;
There have been fewer Friends on earth then Kings.
To this strange pitch their high affections flew;
Till Natures self scarce looked on them as Two.
Hither flies David for advice and aid,
As swift as Love and Danger could persuade,
As safe in Ionathans trust his thoughts remain
As when Himself but dreams them over again.
My dearest Lord, farewell (said he) farewell;
He'aven bless the King; may no misfortune tell
Th'injustice of his hate, when I am dead;
They 'are coming now, perhaps; my guiltless head
Here in their sight, perhaps, must bleeding ly,
And scarce your own stand safe for being nigh.
Think me not scare'd with death, howere't appear,
I know thou can not think so: it is a fear
From which thy Love, and Dammin speaks me free;
I'have met him face to face, and never could see
One terror in his looks to make me fly
When Virtue bids me stand; but I would die
So as becomes my Life, so as may prove
Saul's Malice, and at least excuse your Love.
He stopped, and spoke some passion with his eyes;
Excellent Friend (the gallant Prince replies)
Thou have so proved thy Virtues, that they are known
To all good men, more then to each his own.
Who lives in Israel, that can doubtful be
Of thy great actions? for he lives by Thee.
Such is thy Valor, and thy vast success,
That all things but thy Loyalty are less.
And should my Father at thy ruin aim,
'Twould wound as much his Safety as his Fame.
Think them not coming then to slay thee here,
But doubt mishaps, as little as you fear.
For by thy loving God who e're design
Against thy Life must strike at it through Mine.
But I my royal Father must acquit
From such base guilt, or the low thought of it.
Think on his softness when from death he freed
The faithless King of Am'alecks cursed seed, 1 Samuel 15. 9.

Can he to'a Frind, to'a Son so bloody grow,
He who ev'en sinn'ed but now to spare a Foe?
Admit he could; but with what strength or art
Could he so long close, and seal up his heart?
Such counsels jealous of themselves become,
And dare not fix without consent of some.
Few men so boldly ill, great sins to do,
Till licens'ed and approv'ed by others too.
No more (believe'it) could he hide this from me, 1 Samuel 20. 2.

Then I, had he discovered it, from Thee.
Here they embraces join, and almost tears;
Till gentle David thus new prov'ed his fears.
The praise you pleased (great Prince) on me to spend
Was all out-spoken when you stil'ed me Friend.
That name alone does dang'erous glories bring,
And gives excuse to the Envy of a King.
What did his Spear, force, and dark plots impart
But some eternal rancour in his heart?
Still does he glance the fortune of that day
When drowned in his own blood Goliath lay,
And covered half the plain; still hears the sound
How that vast Monster fell, and struck the ground
The Dance, and, David his ten thousand slew,
Still wound his sickly soul, and still are new.
Great acts t'ambitious Princes Treasons grow,
So much they hate that Safety which they ow.
Tyrants dread all whom they raise high in place,
From the Good, danger; from the Bad, disgrace.
They doubt the Lords, mistrust the Peoples hate,
Till Blood become a Principle of State.
Secured nor by their Guards, nor by their Right,
But still they Fear ev'en more then they Affright.
Pardon me, Sir, yours Father's rough and stern:
His Will too strong to bend, too proud to learn.
Remember, Sir, the Honey's deadly sting;
Think on that savage Justice of the King.
When the same day that saw you do before
Things above Man, should see you Man no more.
Tis'true th'accursed Agag mov'ed his ruth,
He pitied his tall Limbs and comely youth
Had seen, alas the proof of he'avens fierce hate,
And feared no mischief from his powerless fate.
Remember how the old Seer came raging down,
And taught him boldly to suspect his Crown.
Since then his pride quakes at the Almighties rod,
Nor dares he love the men belov'ed by God.
Hence his deep rage and trembling Envy springs;
Nothing so wild as Jealousy of Kings.
Whom should he counsel ask, with whom advise,
Who Reason and Gods counsel does despise?
Whose headstrong will no Law or Conscience daunt,
Dares he not sin, do'you think, without your grant?
Yes, if the truth of our fixed love he knew,
He would not doubt, believe't, to kill ev'en you.
The Prince is mov'ed, and straight prepares to find
The deep resolves of his grieved Fathers mind.
The danger now appears, Love can soon show't,
And force his Stubborn Piety to know it.
They'agree that David should concealed abide, 1 Samuel 20. 5, etc.

Till his great friend had the Courts temper tryde,
Till he had Saul's most secret purpose found,
And searched the depth and rancour of his wound.
8 'Twas the years seventh-born Moon; Lev. 23. 24.
the solemn Feast
That with most noise its sacred mirth expressed. Nu. 29. 1.

From op'ening Morn till night shuts in the day,
On Trumpets and Shrill Horns the Levites play.
9 Whether by this in mystic Type we see
The New-years-Day of great Eternity,
When the changed Moon shall no more changes make,
And scattered Deaths by Trumpets sound awake;
10 Or that the Law be kept in Mem'ory still, Exo. 19. 19.

Giv'en with like noise on Sina's shining Hill.
11 Or that (as some men teach) it did arise
From faithful Abrams righteous Sacrifice,
Who whilst the Ram on Isaac's fire did fry,
His Horn with joyful tunes stood sounding by.
Obscure the Cause; but God his will declar'ed;
And all nice knowledge then with ease is spared.
12 At the third hour Saul to the hallowed Tent
Midst a large train of Priests and Courtiers went;
The sacred Herd marched proud and softly by;
13 Too fat and gay to think their deaths so nigh.
Hard fate of Beasts, more innocent then We!
Prey to our Lux'ury, and our Piety!
Whose guiltless blood on boards and Altars spilt,
Serves both to Make, and Exp'iat too our guilt!
14 Three Bullocks of free neck, two gilded Rams,
Two well-washt Goats, and fourteen spotless Lambs,
With the three vital fruits, Wine, Oil, and Bread,
(Small fees to heav'en of all by which we are fed)
Are offer'ed up; the hallowed flames arise,
And faithful prayers mount with them to the skies.
15 From thence the King to th'outmost Court is brought,
Where heav'enly things an inspir'ed Prophet taught,
And from the sacred Tent to'his Palace gates,
With glad kind shouts The Assembly on him waits;
The cheerful Horns before him loudly play,
And fresh-strew'd flowers paint his triumphant way.
Thus in slow state to the Palace Hall they go,
Rich dressed for solemn Luxury and Show;
16 Ten pieces of bright Tap'estry hung the room,
The noblest work ere stretched on Syrian loom;
For wealthy Adri'el in proud Sydon wrought
And giv'en to Saul when Saul's best gift he sought
The bright-ey'd Merab; for that mindful day
No ornament so proper seemed as they. 1 Samuel 18. 19.

17 There all old Abrams story you might see;
18 And still some Angel bore him company.
His painful, but well-guided Travels, show
The fate of all his Sons, Genesis 121 14.
the Church below.
19 Here beauteous Sara to great Pharo came,
He blushed with sudden passion, she with shame;
Troubled she seemed, and lab'oring in the strife
'Twixt her own Honor, and her Husbands Life.
Here on a conqu'ering Host that careless lay,
Drowned in the joys of their new gotten prey, Genesis 14.

The Patriarch falls; well mingled might you see
20 The confused marks of Death and Luxury.
21 In the next piece blessed Salems mystic King
22 Does sacred Presents to the Victor bring; Genesis 14. 18.

Like him whose Type he bears, his rights receives;
Strictly requires his Due, yet freely gives.
Ev'en in his port, his habit, and his face;
The Mild, and Great, the Priest and Prince had place.
Here all their starry host the heavens display; Genesis 15. 5.

And, Lo, an heav'enly Youth, more fair then they,
Leads Abram forth; points upwards; such, said he,
23 So bright and numberless thy Seed shall be.
24 Here he with God a new Alliance makes, Genesis 17.

And in his flesh the marks of Homage takes;
25 Here he the three mysterious persons feasts, Genesis 18. 2.

Well paid with joyful tidings by his Guests. Ver. 10.

Here for the wicked Town he prays, Genesis 18. 23.
and near
Scarce did the wicked Town through Flames appear. Genesis 19. 24.

And all his Fate, and all his Deeds were wrought,
26 Since he from Genesis 11. 31.
Ur to Genesis 25. 9.
Ephrons cave was brought.
But none amongst all the forms drew then their eyes
Like faithful Abrams righteous Sacrifice.
27 The sad old man mounts slowly to the place, Genesis 22.

With Natures power triumphant in his face
Over the Minds courage; Ver. 3.
for in spite of all
From his swollen eyes resistless waters fall.
28 The inn'ocent Boy his cruel burden bore
With smiling looks, Ver. 6.
and sometimes walked before,
And sometimes turned to talk; above was made
The Altars fatal Pile, Ver. 9.
and on it laid
29 The Hope of Mankind; patiently he lay,
And did his Sire, as he his God, obey.
The mournful Sire lifts up at last the knife, Ver. 10.

And on one moments string depends his life
In whose young loins such brooding wonders ly.
A thousand Spir'its peeped from the affrighted sky,
Amazed at this strange Scene; and almost feared,
For all those joyful Prophesies they would heard.
Till one leapt nimbly forth by Gods command*
Like Lightning from a Cloud, Ver. 11.
and stopped his hand.
The gentle Spirit smil'ed kindly as he spoke,
New beams of joy through Abrams wonder broke.
The Angel points to'a tust of bushes near, Ver. 13.

Where an entangled Ram does half appear,
And struggles vainly with that fatal net,
Which though but slightly wrought, was firmly set.
For, lo, anon, to this sad glory doomed,
The useful Beast on Isaac's Pile consum'ed;
Whilst on his Horns the ransom'ed couple played,
And the glad Boy danced to the tunes he made.
Near this Halls end a Sittim Table stood;
Yet well-wrought plate strove to conceal the wood.
For from the foot a golden vine did sprout,
And cast his fruitful riches all about.
Well might that beauteous Oar the Grape express,
Which does weak Man intoxicate no less,
Of the same wood the gilded beds were made,
And on them large embroidered carpets laid,
From Egypt the rich shop of Follies brought
But Arts of Pride all Nations soon are taught
30 Behold sev'en comely blooming Youths appear,
And in their hands sev'en silver washpots bear,
31 Curled, and gay clad: the choicest Sons that be
Of Gibeons race, and Slaves of high degree.
Seven beauteous Maids marched softly in behind;
Bright scarfs their clothes, their hair fresh Garlands bind,
32 And whilst the Princes wash, they on them shed
Rich Ointments, which their costly odours spread
Ore the whole room; from their small prisons free
With such glad haste through the wide air they flee.
33 The King was plac'ed alone, 1 Samuel 20. 25.
and over his head
A well-wrought Heav'en of silk and gold was spread.
Azure the ground, the Sun in gold shone bright,
But pierced the wandering Clouds with silver light.
The right hand bed the Kings three Sons did grace,
The third was Abners, Adriels, David's place.
And twelve large Tables more were filled below,
With the prime men Saul's Court and Camp could show;
The Palace did with mirth and music sound,
34 And the crowned goblets nimbly mov'ed around.
But though bright joy in every guest did shine
The plenty, state, music, and sprightful wine
Were lost on Saul; an angry care did dwell
In his dark breast, and all gay forms expel.
David's unusual absence from the feast, 1 Samuel 20 26, 27.

To his sick spir'it did jealous thoughts suggest.
Long lay he still, nor drank, nor eat, nor spoke,
And thus at last his troubled silence broke.
Where can he be? said he; It must be so:
With that he paws'd awhile; Too well we know
His boundless pride: he grieves and hates to see
The solemn triumphs of my Court and Me.
Believe me, friends, and trust what I can show
From thousand proofs, the ambitious David now
Does those vast things in his proud soul design
That too much business give for Mirth or Wine.
He Is kindling now perhaps, rebellious fire
Among the Tribes, and does even now conspire
Against my Crown, and all our Lives, whilst we
Are loath ev'en to suspect, what we might See.
35 By the Great Name, it is true.
With that he struck the board, and no man there
But Jonathan durst undertake to clear
The blameless Prince; 1 Samuel 20 28, 29.
and scarce ten words he spoke,
When thus his speech the enraged Tyrant broke. V. 30, 31.

36 Disloyal Wretch! thy gentle Mothers shame!
Whose cold pale Ghost ev'en blushes at thy name!
Who fears lest her chaste bed should doubted be,
And her white fame stained by black deeds of thee!
Can thou be Mine? a Crown sometimes does hire
Ev'en Sons against their Parents to conspire,
But never did story yet, or fable tell
Of one so wild, who merely to Rebel
Quitted th'unquestion'd birthright of a Throne,
And bought his Fathers ruin with his own:
Thou need'st not plead the ambitious youths defense;
Thy crime clears his, and makes that Innocence.
Nor can his foul Ingratitude appear,
Whilst thy unnatural guilt is plac'ed so near.
Is this that noble Friendship you pretend?
Mine, thine own Foe, and thy worst En'emies Friend?
If thy low spirit can thy great brithright quit,
The things but just, so ill deserv'est thou it.
I, and thy Brethren here have no such mind;
Nor such prodigious worth in David find,
That we to him should our just rights resign,
Or think Gods choice not made so well as Thiue.
Shame of thy House and Tribe! hence, from mine Eye,
To thy false Friend, and servile Master fly;
He Is e're this time in arms expecting thee;
Haste, for those arms are rais'ed to ruin Me.
Thy sin that way will nobler much appear,
Then to remain his Spy and Agent here.
When I think this, Nature by thee forsook,
Forsakes me too. With that his spear he took
To strike at him; Ver 33.
the mirth and music case;
The ghests all rise this sudden storm to appease.
37 The Prince his danger, Ver. 34.
and his duty knew;
And low he bowed, and silently withdrew
To David strait, Ver. 35.]
who in a forest nigh
Waits his advice, the royal Friend does fly.
The sole advice, now like the danger clear,
Was in some foreign land this storm t'outwear.
All marks of comely grief in both are seen;
And mournful kind discourses past between.
Now generous tears their hasty tongues restrain, Ver 42.

Now they begin, and talk all over again
A reverent Oath of constant love they take, Ver. 42:

And Gods high name their dreaded witness make;
Not that at all their Faiths could doubtful prove;
But 'twas the tedious Zeal of endless Love.
Thus ere they part, they the short time bestow
In all the pomp Friendship and Grief could show.
And David now with doubtful cares oppressed,
Beneath a shade borrows some little rest;
When by command divine thick mists arise,
And stop the Sense, and close the conque'red eyes.
38 There is a place which Man most high does rear,
The small Worlds Heav'en, where Reason moves the Sphaere.
Here in a robe which does all colors show,
(Th'envy of birds, and the clouds gaudy bow)
Fancy, wild Dame, with much lascivious pride
By twin- Camelions drawn, does gaily ride.
Her coach there follows, and throngs round about
Of shapes and airy Forms an endless rout.
A Sea rowls on with harmless fury here;
Straight it is a field, and trees and herbs appear.
Here in a moment are vast Armies made,
And a quick Scene of war and blood displaide.
Here sparkling wines, and brighter Maids come in,
The bawds for sense and lying baits of sin.
39 Some things arise of strange and quar'elling kind,
The forepart Lion, and a Snake behind;
Here golden mountains* swell the cove'tous place,
40 And Centaures ride Themselves a painted race.
Of these slight wonders Nature sees the store,
And only then accounts herself but poor.
Hither an Angel comes in David's trance;
And finds them mingled in an antique dance;
Of all the numerous forms fit choice he takes,
And joins them wisely, and this Vision makes.
First David there appears in Kingly state,
Whilst the twelve Tribes his dread commands await; 2 Samuel 5. 1.

Straight to the wars with his joined strength he goes,
Settles new friends, 1 Chro. 12. 23.
and frights his ancient Foes.
To Solima, Ver. 6.
Cana'ans old head, they came,
(Since high in note, then not unknown to Fame)
41 The Blind and Lame th'undoubted wall defend, 2 Samuel 5. 6.

And no new wounds or dangers apprehend.
The busy image of great Ioab there
Disdains the mock, and teaches them to fear.
He climbs the airy walls, leaps raging down,
New-minted shapes of slaughter fill the town.
They curse the guards their mirth and bravery chose;
All of them now are slain, or made like those.
42 Far through an inward Scene an Army lay,
Which with full banners a fair Fish display. From Sidon plains to happy Egypts
coast
They seem all met; 2 Samuel 5. 17, 18, 19 20, 21, 22
a vast and warlike Host.
Thither hastes David to his destin'ed prey, 1 Chronicles. 14. 8.

Honor, and noble Danger lead the way;
43 The conscious Trees shook with a reverend fear
Their unblown tops; Ver. 22. 23, 24.
God walked before him there.
Slaughter the wearied Riphaims bosom fills, 1 Chro. 14. 14.

Dead corpse imboss the vail with little hills.
44 On the other side Sophenes mighty King
Numberless troops of the blessed East does bring: 2 Samuel 8. 3.

Twice are his men cut off, 1 Chronicles. 18. 3.
and chariots taken;
45 Damascus and rich Adad help in vain. Ver. 5.

46 Here Nabathaean troops in battle stand, 2 Samuel 10. 6.

With all the lusty youth of Syrian land; 1 Chro. 19. 6. and 19. 8.

Undaunted Ioab rushes on with speed,
Gallantly mounted on his fiery steed;
He hews down all, and deals his deaths around;
The Syrians leave, or possess dead the ground.
On the other wing does brave Abishai ride
Reeking in blood and dust; Ver 10.
on every side
The perjured sons of Ammon quit the field,
Some basely dye, and some more basely yield.
Through a thick wood the wretched Hanun flies,
And far more justly then fears Hebrew Spies. 2 Samuel 10. 3, 4.

47 Moloch, 1 Chro. 19. 3.
their bloody God, thrusts out his head,
Grinning through a black cloud; 1 Chro. 19. 3.
him they would long fed
In his sev'en Chambers, and he still did eat
New-roasted babes, his dear, delicious meat.
Again they' arise, Ver. 15.
more ang'red then dismayed;
48 Euphrates, 1 Chro. 19. 16.
and Swift Tygris sends them aid:
In vain they send it, for again they are slain,
49 And feast the greedy birds on Helay plain. 2 Samuel 11. 1.

50 Here Rabba with proud towers affronts the sky,
And round about great Ioabs trenches ly. 1 Chr. 20

They force the walls, 2 Samuel 12. 30.
and sack the helpless town;
51 On David's head shines Ammons massy Crown.
Midst various torments the cursed race expires, 1 Chro 20. 2.

David himself his severe wrath admires. Ver. 31.

Next upon Isra'els throne does bravely sit
52 A comely Youth endow'ed with wondrous wit. 1 Chro 20. 3.
1 King. 1.

53 Far from the parched Line a royal Dame, 1 Chro. 23. 1.

To hear his tongue and boundless wisdom came. 1 King. 3. 12.

She carried back in her triumphant womb
The glorious stock of thousand Kings to come. 2 Chro. 1. 12.

Here brightest forms his pomp and wealth display, 1 Kim. 10.

Here they a Temples vast foundations lay. Mat. 12. 42.

A mighty work; Lu. 11. 31
and with fit glories filled.
For God inhabit, 2 Chr 19
and that King to build.
Some from the quarries hew out massy stone, 1 Kin. 6.

Some draw it up with cranes, 2 Chr. 3. etc. 4, 5.
some breathe and groan
In order ore the anvile; some cut down
Tall Cedars, the proud Mountains ancient crown;
Some carve the Truncks, and breathing shapes bestow,
Giving the Trees more life then when they grow;
But, oh (alas) what sudden cloud is spread
About this glorious Kings eclypsed head? 1 Kin. 11.

It all his same benights, and all his store,
Wrapping him round, and now he is seen no more.
When straight his Son appears at Sichem crowned. 1 Kin. 12. 2 Chr. 10

With young and heedless Council circled round;
Unseemly object! but a falling state
Has always its own errors joined with fate.
Ten Tribes at once forsake the Iessian throne,
And bold Adoram at his Message stone; Ver. 18.

Brethren of Israel! 2 Chro. 10. 18.
-- more he fain would say,
But a flint stops his mouth, and speech i'th'way.
Here this fond Kings disasters but begin,
He s destined to more shame by his Fathers sin.
Susack comes up, 1 K. 14. 25
and under his command
54 A dreadful Army from scorcht Africks sand
As numberless as that; 2 Chro. 12. 2.
all is his prey,
The Temples sacred wealth they bear away;
55 Adrazars shields and golden loss they take;
Even David in his dream does sweat and shake.
Thus fails this wretched Prince; 1 Kin. 12 10.
his Loins appear
Of less weight now, 2 Chro. 10. 10.
then Solomon's Fingers were.
Abijah next seeks Isra'el to regain, 1 K. 15. 1

And wash in seas of blood his Fathers stain;
56 Never saw the aged Sun so cruel fight, 2 Chro. 13. 1. and 13. 3.

Scarce saw he this, but hid his bashful light.
Nebats cursed son fled with not half his men,
Where were his Gods of Dan and Bethel then? 2 Chro. 13. 17.

Yet could not this the fatal strife decide;
God punished one, but blessed not the other side.
Asan a just and virtuous Prince succeeds; 1 K. 15. 9.

High raised by fame for great and godly deeds. 2 Chro. 14. 1.

57 He cut the solemn groves where Idols stood, ver. 13.

And Sacrifice'd the Gods with their own wood. 2 Chro. 14. 3.

He vanquished thus the proud weak powers of hell,
Before him next their doting servants fell.
58 So huge an Host of Zerahs men he slew,
As made ev'en that Arabia Desert too. 2 Chr. 14. 9.

59 Why feared he then the perjured Baasha's fight? 2 Chro. 16. 2.

Or bought the dangerous aid of Syrian's might?
Conquest Heav'ens gift* ver. 18.
cannot by man be sold;
Alas, 2 Chro. 16. 8.
what weakness trust he? Man, and Gold.
Next Iosaphat possessed the royal state;
An happy Prince, 1 K. 15. 24 and 22 43.
well worthy of his fate;
His often Oblations on Gods Altar made, 2 Chr. 17

With thousand flocks, 2 Chro. 17. 11*
and thousand herds are paid,
Arabian Tribute! what mad troops are those,
Those mighty Troops that dare to be his foes? 2 Chro. 20. 17.

He Prays them dead; with mutual wounds they fall;
One fury brought, one fury slays them all.
Thus sits he still, 1 Kings 22. 30.
and sees himself to win;
Never overcome but by's Friend Ahabs sin; 2 Chro. 18. 19.

60 On whose disguise fates then did only look;
And had almost their Gods command mistook.
Him from worse danger heav'en securely brings, 2 Kin. 3. 14 and 3. 9. and 3. 8.

And for his sake two ripely wicked Kings.
61 Their Armies languish, burnt with thirst at Seere,
Sighs all their Cold, Tears all their Moisture there.
They fix their greedy eyes on th'empty sky,
And fancy clouds, and so become more dry.
Elisha calls for waters from afar
To come; 2 Ki 3. 1s.
elisha calls, and here they are.
In helmets they quaff round the welcome flood; 2 Kin. 3. 24.

And the decrease repair with Moabs blood. 2 Kin. 8. 16. and 8. 25.

62 Iehoram next, and Ochoziah throng
For Iudahs Scepter; both short lived too long*
63 A Woman too from Murder Title claims; 2 Chr. 21 1. and 22. 1

Both with her Sins and Sex the Crown she shames. 2 Kings 11. 1.

Proud cursed Woman! but her fall at last
To doubting men clears heave'n for what was past. 2 Chro. 22. 10.

Ioas at first does bright and glorious show; 2 Kin 12

In life's fresh morn his fame did early Crow. 2 Chr 24

Fair was the promise of his dawning ray,
But Prophets angry blood o'recast his day.
From thence his clouds, 2 Chro. 24 21.
from thence his storms begin,
64 It cries aloud, 2 King. 12 18.
and twice let us Aram in.
65 So Amaziah lives, so ends his reign;
Both by their Trayt'erous servants justly slain. 2 Chro. 2^. 23.

Edom at first dreads his victorious hand, 2 K. 14.

Before him thousand Captives trembling stand. 2 Chr. 25.

Down a precipice deep, 2 K 14. 7
down he casts them all,
66 The mimick shapes in several postures fall. 2 Chro. 25 11. and ^5 12.

But then (mad fool! 2 Chr. 25. 14
) he does those Gods adore,
Which when plucked down, 2 K. 14 13
had worshipped him before.
Thus all his life to come is loss and shame; 2 Chronicles. 25. 43.

No help from Gods who themselves helped not came. 2 K* 15. 1

67 All this Uzziahs strength and wit repairs, 2 Chr 26

Leaving a well built greatness to his Heirs. 2 K 15. 5

68 Till leprous scurff over his whole body cast, 2 Chr 26 10.

Takes him at first from Men, 2 K. 15. 32.
from Earth at last.
69 As virtuous was his Son, 2 Chr. 27
and happier far;
Buildings his Peace, 2 Chr. 27 4.
and Trophies grac'ed his War.
But Achaz heaps up sins, 2 K 16. 1.
as if he meant
To make his worst forefathers innocent. 2 Chr. 28.

70 He burns his Son at Hinon, 2 K 16. 1
whilst around
The roaring child drums and loud Trumpets sound. 2 Chr. 28 3.

This to the boy a barb'arous mercy grew,
And snatched him from all mis'eries to ensue.
Here Peca comes, 2 K. 16. 5.
and hundred thousands fall,
Here Rezin marches up, 2 Cho. 28. 6.
and sweeps up all.
71 Till like a Sea the Great Belochus Son
Breaks upon both, 2 K. 16. 7.
and both does overrun.
The last of Adads ancient stock is slain, 2 K. 16. 9. and 15. 27.

Isra'el captiv'ed, and rich Damascus taken.
All this wild rage to revenge Iuda's wrong;
72 But woe to Kingdoms that have Friends too strong! 2 Chro. 28. 20.

Thus Hezechiah the torn Empire took, 2 Kin. 18.

And Assurs King with his worse Gods forsook, 2 Chr. 29.

Who to poor Judah worlds of Nations brings,
There rages; 2 K. 18. 7
utters vain and mighty things.
Some dream of triumphs, 2 King. 18. 17.
and exalted names,
Some of dear gold, 2 Chr. 32.
and some of beauteous dames;
Whilst in the midst of their huge sleepy boast, Isa. 36.

73 An Angel scatters death through all the host. 2 K.^ 19. 35.

The Affrighted Tyrant back to Babel hies, 2 Chro. 32. 21.

74 There meets an end far worse then that he flies. 2 Kin. 19. 37.

Here Zezekiahs life is almost done! 2 Chr. 32, 21.

So good, and yet, alas! so short it is spunne.
The End of the Line was ravell'd, weak and old;
Time must go back, 2 Kin. ^0
and afford better hold
To tie a new thread to'it, 2 Chr. 32. 24.
of fifteen years;
It Is done; The almighty power of prayer and tears!
75 Backward the Sun, 2 K. 20. 11.
an unknown motion, went;
The Stars gaz'ed on, 2 Chr. 3^.
and wondered what he meant?
76 Manasses next (forgetful man! 2 K. 21?
) begins;
Enslav'ed, 2 Chr. 33.
and sold to Ashur by his sins.
Till by the rod of learned mis'ery taught,
Home to his God and Country both he is brought. 2 K. 21. 19.

It taught not Ammon, 2 Chr. 33. 21.
nor his hardness brake;
He Is made the Example he refused to take. 2 Kin. 22

Yet from this root a goodly Cyon springs; 2 Kin. 29

Josiah best of Men, as well as Kings.
77 Down went the Calves with all their gold and cost;
The Priests then truly griev'ed, Osyris lost.
These mad Egyptian rites till now remained;
Fools! 2 Kin. 23 10. Ib. v. 13.
they their worser thraldom still retaind!
78 In his own Fires Moloch to ashes fell,
And no more flames must have besides his Hell.
79 Like end Astartes horned Image found,
80 And Baals spired stone to dust was ground:
81 No more were Men in female habit seen,
Or They in Men's by the lewd Syrian Queen.
82 No lustful Maids at Benos Temple sit,
And with their bodies shame their marriage get.
83 The double Dagon neither nature saves,
Nor flies She back to the Erythraean waves.
84 The trav'elling Sun sees gladly from on high
His Chariots burn, 2 Kin. 23. 11.
and Nergal quenched ly.
The Kings impartial Anger lights on all.
85 From fly-blown Acca'ron to the thundering Baal.
Here David's joy unruly grows and bold;
Nor could Sleeps silken chain its vio'lence hold;
Had not the Angels to seal fast his eyes
The humors stirred, and bad more mists arise:
When straight a Chariot hurries swift away,
And in it good Josiah bleeding lay.
One hand's held up, one stops the wound; in vain
They both are used; alas, he is slain, he is slain.
Iehoia's and Iehoikim next appear; 2 Kin. 23 31.

Both urge that vengeance which before was near. Ib. v 36.

He in Egyptian fetters captive dies, 2 Chro. 35. 1. and 5

86 This by more courteous anger murdered lies. 2 Kin. 23 34.

87 His Son and Brother next do bonds sustain,
Israe'ls now solemn and imperial Chain. 2 Chro. 36. 4.

Here Is the last Scene of this proud Cities state; Ier. 36. 30.

All ills are met ty'ed in one knot of Fate. 2 Kin. 24. 8.

88 Their endless slavery in this trial lay;
Great God had heapt up Ages in one Day: 2 Chr. 36*

Strong works around the wall the Caldees build,
The Town with grief and dreadful bus'iness filled. 2 King. 25. 1.

To their carv'ed Gods the frantic women pray, Ier. 52. 4

Gods which as near their ruin were as they.
At last in rushes the prevailing foe,
Does all the mischief of proud conquest show.
The wondering babes from mothers breasts are rent, 2 Chr. 36 17.

And suffer ills they neither feared nor meant.
No silver rev'erence guards the stooping age,
No rule or method ties their boundless rage.
The glorious Temple shines in flame all over, 2 Chro. 26. 19.

Yet not so bright as in its Gold before. 2 King. 25. 9.

Nothing but fire or slaughter meets the eyes,
Nothing the ear but groans and dismal cries.
The walls and towers are levi'ed with the ground,
And scarce ought now of that vast Citie's found
But shards and rubbish which weak signs might keep
Of forepart glory, and bid Trav'ellers weep.
Thus did triumphant Assure homewards pass,
And thus Ierus'alem left, Jerusalem that was:
This Zedechiah saw, and this not all;
Before his face his Friends and Children fall, 2 King. 25. 7.

The sport of ins'olent victors; Ier 52. ^0.
this he viewes,
A King and Father once; ill fate could use
His eyes no more to do their master spite;
All to be seen she took* and next his Sight.
89 Thus a long death in prison he outwears;
Bereft of griefs last solace, ev'en his Tears.
Then Ieconiahs son did foremost come, Mat. 1. 12

And he who brought the captiv'ed nation home; Luke 3.

A row of Worthies in long order past
Ore the short stage; of all old Joseph last.
Fair Angels past by next in seemly bands,
All gilt, with gilded basquets in their hands.
Some as they went the blew-ey'd violets strew,
Some spotless Lilies in loose order threw.
Some did the way with full-blown roses spread;
Their smell divine and color strangely red;
Not such as our dull gardens proudly wear,
Whom weathers taint, and winds rude kisses tear.
Such, I believe, was the first Roses hew,
Which at Gods word in beauteous Eden grew.
Queen of the Flowers, which made that Orchard gay;
The morning blushes of the Springs new Day.
90 With sober pace an heav'enly Maid walks in,
Her looks all fair; no sign of Native sin
Through her whole body writ; Immod'erate Grace
Spoke things far more then humane in her face.
It casts a dusky gloom over all the flowers;
91 And with full beams their mingled Light devowrs.
An Angel straight broke from a shining clowd,
And pressed his wings, and with much reve'rence bowed.
Again he bowed, and grave approach he made,
And thus his sacred Message sweetly said:
Hail, Lu. 1. 28
full of Grace, thee the whole world shall call
Above all blessed; Thee, who shall bless them all.
Thy Virgin womb in wondrous sort shall shroud
Jesus the God; (and then again he bowed)
Conception the great Spirit shall breathe on thee;
92 Hail thou, who must Gods Wife, Gods Mother be!
With that, his seeming form to heaven he reared;
She low obeisance made, and disappeared.
Lo a new Star three eastern Sages see;
(For why should only Earth a Gainer be? Mat. 2. 10.

They saw this Phosphors infant-light, and knew
It bravely ushered in a Sun as New.
They hasted all this rising Sun to adore;
93 With them rich myrrh, and early spices bore.
Wise men; no fitter gift your zeal could bring;
You Will in a noisome stable find your King.
Anon a thousand Dev'ils run roaring in;
Some with a dreadful smile deform'edly grin.
Some stamp their cloven paws, some frown and tear
The gaping Snakes from their black-knotted hair.
As if all grief, and all the rage of hell
Were doubled now, or that just now, they fell.
But when the dreaded Maid they entering saw,
All fled with trembling fear and silent aw.
In her chaste arms the Eternal Insant lies,
The Almighty voice chang'ed into feeble cries.
Heav'en contained Virgins often, and will do more;
Never did Virgin contain Heav'en before.
Angles peep round to view this my stick thing,
And Halleluiah round, all Halleluiah sing
No longer could good David quiet bear,
The unwieldy pleasure which ore-flow'd him here.
It broke the fetters, and burst open his ey.
Away the tim'erous Forms together fly.
Fixed with amaze he stood; and time must take,
To learn if yet he were at last awake.
Sometimes he thinks that heav'en this Vision sent,
And order'ed all the Pageants as they went.
Sometimes, that only 'twas wild Phancies play,
The loose and scattered relics of the Day.
94 When Gabriel (no blessed Spirit more kind or fair)
95 Bodies and clothes himself with thickened air.
All like a comely youth in life's fresh bloom;
Rare workmanship, and wrought by heavenly loom!
He took for skin a cloud most soft and bright,
That ere the midday Sun pierc'ed through with light*
Upon his cheeks a lively blush he spread;
Washed from the morning beauties deepest red.
An harmless flaming Meteor shone for hair.
And fell adown his shoulders with loose care,
He cuts out a silk Mantle from the skies,
Where the most sprightly azure pleased the eyes.
This he with starry vapors spangles all,
Took in their prime ere they grow ripe and fall.
Of a new Rainbow ere it fret or fade,
The choicest piece took out, a Scarf is made.
Small streaming clouds he does for wings display,
Not Virtuous Lovers sighs more soft then They.
These he gilds over with the Suns richest rays,
Scrap'ed neatly from pure streams on which he plays.
Thus dressed the joyful Gabriel posts away,
And carries with him his own glorious day
Through the thick woods; the gloomy shades awhile
Put on fresh looks, and wonder why they smile.
The trembling Serpents close and silent ly,
96 The birds obscene far from his passage fly.
A sudden spring waits on him as he goes,
Sudden as that which by Creation rose.
Thus he appears to David, at first sight
All earth-bred fears and sorrows take their flight.
In rushes joy divine, and hope, and rest;
A Sacred calm shines through his peaceful breast.
Hail, Man belov'ed! from highest heav'en (said he)
My mighty Master sends thee health by me.
The things thou saw'est are full of truth and light,
97 Shaped in the glass of the divine Foresight.
Even now old Time is harnessing the years
To go in order thus; hence empty fears;
Thy Fate's all white; from thy blessed seed shall spring
The promised Shilo, the great Mystic King.
Round the whole earth his dreaded name shall sound,
And reach to Worlds, that must not yet be found.
The Southern Clime him her sole Lord shall style,
98 Him all the North, ev'en Albions stubborn Isle.
99 My fellow servants, credit what I tell.
100 Straight into shapeless air unseen he fell.
NOTES UPON THE SECOND BOOK.
1. HOnors, that is, Beauties, which make things Honored; in which sense Virgil
often uses the word, and delights in it: Et laetos oculis afflarat Honores.
And in the 2 Georg. (as in this place) for Leaves. Frigidus and silvis Aquilo
decussit honorem.

2 Josephus calls David's, (...). The yellow; that is, yellow-haired Boy, or
rather, Youth. Cedrenus says, that Valentinian the Emperor was like David,
because he had beautiful Eyes, a ruddy complexion, and red, or rather, yellow
hair.

3. Power, Love, and Wisdom, that is, the whole Trinity (The Father, Power; the
Son, Love; the Holy Ghost, Wisdom) concurred inthe Creation of the world: And
it is not only preserved by these Three, the Power, Love, and Wisdom of God,
but by the emanations and beams of them derived to, and impressed in the
Creatures. Which could not subsist without Power to Act, Wisdom to direct those
Actions to Ends convenient for their Natures, and Love or Concord, by which
they receive mutual necessary assistances and benefits from one another. Which
Love is well termed by Cicero Cognatio Naturae, The Kindred, or Consanguinity
of Nature. And to Love the Creation of the world, was attributed even by many
of the ancient Heathens, the Verse of Orph. (...).
Wisdom and Love were parents of the world: And therefore Hesiod in his mad
confused Poem of the Generation of the Gods, after Chaos, the Earth, and Hell,
brings in Love, as the first of all the Gods, (...).
Pherecides said excellently, that God transformed himself into Love, when he
began to make the world, (...)
(...).


4. As Humane Nature is elevated by Grace, so other Agents are by Love to
Operations that are above, and seem contrary to their Nature, as the ascension
of heavy bodies, and the like.

5. Guirlands of Ivy were anciently the ornaments of Poets, and other learned
men, as Laurel of Conquerors, Olive of Peacemakers, and the like. Horace, Me
doctarum Hederae praemia frontium
Diis miscent superis --
Me Ivy the reward of learned brows does mingly with the Gods. Virg. -- Atque
hanc sine tempora circum
Inter victrices hederam tibi serpere laurus.
And let this humble Ivy creep around thy Temples with triumphant Laurel hound.
Because Ivy is always, green, and requires the support of some stronger Tree,
as Learning does of Princes and great men.

6. The Object of the Sensitive Appetite is not that which is truly good, but
that which Appears to be Good. There is great caution to be used in English in
the placing of Adjectives (as here) after their Substantives. I think when they
constitue specifical difference of the Substantive, they follow best; for then
they are to it like Cognomina, or Surnames to Names, and we must not say, the
Great Pompey, or the Happy sylla, but Pompey the Great, and Sylla the Happy;
sometimes even in other cases the Epithete is put last very gracefully, of
which a good ear must be the Judge for ought I know, without any Rule. I choose
rather to say Light Divine, and Command Divine, then Divine Light, and Divine
Command.

7. These are the Effects of Love, according to Th. Aquinas in Prima Sec.
Quaest. 28. the 1, 2, 3, and 4. Artic. to whom I refer for the proof and
explanation of them, Amor est affectus quo cum re amata aut unimur, aut
perpetuamus unionem. Scal. de subt.

8. 1 Samuel 5. And David said unto Jonathan, behold to morrow is the New Mood,
and I should not fail to sit with the King at meat, but let me go, etc. Ecce
Calendae sunt crastino, and ego ex more sedere soleo juxta regem ad vescendum,
etc. The first day of every month was a Festival among the Jews: for the
First Fruits of all things, even all distinctions of Times were Sacred to God;
In it they neither bought nor sold, Amos 8. 4. When will the New Mood be gone,
that we may sell Corn? the Vulg. Quando transibit mensis (that is, Primus dies,
or Festum Mensis) and venundabimus merces? They went to the Prophets to hear
the word as upon Sabboths, 2 Kings 4. 23. Wherefore will thou go to him to day?
it is neither New Mood nor Sabbath; which was likewise a Custom among the
Romans: for the day of the Calends the High Prests called together the people
(from whence the name of Calends a Calando plebem) to instruct them in the
divine duties which they were to perform that month, Macro. 1. Saturnal. And
lastly, there were greater Sacrifices on that, then upon other ordinary days,
Numb. 28 11. But of all New Moons, that of the seventh month was the most
solemn, it being also the Feast of Trumpets. It is not evident that this was
the New Mood spoken of in this story of David; but that it was so, may probably
be conjectured, in that the Text seems to imply a greater solemnity then that
of ordinary Calends, and that the feast lasted above one day, 1 Samuel 20. 27.
And it came to pass, that on the morrow, which was the second day of the
month, David's place was empty. Now the reason of this greater observation of
the Calends of the Seventh Month (called Tisri, and answering to our September)
was, because according to the Civil Computation (for the Jews had two accounts
of the beginning of the year, one Civil, the other Religious; this latter being
instituted in memory of their passage out of Egypt in the month Abib, that is,
about our March) this was the beginning of the year, from hence contracts, and
the account of Sabbatical years and Jubilees bare date. It is called by some
Sabbathum Sabbathorum, because it is the Sabbath of Months; for as the seventh
day, and the seventh year, so the seventh month too was consecrated to God. Of
this New Mood it is that David speaks, Psalm. 81. 3. Blow the Trumpet in the
New Mood, in the time appointed on our solemn Feast Day. In insigni die
solennitatis vestrae. And the Psalm is inscribed, Pro Torcularibus; which
concurs just with this seventh Moon; which Philo in Decal. terms, (...). And S.
August. reads, In initio Mensis Tubae. See the Institution of this Festival,
Levit. 23. 24. and Numb. 29* 1.

9. The Priests were wont to blow the Trumpets upon all Festivals, the year of
Iubilee was proclaimed by them with the sound of Trumpets through the whole
Land; nay the Sabbath it self was begun with it, as Josephus testifies, l. 5.
Bell. Iud. c. 9. But why the Trumpets were sounded more extraordinarily on this
day, is hard to find out; for which it is named Dies Clangoris. Some will have
it to be only as a Solemn Promulgation of the New-year; which opinion is
likewise adorned with an allusion to the beginning (or as it were
New-years-Day) of Eternity; which is to be proclaimed by Angels in that manner
with a great sound of a Trumpet, Mat. 24. 31.

10. This was Saint Basils opinion, but is not much followed, because when
Festivals are instituted in memory of any past Blessing, they used to be
observed on the same day that the blessing was conferred.

11. This third is the common opinion of the Jews; who therefore call this when
Festival Festum Cornu, and say, that they sounded only upon Rams Horns: but
that, methinks, if this be the true reason of it, is not necessary.

12. The Third Hour; 1. Nine a clock in the morning: For the day began at six a
clock, and contained twelve Little, or Four Great Hours, or Quarters. The first
Quarter from Six to Nine, was called the Third Hour, because that closed up the
Quarter.

13. Gay, because the Beasts to be Sacrificed, used to be Crowned with
Guirlands, and sometimes had their Horns gilt, as I say afterward.

14. For on the ordinary New Mons there was offered up two Bullocks, one Ram,
and seven Lambs of the first year without spot, Numb. 28. 11. and a Kid of the
Goats, v. 15. and there was added on this New Mood, one young Bullock, one Ram,
seven Lambs of the first year without blemish, and one Kid, Numb. 29. which
joined, make up my number. Bullocks of Free-neck; that is, which had never been
yoked, employed in the Epithete Young. Intacta cervice Iuvenci.

15. The outmost Court of the Tabernacle.

16. The custom of having Stories wrought in Hangings, Coverlits, nay even
wearing garments, is made to be very ancient by the Poets. Such is the history
of Theseus and Ariadne in the coverlit of Thet is Pulvinar, or Marriage Bed.
Catull. Argonaut. Talibus amplifice vestis variata figuris
Polvinar complexa suo velabat amictu.
So Aeneas in 5. Aen. gives Coat to Cloanthus, in which was wrought the rape of
Ganymede, Intextusque puer frondosa regius Ida.
And many authorities of this kind might be alleged if it were necessary.

17. You might see. That is, It might be seen, or, Any one might see* This
manner of speaking, which puts the second person Indefinitely, is very frequent
among the Poets; as Homer, (...)
Virg. 4. Aen. Migrantes cernas:
Upon which Servius says, Honesta figura si rem tertiae personae in secundam
tranferas. Mugire videbis, that is, Videbit aut poterit videre aliquis. So 8.
Aen. Credas innare revulsas Cycladas; that is, Credat quis.


18. God is said to have spoken with Abraham Nine times; that is, so many times
Angles brought him Messages from God. An Angel is called by Josephus (...).

19. Some make Sara to be the Daughter of Haran, Abrams Brother; others of
Therah by another wife, which marriages were then lawful, but the Scripture
Genesis 11. calls her Terahs daughter in Law, not Daughter; others think she was
only Abrams Kinswoman; all which the Hebrews called Sisters. (...) non (...)
Grot. Beauteous were a strange Epithete for her at the Age she then had, which
was above threescore years, but that the Scripture calls her so, and she proved
herself to be so, by striking two Kings in love, Pharaoh, and Abimelech. It is
to be believed, that people in those days bore their age better then now, and
her barrenness might naturally contribute somewhat to it; but the chief reason
I suppose to be a Blessing of God as particular, as that of her childbearing
after the natural season.

20. The Scripture does not say particularly, that Abram surprised this Army
in, or after a debauch, but it is probable enough for my turn, that this was
the case. Of these Confused marks of death and luxury, there is an excellent
description in the 9 Aeneid, where Nisus and Eurialus fall upon a quarter of
the Enemy, Somno vinoque sepultam.
Purpuream vomit ille animam, and cum sangnine mista
Vina refert moriens, etc.
But I had no leisure to expatiate in this place.

21. St. Hierom says this Salem was a Town near Scythopolis, called Salem even
to his Time; and that there were then remaining some ruins of the Palace of
Melchisedec, which is not very probable. I rather believe him to have been King
of Jerusalem; for being a Type of Christ, that seat was most proper for him,
especially since we are sure that Jerusalem was once named Salem, Psalm. In
Salem is his Tabernacle, and his habitation in Sion. And the addition of Ieru
to it, was from Iebu, the Iebusites; that is, Salem of the Iebusites, Adric.
The situation of Jerusalem agrees very well with this story. For Abram coming
to Hebron from the parts about Damascus, passes very near Jerusalem, nay nearer
then to the other Salem. But concerning this King of Salem, Melchisedec, the
difficulties are more important. Some make him to be no man, but God himself,
or the Holy Ghost, as the ancient Melchisedecians and Hieracites; others, to be
Christ himself; others, an Angel, as Origin; others; to be Sem the son of Noah;
which is little more probable then the former extravagant fancies. That which
is most reasonable, and most received too, is, that he was a King of a little
Territory among the Canaanites, and a Priest of the true God, which makes him
so remarkable among those Idolatrous Nations; for which cause he is termed,
(...), because he was not of any of the Genealogies of the Scripture; and
therefore the better typified or represented Christ, as being both a King and a
Priest, without being of the Tribe of Levi: But this and the other
controversies about him, are too copious to be handled in a Comment of this
Nature.

22. Ver. 18. And Melchisedec King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, etc.
The Romanists maintain, that this was only a Sacrifice, and a Type of the
Eucharist, as Melchisedec himself was of Christ; others, that it was only a
Present for the relief of Abrams men. Why may we not say that it was both? and
that before the men were refresht by bread and wine, there was an offering or
prelibation of them to God, by the Priest of the most High God, as he is
denominated? for even this oblation of bread and wine (used also among the
Hebrews) is called (...) Levit. 2. and Philo says of Melchisedec upon this
occasion, (...). I therefore name them Sacred Presents. Like him whose Type he
bears; that is, Christ. And the Dues he received were Tenths, whether of all
Abrams substance, or of the present Spoils ((...)) is a great controversy.

23. Genesis 15. 5. and Genesis 22. 17. I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the
heaven, and as the sand upon the sea shore. An ordinary proverb in all
languages, for great numbers. Catul, Aut quot sidera multa cum tacet nox; and
in another place he joins the sand of the sea too as this Text does. Ille
pulveris Erythraei Siderumque micantium subducat numerum. It does no hurt, I
think, to add Bright as well as Numberless to the similitude.

24. Genesis 17. It is called a Covenant; and circumcision may well be termed a
Mark of Homage, because it was a renouncing of the flesh, and peculiar
dedication of Abram and his seed to the service of the true God.

25. The received opinion is, that two of these persons were Angels, and the
Third, God himself; for after the two Angels were gone toward Sodom, it is
said, Genesis 18. 22. But Abraham stood yet before the Lord. So Sulpit. Sever.
Dominus qui cum duobus Angelis ad eum venerat. Lyra and Tostatus report, that
the Jews have a Tradition, that these Three were Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael.
The first of which represented God, and remained with Abraham, the second
destroyed Sodom, and the third brought Lot out of it. It was a very ancient
opinion that these were the Three persons of the Trinity; from whence arose
that notorious saying, Tres vidit and unum adoravit. This appearing of Gods in
the manner of strangers to punish and reward men was a common tradition too
among the Heathens, Hom. r. Odyss. (...)
(...)
(...).
The Gods in the habits of strangers went about to several Towns to be
eyewitnesses of the justice and injustice of men. So Homer makes the Gods to
go once a year to feast, -- (...) With the unblameable Aethiopians. And we find
these peregrinations frequent in the Metamorphosis, Summo delabor Olympo, --
Et Deus humana lustro sub imagine terras. 1. Metam.


26. From Ur, the place of his Birth to Ephrons Cave, the place of his Burial.
Ur of the Chaldees, Genesis 11. 31. Some of the Jews take Ur here for Fire, and
tell a ridiculous fable, that Abraham and Haran his brother were cast by the
Caldaeans into a burning furnace for opposing their Idolatry, in which Haran
was consumed, but Abraham was preserved. Josephus and Eusebius, lib. 9.
Praepar. Evang say Ur was the name of a City, which Josephus calls (...). and
Plin. 1. 5. c. 24. makes mention of Ura, a place Usque quem fertur Euphrates.
It was perhaps denominated from the worship of Fire in that country. The name
continued till Ammianus his time. Ammian. lib. 25.

27. Mounts. For the place was the Hill Moriah, which the Vulgar translates
Montem Visionis. Aquila (...); which I conceive to be, not as some render it,
In terram lucidam, but terram apparentem, the place which appears a great way
off, as being a Mountain. Symmachus for the same reason has (...), which is the
same with the Latin Visionis; and the Septuag. call it (...), the High
Country; others interpret it, The Country of Worship, by Anticipation. And it
was not perhaps without relation to this Sacrifice of Abraham's, that this was
chosen afterward to be the seat of Solomon's Temple.

28. The Boy. Our English Translation, Lad, which is not a word for verse, the
Latin Puer, Boy. Aben EZra is cited to make him at that time but ten or twelve
years old. Put that is an age unfit for the carrying of such a Burden as he
does here. Rivet for that reason conceives that he was about sixteen years of
age, Josephus 25 Others 33. because at that age our Savior (whose Type he was)
was sacrificed. Some of the Jews 36. none of which are contrary to the Hebrew
use of the word Boy; for so all young men are termed, as Benjamin, Genesis 43. 8:
and Joseph, Joshua, and David when he fought with Goliath. The Painters commonly
make him very young, and my description agrees most with that opinion, for it
is more poetical and pathetical then the others.

29. Because the Covenant and Promises were made in Isaac, Genesis 17. 21. Heb.
11. 17, 18.

30. The ancients (both Hebrews and other Nations) never omitted the washing at
least of their hands and feet before they sat or lay down to Table. Judge. 19.
21. it is said of the Levite and his Concubine, They washed their feet and did
eat and drink. So Abraham says to the three Angels, Genesis 18. 4. Let a little
water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest your selves under
the Tree, and I will fetch a morsel of Bread, etc. So likewise Joseph's Steward
treats his Masters brethren. So David to Uriah, 2 Samuel 11. 8. Go down to thy
house, and wash thy feet, etc. and there followed him a mess of meat from the
King. It is in vain to add more authorities of a thing so notorious. And this
custom was then very necessary, for their Legs and Thighs being bare, they
could not but contract much dirt, and were (of which this custom is some
argument) to lie down upon Beds, which without washing they would have spoiled.
Homer makes the Wives and Daughters even of Princes to wash the feet of their
guests, -- (...). Athen. L. 1. c. 8. For this (says he) was the ancient custom;
and so the daughters of Cocalus washed Minos at his arrival in Sicilie. But the
more ordinary, was to have young and beautiful servants for this and the like
ministeries. Besides this, it was accounted necessary to have washpots standing
by at the Jewish feasts, to purify themselves, if they should happen to touch
any thing unclean. And for these reasons six Waterpots stood ready at the
wedding feast of Cana in Galilee.

31. Eccles. 2. 8. I gate men-singers, and women-singers, the delights of the
sons of men, (...). He and she, servants to fill wine, says the Septuagint:
Though I know the Vulgar, and our English Edition translate it otherwise; both
differently: And it is incredible, how curious the ancients were in the choice
of Servants to wait at Table. Mart. Stant pueri, Dominos quos precer esse meos.

32. After washing they always anointed themselves with precious oil. So
Judith 10. 2. So Naomi to Ruth, Wash thy self therefore, and anoint thy self.
So David after the death of his child, Rose up and washed, and anointed himself,
etc. So Hom. Od. 6. of Nausicaa and her maids, (...)
(...).
But this too is as notorious as the other fashion of washing. Small Prisons.
Boxes of Ointments, such as the woman poured upon the head of our Savior, Mat.
26. 7. (...), that is, as we say an Inkhorn, though it be not made of Horn, but
any other matter; for this was not of Alabaster, S. Mark affirming that it was
broken. Horace, Nardi parvus Onyx.
Claudian. Gemmatis alii per totum balsama tectum
Effudere cadis --


33. The Roman custom was, to have three Beds to each Table (from whence the
word Triclinium) and three persons to each bed (though sometimes they exceeded
in both; and it is likely they took this from the Asiatiques as well as the
very fashion of discubation, for conveniently there could be no more. To Saul
for state I give a whole Bed; and the other two, to his own Sons, Jonathan,
Ishui and Melchisua, 1 Samuel 14. 49. to Abner his Cousin German, and Captain of
his Hosts, and to his two Sons in Law, Adriel and David. Neither does it
convince me, that Lying down was not in use, because it is said here, 1 Samuel
20. 25. And Saul sat upon his seat as at other times, even upon a Seat by the
wall: because the words of Session and Accubation are often confounded, both
being in practice at several times, and in several Nations.

34. At the feasts of the ancients, not only the rooms were strewed with
flowers, but the Guests and the Waiters, and the very drinking Bowls were
crowned with them. Virg. Crateras magnos statuunt and vina coronant; and,
Tum pater Anchises magnum cratera corona
Induit, implevitque mero --
Which cannot be interpreted as some do Homers, (...). Which they say are said
to be Crowned, when they are filled so full, that the liquor standing higher
then the brims of the Bowl, looks like a Crown upon it. Athen l. j. c. 11. But
why may we not construe Homer, They crowned, (...), Bowls of drink, as well as
They crowned Bowls with drink?

35. The name of God, the Tetragrammaton, that was not to be pronounced.

36. 1 Samuel 20. 30. Thou Son of the perverse rebellious woman, etc. The Vulg.
Fili mulieris virum ultro rapientis; that is as much as to say, Thou Son of a
whore. Upon which place Grotius. Sons use to be like their Parents, and
therefore Saul who would not accuse himself, casts the fault of his
stubbornness and ill nature upon his Mother. In which I cannot abide to be of
his opinion; the words are so ungracious from the mouth of a Prince: I rather
think that they import this, Thou who art so stubborn and unnatural, that thou
may seem to be not my son, but a Bastard, the son of a whore or rebellious
woman; and that which follows in the same verse confirms this to me. Thou have
chosen the Son of Iesse to thine own confusion, and to the confusion of thy
Mothers nakedness; that is, to her shame, who will be thought to have had thee
of some other man, and not of me.

37. 1 Samuel 20. 34. And Jonathan arose from the Table in fierce anger, In ira
furoris. But his passion (it seems) did not overcome his duty or discretion;
for he arose without saying any thing. I omit here Ionathans shooting arrows,
and sending his page for them, from the 35 to the 40 verse: By Horace his rule,
-- Et quae
Desperes tractata nitescere posse, relinquas.
And what art or industry could make that story shine? besides it was a
subtilty that I cannot for my life comprehend; for since he went to David, and
talked to him himself, what needed all that

38. politic trouble of the shooting?

39. The Head, which is the seat of Fancy. These are called by the Schoolmen,
Entia Rationis, but are rather Entia Imaginationis, or Phantastique Creatures.
Inter se quorum discordia membra videmus, Lucr. L. 5. And afterward, Prima
Leo, postrema Draco, media* ipsa Chimaera, Which is out of Homer, (...).

40. When the Country people in Thessaly saw men first that came on horseback,
and drove away their Cattle, they imagined the Horse and Men to be all one, and
called them Centaures from driving away of Oxen; according to which fancy, they
are truly said to ride upon themselves.

41. Unless thou take away the Lame and the Blind, thou shall not come in
hither, thinking David cannot come in hither, 2 Samuel 5. 6. There are some other
interpretations of the place, then that which I here give; as that the Idols of
the Iebusites were meant by the Lame and the Blind. But this carries no
probability. Thinking David cannot come hither; is a plain proof that they did
it in scorn of David, and confidence of the extraordinary strength of the
place; which without question was very great, or else it could not have held
out so many hundred years since the entrance of the Israelites into the land,
in the very midst of them.

42. Fish; Dagon the Deity most worshipped by the Philistims.

43. The English says Mulberry Trees; the Latin, Pear Trees; the safest is to
leave it indefinite. The sound of a going in the Tops of the Mulberry Trees, v.
24. Some interpret, The noise of the dropping of the dew like Tears from the
Trees. From whence the Greek (...).

44. Hadad-Eser King of Zobah, which is called by Josephus Sophene, a part of
Coelosyria, confining upon the Half Tribe of Manasses. This Kingdom is first
mentioned, 1 Samuel 14. 47. at what time (it seems) it was under several Princes,
and against the Kings of Zoba.

45. Adad was at that time King of Damascus, according to Josephus, and the
family of the Adads reigned there long after in great luster.

46. The Children of Ammon.

47. Moloch is called peculiarly the God of the Ammonites, 1 King. 11. 5. and
7. Fonseca takes it to be Priapus, confounding it with Belphegor of the
Moabites; Arias Montanus will have it to be Mercury, deriving it from Malach,
Nuncius. Others more probably, Saturn, because the like Worship and like
Sacrifices were used to him. Macrob. 1. Saturn. Curt. Lib 4. Diodor. L. 20,
etc. I rather believe the Sun was worshipped under that name by the Ammonites,
as the King of Heaven: for the word signifies King; and it is the same Deity
with Baal, or Bell of the Assy ians and Sidonians, signifying Lord. Some think
that children were not burnt or sacrificed to him, but only consecrated and
initiated by passing between two fires; which perhaps might be a custom too.
But it is evident by several places of Scripture, that this was not all: And
the Jews say, that Passing through the Fire, is but a Phrase for Burning. He
had seven Chapels from the number of the Planets, of which the Sun is King;
for which reason the Persians likewise made seven Gates to him. In the fifst
Chapel was offered to him a Cake of fine flower, in the second a Turtle, in
the third a Sheep, the fourth a Ram, the fisth an Heifer, the sixth an Ox, and
the seventh a Man, or Child, commonly a young Child. The Image was of Brass, of
wonderful greatness, with his hands spread, and set on fire within, perhaps to
represent the heat of the Sun, and not as some think, to burn the Children in
his Arms. He had likewise the face of a Bullock, in which figure too Osyris
among the Egyptians represented the Sun, and Mithra among the Persians, Stat.
Indignata sequi torquentem cornua Mithram. But though they intended the worship
of the Sun, under this name of Moloch, it was indeed the Devil that they
worshipped; which makes me say, Grinning through a black Cloud, etc.

48. Swift Tygris. Curt. L. 4. No River in the East runs so violently as
Tygris, from which swiftness it takes the name; for Tygris in the Persian
Language signifies an Arrow.

49. Helam, or Chelam, which Ptolomy calls Alamatha, a Plain near the Foords of
Euphrates.

50. The Metropolis of Ammon, since Philadelphia.

51. And he took their Kings Crown from off his head (the weight whereof was a
Talent of Gold, with the precious stones) and it was set on David's head, 2 Samuel
12. 30. and the like, 1 Chro 2^. 2. Tulit diadema regis eorum de capite ejus,
etc. But the Seventy have it, (...), etc. He took the Crown of Molchom their
King from off his head. That is, The crown upon the head of their Idol Moloch,
or Melcom; which makes some of the Greek Fathers say, That Melchoms Image had a
bright precious stone in form of the Morning Star, placed on the top of his
forehead. I rather follow the English Translation.

52. Some would have Solomon to have begun his reign at eleven years old, which
is very unreasonable. Sir W. Raughley, methinks, convinces that it was in the
19 year of his age; at which time it might truly be said by David to Solomon,
Thou art a wise man; and by Solomon to God, I am but a young child.

53. I am not ignorant that I go contrary to most learned men in this point,
who make Saba, of which she was Queen, a part of Arabia Foelix, Virg. Solis est
thurea virga Sabaeis. And Frankincense was one of her presents to Solomon.
Psalm 72. The Kings of Arabia and Saba. The City where she lived they say was
called Marab; by Strabo, Mariaba; and her, some name, Nicanna; others, Makeda;
the Arabians, Bulkis. This consists well enough with her title of the Queen of
Ethiopia; for there were two Ethiopia's, the one in Asia, the other in Africa.
Nevertheless, I make her here Queen of this latter Ethiopia for two reasons;
first because she is called in the New Testament Queen of the South, which
seems to me to be too great a Title for the Queen of a small Territory in
Arabia, lying full East, and but a little Southward of Iudaea; and therefore
the Wisemen who came to worship Christ from those parts, are termed Eastern,
and not Southern Sages. Secondly, all the Histories of the Abyssines or
African-Ethiopians affirm, that she was Queen of their Country, and derive the
race of their Kings from her and Solomon, which the ordinary names of them seem
to confirm, and the custom of Circumcision used even to this day, though they
be Christians. In fine, whatever the truth be, this opinion makes a better
sound in Poetry.

54. This Egyptian Kings name is very variously written. Shishac the English,
Sesac Latin, Susakim Septuagint, Susac. Josephus, Susesin Cedrenus also*
Sasuges, Sosonchis, Sosachis; and by Eusebius Smendes, Josephus, l. 8. proves
that Herodot. falsely ascribes the acts of this Susac to Sosostris, and
particularly his setting up of pillars in Palestine, with the figures of women's
privy parts graven upon them, to reproach the effeminateness of those nations.
The Scripture says, his Army was without number, composed of Lubims, 1.
Lybians, the Countries west of Egypt. Sukkyms, from Succoth Tents, Lat.
Trogloditae, a people bordering upon the Red sea; by others, Arabes Egyptii, or
Ichthyophagi; and Ethiopians, Cusitae, Iosep. which is more probable, then to
make them, as some do, the people of Arabia Deserta and Petraea. From this time
the Egyptians claimed the Sovereignty of Iudaea, 2 Chr. 12. 8.

55. Adadesar, 1 Chronicles. 18. 7. I mention rather the golden shields taken by
David, then those made by Solomon, because David might be more concerned in
them.

56. The story of this great battle between Abijah and Jeroboam is one of the
strangest and humanely most hard to believe, almost in the whole Old Testament,
that out of a Kingdom, not half so big as England, five hundred thousand chosen
and valiant men should be slain in one battle; and of this not so much, as any
notice taken in Abijahs or Ieroboams lives in the first of Kings. It adds much
to the wonder, that this defeat should draw no other consequence after it but
Abijahs recovery of two or three Towns; no more then all the mighty troubles
and changes in Israel, that happened afterward in Asa's time, who had besides,
the advantage of being a virtuous and victorious Prince. Sir W. Raughley makes
a good discourse to prove the reason of this to have been, because the
successors of Solomon still kept up that severity and arbitrariness of
Government* which first caused the separation, but that all the Kings of Israel
allowed those liberties to the people, upon the score of which Jeroboam possessed
himself of the Crown; which the people chose rather to enjoy, though with great
wars and disturbances, then to return to the quiet which they enjoyed with
servitude under Solomon. There may be something of this perhaps in the case;
but even though this be true, it is so strange that the Kings of Judah should
never (among so many changes) find a party in Israel to call them in again,
that we must fly to the absolute determination of Gods will for a cause of it,
who being offended with the sins of both, made both his instruments of
vengeance against one another, and gave victories and other advantages to
Judah, not for blessings to that, but for Curses and Scourges to Israel. God
punished one, but blessed not the other side.

57. This Superstition of consecrating Groves to Idols grew so frequent, that
there was scarce any fair green Tree that was not dedicated to some Idol, --
Lucosque vetusta
Religione truces and robora Numinis instar.
Claud. The word it self Lucus is conceived by some to come a Lucendo, from the
constant Light of Sacrifices burnt there to the Gods, or rather perhaps from
Tapers continually burning there in honor of them. At last the very Trees grew
to be the Idols: -- Quercus, oracula prima. Ovid. The Druidae had their name
from worshipping an Oak; and among the Celtae an Oak was the Image of Jupiter,
the Holm Tree had no less honor with the Hetrurians. Tacitus says the ancient
Germans called Trees by the names of the Gods, 2 King. 23. 6. Josiah is said to
bring out the Groves from the house of the Lord; where it seems the Idols
themselves are called Groves; either having gotten that name from standing
commonly in Groves, or perhaps because they were the Figures of Trees adored by
them, or of Idols with Trees represented too about them; as Acts 19. 24. the
silver similitudes of Diana's Temple, made by Demetrius, are termed Temples of
Diana.

58. The number of the Armies is here likewise more then wonderful, Asa's
consisting of five hundred and eighty thousand, and Zerahs of ten hundred
thousand men, called Ethiopians, Cusitae: Now though I took the Cusites of
Susacs Army to be the Ethiopians of Africa, for it is very likely he might
bring up those as well as Lybians, into Palestine; yet it is improbable that
Zerah should march with such an Army through all Egypt, out of that Ethiopia;
besides, Gerar and the Cities thereabout are spoiled by Asa, as belonging to
Zera, but that is in Arabia Petraea, which I suppose to be his Kingdom, though
perhaps with other Countries thereabouts; and with the help of his neighbor
Princes: for otherwise it is hard to believe, that his Army could be so great.
It is clear that the Arabians were called Ethiopians as well as the Abissines,
both descending from Chus. He lost so many of his Subjects of Arabia Petraea,
as might make that like Arabia Deserta.

59. It is strange, that after his being able to bring such an Army into the
field, after his great success against Zerah, and his fathers but a little
before against Jeroboam, he should be so alarmed with the War of Baasha (a
murderer, and an unsettled Usurper; for which cause I call him Perjured) as to
give his own and the Temples Treasures for the assistance of Benhadad: But it
was not so much out of fear of Baasha alone, as of Benhadad too at the same
time, who would have joined with Baasha, if he had not been bought off to join
with Asa. The family of the Adads then reigning in Damascus, were grown mighty
Princes, and so continued long after. But the Assistance was very Dangerous;
for the Syrians having by this occasion found the weakness of both Kingdoms, of
Israel and Iudaea, and enriched themselves at once upon both, never ceased
afterward to molest and attaque them.

60. The Fates; that is, according to the Christian Poetical manner of
speaking, the Angels, to whom the Government of this world is committed. The
meaning is, that having a command to kill the King, and seeing Iehosaphat in
Kingly robes, and looking only upon the outward disguise of Ahab (without
staying to consider who the person was) they had like to have caused the King
of Judah to be slain instead of the King of Israel. He had like to have dyed as
Virgil says, Alieno vulnere.

61. Seir, A little Country lying between Edom and Moab.

62. Iehoram is said to have reigned eight years in Jerusalem, 2 King: 8. 17. 2 Chronicles. 21. 20. but it is apparent by most evident collection out of the Text,
that either seven of those eight years (as some will have it) or at least four,
are to be reckoned in the life of his father Iehosaphat. Which makes me wonder
at Sulpit. Severus his mistake, who says, Ioram filius regnum tenuit (Iosaphat
rege defuncto) annos duo deviginti: Reigned eighteen years. I rather think it
should be annos duos, and that deviginti is crept in since. Ochosia, or Ahazia
reigned scarce one year.

63. Athalia, by some Gotholia. Her murder of all that remained (as she
thought) of the family of David, made her only pretense to the Government,
which was then Vacua possessio, and belonged to the first possessor. She had
been in effect in possession of it all the time of her Husband Iehoram, and son
Ochosia, (...). Joseph. And after these Murders here was a double Usurpation of
Athaliah first as she was not of the House of David. And secondly, as she was a
Woman. For the Crown of David did not, as the French say, Fall to the Distaff,
Tomber en quenouille, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Yet she reigned peaceably almost seven
years, which was very much to be wondered at, not only in regard of her
murders, usurpation, tyranny and Idolatry at home, but because Iehu then King
of Israel, was a sworn enemy of the house of Ahab, and had vowed to root it all
out, which likewise he effected, except in the person of this wicked woman, who
nevertheless perished at last as she deserved, Absolvitque Deum.

64. 2 Kings mentions but one Invasion of Hazaels King of Aram or Syria, which
was compounded by Ioas for a great sum of money. The 2 of Chronicles mentions
likewise but one, which ended in the loss of a battle by Ioas, and the
slaughter of most of the Princes of Judah. Some think that both those places
signify but one war, and that the composition followed the victory. That they
were several Invasions appears to me more probable, and that mentioned in the
Chronicles to be the former of the two, though it be generally otherwise
thought; for it is more likely, that Ioas should be driven to accept of that
costly and shameful composition, after the loss of a battle, and of the
greatest part of his Nobility, against a small number, then before he had ever
tried his fortune in the field against the Aramites. Neither is it so probable
that the Syrians having made that agreement for a vast treasure, should again
break it, and invade them with a small company, as that having at first with a
party only defeated the Iudaean Army, they should afterward enter with
greater Forces to prosecute the Victory, and therewith force them to accept of
so hard and dishonorable conditions. But it may be objected, that it is said, 2 Chronicles. 24. 25. When they (the Syrians) departed from him (for they left him in
great diseases) his own servants conspired against him, and slew him; as if
this followed immediately after the battle. But he that observes the manner of
writing used in the Kings and Chronicles, and indeed all other Historical parts
of the Scripture, shall find the relation very imperfect and confused
(especially in circumstances of Time) reciting often the latter things first,
by Anticipation. So that When they departed, etc. may relate not to this defeat
which in the Text it immediately follows, but to the other composition
afterward; which may be here omitted, because that second Invasion was but a
consequence; and almost Continuance of the former: In which respect one
Relation (2 Chronicles) mentioning the first part, which was the battle only;
and the other (2 Kings) the second, which was the sending in of new Forces, and
the conditions of agreement, both have fulfilled the duty of Epitomies.

65. That is, In the same manner as his Father Ioas; both being virtuous and
happy at first, wicked and unfortunate at last; with the same resemblance in
their defeats, the one by the Syrians, the other by the Israelites; and in the
consequences of them, which were the loss of all their treasures, and those of
the Temple, a dishonorable peace; and their murders, by their own servants.

66. This punishment, I suppose, was inflicted on them as Rebels, not as
enemies.

67. Uzziah, so he is called in our Translation of the Chronicles, the
Septuagint, (...), and so Josephus; but in Kings he is named Azarias, which was
the High Priests name in his time.

68. At first from men, 2 Chronicles. 26. 21. Dwelt in an house apart, being a
Leper. So likewise 2 King. 15. 5. according to the Law concerning Lepers,
Levit. 13. 46. From earth at last: For Josephus reports, that the grief caused
his death, (...).

69. Josephus gives Iothan an high elogie. That he wanted no kind of virtue,
but was religious toward God, just to men, and wise in Government.

70. To the Idol Moloch, of which before. When they burnt the child in
Sacrifice, it was the custom to make a great noise with Drums, Trumpets,
Cymbals, and other Instruments, to the end that his cries might not be heard.
Hinnon, a valley full of Trees close by Jerusalem, where Moloch was worshipped
in this execrable manner, called Gehinnon, from whence the word Gehenna comes
for Hell; it was called likewise Tophet. Some think (as Theodor. Salia. etc.)
that Achaz only made his Son pass between two fires for a Lustration and
Consecration of him to Moloch, because it is said, 2 Kings 16. 2. He made his
Son to pass through the fire. But 2 Chronicles. 28. 3. Explains it, He burnt his
children in the fire. And Josephus, (...).

71. Tiglat-pilleser, or, Tiglat-Phul-aser. The Son of Phul, called by Annius
Phul Belochus, by others Belosus, by Diodor. Beleses, the Associate of Arbaces
in destroying Sardanapalus, and the Assyrian Empire. After which, the
Government of Babylon and Assyria was left to him by Arbaces, which he soon
turned into an absolute Sovereignty, and made other great additions to it by
conquest.

72. For after the spoil of Syria and Israel, which he destroyed upon Achas
quarrel, he possessed himself also of a great part of Iudaea, which he came to
succor, bore away the chief riches of the Country, and made Achas his
Tributary and servant.

73. The Rabbis, and out of them Abulensis and Cajetan say the Angel of God
destroyed them by fire from heaven. Josephus says by a Pestilence, (...).

74. He was slain in the Temple of Nesroth, Septuagint, (...), Josephus, (...),
by his two eldest Sons Adramelec and Sarasar, some say, because in his distress
at Pelusium (of which see Herodot.) he had bound himself by vow to sacrifice
them to his Gods. Others more probably, because he had declared Asarhaddon,
their younger brother by another Mother, his Successor. Herod. reports that
this Sennacheribs Statue was in the Temple of of Vulcan in Egypt, with this
Inscription, (...). Let him who looks upon me learn to fear God.

75. It is not plain by the Scripture, that the Sun went backward, but that the
shadow only, upon that particular Dial, which Vatablus, Montanus, and diverse
others believe. However, this opinion has the authority of all the Greek and
Latin Fathers.

76. Forgetful Man, which is the signification of his name.

77. The Egyptians worshipped Two Calves, Apis and Mnevis, the one dedicated to
the Sun, and the other to the Moon; or rather, the one being an Idol or Symbol
of the Sun, and the other of the Moon; that is in their Sacred Language, of
Osyris and Isis. From the Egyptians the Israelites took this Idolatry, but
applying to it the name of the True God, whom they thought fit to worship under
the same figure, as they had seen Osyris worshipped in Egypt. Such was Aarons
Calf, or Ox, and Ieroboams two Calves erected in Dan and Bethel (which
Religion he learnt at the time of his banishment in Egypt) which I do not
believe to have been two different Idols, in imitation of Api2 and Mnevis, but
that both were made to represent the same true God, which he thought might as
well be adored under that Figure, as the Osyris was, or Sun of the Egyptians.
Of Osyris, see before the Note upon the Ode called, The Plagues of Egypt, ib.

78. See Note 47. where I say that his Image was of Brass; how then could it
fall to Ashes in his own Fires? that is, it was first melted, and then beaten
to dust, as the graven Image of the Groves which Manasses set up, and which
Josiah burnt, and then stamped to powder, which stamping was not necessary if it
had been of wood, for then it would have burnt to ashes. 2 King. 23 6.

79. The Sydonians had two Principal Idols. Baal and Astarte, or Ashtaroth, i.
The Sun and the Moon; which Astarte is perhaps the (...), mentioned often in
the Septuagint, Tob. 1. 5. (...) They sacrificed to She-Baal the Cow. Both the
Sun and Moon were represented anciently under that Figure, Luc. de Dea Sir.
(...), her Image was the Statue of a Woman, having on her head the head of a
Bull. Syderum Regina bicornis. Hor.

80. Herodian testifies, that Heliogabalus (that is, the Baal of the Tyrians)
was worshipped in a Great stone, round at bottom, and ending in a spire; to
signify the nature of Fire. In the like figure Tacitus reports that Venus
Paphia was worshipped, that is, I suppose, the Moon; Astarte (for the Cyprian
superstition is likely to have come from the Tyrians) the wife of Baal. I find
also Lapis to have been a surname of Jupiter; Jupiter Lapis.

81. Dea Syria, which is thought to be Venus Urania, that is, the Moon, Men
sacrificed to her in the habit of women, and they in that of men, because the
Moon was esteemed, (...), both Male and Female, Macrob. Saturn. 3. 8. from
whence it was called Lunus as well as Luna, and Venus too, Deus Venus, Iul.
Firm. says of these Priests, Virilem sexum ornatu muliebri dedecorant, which is
the occasion of the Law, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.

82. 2 Kings 17. 30. And the men of Babylon made Succoth Benoth; that is, built
a Temple or Tabernacle (for Succoth is a Tabernacle) to Benoth, or Benos, or
Binos; for Suid. has, (...), (i.) To Melita, the Babylonian Venus. Of whose
worship Herodot. L. 1. reports, That Virgins crowned with Guirlands sat in
order in her Temple, separated from one another by little cords, and never
stirred from thence till some stranger came in, and giving them a piece of
money took them out to lie with them; and till th^n they could not be married.

83. Some make Dagon to be the same with Jupiter Aratrius, (...), deriving it
from Dagan, Corn; but this is generally exploded, and as generally believed,
that it comes from Dag, a Fish; and was an Idol, the upper part Man, and the
lower Fish. Desinit in Piscem mulier formosa superne. I make it rather Female
then Male, because I take it to be the Syrian Atergatis (Adder dagan, the
mighty Fish) and Derecto, whose Image was such, and her Temple at Ascalon,
which is the place where Dagon was worshipped. Diodor. says of the Image L. 3.
(...). And Lucian, (...). There is an ancient Fable, that (...), a creature
Half-man, and Half-Fish, arose out of the Red Sea, and came to Babylon, and
there taught men several arts, and then returned again to the Sea. Apollodor.
reports, that four such Oannes in several ages had arose out of the Red Sea,
and that the name of one was (...). From whence our learned Seldom fetches
Dagon, whom see at large upon this matter. De D. Syris. Syntag. 2. c. 3.

84. 2 King. 23 11. Chariots and Horses were dedicated to the Sun, in regard of
the swiftness of his motion. See Zen. l. 8. de Cyro. 11. (...). Pausan. in
Lacon. Heliodor. Aeth. 10. Justin. 1. Herod. 1. They were Living white Horses
to represent the Light. Nergal, 2 King. 17. 30. And the men of Cuth made
Nergal, which signifies fire; to wit, the sacred fire that was kept always
burning in honor of the Sun, as that of Vesta among the Romans. the ancient
Persians worshipped it, and had no other Idol of the Sun. From thence the
Cuthites brought it, when they were removed into Samaria, who came from the
borders of Cuthus, a River in Persia. Strabo says of the Persians, (...), which
was the reason they abhorred the burning of dead bodies, as a profanation of
their Deity.

85. Beelzebub* The God of Ekron or Accaron. The God of Flies. See the Note on
the eighth Stanza of the Ode called, The Plagues of Egypt, and the Note 18.
upon the first Book. Thundering Baal. The Jupiter and Sun of the Sidonians, and
other neighboring Countries. See the Note 45. L. 3.

86. Neither the Book of Kings nor Chronicles make particular mention of the
slaughter of Iehoiakim by the Assyrians. Nay the second of Chron. 36. 6. seems
at first sight to imply the contrary. Against him came up Nebucadnezar, and
bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon. That is, he first bound him with
an intent to carry him away captive, but after caused him to be slain there, to
fulfill the Prophesies of Jeremiah, Ier. 36 30. and Josephus says expressly, that
Nebuchadnezar commanded him to be slain, and his body to be cast over the walls.

87. Iehoiachin, the son of Iehoiakim, a Child, and who was taken away captive
after three months and ten days, Zedechia being set up in his place, the
younger brother of Iehoias and Iehoiakim; The fourth King of the Jews
successively, that was made a Bond-slave. Isreal's now solemn and imperial
chain: for it was the custom of the great Eastern Monarchs, as afterward of
the Romans too, Ut haberent instrument a servitutis and reges. Tacit.

88. For though they were restored again to their country, yet they never
recovered their ancient Liberty, but continued under the yoke of the Persians,
Macedonians, and Romans till their final destruction.

89. In this manner Oedipus speaks, after he had put out his own eyes. In Theb.
Quid hic manes meos detineo? Why do I keep my Ghost alive here so long? And to
Antigone, Funus extendis meum,
Longasque vivi ducis exequias patris.
And Oed. Act. 5. Mors eligatur longa, quaeratur via
Qua nec sepultis mistus and vivis tamen
Exemptus errem. -- Seneca the Philosop.
(But as a Poet, not a Philosopher) calls Banishment it self (the least of
Zedechia's affliction) a Death, nay a Burial, Parce religatis, hoc est, jam
parce sepultis.
Vivorum cineri sit tua terra Levis.
But Seneca the Father in the 19. Controvers. has raised an objection against
the next verse, Bereft of griefs, etc. Cestius (says he) spoke a most false
sense, into which many fall. She was the more to be lamented, because she could
not weep her self. And again, So much cause, and no power to weep. As if (says
he) Blind people could not weep. Truly, Philosophically speaking, The moisture
that falls through the place of the Eyes, if provoked by grief, is as much
weeping, as if the Eyes were there; yet (sure) weeping seems to depend so much
upon the Eyes, as to make the expression Poetically true, though not Literally.
And therefore the Tragoedian was not frighted with his Criticism; for Oedip.
says in Theb. Cuncta sors mihi infesta abstulit.
Lacrymae supererant, has quoque eripui mihi.
I confess indeed in a Declamation I like not those kind of Flowers so well.

90. I do not mean, that she was without Original Sin, as her Roman Adorers
hold very temerariously; but that neither Disease nor Imperfection, which are
the effects and footsteps, as it were, of Sin, were to be seen in her body.

91. Their mingled Light; i. Their Colors; which are nothing but the several
mixtures of Light with Darkness in the superficies of opacous bodies; as for
example, Yellow is the mixture of Light with a little darkness; Green, with a
little more; Red with more yet. So that Colors are nothing but Light diversely
reflected and shadowed. Plato calls them, (...). Flames, that is, Light
continually flowing from Bodies; and Pindar. Od. 6. elegantly attributes to
Flowers, (...). Purple Beams.

92. Gods wife. Though the word seem bold, I know no hurt in the figure. And
Spouse is not an Heroical Word. The Church is called Christ's Spouse, because
whilst it is Militant, it is only as it were Contracted, not Married, till it
becomes Triumphant, but here is not the same reason.

93. Early, i. Eastern Spices. From Arabia, which is Eastward of Iudaea*
Therefore the Scripture says, that these Arabian wise men came (...). We have
seen his Star, (...). Virg. Ecce Dionaei processit Caesaris astrum. And the
Presents which these wise men brought, show that they came from Arabia.

94. Gabriel; the name signifies, The power of God. I have seen in some Magical
Books, where they give barbarous names to the Guardian Angels of great persons,
as that of Mathattron to the Angel of Moses, that they assign one Cerviel to
David, And this Gabriel to Joseph, Joshua and Daniel. But I rather use this then
that Diabolical Name (for ought I know) of an Angel, which the Scripture makes
no mention of. Especially because Gabriel is employed particularly in things
that belong to the manifestation of Christ, as to the Prophet Daniel, to
Zacharia, and to Mary. The Rabbis account Michael the Minister of Gods
Justice, and Gabriel of his Mercies, and they call the former Fire, and the
latter Water.

95. Tho: Aquinas, upon the second of the Senten. Distinct. 9. Art. 2. It is
necessary that the Air should be thickened, till it come near to the propriety
of earth; that is, to be capable of Figuration, which cannot be but in a solid
body, etc. And this way of Spirits appearing in bodies of condensed air (for
want of a better way, they taking it for granted that they do frequently
appear) is approved of by all the Schoolmen, and the Inquisitors about Witches.
But they are beholding for this Invention to the ancient Poets. Virg. 12. Tum
Dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram,
In faciem Aen. etc.
Which is the reason (perhaps) that Apollo, as the drawer up, and best
Artificer of Vapors, is employed to make the Phantasm of Aeneai, 5 Iliad. (...).
(...)


96. Obscene was a word in use among the Augures, signifying that which
portended ill Fortune. And it is most frequently applied to Birds of ill Omen.
Virg. 3. Aen. Sive Deae, ceu sint Dirae, obscaenaeque volucres.
Aen. 12. -- Nec me terrete timentem
Obscaenae volucres. --
Ovid. -- Obscaenae quo prohibentur aves.
And Servius interprets Virgils Obscaenam famem, to be, The hunger that drives
men to Obscene, that is, unclean or shameful things, or because it was foretold
by an Obscene; i. unlucky Bird.

97. It is rightly termed a Glass or Mirror, for God foresees all things by
looking only on himself in whom all things always are.

98. Albion is the ancientest name of this Island, yet I think not so ancient
as David's time. But we must content our selves with the best we have. It is
found in Arist. de Mundo. In Plin. Ptolem. and Strabo; by which appears the
vanity of those who derive it from a Latin word, Ab Albis Rupibus.

99. So the Angel to S. John, Revel. 19. 10. and 22. 9. calls himself His
Fellow Servants.

100. Virg. -- Cum circumfusa repent
Scindit se nubes and in era purgat apertum; and again,
Tenues fugit ceu Fumus in auras.
Hom. (...).


THE CONTENTS.
David's flight to Nob, and entertainment there by the High Priest; from thence
to Gath in disguise, where he is discovered and brought to Achis; He
counterfeits himself Mad, and escapes to Adullam. A short enumeration of the
forces which come thither to him. A description of the Kingdom of Moab, whither
David flies; His entertainment at Moabs Court, a Digression of the History of
Lot, Father of the Moabites, represented in Picture. Melchors Song at the
feast; Moab desires Ioab to relate the story of David. Which he does; His
Extraction, his excellency in Poesy, and the effects of it in curing Saul's
malady. The Philistims Army encamped at Dammin, the description of Goliath and
his arms, his Challenge to the Israelites, David's coming to the camp, his
speech to Saul to desire leave to fight with Goliath; several speeches upon that
occasion, the combat and slaughter of Goliath, with the defeat of the Philistims
Army. Saul's envy to David. The Characters of Merab and Micol. The Love between
David and Micol, his Song at her window, his expedition against the Philistims,
and the Dowry of two hundred foreskins for Micol, with whom he is married, The
Solemnities of the Wedding; Saul's relapse, and the causes of David's flight into
the Kingdom of Moab.

Davideis, The third Book.
Raised with the news he from high Heav'en receives, 1 Samuel 21. 1.

Straight to his diligent God just thanks he gives.
1 To divine Nobe directs then his flight,
A small Town great in Fame by Levy's right,
2 Is there with sprightly wines, v. 4, 5, 6.
and hallowed bread,
(But what is to Hunger hallowed? Mar. 12. 4.
) largely fed.
3 The good old Priest welcomes his fatal Guest,
And with kind talk prolongs the hasty feast.
4 He lends him vain Goliahs Sacred Sword, Ver ^.

(The fittest help just fortune could afford)
A Sword whose weight without a blow might slay,
Able unblunted to cut Hosts away,
A Sword so great, that it was only fit
To take off his great Head who came with it.
Thus he arms David; I your own restore,
Take it (said he) and use it as before.
I saw you then, and 'twas the bravest sight
That ere these Eyes ow'ed the discov'ering light. 1 Samuel 17

When you stepped forth, how did the Monster rage,
In scorn of your soft looks, and tender age!
Some your high Spirit did mad Presumption call,
Some piti'ed that such Youth should idly fall.
Th'uncircumcis'ed smil'ed grimly with disdain;
I knew the day was yours: I saw it plain.
Much more the Reverend Sire prepar'ed to say,
Rapt with his joy; how the two Armies lay;
Which way the amazed Foe did wildly flee,
All that his Hearer better knew then He.
But David's haste denies all needless stay;
To Gath an Enemies Land, 1 Samuel 21 10.
he hastes away,
Not there secure, but where one Danger's near,
The more remote though greater disappear.
So from the Hawk, Birds to Man's succor flee,
So from fir'ed Ships Man leaps into the Sea.
There in disguise he hopes unknown to abide!
Alas! in vain! what can such greatness hide?
Stones of small worth may lie unseen by Day,
But Night it self does the rich Gem betray.
5 Tagal first spi'ed him, a Philistian Knight,
Who erst from David's wrath by shameful flight
Had saved the sordid remnant of his age;
Hence the deep sore of Envy mixed with Rage.
Straight with a band of Soldiers tall and rough,
Trembling, for scarce he thought that band enough,
On him he seases whom they all had feared,
Had the bold Youth in his own shape appeared.
And now this wisht-for, but yet dreadful prey
To Achis Court they had in haste away.
With all unmanly rudeness which does wait
Upon the Immod erate Vulgars Joy and Hate.
His valor now and strength must useless ly,
And he himself must arts unusu'al try;
Sometimes he rends his garments, 1 Samuel 21. 13.
nor does spare
The goodly curles of his rich yellow hair.
Sometimes a violent laughter scru'd his face,
And sometimes ready tears dropped down apace.
Sometimes he fixed his staring eyes on ground,
And sometimes in wild manner hurled them round.
More full revenge Philistians could not wish,
6 But called the Justice of their mighty Fish.
They now in height of anger, Ver. 15.
let him Live;
And Freedom too, t'encrease his scorn, they give.
He by wise Madness freed does homeward flee,
And Rage makes them all that He seemed to be. 1 Samuel 22. 1.

7 Near to Adullam in an aged Wood,
An Hill part earth, part rocky stone there stood,
Hollow and vast within, which Nature wrought
As if by 'her Scholar Art she had been taught.
Hither young David with his Kindred came,
Servants, and Friends; many his spreading fame,
Many their wants or discontents did call; 1 Samuel 22. 1.

Great men in war, and almost Armies all!
8 Hither came wise and valiant Ioab down,
One to whom David's self must owe his Crown,
A mighty man, had not some cunning Sin,
Amidst so many Virtues crowded in. 1 Chr. 1^. 2.

With him Abishai came by whom there fell
At once three hundred; with him Asahel:
9 Asahel, 1 Chr. 11. 26.
swifter then the Northern wind;
Scarce could the nimble Motions 2 Samuel 2. 18.
of his Mind
Outgo his Feet; so strangely would he run,
That Time it self perceiv'ed not what was done.
Often ore the Lawns and meadows would he pass,
His weight unknown, and harmless to the grass;
Often ore the sands and hollow Dust would trace,
Yet no one Atome trouble or displace.
Unhappy Youth, 2 Samuel 2. 23.
whose end so near I see!
There Is naught but thy Ill Fate so swift as Thee.
10 Hither Iessides wrongs Benaiah drew,
He who the vast exceeding Monster slew. 1 Chro. 11. 22.

The Egyptian like an Hill himself did rear,
Like some tall Tree upon it seemed his Spear.
But by Benaiahs staff he fell orethrown; Ver. 23.

The Earth, as if worst struck, did lowdest groan.
Such was Benaiah; in a narrow pit
He saw a Lion, Ver. 22.
and leapt down to it.
As eas'ily there the royal Beast he tore
As that it self did Kids or Lambs before.
Him Ira follow'ed, 1 Chro. 11. 28.
a young lovely boy,
But full of Sp'irit, and Arms was all his joy.
Often when a child he in his dream would fight
With the vain Air, and his wak'ed Mother fright.
Often would he shoot young birds, and as they fall,
Would laugh, and fancy them Philistians all.
And now at home no longer would he stay,
Though yet the face did scarce his Sex betray.
Dodos great Son came next, 1 Chro. 11. 12.
whose dreadful hand
Snatched ripened Glories from a conqu'ering band;
Who knows not Dammin, and that barley field;
Which did a strange and bloody Harvest yield?
Many besides did this new Troop increase;
Adan, whose wants made him unfit for peace.
Eliel, 1 Chro. 11. 46.
whose full quiv'er did always bear
As many Deaths as in it Arrows were.
None from his hand did vain or inn'ocent flee,
Scarce Love or Fate could aim so well as He.
Many of Judah took wrong'ed David's side, 1 Chr. 12. 16.

And many of old Jacobs youngest Tribe;
But his chief strength the Gathite Soldiers are, 1 Chro* 12. 8.

Each Single man able t'orecome a War!
Swift as the Darts they fling through yielding air,
And hardy all as the strong Steel they bare,
A Lions nobler age sits in their face, 1 Chr* 12. 8.

Terrible comely, arm'ed with dreadful grace!
Th'undaunted Prince, though thus well guarded here,
Yet his stout Soul durst for his Parents fear;
He seeks for them a safe and quiet seat,
Nor trusts his Fortune with a Pledge so great.
So when in hostile fire rich Asias pride
For ten years siege had fully satisfi'ed,
Aeneas stole an act of higher Fame, Virg 2. Aen.

And bore Anchises through the wondering flame,
A nobler Burden, and a richer Prey,
Then all the Grecian forces bore away.
Go pious Prince, in peace, in triumph go;
Enjoy the Conquest of thine Overthrowe;
To have saved thy Troy would far less glorious be;
By this thou Overcom'est their Victory.
11 Moab, next Judah, an old Kingdom, lies;
12 Jordan their touch, and his cursed Sea denies.
13 They see North-stars from over Amoreus ground,
14 Edom and Petra their south part does bound.
15 Eastwards the lands of Cush and Ammon ly,
The mornings happy beams they first espy.
The region with fat soil and plenty's blessed,
A soil too good to be of old possessed
16 By monstrous Emins; but Lots offspring came
And conquer'ed both the People and the Name.
17 Till Seon drove them beyond Arnons flood, Number. 21. 26.

And their sad bounds marked deep in their own blood.
18 In Hesbon, his triumphant Court he plac'ed,
Hesbon by Men and Nature strangely grace'd.
A glorious Town, and fill'ed with all delight.
Which Peace could yield, though well prepar'ed for fight.
But this proud City and her prouder Lord
Felt the keen rage of Isreal's Sacred Sword, Number. 21. 24, 25.

Whilst Moab triumphed in her torn estate,
To see her own become her Conqu'erers fate:
Yet that small remnant of Lots parted Crown
Did arm'ed with Isreal's sins pluck Israel down,
Full thrice six years they felt fierce Eglons yoke, Judge. 3. 14.

Till Ehuds sword Gods vengeful Message spoke; Ib. v. 21.

Since then their Kings in quiet held their own,
Quiet the good of a not envied Throne.
And now a wise old Prince the Scepter swayed,
Well by his Subjects and Himself obeyed.
Only before his Fathers Gods he fell;
Poor wretched Man, almost too good for Hell!
Hither does David his blessed Parents bring, 1 Samuel 22. 3.

With humble greatness begs of Moabs King,
A safe and fair abode, where they might live,
Free from those storms with which himself must strive.
The King with cheerful grace his suit approved,
19 By hate to Saul, and love to Virtue moved.
Welcome great Knight, and your fair Troop (said he)
Your Name found welcome long before with me.
20 That to rich Ophirs rising Morn is known,
And stretched out far to the burnt swarthy Zone.
21 Swift Fame, when her round journey she does make,
Scorns not sometimes Us in her way to take.
Are you the man, did that huge Giant kill?
Great Baal of Phegor! and how young he is still!
22 From Ruth we heard you came; Ru. 1. 4.
Ruth was born here,
In Judah sojourned, and (they say) matched there
To one of Bethlem; Ru. 4. 10.
which I hope is true;
However your Virtues here entitle you.
Those have the best alliance always bin,
To Gods as well as Men they make us Kin.
He spoke, and straight lead in his thankful Guests,
To'a stately Room prepar'ed for Shows and Feasts.
The room with golden Tap'estry glister'ed bright,
At once to please and to confound the sight,
23 Th'excellent work of Babylonian hands;
24 In midst a Table of rich Iv'ory stands,
By three fierce Tigers, and three Lions born,
Which grin, and fearfully the place adorn.
Widely they gape, and to the eye they roar,
As if they hunger'd for the food they bore.
25 About it Beds of Lybian Citron stood,
26 With coverings dy'ed in Tyrian Fishes blood,
They say, the Herculean art; but most delight
27 Some pictures gave to David's learned sight.
Here several ways Lot and great Abram go, Genesis 13. 6.

Their too much wealth, vast, and unkind does grow.
Thus each extreme to equal danger tends,
Plenty as well as Want can separate Friends;
Here Sodoms Towers raise their proud tops on high;
The Towers as well as Men outbrave the sky.
By it the waves of rev'erend Jordan run,
Here green with Trees, there gilded with the Sun.
Hither Lots Household comes, Ib. v. 10.
a numerous train,
And all with various business fill the plain.
Some drive the crowding sheep with rural hooks,
They lift up their mild heads, and bleat in looks.
Some drive the Herds; here a fierce Bullock scorns
The Appointed way, and runs with threatening horns;
In vain the Herdman calls him back again;
The Dogs stand off afar, and bark in vain.
Some lead the groaning wagons, loaded high,
With stuff, on top of which the Maidens ly.
Upon tall Camels the fair Sisters ride,
And Lot talks with them both on either side.
Another Picture to cursed Sodom brings
28 Elams proud Lord, Genesis 14. 11. 12.
with his three servant Kings:
They sack the Town, and bear Lot bound away;
Whilst in a Pit the vanquished Bera lay, Ib. v. 10.

Buried almost alive for fear of Death.
29 But heav'ens just vengeance sav'ed as yet his breath.
Abraham pursues, Genesis 14. 13.
and slays the Victors Host
Scarce had their Conquest leisure for a boast.
Next this was drawn the reckless Cities flame, Genesis 19. 24.

30 When a strange Hell poured down from Heaven there came.
Here the two Angels from Lots window look
With smiling anger; the lewd wretches, struck
With sudden blindness, Ib. v. 11.
seek in vain the door,
31 Their Eyes, first cause of Lust, first Veng'eance bore.
Through liquid Air, heavens busy Soldiers fly,
And drive on Clouds where seeds of Thunder ly.
Here the sad sky gloes red with dismal streaks,
Here Lightning from it with short trembling breaks.
Here the blew flames of scalding brimstone fall,
Involving swiftly in one ruin all.
The fire of Trees and Houses mounts on high,
And meets half way new fires that shower from sky.
Some in their arms snatch their dear babes away;
At once drop down the Fathers arms, and They.
Some into waters leap with kindled hair,
And more to vex their fate, are burnt ev'en there.
Men thought, so much a Flame by Art was shown,
The Pictures self would fall in ashes down.
A far old Lot to'ward little Zoar hyes,
And dares not move (good man) his weeping eyes. Genesis 19. 17.

32 Behind his Wife stood ever fixed alone; Ib. v. 26.

No more a Woman, not yet quite a Stone.
A lasting Death seizd on her turning head;
One cheek was rough and white, the other red,
And yet a Cheek; in vain to speak she strove;
Her lips, though stone, a little seemed to move.
One eye was clos'ed, surpris'ed by sudden night,
The other trembled still with parting light.
The wind admir'ed which her hair loosely bore,
Why it grew stiff, and now would play no more.
To heav'en she lifted up her freezing hands,
And to this day a Suppliant Pillar stands.
She try'ed her heavy foot from ground to rear,
And raised the Heel, but her Toe's rooted there*
Ah foolish woman! who must always be,
A sight more strange then that she turned to see!
Whilst David fed with these his curious eye,
The Feast is now serv'ed in, and down they lie.
Moab a goblet takes of massy gold,
33 Which Zippor, and from Zippor all of old
Quaft to their Gods and Friends; an Health goes round
In the brisk grape of Arnons richest ground.
34 Whilst Melchor to his harp with wondrous skill
35 (For such were Poets then, and should be still)
His noble verse through Natures secrets lead;
He sung what Spirit, through the whole Mass is spread,
Ev'ery where All; how Heavens Gods Law approve,
And think it Rest eternally to Move.
How the kind Sun usefully comes and goes,
Wants it himself, yet gives to Man repose.
How his round Journey does for ever last,
36 And how he baits at every Sea in haste.
He sung how Earth blots the Moons gilded Wane,
37 Whilst foolish men beat sounding brass in vain,
Why the Great Waters her slight Horns obey,
Her changing Horns, not constanter then They,
38 He sung how grisly Comets hang in air,
Why Sword, and Plagues attend their fatal hair.
Gods Beacons for the world, drawn up so far,
To publish ills, and raise all earth to war.
39 Why Contraries feed Thunder in the cloud,
What Motions vex it, till it roar so loud.
40 How Lambent Fires become so wondrous tame,
And bear such shining Winter in their Flame.
41 What radiant Pencil draws the Watery Bow.
What types up Hail, and picks the fleecy Snow.
What Palsy of the Earth here shakes fixed Hills,
From off her brows, and here whole Rivers spills.
Thus did this Heathen Natures Secrets tell,
And sometimes mist the Cause, but sought it Well.
Such was the sauce of Moabs noble feast,
Till night far spent invites them to their rest.
Only the good old Prince stays Ioab there,
And much he tells, and much desires to hear.
He tells deeds antique, and the new desires;
Of David much, and much of Saul enquires.
Nay gentle Guest (said he) since now you're in,
The story of your gallant friend begin.
His birth, his rising tell, and various fate,
And how he slew that man of Gath of late,
What was he call'ed? that huge and monstrous man?
With that he stopped, and Ioab thus began:
His birth, 1 Chr. 2. 16.
great Sir, so much to mine is tied,
That praise of that might look from me like pride.
Yet without boast, his veins contain a flood
42 Of the old Iudaean Lions richest blood. Genesis 49. 9.

From Judah Pharez, 1 Chr. 2.
from him Esrom came
Ram, Nashon, Salmon, Names spoke loud by Fame.
A Name no less ought Boaz to appear, Mat. ^.

By whose blessed match we come no strangers here.
From him and your fair Ruth good Obed sprung,
From Obed Iesse, Iesse whom fames kindest tongue,
Counting his birth, and high nobil'ity, shall
Not Iesse of Obed but of David call,
David born to him sev'enth; 1 Chr. 2 15.
the six births past
Brave Trials of a work more great at last. 1 Samuel 16.

Bless me! how swift and growing was his Wit?
The wings of Time flag'd dully after it.
Scarce past a Child, all wonders would he sing
Of Natures Law, and Pow'er of Natures King.
His sheep would scorn their food to hear his lay,
And savage Beasts stand by as tame as they.
The fighting Winds would stop there, and admire;
Learning Consent and Concord from his Lyre.
Rivers, whose waves roll'ed down aloud before;
Mute, as their Fish, would listen to'wards the shore.
'Twas now the time when first Saul God forsook,
God Saul; 1 Samuel 16. 14.
the room in's heart wild Passions took;
Sometimes a Tyrant-Frensie revell'ed there,
Sometimes black sadness, and deep, deep despair.
No help from herbs or learned drugs he finds,
They cure but sometime Bodies, never Minds.
Music alone those storms of Soul could lay;
Not more Saul them* then Music they obey.
David's now sent for, 1 Samuel 16 23.
and his harp must bring;
His harp that Magic bore on ev'ery string.
When Saul's rude passions did most tumult keep;
With his soft notes they all dropped down asleep.
When his dull Spir'its lay drowned in Death and Night;
He with quick strains raised them to Life and Light.
Thus cheered he Saul, thus did his fury swage,
Till wars began, and times* more fit for rage.
To Helah Plain Philistian Troops are come, 1 Samuel 17

And wars loud noise strikes peaceful Music dumb.
Back to his rural Care young David goes,
For this rough work Saul his stout Brethren chose.
He knew not what his hand in war could do,
Nor thought his Sword could cure men's Madness too.
Now Dammin's destin'ed for this Scene of Blood,
On two near Hills the two proud Armies stood.
Between a fatal valley stretched out wide,
And Death seeme'd ready now on either side,
When (Lo!) their Host raised all a joyful shout,
43 And from the midst an huge and monstrous man stepped out. 1 Samuel 17* 4.

Aloud they shouted at each step he took;
We and the Earth it self beneath him shook,
Vast as the Hill, down which he marched, he'appear'd;
Amaz'ed all Eyes, nor was their Army feared.
A young tall Squire (though then he seemed not so)
Did from the Camp at first before him go;
At first he did, but scarce could follow strait.
Sweating beneath a Shields unruly weight.
44 On which was wrought the Gods, and Giants fight,
Rare work! all fill'ed with terror and delight.
45 Here a vast Hill, against thundering Baal was thrown,
Trees and Beasts on it fell burnt with Lightning down.
One flings a Mountain, and its River too
Torn up with it; that rains back on him that threw.
Some from the Main to pluck whole Islands try;
The Sea boils round with flames shot thick from sky.
This he believed, and on his shield he bore,
And praised their strength, but thought his own was more.
The Valley now this Monster seemed to fill;
46 And we (methoughts) looked up to'him from our Hill.
47 All arm'ed in brass, the richest dress of war
(A dismal glorious sight) he shone afar.
The Sun himself started with sudden fright,
To see his beams return so dismal bright.
Brass was his Helmet, 1 Samuel 17 7, etc.
his Boots brass; and over
His breast a thick plate of strong brass he wore,
His Spear the Trunk was of a lofty Tree,
Which Nature meant some tall ships Mast should be,
The'huge i'ron head six hundred shekels weighed,
And of whole bodies but one wound it made,
Able Deaths worst command to overdoe,
Destroying Life at once and Carcass too;
Thus armed he stood; all direful, and all gay,
And round him flung a scornful look away.
So when a Scythian Tiger gazing round,
An Herd of Kine in some fair Plain has found
Lowing secure, he swells with angry pride,
48 And calls forth all his spots on ev'ery side.
Then stops, and hurls his haughty eyes at all,
In choice of some strong neck on which to fall.
Almost he scorns, so weak, so cheap a prey,
And grieves to see them trembling haste away.
Ye men of Jury, I^* v. 8.
he cries, if Men you be,
And such dare prove your selves to Fame and Me,
Choose out amongst all your Troops the boldest Knight,
To try his strength and fate with me in fight.
The chance of war let us two bear for all,
49 And they the Conqu'eror serve whose Knight shall fall. Ib. v. 9, 10.

At this he paws'd awhile; straight, I defy
Your Gods and You; dares none come down and die?
Go back for shame, and Egypts slav'ery bear,
Or yield to us, and serve more nobly here.
Alas, there is no more Wonders to be done,
Your Sorce'rer Moses now and Iosua's gone,
Your Magic Trumpets then could Cities take,
And sounds of Triumph did your Battles make. Io^. 6. 20

Spears in your hands and manly Swords are vain;
Get you your Spells, and Conj'uring Rods again.
Is there no Sampson here? Oh that there were!
In his full strength, Judge. 16. 17.
and long Enchanted Hair.
This Sword should be in the weak Razors stead;
It should not cut his Hair off, but his Head.
Thus he blasphemed aloud; the Valleys round
Flatt'ering his voice restor'ed the dreadful sound.
We turned us trembling at the noise, and feared
We had behind some new Goliath heard.
'Twas Heav'en, 1 Samuel 17. 11.
Heav'en sure (which David's glory meant
Through this whole Act) such sacred terror sent
To all our Host, for there was Saul in place,
Who never saw fear but in his Enemies face,
His god-like Son there in bright armor shone,
Who scorned to conquer Armies not Alone. 1 Samuel 14

Fate her own Book mistrusted at the sight;
On that side War, on this a Single Fight.
There stood Benaiah, and there trembled too,
He who the Egyptian, proud Goliath slew.
In his pale fright, 1 Chr. 11
rage through his eyes shot flame,
50 He saw his staff, and blushed with generous shame.
Thousands beside stood mute and heartless there,
Men valiant all; nor was I us'ed to Fear.
Thus forty days he marched down armed to fight,
Once every morn he marched, and once at night.
Slow rose the Sun, but gallopt down apace,
With more then Evening blushes in his face.
When Iesse to the Camp young David sent; 1 Samuel 17 12, etc.

His purpose low, but high was Fates* intent.
For when the Monsters pride he saw and heard,
Round him he looked, and wondered why they feared.
Anger and brave disdain his heart possessed,
Thoughts more then manly swelled his youthful breast.
Much the rewards proposed his spirit inflame, 1 Samuel 17. 25.

Saul's Daughter much, and much the voice of fame.
These to their just intentions strongly move,
But chiefly God, and his dear Countries Love,
Resolv'ed for combat to Saul's tent he is brought,
Where thus he spoke, as boldly as he fought:
Henceforth no more, Ib. v. 32.
great Prince, your sacred breast
With that hunge talking wretch of Gath molest.
This hand alone shall end his cursed breath;
Fear not, the wretch blasphemes himself to death,
And cheated with false weight of his own might,
Has challenged Heaven, not Us, to single fight.
Forbid it God, that where thy right is tried,
The strength of man should find just cause for pride!
Firm like some Rock, and vast he seems to stand,
But Rocks we know were op'ed at thy command. Exodus 17. 6.

That Soul which now does such large members sway,
Through one small wound will creep in haste away.
And he who now dares boldly Heaven defy,
To ev'ery bird of Heav'en a prey shall lie.
For it is not humane force we ought to fear;
Did that, alas, plant our Forefathers here?
51 Twice fifteen Kings did they by that subdue? Josh. 12.

By that whole Nations of Goliahs slew?
The wonders they performed may still be done;
Moses and Joshua is, but God's not gone.
We'have lost their Rod and Trumpets; not their skill:
Prayers and Belief are as strong Witchcraft still.
These are more tall, more Giants far then He,
Can reach to Heav'en, and thence pluck Victory.
Count this, and then, Sir, mine the advantage is;
He Is stronger far then I, my God then His.
Amazement seized on all, and shame to see,
Their own fears scorned by one so young as He. 1 Samuel 17. 33.

Brave youth (replies the King) whose daring mind
Ere come to Manhood, leaves it quite behind;
Reserve thy valor for more equal fight,
And let thy Body grow up to thy Spright.
You Are yet too tender for so rude a foe,
Whose touch would wound thee more then him thy blow.
Nature his Limbs only for war made fit,
In thine as yet naught beside Love she'has writ.
With some less Foe thy unflesht valor try;
This Monster can be no first Victory.
The Lions royal whelp does not at first
For blood of Basan Bulls or Tigers thirst.
In timorous Deer he hansels his young paws,
And leaves the rugged Bear for firmer claws.
So vast thy hopes, so unproportion'd be,
Fortune would be asham'ed to second Thee.
He said, and we all murmured and assent;
But naught moves David from his high intent.
It brave to him, and om'inous does appear,
To be oppos'ed at first, and conquer here,
Which he resolves; Scorn not (said he) mine age,
For Vict'ory comes not like an Heritage, 1 Samuel 17. 33.

At set-years; when my Fathers flock I fed,
A Bear and Lion by fierce hunger led,
Broke from the wood, and snatched my Lambs away;
From their grim Mouths I forc'ed the panting prey.
Both Bear and Lion ev'en this hand did kill,
On our great Oak the Bones and Iaws hang still.
My God's the same, which then he was, to day,
And this wild wretch almost the same as They.
Who from such danger sav'ed my Flock, will he
Of Isra'el, his own Flock less careful be?
Be It so then ( Saul bursts forth:) and thou on high,
Who often in weakness do most strength descry,
At whose dread beck Conquest expecting stands,
And casts no look down on the Fighters hands,
Assist what Thou inspir'est; and let all see,
As Boys to Giants, Giants are to Thee.
Thus; and with trembling hopes of strange success,
52 In his own Arms he the bold Youth does dress. 1 Samuel 17. 34.

On's head an helm of well wrought brass is place'd,
The top with warlike Plume severely grace'd.
His breast a plate cut with rare Figures bore,
A Sword much practis'ed in Deaths art he wore.
Yet David use'd so long to no defense,
But those light Arms of Spirit and Innocence,
No good in fight of that gay burden knows,
But fears his own arms weight more then his Foes.
He lost himself in that disguise of war,
And guarded seems as men by Prisons are.
He therefore to exalt the wondrous sight,
Prepares now, and disarms himself for fight.
Against Shield, 1 Samuel 17. 40.
Helm, Breast Plate, and instead of those,
Five sharp smooth stones from the next brook he chose,
And fits them to his sling; then marches down;
For Sword, his Enemies he esteemed his Own.
We all with various passion strangely gaz'ed
Some sad, some'sham'ed, some angry, all amaz'ed.
Now in the Valley'he stands; through's youthful face
Wrath checks the Beauty, and sheds manly grace.
Both in his looks so joined, that they might move
Fear even in Friends, and from an En'emy Love.
Hot as ripe Noon, sweet as the blooming Day,
Like July furious, but more fair then May.
Th'accurst Philistian stands on the other side, Ib. v. 45.

Grumbling aloud, and smiles 'twixt rage and pride.
The Plagues of Dagon! a smooth Boy, said he,
A cursed beardless foe opposed to Me!
Hell! with what arms (hence thou fond Child) he is come!
Some friend his Mother called to drive him home.
Not gone yet? if one minute more thou stay,
The birds of heav'en shall bear thee dead away.
Gods! a cursed Boy! the rest then murmuring out,
He walks, and casts a deadly grin about.
David with cheerful anger in his Eyes,
Advances boldly on, and thus replies,
Thou com'est, Ib. v. 45.
vain Man, all arm'ed into the field,
And trustest those War toys, thy Sword, and Shield;
Thy Pride's my Spear, thy Blasphemies my Sword;
My Shield, thy Maker, Fool; the mighty Lord
Of Thee and Battles; who has sent forth me
Unarm'ed thus, not to Fight, but Conquer Thee.
In vain shall Dagon thy false Hope withstand;
53 In vain thy other God, thine own right hand.
Thy fall to man shall heavens strong justice show;
Wretch! it is the only Good which thou can do.
He said; our Host stood dully silent by;
And durst not trust their Ears against the Eye.
As much their Champions threats to him they feared,
As when the Monsters threats to them they heard,
His flaming Sword th'enrag'd Philistian shakes,
And haste to'his ruin with loud Curses makes.
Backward the Winds his active Curses blew,
54 And fatally round his own head they flew.
For now from David's sling the stone is fled, Ib. v. 49.

And strikes with joyful noise the Monsters head.
It struck his forehead, and pierc'ed deeply there;
As swiftly as it pierc'ed before the Air.
Down, down he falls, and bites in vain the ground;
Blood, Brain, and Soul crowd mingled through the Wound.
So a strong Oak, which many years has stood
With fair and flourishing bows, it self a Wood;
Though it might long the Axes violence bear,
And played with Winds which other Trees did tear;
Yet by the Thunders stroke from th'root it is rent;
So sure the blows that from high heav'en are sent.
What tongue the joy and wonder can express,
Which did that moment our whole Host possess?
Their jocond shouts the air like a storm did tear,
The Amazed Clouds fled swift away with Fear.
But far more swift th'accurs'd philistians fly, 1 Samuel 17. 52.

And their ill fate to perfect, basely dye.
With thousand corpse the ways around are strown,
Till they, by the days flight secure their own.
Now through the Camp sounds naught but David's name;
All joys of several stamp and colors came
From several passions; some his Valor praise,
Some his free Speech, some the fair pop'ular rays
Of Youth, and Beauty, and his Modest guise;
Gifts that mov'ed all, but charm'ed the Female Eyes.
Some wonder, some they thought it would be so swear;
And some saw Angels flying through the Air.
The basest spir'its cast back a crooked glance
On this great act, 1 Samuel 18. 6.
and fain would give't to Chance.
Women our Host with Songs and Dances meet, Ib. v. 8. ^

With much joy Saul, David with more they greet*
Hence the Kings politic rage and envy flows,
Which first he hides, and seeks his life t'expose
To gen'erous dangers that his hate might clear,
And Fate or Chance the blame, nay David bear.
So vain are man's designs! for Fate, and Chance,
And Earth, and Heav'en conspir'ed to his advance;
His Beauty, 1 Samuel 18. 16.
Youth, Courage and wondrous Wit,
In all Mankind but Saul did Love begit.
Not Saul's own house, not his own nearest blood,
The noble causes sacred force withstood.
You'have met no doubt, and kindly us'ed the fame,
Of God-like Ionathans illustrious Name;
A Name which ev'ery wind to heav'en would bear,
Which Men to speak, and Angels joy to hear.
55 No Angel e're bore to his Brother-Mind
A kindness more exalted and refined,
Then his to David, which looked nobly down,
And scorned the false Alarums of a Crown.
At Dammin field he stood, 1 Samuel 18 1,
And from his place
Leapt forth, the wondrous Conqu'eror to embrace;
56 On him his Mantle, Ib. v. 4.
Girdle, Sword, and Bow,
On him his Heart and Soul he did bestow.
Not all that Saul could threaten or persuade,
In this close knot the smallest looseness made.
Often his wise care did the Kings rage suspend.
His own life's danger sheltered often his Friend. 1 Samuel 20. 33.

Which he expos'ed a Sacrifice to fall
By the undiscerning rage of furious Saul.
Nor was young David's active virtue grown
Strong and triumphant in one Sex alone.
Imperious Beauty too it durst invade,
And deeper Prints in the soft breast it made, 1 Samuel 18 20, 28.

For there t'esteem and Friendships graver name,
Passion was poured like Oil into the Flame.
Like two bright Eyes in a fair Body plac'ed,
Saul's royal House two beauteous Daughters grac'ed.
Merab the first, Michol the younger nam'ed,
Both equally for different glories fam'ed.
Merab with spacious beauty fill'ed the sight,
But too much aw chastis'ed the bold delight.
Like a calm Sea, which to th'enlarged view,
Gives pleasure, but gives fear and rev'erence too.
Michols sweet looks clear and free joys did move,
And no less strong, though much more gentle Love.
Like virtuous Kings whom men rejoice to obey,
Tyrants themselves less absolute then They.
Merab appeared like some fair Princely Tower,
Michol some Virgin Queens delicious Bower.
All Beauties stores in Little and in Great;
But the contracted Beams shot fiercest heat.
A clean and lively Brown was Merabs die,
Such as the Prouder colors might envy.
Michols pure skin shone with such taintless White,
As scattered the weak rays of humane sight.
Her lips and cheeks a nobler red did show,
Then e're on fruits or flowers Heav'ens Pencil drew.
From Merabs eyes fierce and quick Lightnings came
From Michols the Suns mild, yet Active Flame;
Merabs long hair was glossy chestnut brown,
Tresses of palest gold did Michol crown.
Such was their outward form, and one might find
A difference not unlike it in the Mind.
Merab with comely Majesty and state
Bore high the advantage of her Worth and Fate.
Such humble sweetness did soft Michol show,
That none who reached so high ere stoopt so low.
Merab rejoyc'ed in her wrackt Lovers pain,
And forthfi'ed her virtue with Disdain.
The griefs she caus'ed gave gentle Michol grief,
She wished her Beauties less for their relief,
Ev'en to her Captives civil; yet th'excess
Of naked Virtue guarded her no less.
Business and Power Merabs large thoughts did vex,
Her wit disdained the fetters of her Sex.
Michol no less disdained affairs and noise,
Yet did it not from Ignorance, but Choice.
In brief, both Copies were more sweetly drawn;
Merab of Saul, Michol of Jonathan.
The day that David great Goliath slew,
Not great Goliahs Sword was more his due,
Then Merab; by Saul's public promise she
Was sold then and betrotht to Victory.
But haughty she did this just match despise,
Her Pride debaucht her Judgment and her Eyes.
An unknown Youth, never seen at Court before,
Who Shepherds-staff, and Shepherds habit bore;
The seventh-born Son of no rich house, were still
Th'unpleasant forms which her high thoughts did fill.
And much aversion in her stubborn mind
Was bred by being promis'ed and designed.
Long had the patient Adriel humbly born
The roughest shocks of her imperious scorn,
Adriel the Rich, but riches were in vain,
And could nor set him free, nor her enchain.
Long live'd they thus; but as the hunted Dear
Closely pursu'ed quits all her wonted fear,
And takes the nearest waves, which from the shore
She often with horror had beheld before.
So whilst the violent Maid from David fled, 1 Samuel 18. 19.

She leapt to Adriels long avoided bed.
The match was nam'ed, agreed, and finished strait;
So soon comply'ed Saul's Envy with her Hate.
But Michol, in whose breast all virtues move
That hatch the pregnant seeds of sacred Love,
With juster eyes the noble Objects meets,
And turns all Merabs Poison into Sweets.
She saw and wondered how a Youth unknown,
Should make all Fame to come so soon his own:
She saw, and wondered how a Shepherds Crook
Despised that Sword at which the Scepter shook.
Though he seventh-born, and though his House but poor,
She knew it noble was, and would be more.
Often had she heard, and fansied often the sight,
With what a generous calm he marched to fight.
In the great danger how exempt from Fear,
And after it from Pride he did appear.
Greatness, and Goodness, and an Air divine,
She saw through all his words and Actions shine.
She heard his eloquent Tongue, and charming Lyre,
Whose artful sounds did violent Love inspire,
Though us'ed all other Passions to relieve;
She weighed all this, and well we may conceive,
When those strong thoughts attaqu'ed her doubtful breast,
His Beauty no less active then the rest.
The fire thus kindled soon grew fierce and great,
When David's breast reflected back its heat.
Soon she perceived (scarce can Love hidden ly
From any sight, much less the Loving Eye)
She Conqu'eror was as well as Overcome,
And gain d no less Abroad then lost at Home.
57 Eve'n the first hour they met (for such a pair,
Who in all mankind else so matchless were,
Yet there own Equals, Natures self does wed)
A mutual warmth through both their bosoms spread.
Fate gave the Signal; both at once began
The gentle Race, and with just pace they ran.
Ev'en so (methinks) when two Fair Tapers come,
From several Doors entering at once the room,
With a swift flight that leaves the Eye behind;
Their amorous Lights into one Light are joined.
Nature herself, were she to judge the case,
Knew not which first began the kind embrase*
Michol her modest flames sought to conceal,
But Love even the Art to hide it does reveal.
Her soft unpractis'ed Eyes betrayed the Theft,
Love past through them, and there such footsteps left.
She blushed when he approacht, and when he spoke,
And suddenly her wandering answers broke,
At his names sound, and when she heard him praised,
With concerned haste her thoughtful looks she raised.
Uncall'ed for sighs often from her bosom flew,
And Adriels active friend she' abruptly grew.
Often when the Courts gay youth stood waiting by,
She strove to act a cold Indifferency;
In vain she acted so constrained a part,
For thousand Nameless things disclosed her Heart.
On the other side David with silent pain
Did in respectful bounds his fires contain.
His humble fear to offend, and trembling aw,
Impos'ed on him a no less rigorous Law
Then Modesty on her, and though he strove
To make her see it, he durst not tell his Love.
To tell it first the timorous youth made choice
Of Musicks bolder and more active voice.
And thus beneath her Window, did he touch
His faithful Lyre; the words and numbers such,
As did well worth my Memory appear,
And may perhaps deserve your princely Ear.
1.
Awake, awake my Lyre,
And tell thy silent Masters humble tale,
In sounds that may prevail;
Sounds that gentle thoughts inspire,
Though so Exalted she
And I so Lowly be,
Tell her such diffe'rent Notes make all thy Harmony.
2.
Hark, how the Strings awake,
And though the Moving Hand approach not near,
Themselves with awful fear,
A kind of num'erous Trembling make.
Now all thy forces try,
Now all thy charms apply,
Revenge upon her Ear the Conquests of her Eye.
3.
Weak Lyre! thy virtue sure
Is useless here, since thou art only found
To Cure, but not to Wound,
And she to Wound, but not to Cure.
Too weak too will thou prove
My Passion to remove,
Physic to other Ills, you are Nourishment to Love.
4*
Sleep, sleep again, my Lyre;
For thou can never tell my humble tale,
In sounds that will prevail,
Nor gentle thoughts in her inspire;
All thy vain mirth lay by,
Bid thy strings silent ly,
Sleep, sleep again, my Lyre, and let thy Master die.
She heard all this, and the prevailing sound
Touched with delightful pain her tender wound.
Yet though she joy'd the authentic news to hear,
Of what she ghest before with jealous fear.
She checked her forward joy, and blushed for shame,
And did his boldness with forc'ed anger blame.
The senseless rules, which first False Honor taught,
And into Laws the Tyrant Custom brought,
Which Women's Pride and Folly did invent,
Their Lovers and Themselves too to torment,
Made her next day a grave displeasure fain,
And all her words, and all her looks constrain
Before the trembling youth; who when he saw
His vital Light her wonted beams withdraw,
He cursed his voice, his fingers, and his Lyre,
He cursed his too bold Tongue, and bold Desire.
In vain he cursed the last, for that still grew;
From all things Food its strong Complexion drew;
His Joy and Hope their cheerful motions ceast,
His Life decayed, but still his Love encreast.
Whilst she whose Heart approv'ed not her Disdain,
Saw and endur'ed his pains with greater pain.
But Jonathan, to whom both hearts were known
With a concernment equal to their own,
Joyful that Heav'en with his sworn love complied
To draw that knot more fast which he had tied,
With well-tim'ed zeal, and with an artful care,
Restor'ed, and bettered soon the nice affair.
With ease a Brothers lawful power orecame
The formal decencies of virgin-shame.
She first with all her heart forgave the past,
Heard David tell his flames, and told her own at last.
Lo here the happy point of prosperous Love!
Which ev'en Enjoyment seldom can improve!
Themselves agreed, which scarce could fail alone,
All Isreal's wish concurrent with their own.
A Brothers powerful aid firm to the side,
By solemn vow the King and Father tide:
All jealous fears, all nice disguises past,
All that in less-ripe Love offends the Taste,
In eithers Breast their Souls both meet and wed,
Their Heart the Nuptial-Temple and the Bed.
And though the grosser cates were yet not dressed,
By which the Bodies must supply this Feast;
Bold Hopes prevent slow Pleasures lingering birth,
As Saints assur'ed of Heav'en enjoy't on Earth.
All this the King observed, and well he saw
What scandal, and what danger it might draw
To Oppose this just and pop'ular match, but meant
TO out-malice all Refusals by Consent.
He meant the pois'onous grant should mortal prove,
He meant t'ensnare his Virtue by his Love.
And thus he to him spoke, 1 Samuel 18. 2^.
with more of art
And fraud, then well became the Kingly part.
Your valor, David, and high worth (said he)
To praise, is all men's duty, mine to see
Rewarded; and we shall to our utmost powers
Do with like care that part, as you did yours.
Forbid it God, we like those Kings should prove,
Who Fear the Virtues which they are bound to Love.
Your Pi'ety does that tender point secure,
Nor will my Acts such humble thoughts endure.
Your neerness to it rather supports the Crown,
And the honors giv'en to you increase our own.
All that we can we'll give; it is our intent
Both as a Guard, and as an Ornament
To place thee next our selves; Heav'en does approve,
And my Sons Friendship, and my Daughters Love,
Guide fatally, methinks, my willing choice;
I see, methinks, Heav'en in it, and I rejoice.
Blush not, my Son, that Michols Love I name,
Nor need she blush to hear it; it is no shame
Nor secret now; Fame does it loudly tell,
And all men but thy Rivals like it well.
If Merabs choice could have comply'ed with mine,
Merab, my elder comfort, had been thine.
And hers at last should have with mine comply'ed,
Had I not Thine and Michols heart descry'ed.
Take whom thou lov'est, and who loves thee; the last
And dearest Present made me by the chaste
Ahinoam; and unless she me deceave,
When I to Jonathan my Crown shall leave,
'Twill be a smaller Gift.
If I thy generous thoughts may undertake
58 To ghess, they are what Ioynture thou shall make,
Fitting her birth and fortune: and since so
Custom ordains, we mean t'exact it too.
The Ioynture we exact, is that shall be
No less advantage to thy Fame then She.
Go where Philistian Troops infest the land;
Renew the terrors of thy conquering hand.
When thine own hand, which needs must conque'ror prove,
In this joint cause of Honor and of Love,
An hundred of the faithless foe shall slay, 1 Samuel 18. 25.

59 And for a Dowre their hundred foreskins pay,
Be Michol thy Reward; did we not know
Thy mighty Fate, and Worth that makes it so,
We should not cheaply that dear blood expose
Which we to mingle with our own had chose.
But you are secure; and since this match of thine
We to the public benefit design,
A public good shall its beginning grace,
And give triumphant Omens of thy race.
Thus spoke the King: the happy Youth bowed low;
Modest and graceful his great joy did show;
The noble task well pleas'ed his generous mind;
And naught t'except against it could he find,
But that his Mistress price too cheap appeared,
No Danger, but her Scorn of it he feared.
She with much different sense the news receiv'ed,
At her high rate she trembled, blushed, and griev'ed.
'Twas a less work the conquest of his foes,
Then to obtain her leave his life t'expose.
Their kind debate on this soft point would prove
Tedious, and needless to repeat: If Love
(As sure it has) ere touched your princely breast,
'Twill to your gentle thoughts at full suggest
All that was done, or said; the grief, hope, fears;
His troubled joys, and her obliging Tears.
In all the pomp of Passions reign, they part;
And bright prophetique forms enlarge his heart;
Vict'ory and Fame; and that more quick delight
Of the rich prize for which he was to fight.
Tow'ards Gath he went; and in one month (so soon
A fatal and a willing work is done)
A double Dowre, two hundred foreskins brought
60 Of choice Philistian Knights with whom he fought,
Men that in birth and valor did excel,
Fit for the Cause and Hand by which they fell.
Now was Saul caught; nor longer could delay
The two resistless Lovers happy day.
Though this days coming long had seemed and slow,
Yet seemed his stay as long and tedious now.
For now the violent weight of eager Love,
61 Did with more haste so near its Center move,
He cursed the stops of form and state, which lay
62 In this last stage like Scandals in his way.
On a large gentle Hill, crowned with tall wood,
Near where the regal Gabaah proudly stood,
63 A Tent was pitched, of green wrought Damask made,
And seemed but the fresh Forests natu'ral shade,
Various, and vast within, on pillars born
Of Sittim Wood, that usefully adorn.
Hither to grace the Nuptial-Feast does Saul
Of the Twelve Tribes the Elders and Captains call,
And all around the idle, busy crowd,
With shouts and Blessings tell their joy alowd.
Lo, the press breaks, and from their several homes
In decent pride the Bride and Bridegroom comes.
Before the Bride, in a long double row
With solemn pace thirty choice Virgins go,
And make a Moving Galaxy on earth;
All heav'enly Beauties, all of highest Birth;
64 All clad in liveliest colors, fresh and fair,
65 As the bright flowers that crowned their brighter Hair,
All in that new-blown age, which does inspire
Warmth in Themselves, in their Beholders Fire.
But all this, and all else the Sun did ere,
Or Fancy see, in her less bounded Sphere,
The Bride herself outshone; and one would say
They made but the faint Dawn to her full Day.
Behind a numerous train of Ladies went,
Who on their dress much fruitless care had spent,
Vain gems, and unregarded cost they bore,
For all men's eyes were tied to those before.
The Bridegrooms flourishing Troop fill'ed next the place,
66 With thirty comely youths of noblest race,
That marched before; and heav'en around his head,
The graceful beams of Joy and Beauty spread.
67 So the glad star which Men and Angels love,
Prince of the glorious Host that shines above,
No Light of Heav'en so cheerful or so gay,
Lifts up his sacred Lamp, and opens Day.
The King himself, at the Tents crowned gate
In all his robes of ceremony'and state
Sat to receive the train; or either hand
Did the High Priest, and the Great Prophet stand.
Adriel behind, Jonathan, Abner, Iesse,
And all the Chiefs in their due order press.
First Saul declar'ed his choice, and the just cause,
Avowed by'a gene'ral murmr of applause,
68 Then sign'ed her Dow're, and in few words he prayed,
And blessed, and gave the joyful trembling Maid
T'her Lovers hands, who with a cheerful look
And humble gesture the vast Present took.
69 The Nuptial-Hymn straight sounds, and Musicks play,
70 And Feasts, and Balls shorten the thoughtless day
To all but to the wedded; till at last
The long-wisht night did her kind shadow cast;
At last the inestimable hour was come
To lead his Conquering prey in triumph home,
71 To'a Palace near, dressed for the Nuptial-bed
(Part of her Dowre) he his fair Princess led,
Saul, the High Priest, and Samuel here they leave,
Who as they part, their weighty Blessings give.
72 Her Vail is now put on; and at the gate
The thirty Youths, and thirty Virgins wait
73 With golden Lamps, bright as the flames they bore,
To light the Nuptial-pomp, and march before.
The rest bring home in state the happy Pair,
To that last Scene of Bliss, and leave them there
All those free joys insatiably to prove
With which rich Beauty feasts the Glutton Love.
74 But scarce, alas, the first sev'en days were past,
In which the public Nuptial Triumphs last,
When Saul this new Alliance did repent,
Such subtle cares his jealous thoughts torment,
He envy'ed the good work himself had done;
Feared David less his Servant then his Son.
No longer his wild wrath could he command;
He seeks to stain his own imperial hand
In his Sons blood; and that twice cheated too,
With Troops and Armies does one Life pursue.
Said I but One? his thirsty rage extends
To th'Lives of all his kindred, and his friends;
Ev'en Jonathan had dyed for being so,
Had not just God put by th'unnat'ural blow.
You see, Sir, the true cause which brings us here;
No sullen discontent, or groundless fear,
No guilty Act or End calls us from home.
Only to breath in peace a while we come,
Ready to Serve, and in mean space to Pray
For you who us receive, and Him who drives away.
NOTES UPON THE THIRD BOOK.
1. A Town not far from Jerusalem, according to S. Heiron. in his Commentary
upon Isaiah, by which it seems it was re-edified, after the destruction of it
by Saul; he says that Jerusalem might be seen from it. Adricomius knows not
whether he should place it in the Tribe of Benjamin, or Ephraim. Abulensis sure
is in an error, placing it in the Half Tribe of Manasses beyond Jordan. I call
it Nobe according to the Latin Translation; for (methinks) Nob is too
unheroical a name.

2. Panes Propositionis, in the Septuagint, (...), from the Hebrew, in which it
signifies Panes Facierum, because they were always standing before the Face of
the Lord; which is meant too by the English word Shewbread. The Law concerning
them, Levit. 23. commands not only that they should be eaten by the Priests
alone, but also eaten in the holy Place. For it is most holy unto him, of the
offerings made unto the Lord by fire, by a perpetual statute, Verse 9. In the
Holy place; that is, at the door of the Tabernacle; as appears, Lev. 8. 31. and
that which remained was to be burnt, least it should be eaten by any but the
Priests. How comes it then to pass, not only that Ahimelech gave of this bread
to David and his company, but that David says to him, 1 Samuel 21. 5. The bread
is in a manner common? The Latin differently, Porro via haec polluta est, sed
and ipsa hodie sanctificabitur in vasis. The words are somewhat obscure; the
meaning sure must be, that seeing here are new Breads to be set upon the Table,
the public occasion (for that he pretended) and present necessity makes these
as it were common. So, what more sacred then the Sabbath? yet the Maccabees
ordained, that it should be lawful to fight against their enemies on that day.
Seneca says very well, Necessitas magnum humanae imbecillitatis patrocinium,
quicquid cogit excusat. And we see this act of David's approved of in the
Evangelists.

3. Fatal, in regard his coming was the cause of Ahimelechs murder, and the
destruction of the Town.

4. Sacred: made so by David's placing it in the Tabernacle as a Trophee of his
Victory, (...). Thus Judith dedicated all the stuff of Holophernes his Tent as
a Gift unto the Lord, Iud. 16. 19. (...), where the Latin corruptly adds
Oblivionis; in anathema oblivionis, which should be left out. Josephus of this
Sword, (...). And Sulpit. Sever. Gladium postea in Templum posuit; i. In
Tabernaculum Nobae: where, methinks, In Templum signifies more then if he had
said in Templo. The reason of this custom is, to acknowledge that God is the
giver of Victory. And I think all Nations have concurred in this duty after
successes, and called (as Virgil says) In praedam partemque Iovem. -- So the
Philistims hung up the Arms of Saul in the Temple of Ashtaroth, and carried the
Ark into the Temple of Dagon. Nicol. de Lyra believes that this Sword of Goliath
was not consecrated to God: for then Ahimelech in giving, and David in taking
it had sinned; for it is said, Levit. 27, 28. Whatsoever is devoted is most
holy unto the Lord; but that it was only laid up as a Monument of a famous
victory, in a public place. There is no need of this evasion; for not every
thing consecrated to God is unalienable (at least for a time) in case of
necessity, since we see the very vessels of the Temple were often given to
Invaders by the Kings of Judah, to make peace with them. Pro Rep. plerumque
Templa nudantur. Sen. in Controvers.

5. This particular of Tagal and David's going in disguise into the Land of the
Philistims (which seems more probable then that he should go immediately and
avowedly to Achis Court so soon after the defeat of Goliath) is added to the
History by a Poetical License, which I take to be very harmless, and which
therefore I make bold to use upon several occasions.

6. Their Goddess Dagon, a kind of Mermaid-Deity. See on the second Book.

7. Adullam, An ancient Town in the Tribe of Judah, even in Judah's time, Genesis
38. in Joshua's it had a King, Josh. 12. 15. The Cave still remains; and was
used by the Christians for their refuge upon several irruptions of the Turks,
in the same manner as it served David now.

8. In this Enumeration of the chief Persons who came to assist David, I choose
to name but a few. The Greek and Latin Poets being in my opinion too large
upon this kind of subject, especially Homer, in enumerating the Grecian Fleet
and Army; where he makes a long list of Names and Numbers, just as they would
stand in the Roll of a Muster-Master, without any delightful and various
descriptions of the persons; or at least very few such. Which Lucan (methinks)
avoids viciously by an excess the other way.

9. 2 Samuel 2. And Asael was as swift of foot as a wild Roe. Joseph. says of
him, that he would outrun (...), which is no such great matter. The Poets are
all bolder in their expressions upon the swiftness of some persons. Virgil upon
Nisus Aen. 5. Emicat and ventis, and fulminis ocyor alis. But that is Modest
with them. Hear him of Camilla, Aen. 7. Illa vel intactae segetis per summa
volaret
Gramina, nec teneras cursu laesisset aristas.
Vel mare per medium fluctu suspensa tumenti
Ferret iter, celeres nec tingeret aequore plantas.
From whence I have the hint of my description, Often over the Lawns, etc. but I
durst not in a Sacred Story be quite so bold as he. The walking over the waters
is too much, yet he took it from Homer, 20. Iliad. (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
They ran upon the top of flowers without breaking them, and upon the back of
the Sea, etc. where the Hyperbole (one would think) might have satisfied any
moderate man; yet Scal. 5. de Poet. prefers Virgils from the increase of the
miracle, by making Camilla's flight over a tenderer thing then Antherici, and
by the exaggerations of Intactae, Gramina, Volaret, Suspensa, Nec tingeret.
Apollon. 1. Argonant. has the like Hyperbole, and of Polyphemus too, a Monster,
that one would believe should rather sink the Earth at every tread, then run
over the Sea with dry feet, (...)
(...)
(...)
And Solinus reports historically of Ladas (the man so much celebrated by the
Poets) cap. 6. That he ran so lightly over the dust ( supra cavum pulverem)
that he never left a mark in it. So that a Greek Epigram calls his (...)
The swiftness of a God.
All which, I hope, will serve to excuse me in this place.

10. Iessides, the Son of Iesse; a Patronymique after the Greek form.

11. Moab, that part of the Kingdom of Moab that was possessed by Ruben, lying
upon the Dead-Sea, which divides it from the Tribe of Judah; but Jordan divides
it from the Tribes of Benjamin and Ephraim, so Judah is not here taken in a
precise sense for that Tribe only.

12. His: because Jordan runs into it, and is there lost. It is called
promiscuously a Sea, or Lake, and is more properly a Lake.

13. Amoreus was the fourth Son of Canaan; the Country of his Sons extended
East and West between Arnon and Jordan, North and South between Iaboc and the
Kingdom of Moab. They were totally destroyed by the Israelites, and their Land
given to the Tribe of Gad, Genesis 10. 14 Numb. 21. 32. Deuteronomy 3. Josh 13. Judge. 12.

14. Edom: called by the Greeks Idumaea: denominated from Esau. Josephus makes
two Idumaea's, the Upper and the Lower; the upper was possessed by the Tribe of
Judah, and the Lower by Simeon: but still the Edomites possessed the Southern
part of the Country, from the Sea of Sodom toward the Red, or, Idumaean Sea.
The great Map of Adricomius places another Edom and Montes Seir, a little North
of Rabba of the Ammonites, which I conceive to be a mistake. The Greeks under
the name of Idume include sometimes all Palestine and Arabia.

Petra. The Metropolis of Arabia Petraea. Adric. 77. Petraea autem dicta a
vetustissimo oppido Petra deserti ipsius Metropoli supra mare mortuum sita. It
is hard to set the bounds of this Country (and indeed of all the little
ancient Kingdoms in those parts;) for sometimes it includes Moab, Edom, Amalec,
Cedar, Madian, and all the Land Southward to Egypt, or the Red Sea: but here it
is taken in a more contracted signification, for that part of Arabia which lies
near the Metropolis Petra, and denominates the whole. I doubt much, whether
Petra Deserti, which Adric. makes to be the same, were not another City of the
same name. Adric. is very confused in the description of the Countries
bordering upon the Jews, nor could well be otherwise, the matter is so
intricate, and to make amends not much important.

15. Cush. Arabia Sabaea, so called from Saba the Son of Cush, and Grandchild
of Cham. All the Inhabitants of Arabia, down to the Red Sea (for Iethro's
daughter of Midian was a Cusite, though taken by Josephus to be an African
Ethiop) are called sometimes in Scripture Cusites, and translated Ethiopians;
and I believe the other Ethiopians beyond Egypt descended from these, and are
the Cusitae at other times mentioned in the Scripture. Ammon is by some
accounted a part of Arabia Foelix, and the Country called since Philadelphia,
from the Metropolis of that name, conceived by Adricom. to be the same with
Rabba of Ammon, the Son of Lot.

16. Accounted of the race of the Giants, that is, a big, strong, and warlike
sort of people; as Amos says Poetically of the Amorites, As tall as Cedars, and
strong as Oaks. These Emins were beaten Cheder-laomer, Genesis 14. and extirpated
afterward by the Moabites, who called all that Country Moab, from their
Ancestor the Son of Lot.

17. Seon King of the Amorites, who conquered the greatest part of the Kingdom
of Moab all westward of Arnon, and possessed it himself till the Israelites slew
him, and destroyed his people. Arnon, a River that discharges it self into the
Dead-sea, and rises in an high Rock in the Country of the Amorites, called
Arnon, which gives the name to the River, and that to the City Arnon, or Aroer
seated upon it. Or,

18. Esebon. A famous and strong City seated upon an hill, and encompassed with
brick-walls, with many Villages and Towns depending on it. It was twenty miles
distant from Jordan. Adric.

19. For Saul had made war upon the Moabites, and done them much hurt, 1 Samuel
14. 49.

20. I take it for an infallible certainty, that Ophir was not as some imagine
in the West Indies; for in Solomon's time, where it is first mentioned, those
Countries neither were nor could be known, according to their manner of
Navigation. And besides, if all that were granted, Solomon would have set out
his fleet for that voyage from some port of the Mediterranean, and not of the
Red Sea. I therefore without any scruple say, Ophirs rising Morn, and make it a
Country in the East Indies, called by Josephus and S. Hierome, The Golden
Country. Grotius doubts whether Ophir were not a Town seated in the Arabian
Bay, which Arrian calls Aphar, Pliny Saphar, Ptolomy Sapphara, Stephanus
Sapharina, whither the Indians brought their Merchandises, to be fetched from
thence by the Merchants of the more Western Countries. But that small
similitude of the name is not worth the change of a received opinion.

21. Like this is that of Dido to Aeneas, Non obtusa adeo gestamus pectora
Poeni,
Nec tam aversus equos Tyria Sol jungit ab urbe.
And in Stat. of Adrastus to Polynices, Nec tam aversum fama
Mycaenis Volvit iter.


22. Phegor, or Phogor, or Peor, was an high Mountain upon the Top of which
Balaam was desired by Balac to curse, but did bless Israel. This place was
chosen perhaps by Balac, because upon it stood the Temple of his God Baal.
Which was, I believe the Sun, the Lord of Heaven, the same with Moloch of the
Ammonites and the Moabites Chemos; only denominated Baal Phegor, from that
particular place of his worship, as Jupiter Capitolinus. Some think that Baal
Peor was the same with Priapus the obscene Idol, so famous in ancient Authors;
it may be the Image might be made after that fashion, to signify that the Sun
is the Baal, or Lord of Generation.

23. The making of Hangings with Figures came first from Babylon, from whence
they were called Babylonica, Plin. l. 8. c. 48. Colores diversos picturae
intertexere Babylon maxim Celebravit, and nomen imposuit. Plaut. in Sticho.
Tum Babylonica peristromata consutaque tapetia
Advexit minimum bonea rei.
He calls the like Hangings in Pseud. Alexandrina belluata conchiliata
peristromata.
Mart L. 8. Non ego praetulerim Babylonica picta superbe
Texta Semiramia quae variantur acu.
And long before, Lucret. l 4. Babylonica magnifico splendore.

24. These kind of Ivory Tables born up with the Images of Beasts, were much in
esteem among the Ancients. The Romans had them, as also all other instruments
of Luxury, from the Asiatiques, -- Putere videntur
Unguenta atque rosae latos nisi sustinet orbs
Grande ebur, and magno sublimis Pardus hiatu,
Dentibus ex illis quos mittit porta Sienes
Et Mauri celeres. Iuven. 11.
Mart. Et Mauri Lybicis centum stent dentibus orbs.


25. Citron: It is not here taken for the Lemon Tree (though that be in Latin
called Citrus too, and in French Citronnier) but for a Tree something
resembling a wild Cypress, and growing chiefly in Africa: it is very famous
among the Roman Authors, and was most used for banqueting Beds and Tables.
Martial says it was more precious then Gold. Accipe faelices, Atlantica munera,
mensas,
Aurea qui dederit dona, minora dabit.
See Plin l. 13. c. 15. The spots and crispness of the wood, was the great
commendation of it: From whence they were called, Tygrinae and Pantherinae
Mensae. Virg. Ciris. Nec Lybis Assyrio sternetur Lectulus ostro.
Where Lybis Lectulus may signify either an Ivory, or a Citron Bed.

26. Purple Coverlits were most in use among great persons. Hom. Il. 9. (...).
Virg. Sarrano dormiat ostro.
That is, Tyrian purple. Stat. Theb. 1. -- Pars ostro tenues auroque sonantes
Emunire toros. --
They lie (says Plato to the Comoedian in Athen. 2.) (...), etc. The Purple of
the Ancients was taken out of a kind of Shellfish called Purpura; where it was
found in a white vein running through the middle of the mouth, which was cut
out and boiled; and the blood used afterward in Dying, produced the color
Nigrantis rosae sublucentem, which Pliny witnesses to be the true Purple,
though there were other sorts too of it, as the color of Violet, Hyacinth,
etc. Of this Invention now totally lost, see Plin. l. 9. c. 38. and
Pancirollus. The greatest Fishing for these Purples was at Tire, and there was
the greatest manufacture and Trade of Purple; there likewise was the invention
of it, which is attributed to Hercules Tyrius, who walking upon the shore, saw
his Dog bite one of those Fishes, and found his mouth all stained with that
excellent color, which gave him the first hint of teaching the Tyrians how to
Dye with it: From whence this color is called in Greek (...), Aristot. quasi
(...), the work of the sea; and Plato in Tim. defines (...) to be Red mingled
with White and Black.

27. So Aeneas in the 1. Aen. finds the story of all the Trojan War painted
upon the walls of Juno's Temple at Carthage. I choose here the history of Lot,
because the Moabites descended from him.

28. Chedor-laomer, who according to the general opinion, was King of Persia,
but to me it seems altogether improbable that the King of Persia should come so
far, and join with so many Princes to make a war upon those five little Kings,
whose whole Territories were scarce so big as the least shire in England, and
whose very names are unlikely to have been heard of then, so far as Persia.
Besides Persia was not then the chief Eastern Monarchy, but Assyria under
Ninias or Zamaeis, who succeeded Semiramis; which makes me likewise not doubt
but that they are mistaken too, who take Amraphel King of Shinaar, which is
interpreted Babylonia, for the same with Ninias, since Chedor-laomer commanded
over him; a fouler error is their's, who make Arioch King of Ellasar to be the
King of Pontus, as Aquila and S. Hierome translate it; or as Tostatus, who
would have it to be the Hellespont. Stephan. de Urb. places Ellas in
Coelosyria, others on the borders of Arabia, and that this was the same with
Ellasar has much more appearance. But for my part, I am confident that Elam,
Shinaar, Ellasar and Tidal, were the names of some Cities not far distant from
Sodom and Gomorra, and their Kings such as the thirty three that Joshua drove
out of Canaan; otherwise how could Abraham have defeated them (abating
miracles) with his one family only? perhaps they were called of Elam, that is
Persia, of Shinaar, that is Babylonia, of Ellasar, that is Pontus, or rather
the other Ellas, because they were Colonies brought from those Countries; which
the fourth Kings title, of Tidal, seems to confirm; that is, of Nations;
Latin, Gentium; Symmach. (...) to wit, of a City compounded of the conflux of
people from several Nations. The Hebrew is Goijm, which Vatablus, not without
probability, takes for the proper name of a Town.

29. That he might be consumed presently after with his whole people and
Kingdom, by fire from Heaven.

30. For Fire and Brimstone is named in Scripture; as the Torment of Hell; for
which cause the Apostle Jude, v. 7. says that Sodom and Gomorra are set forth
for an example, (...), suffering the vengeance of eternal fire; So our English;
Latin, Ignis aeterni poenam sustinentes. But I wonder none have thought of
interpreting (...) adverbially; for, Instar habentes ignis aeterni. Suffering
the similitude of eternal, that is, Hell Fire. So (...) is used Arist de Mund.
(...), nay even (...), the subst* is taken sometimes in that sense, as Homer,
Ulyss. (...). (...).
For this is the Manner or fashion of Suitors. It is not improbable that this
Raining of Fire and Brimstone was nothing but extraordinary Thunders and
Lightnings; for Thunder has sulphur in it, which (Grotius) says is therefore
called (...), as it were, Divine, because it comes from above. Several profane
Authors make mention of this destruction of Sodom; as Tacitus, L 5. Histor.
Fulminum ictu arsisse, etc. and by and by, Igne coelesti flagrasse, etc

31. The blindness with which these wretches were strooken, was not a total
Blindness or Privation of their sight, but either such a sudden darkness in the
air as made them grope for the door, or a sudden failing of the sight, as when
men are ready to fall into a Trance; I blouissement; or that which the Greeks
term (...), when men see other things, but not the thing they look for. For
says S. Augustine, De Civit. Dei Lib. 22. c. 19. If they had been quite blind,
they would not have sought for the door to go into Lots house, but for guides
to conduct them back again to their own.

32. I describe her not after she was changed, but in the very act or moment of
her changing, Genesis 19. 26. Our English says, she became a Pillar of Salt,
following the Greek (...). The Latin is, Statua Salis. Some call it Cumulum;
others, Columnam. Sulpit. Sever. Reflexit oculos, statimque in molem conversa
traditur. It is pity Josephus, who says he saw the Statue himself, omitted the
description of it. Likely it is, that it retained her form. So Cyprian in
better verse then is usual among the Christian Poets, Stetit ipsa Sepulchrum,
Ipsaque Imago sibi, formam sine corpore servans.
Some with much subtlety, and some probability, understand a Pillar of Salt, to
signify only an Everlasting Pillar, of what matter soever, as Numb. 18, 19. A
Covenant of Salt. But we may very well too understand it Literally; for there
is a Mineral kind of Salt which never melts, and serves for building as well
as stone* of which Pliny speaks, l. 31 c. 7. besides, the conversion into Salt
is very proper there, where there is such abundance, mixed with Sulphur, and
which place God had* as it were, sowed with Salt, in token of eternal
barrenness, of which this Statue was set up for a Monument. The Targum of
Jerusalem is cited, to give this reason why she looked back; it says, she was a
woman of Sodom, and that made her impatient to see what became of her friends
and Country. The moral of it is very perspicuous, but well expressed by S.
August. Uxor Loath in Salem conversa magno admonuit Sacramento neminem in via
liberationis suae praeterita desiderare debere.

33. Zippor the Father of Balac, and first King of Moab mentioned in Scripture.
Some Authors, I know, name one Vaheb before him, but Zippor is the more known,
more authentical, and better sounding Name. Among the Ancients there was always
some heareditary Bowl with which they made their Libations to the Gods, and
entertained Strangers. Virg. Hic Regina gravem gemmis auroque poposcit
Implevitque mero pateram, qua Belus etc omnes
A Belo soliti --
And presently she begins to the Gods. So Stat. l. 1. Theb. Signis perfectam
auroque nitentem
Iasides pateram famulos ex more poposcit,
Qua Danaus libare Deis, seniorque Phoroneus
Assueti --
And then he adds the Stories engraven on the Bowl, which would not have been
so proper for me in this place, because of the Pictures before. Sen. Thyest.
Poculum infuso Cape Gentile Baccho. This Libation to the Gods at the beginning
of all Feasts came from the natural custom of paying the First Fruits of all
things to the Divinity by whose bounty they enjoyed them.

34. This too was an ancient custom that never failed at solemn Feasts, to have
Music there (and sometimes dancing too) which Homer calls, (...).
The Appendixes; or as Heisich interprets, (...), the Ornaments of a Feast. And
as for wise and honorable persons, there was no time of their Life less lost,
then that they spent at Table; for either they held then some profitable and
delightful discourses with Learned men, or heard some remarkable pieces of
Authors (commonly Poets) read or repeated before them; or if they were Princes,
had some eminent Poet (who was always then both a Philosopher and Musician) to
entertain them with Music and Verses, not upon slight or wanton, but the
greatest and noblest subjects. So does Iopas in Virg. Cythara crinitus Iopas
Personat aurata docuit quae maximus Atlas
Hic canit errantem Lunam Solisque labores, etc.
So does Orpheus in Apollon. 1. Argonaut. (...),
(...)
(...), etc.
So does Demodocus in Homer; though there the subject, methinks, be not so well
chosen.

35. See Athen. L. 1. c. 12. upon this matter, where among other things, he
speaks to this sense, The Poets were anciently a race of wise men, both in
learning and practice Philosophers; and therefore Agamemnon (at his expedition
for Troy) leaves a Poet with Clytemnestra, as a Guardian and Instructor to her,
who by laying before her the virtues of women, might give her impressions of
goodness and honor, and by the delightfulness of his conversation, divert her
from worser pleasures. So Aegysteus was not able to corrupt her till he had
killed her Poet. Such a one was he too who was forced to sing before Penelopes
Lovers, though he had them in detestation. And generally all Poets were then
had in especial reverence. Demodocus among the Phaeacians, sings the adultery
of Mars and Venus, not for the approving of the like actions, but to divert
that voluptuous people from such unlawful appetites, etc. The old Scholiast
upon Homer, says, 3. Odyss. (...).
Anciently Poets held the place of Philosophers. See Quintil. l. 1. c. 10.
Strab. 1. Geogr. etc.

36. By drawing up vapors from them, with which the Ancients believed that the
Stars were nourished. Virg. Polus dum sidera Pascit.

37. This was an ancient fashion among the Heathens, not unlike to our ringing
of Bells in Thunder. Iuvenal says of a loud scolding woman, that she alone was
able to relieve the Moon out of an Eclipse, Sola laboranti poter at succurrere
Lunae. This superstition took the original from an opinion, that Witches by
muttering some charms in verse, caused the Eclypses of the Moon, which they
conceived to be when the Moon (that is, the Goddess of it) was brought down
from her Sphere by the virtue of those enchantments; and therefore they made a
great noise by the beating of Brass, sounding of Trumpets, whooping and
hallowing, and the like, to drown the Witches murmurs, that the Moon might not
hear them, and so to render them ineffectual. Ovid. To quoq, Luna traho,
quamvis Temesina labores
Era tuos minuant. --
Tib. Cantus and e curru I unam diducere tentat,
Et faceret. si non era repulsa sonent.
Stat. 6. Theb. -- Attonitis quoties avellitur astris
Solis opaca soror, procul auxiliantia gentes
Era crepant.
Sen. in. Hippol. Et nuper rubuit, nullaque Iucidis
Nubes sordidior vultibus obstitit.
At nos solliciti lumine turbido
Tractam Thessalicis carminibus rati
Tinnitus dedimus.


38. The world had had this hard opinion of Comets from all ages, and not only
the vulgar, who never stay for a Cause to believe any thing, but even the
Learned, who can find no reason for it, though they search it, and yet follow
the vulgar belief. Aristotle says, Comets naturally produce Droughts by the
extraction of vapors from the earth to generate and feed them; and droughts
more certainly produce sicknesses; but his authority cannot be great concerning
the effects of Comets, who supposes them to be all Sublunary. And truly there
is no way to defend this Prediction of Comets but by making it, as God speaks
of the Rainbow, Genesis 9 the supernatural Token of a Covenant between God and
Man; for which we have no authority, and therefore might do well to have no
fear. However the ancients had, Luc. Terris mutantem regna Comettem.
Claud. Et nunquam coelo spectatum impune Cometem.
Sil. Ital. Regnorum eversor rubuit laethale Cometes.


39. For Thunder is an Exhalation hot and dry shut up in a cold and moist
Cloud, out of which striving to get forth, it kindless it self by the
agitation, and then violently breaks it.

40. Lambent fire is, A thin unctuous Exhalation made out of the Spirits of
Animals, kindled by Motion, and burning without consuming any thing but it
self. Called Lambent, from Licking over, as it were, the place it touches. It
was counted a Good Omen. Virg. describes the whole nature of it excellently in
three verses, Aen. 2. Ecce levis summo de vertice visus Iuli
Fundere lumen apex, tactuque innoxia molli
Lambere flamma comas and circum tempora pasci.


41. Fleecy Snow, Psalm. 147. He gives Snow like Wool. Pliny calls Snow
ingeniously for a Poet, but defines it ill for a Philosopher. The Foam of
Clouds when they hit one another. Aristotle defines it truly and shortly. Snow
is a Cloud congealed, and Hail Congealed Rain.

42. Genesis 49. 9 Judah is a Lions whelp; from the prey my son thou art gone up,
he stooped down, he couched as a Lion, and as an old Lion, who shall rowse him
up?

43. 1 Samuel 17. 4. And there went out a Champion out of the camp of the
Philistines, named Goliath, etc. wherein we follow the Septuagint, who render
it, (...), a Strong man: but the Latin Translation has, Et egressus est vir
spurius, a Bastard. Grotius notes, that the Hebrews called the Giants so;
because being contemners of all laws, they lived without matrimony, and
consequently their fathers were not known. It is probable he might be called
so, as being of the race of the Anakims (the remainders of which seated
themselves in Gath) by the Gather, and a Gathite by the Mothe.

44. See Turnus his shields, 7 Aen. and Aeneas his 8. Aen. with the stories
engraven on them.

45. For Baal is no other then Jupiter. Baalsemen Jupiter Olympius. But I like
not in an Hebrew story to use the Europaean names of Gods. This Baal and
Jupiter too of the Graecians, was at first taken for the Sun, which raising
vapors out of the earth, out of which the Thunder is engendered, may well be
denominated the Thunderer, (...) and Iuvans Pater fits with no God so much as
the Sun. So Plato in Phaed. interprets Jupiter; and Heliogabalus is no more but
Iupiter-Sol.

The Fable of the Giants fight with Gods, was not invented by the Graecians,
but came from the eastern people, and arose from the true story of the building
of the Tower of Babel.

46. This perhaps will be accused by some severe men for too swelling an
Hyperbole; and I should not have endured it my self, if it had not been
mitigated with the word Methought; for in a great apprehension of fear, there
is no extraordinary or extravagant species that the imagination is not capable
of forming. Sure I am, that many sayings of this kind, even without such excuse
or qualification, will be found not only in Lucan or Statius, but in the most
judicious and divine Poet himself. He calls tall young men, Patriis and
montibus aequos.
Equal to the Mountains of their Country. He says of Polyphemus, --
Graditurque per aequor
Iam medium, nec dum fluctus latera ardua tingit.
That walking in the midst of the Sea, the waves do not wet his sides. Of
Orion, -- Quam magnus Orion
Cum pedes incedit medii per maxima Nere^
Stagna viam scindens humero sup reminet undas.
Aut summis referens annosam montibus ornum,
Ingrediturque solo, and caput inter nubila condit.
And in such manner (says he) Mezentius presented himself. He says of another,
that he flung no small part of a Mountain, Haud partem exiguam Montis. Of which
Seneca, though he adds to the greatness, he does not impudently recede from
truth. One place in him occurs; for which Sen. 1. Suasor. makes that defense
which will serve better for me, -- Credas innare revulsas
Cycladas, aut montes concurrere montibus altos.
That is, speaking of great ships, but yet such as would seem very little ones
if they were near the Sovereign; you would think the Cyclades loosned from
their roots were floating, or that high Mountains encountered one another. Non
dicit hoc fieri, sed videri; propitiis auribus auditur quicquid incredibile
est, quod excusatur antequam dicitur. He does not say it Is, but Seems to be
(for so he understands Credas) and any thing, though never so improbable, is
favorably heard, if it be excused before it be spoken. Which will serve to
answer for some other places in this Poem; as, The Egyptian like an Hill
himself did rear;
Like some tall Tree upon it seemed his spear.
Like an Hill, is much more modest then Montibus aequus.

47. Because Gold is more proper for the ornaments of Peace then War.

48. Sen. in Thyest. Ieiuna silvis qualis in Gangeticis Inter juvencos Tygris
erravit duos, Utriusque praeda cupida, quo primos ferat Incerta morsus, flectit
huc rictus suos, Illo reflectit, and famem dubiam tenet. And the Spots of a
Tygre appear more plainly when it is angered. Stat. 2. Theb. Qualis ubi audito
venantum murmr Tygris
Horruit in Maculas, etc. --
Nay Virgil attributes the same marks of Passion to Dido, Sanguineam volvens
aciem, Maculisque trementes
Interfusa genas. --


49. See the like conditions of a public duel in Homer between Paris and
Menelaus; in Virgil, between Turnus and Aeneas; in Livy, between the Horatii
and Curiatii.

50. The Egyptian-Goliah; i. The Egyptian-Gyant, whom he slew only with his
Staff, and therefore at the sight of it might well be ashamed, that he durst
not now encounter with Goliath. This is that shame which Virgil calls Conscia
Virtus.

51. They were 33 but Poetry instead of the broken number, chooses the next
entire one, whether it be more or less then the truth.

52. It appears by this, that David was about 20 years old (at least) when he
slew Goliath; for else how can we imagine that the Armor and arms of Saul (who
was the tallest man in all Israel) should fit him? neither does he complain
that they were too big or heavy for him, but that he was not accustomed to the
use of them; besides he handled dexterously the sword of Goliath, and not long
after said, There is none like it. Therefore though Goliath call him Boy, and
Child, I make Saul term him Youth.

53. For the men who are so proud and confident of their own strength make that
a God to themselves, as the humane Politicians are said in Scripture to
Sacrifice to their own Nets. That is, their own Wit. Virg. of Mezent. Dextra
mihi Deus, and Telum quod missile libro. And Capaneus is of the same mind in
Statius; Illic Augur ego, and mecum quicunque parati
Insanire manu --


54. The Poets made always the Winds either to disperse the prayers that were
not to succeed, or to carry those that were. Virg. Audiit, and voti Phoebus
succedere partem
Mente dedit, partem volucres dispersit in auras.
Ovid. de Trist. Terribilisque Notus jactat mea verba, precesque
Ad quos mittuntur non sinit ire Deos.
Virg. Partem aliquam venti Divum referatis ad aures, etc.


55. i. To another Angel.

56. 1 Samuel 18. 4. And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him,
and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his Sword, and to his Bow, and
to his Girdle. Some understand this gift exclusively, as to the Sword, Bow, and
Girdle, believing those three to be the proper marks of a Soldier, or Knight;
and therefore not to be parted with. But therefore, I say, to be parted with
upon this occasion. Girdle was perhaps a mark of Military honor; for Ioab
promises to him that should kill Absalom, ten shekels of silver, and a Girdle,
2 Samuel 18. 12. But it was besides that, a necessary part of every man's dress,
when they did any work, or went abroad, their under Robe being very long and
troublesome, if not bound up. If the Sword, Bow and Girdle had not been given;
it could not have been said. And his Garments; for nothing would have been
given but the outward Robe or Mantle, which was a loose garment not exactly
fitted to their bodies (for the profession of Tailors was not so ancient, but
clothes were made by the wives, mothers and servants even of the greatest
persons) and so might serve for any size or stature.

57. 1 Samuel 18. 20. Septuagint. (...), which our English Translation follows,
but the Latin Translations vary; for some have, Dilexit autem Michol filia
Saul altera David. Michol Saul's daughter loved David. And others, Dilexit autem
David Michol filiam Saul alteram. David loved Michol Saul's daughter. To
reconcile which, I make them both love one another.

58. The Husband at the Contract gave his Espoused certain Gifts, as pledges of
the Contract. Thus Abraham's Steward in the name of Isaac gave to Rebecca Jewels
of silver, and of gold, and raiment, Genesis 24. 53. which custom the Greeks too
used, and called the presents (...). But at the day of the marriage he gave her
a Bill of Ioynture or Dowry.

59. Josephus says* Saul demanded so many Heads of the Philistines, which word
he uses instead of Foreskins to avoid the raillery of the Romans. Heads I
confess, had been a better word for my turn too, but Foreskins will serve, and
sounds more properly for a Jewish Story. Besides the other varies too much from
the Text; and many believe that Saul required Foreskins, and not Heads, that
David might not deceive him with the heads of Hebrews, instead of Philistines.

60. If it might have been allowed David to carry with him as many Soldiers as
he pleased, and so make an inroad into the Philistines Country, and kill any
hundred men he could meet with, this had been a small Dowre for a Princess, and
would not have exposed David to that hazard for which Saul chose this manner of
Ioynture. I therefore believe, that he was to kill them all with his own hands.

61. As Heavy Bodies are said to move the swifter, the nearer they approach to
the Center. Which some deny, and others give a reason for it from the Medium
through which they pass, that still presses them more and more; but the natural
Sympathetical attractive power of the Center is much received, and is consonant
to many other experiments in Nature.

62. Scandals in the sense of the new Testament, are Stumbling blocks, (...),
Stops in a man's way, at which he may fall, however they retard his course.

63. Iansenius in his explication of the Parable of the Virgins, thinks it was
the custom for the Bridegroom to go to the Brides house, and that the Virgins
came out from thence to meet him. For in that Parable there is no mention (in
the Greek though there be in the Latin) of meeting any but the Bridegroom.

Others think that Nuptials were celebrated neither in the Brides nor
Bridegrooms house, but in public houses in the Country near the City, built
on purpose for those Solemnities, which they collect out of the circumstances
of the Marriage, 1 Maccab. 9. 37. Hos. 2. 14. and Cant. 8. 5, etc. Whatever the
ordinary custom was, I am sure the ancients in great Solemnities were wont to
set up Tents on purpose in the fields for celebration of them. See the
description of that wonderful one of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus in Athen. l 5. c.
6. and perhaps Psalm. 19. 4, 5. alludes to this. He has set a Tabernacle for
the Sun, which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his chamber.

64. Habits of diverse colors were much in fashion among the Hebrews. See
Judges 5. 30. Ezekiel. 16. 10. and 26. 16. such was Joseph's coat, Genesis 37. 3.
Septuagint (...); as Homer calls Peplum Minervae, vestes Polymitae.

65. It appears by several places in Scripture, that Guirlands too were in
great use among the Jews at their feasts, and especially Nuptials, Isa. 61. 10.
The Latin reads, like a Bridegroom crowned with Guirlands. Wisd. 2. 8. Ezekiel.
16. 12. Lam. 5. 15. Eccles. 32. 1, etc.

66. I take the number of Thirty Maids, and Thirty young Men from the story of
Sampsons mariage-feast, Judge. 14 11. where Thirty Companions were sent to him,
whom I conceive to have been, (...), Children of the Bridegroom, as they are
called by S. Matthew.

67. Qualis ubi Oceani perfusus Lucifer unda,
Quem Venus ante alios astrorum diligit ignes,
Extulit os coelo sacrum, tenebrasque resolvit. Virg.
Which verses Scaliger says, are sweeter then Ambrosia. Homer led him the way.
(...) (...) and,
(...)
(...).


68. The Bride also brought a Dowre to her Husband. Raguel gave with his
daughter Sara half his goods, servants, cattle and money, Tob. 10. 10. See
Exodus 22. 17, etc.

69. The Marriage-Song was called Hillalim, Praises, and the house it self
Beth-hillula, the House of Praise, Psalm 78. 63. Their Maidens were not given
to marriage; the Chald. Paraphras. reads, Are not celebrated, with
Epithalamiums. So Arias too, and Aquila, (...).

70. See Genesis 29. 22. Tab. c. 7. Esth. 2. 18. Luke 14. 1. Judge. 14. 17. Apoc.
19. 9.

71. The custom seems to have been for the Bridegroom to carry home the Bride
to his house, 2 King 11. 27. Judge. 12. 9. Genesis 24. 67. Cant. 3. 4. but because
Micol was a Princess, and David not likely to have any Palace of his own at
that time, I chose rather to bring them to one of the Kings houses assigned to
them by the Dowre.

72. The Bride when she was delivered up to her Husband, was wont to cover
herself with a Vail (called Radid from Radad, to bear rule) in token of her
subjection, Genesis 24. 65, etc.

73. See the Parable of the Virgins, Mat. 25.

74. The time of the Mariage-feast appears clearly to have been usually seven
days. See Judge. 14. 10. and 29. 27. Fulfill her week, etc. It was a Proverb
among the Jews, Septem dies ad convivium, and Septem ad Luctum.

THE CONTENTS.
MOab carries his Guests to hunt at Nebo, in the way falls into discourse with
David, and desires to know of him the reasons of the Change of Government in
Israel, how Saul came to the Crown, and the story of Him and Jonathan. David's
Speech, containing, The state of the Commonwealth under the Judges, the Motives
for which the people desired a King; their Deputies speech to Samuel upon that
subject, and his reply. The assembling of the People at the Tabernacle to
enquire Gods pleasure. Gods Speech. The Character of Saul, his Anointing by
Samuel, and Election by Lot; the defection of his people. The war of Nahas King
of Ammon against Iabes Gilead; Saul and Ionathans relieving of the Town.
Ionathans Character, his single fight with Nahas, whom he slays, and defeats
his Army. The confirmation of Saul's Kingdom at Gilgal, and the manner of
Samuels quitting his office of Judge. The war with the Philistines at Macmas,
their strength, and the weakness of Saul's Forces, his exercising of the
Priestly function, and the judgment denounced by Samuel against him, Ionathans
discourse with his Esquire; their falling alone upon the enemies out guards at
Senes, and after upon the whole Army, the wonderful defeat of it; Saul's rash
vow, by which Jonathan is to be put to death, but is saved by the People.

Davideis, The fourth Book.
1 THough state and kind discourse thus robbed the Night
Of half her natural and more just delight,
Moab, whom Temp'erance did still vig'orous keep,
And regal cares had us'ed to mod'erate sleep,
Up with the Sun arose, and having thrice
With lifted hands bowed toward his shining rise,
And thrice to'wards Phegor, his Baals holiest Hill,
(With good and pious prayers directed ill)
Call'ed to the Chase his friends, who for him stayed;
The glad Dogs barkt, the cheerful Horses neigh'd.
Moab his Chariot mounts, drawn by four Steeds,
2 The best and noblest that fresh Zerith breeds,
3 All white as Snow, and sprightful as the Light,
With Scarlet trapt, and foaming Gold they bite.
He into it young David with him took,
Did with respect and wonder on him look
Since last nights story, and with greedier ear,
The Man, of whom so much he heard, did hear.
The well-born Youth of all his flourishing Court
March gay behind, and joyful to the sport.
Some arm'ed with Bows, some with strait Iavelines ride;
4 Rich Swords and gilded Quivers grace their side.
Midst the fair Troop David's tall Brethren rode,
5 And Ioab comely as a Fanci'ed God;
They entertained th'attentive Moab Lords,
With loose and various talk that chance affords,
Whilst they pac'ed slowly on; but the wise King
Did David's Tongue to weightier subjects bring.
Much (said the King) much I to Ioab owe,
For the fair Picture drawn by him of you.
'Twas drawn in little, but did acts express
So great, that largest Histories are less.
I see (methinks) the Gathian Monster still,
His shape last night my mindful Dreams did fill.
Strange Tyrant Saul with Envy to pursue
The praise of deeds whence his own safety grew!
I'have heard (but who can think it?) that his Son
Has his life's hazard for your friendship run;
His matchless Son, whose worth (if Fame be true)
Lifts him'above all his Countrymen but you,
With whom it makes him One; Low David bows,
But no reply Moabs swift tongue allows.
And'pray, kind Guest, whilst we ride thus (says he)
6 (To gameful Nebo still three leagues there be)
The story of your royal friend relate;
And his ungoverned Sire's imperious fate,
7 Why your great State that nameless fam'ily chose,
And by what steps to Isreal's Throne they rose.
He staid; and David thus; from Egypts Land
You'have heard, Sir, by what strong, unarmed hand
Our Fathers came; Moses their sacred Guide,
But he in sight of the Giv'en Country dy'ed. Deuteronomy. 34

His fatal promis'ed Canaan was on high;
And Joshua's I word must the active Rod supply.
It did so, and did wonders. Josh. 1. 4.

8 From sacred Jordan to the Western main,
From well-clad Lib'anus to the Southern Plain
Of naked sands, his winged Conquests went;
And thirty Kings to Hell uncrown'd he sent. Josh. 12.

Almost four hundred years from him to Saul,
9 In too much freedom past, or foreign thral.
Often Strangers Iron Scepters bruis'ed the Land
(Such still are those born by a Conquering Hand)
Often pity'ing God did well-form'd Spirits raise,
Fit for the toilsome business of their days,
To free the groaning Nation, and to give
Peace first, and then the Rules in Peace to live.
But they whose stamp of Power did chiefly ly
In Characters too fine for most men's Ey,
Graces and Gifts Divine; not painted bright
With state to awe dull minds, and force to affright,
Were ill obeyed whilst Living, and at death,
Their Rules and Pattern vanished with their breath.
The hungry Rich all near them did devour,
Their Judge was Appetite, and their Law was Power.
Not Want it self could Luxury restrain,
For what that empti'ed, Rapine filled again.
Robbery the Field, Oppression sacked the Town;
What the Swords Reaping spar'ed, was gleaned by the Gown.
At Courts, and Seats of Justice to complain,
Was to be robbed more vexingly again.
Nor was their Lust less active or less bold,
Amidst this rougher search of Blood and Gold.
Weak Beauties they corrupt, and force the strong;
The Pride of Old Men that, and this of young.
You'have heard perhaps, Sir, of lewd Gibeahs shame, Judge. 19

Which Hebrew Tongues still tremble when they name,
Alarmed all by one fair strangers Eyes,
As to a sudden War the Town does rise
Shaking and pale, half dead ere they begin
The strange and wanton Trag'edy of their sin,
All their wild Lusts they force her to sustain,
Till by shame, sorrow, weariness, and pain,
She midst their loathed, and cruel kindness dies;
Of monstrous Lust the innocent Sacrifice.
This did ('it is true) a Civil War create
(The frequent curse of our loose-govern'd State)
10 All Gibea's, and all Iabes blood it cost;
Near a whole Tribe and future Kings we lost. Judge. 20. and 21.

Firm in this general Earthquake of the Land,
How could Religion, its main pillar, stand?
Proud, and fond Man, his Fathers worship hates,
Himself, Gods Creature, his own God Creates.
Hence in each Household sev'eral Deities grew,
And when no old one pleased, they framed a New.
The only Land which serv'ed but one before,
Did the only then all Nations Gods adore.
They served their Gods at first, and soon their Kings;
Their choice of that this latter slavery brings.
Till special men arm'ed with Gods warrant broke
By justest force th'unjustly forced yoke.
All matchless persons, and thrice worthy they
Of Power more great, or Lands more apt to obey.
11 At last the Priesthood joined in Itha'mars Son, 1 Samuel 1.

12 More weight and luster to the Scepter won.
But whilst mild Ely, and good Samuel were
Busi'ed with age, and the Altars sacred care;
To their wild Sons they their high charge commit, 1 Samuel 2. 12.

Who 'expose to Scorn and Hate both them and it.
Ely's cursed House th'exemplar vengeance bears
Of all their Blood, and all sad Isra'els Tears.
His Sons abroad, Himself at home lies slain,
Israel's captiv'ed, Gods Ark and Law are taken. 1 Samuel 4.

Thus twice are Nations by ill Princes vexed,
They suffer By them first, and For them next.
Samuel succeeds; 1 Samuel 7. 6.
since Moses none before
So much of God in his bright bosom bore.
In vain our arms Philistian Tyrants seized; 1 Samuel 7.

Heav'ens Magazines he opened when he pleased.
He Rains and Winds for Auxili'aries brought, Ib. v. 10.

He mustered Flames and Thunders when he fought.
13 Thus thirty years with strong and steady hand
He held th'unshaken Balance of the Land.
At last his Sons the indulgent Father chose 1 Samuel 8. 1.

To share that State which they were born to lose.
Their hateful acts that Changes birth did have,
14 Which had long growth in the Womb of Ages past.
To this (for still where some great Periods set,
There Is a strong knot of seve'ral Causes met)
The threats concurred of a rough neighboring war;
A mighty storm long gathering from afar.
For Ammon, heightened with mixed Nations aid,
Like Torrents swollen with rain prepar'ed the land to'invade.
Samuel was old, and by his sons ill choice
Turned Dotard in the unskilful Vulgars voice.
His Sons so scorned and hated, that the Land
Nor hop'ed nor wished a Victory from their hand:
These were the just and faultless causes why
The general voice did for a Monarch cry,
But God ill grains did in this Incense smell,
Wrapped in fair Leaves he saw the Canker dwell.
A mut'inous Itch of Change, a dull Despair
Of helps divine, often prov'ed; a faithless care
Of Common Means; the pride of heart, and scorn
Of the humble-yoke under low Judges born.
They saw the state and glittering pomp which blessed
In vulgar Sense the Scepters of the East.
They saw not Powers true Source, and scorned to obey
Persons that look'ed no dreadfuller then They.
They mist Courts, Guards, a gay and num'erous train;
Our Judges, like their Laws, were rude and plain.
On an old bench of wood, her Seat of State
Beneath the well-known Palm, Wise Debo'ra sat. Judge. 4. 5.

Her Maids with comely dil'igence round her spun,
And she too, when the Pleadings there were don:
With the same Goad Samgar his Oxen drives
Which took the Sun before six hundred lives Judge 3. 31.

From his sham'ed foes; He midst his work dealt Laws;
And ost was his Plow stopped to hear a Cause.
Nor did great Gide'on his old Flail disdain, Judge. 6. 14.

After won Fields, sacked Towns, and Princes slain.
His Scepter that, and Ophras Threshing Flore
The Seat and Emblem of his Justice bore.
What should I Iair, the happiest Father, name? Judge. 10. 3.

Or mournful Iephta known no less to fame
For the most wretched? Judge. 11. 34.
Both at once did keep
The mighty Flocks of Isra'el and their Sheep.
Often from the field in have they summoned were
Some wighty foraign Embassy to hear,
They call'ed their Slaves, their Sons and Friends around,
Who all at several cares were scattered found,
They washed their feet, their only Gown put on;
And this chief work of Cer'emony was done.
These reasons, and all else that could be said,
In a ripe hour by factious Eloquence spread
Through all the Tribes, make all desire a King;
And to their Judge selected Dep'uties bring
This harsh demand; 1. Sam. 8. 3.
which Nacol for the rest
(A bold and artful Mouth) thus with much grace expressed.
We'are come, most sacred Judge, to pay the Arrears
Of much-ow'ed thanks for the bright thirty years
Of your just Reign; and at your feet to lay
All that our grateful hearts can weakly pay
In unproportion'ed words; for you alone
The not unfit Reward, who seek for none.
But when our forc-past ills we call to mind,
And sadly think how Little's left behind
Of your important Life, whose sudden date
Would disinherit th'unprovided State.
When we consider how unjust it is, you,
Who nere of Power more then the Burden knew
At once the weight of that and Age should have;
Your stooping days pressed doubly toward the grave.
When we behold by Ammons youthful rage,
Proud in the advantage of your peaceful age;
And all the united East our fall conspired;
And that your Sons, whom chiefly we desired
As Stamps of you, in your lov'ed room to place, 1 Samuel 8. 5.

By unlike acts that noble Stamp deface:
Midst these new fears and ills, we'are forc'ed to fly
To'a new, and yet unpractis'ed Remedy;
A new one, but long promis'ed and foretold,
15 By Moses, and to Abraham shown of old. Deuteronomy. 17. 4.

A Prophecy long forming in the womb
Of teeming years, and now to ripeness come.
This Remedie's a King; for this we all
With an inspired, and wantless Union call.
And in one found when all men's voices join,
The Musick's tun'ed (no doubt) by'an hand divine.
It Is God alone speaks a whole Nations voice;
That is his Public Language; but the choice
Of what Peculiar, Head that Crown must bear
From you who his Peculiar Organ are
We'expect to hear; the People shall to you
Their King, the King his Crown and People owe.
To your great name what luster will it bring
To Have been our Judge, and to have made our King!
He bowed, and ended here; 1 Samuel 8. 6.
and Samuel straight,
Pawsing a while at this great questions weight,
With a grave sigh, and with a thoughtful Ey
That more of Care then Passion did descry,
Calmly replys: You're sure the first (said he)
Of freeborn men that begged for Slaverie.
I fear, my friends, with heav'enly Manna fed,
(Our old forefathers crime) we lust for Bread.
Long since by God from Bondage drawn, I fear,
We build anew the Egyptian Brick hill here.
16 Cheat not your selves with words: 1 Samuel 8. 16. 11.
for though a King
Be the mild Name, a Tyrant is the Thing.
Let his power loose, and you shall quickly see
How wild a thing unbounded Man will be.
He Will lead you forth your hearts cheap blood to spill,
Where ere his Guidless Passion leads his Will.
Ambition, Lust, or Spleen his wars will raise,
Your Lives best price his thirst of Wealth or Praise.
Your ablest Sons for his proud Guards he will take,
And by such hands your yoke more grievous make.
Your Daughters and dear Wives he ll force away,
His Lux'ury some, and some his Lust to obey.
His idle friends your hungry toils shall eat,
Drink your rich Wines, mixed with your Blood and Sweat.
Then you will all sigh, but sighs will Treasons be;
And not your Griefs themselves, or Looks be free.
Robbed even of Hopes, when you these ills sustain,
Your watery eyes you will then turn back in vain,
On your old Judges, and perhaps on Me,
Nay ev'en my Sons, howere they'unhappy be
In your displeasure now; Not that I Would clear
Their Guilt, or mine own Innocence indear,
17 Witness the unutterable Name, there is naught
Of private ends into this question brought.
But why this yoke on your own necks to draw?
Why Man your God, and Passion made your Law?
Methinks (thus Moab interrupts him here)
The good old Seer against Kings was too severe.
It Is Ielt to tell a People that they are Free,
Who, or How many shall their Masters be
Is the sole doubt; Laws guide, but cannot reign;
And though they bind not Kings, yet they restrain.
I dare affirm (so much I trust their Love)
That no one Moabite would his speech approve.
But, pray go on. It Is true, Sir, he replies;
Yet men whom age and action renders wise,
So much great changes fear, that they believe
All evils will, which may from them arrive.
On men resolved these threats were spent in vain, 1 Samuel 8. 19.

All that his power or elo'quence could obtain.
Was to enquire Gods will ere they proceed
To'a work that would so much his blessing need.
A solemn day for this great work is set,
18 And at the Anointed Tent all Israel met Ex. 48. 9. and 30. 26.

Expect the event; Ib. v. 5, 6.
below fair bullocks fry
In hallowed flames; Ib. v. 5, 6.
above, there mounts on high
The precious clouds of Incense, and at last
The Sprinkling, Pray'ers, and all due Honors past.
19 Lo! we the Sacred Bells of the sudden hear, Exo. 39. 25. and 28.

20 And in mild pomp grave Samuel does appear.
21 His Ephod, Mitre, well-cut Diadem on, Exodus 39. 2. Ib. 8.

22 The' Orac ulous Stones on his rich Breast plate shon
Tow'ards the blew curtains of Gods holiest place
23 (The Temples bright Third Heaven) he turned his face.
Thrice bowed he, thrice the solemn Music played,
And at third rest thus the great Prophet praid:
Almighty God, to whom all men that be
Owe all they have, yet none so much as We;
Who though thou fill'st the spacious world alone,
Thy too small Court, have made this place thy Throne.
With humble Knees, and humbler Hearts, Lo, here,
Blessed Abrah'ams ^eed implores thy gracious Ear.
Hear them, great God, and thy just will inspire;
From Thee, their long-known King, they'a King desire.
Some gracious signs of thy good pleasure send,
Which, lo, with Souls resign'ed we humbly here attend.
He spoke, and thrice he bowed, and all about
Silence and reverend Honor seized the rout.
The whole Tent shakes, the Flames on the Altar by,
In thick dull rolls mount flow and heavily.
24 The Exodus 25 37. 1
seven Lamps wink; and what does most dismay,
The Orac'ulous Gems shut in their nat'ural day.
The Rubies Cheek grew pale, the Em'eraud by
Faded, a Cloud orecast the Saphirs Sky,
The Di'amonds Eye looked Sleepy, and swift night
Of all those little Suns eclypst the Light.
Sad signs of Gods dread anger for our sin,
But straight a wondrous brightness from within
Struck through the Curtains, for no earthly Cloud
Could those strong beams of heave'nly glory shroud.
The Altars fire burnt pure, and every Stone
Their radiant Parent the gay Sun outshone.
Beauty the illustrious Vision did impart
To ev'ery Face, and Joy to ev'ery heart.
In glad effects Gods presence thus appeared,
And thus in wondrous founds his Voice was heard:
This stubborn land sins still, nor is it Thee, but Us
(Who have been so long their King) they seek to cast off thus
Five hundred rolling years has this stiff Nation strove
To'exhaust the boundless stores of our unfadom'ed Love.
Be It so then; yet once more are we resolved to try
T'outweary them through all their Sins Variety.
Assemble ten days hence the num'erous people here;
To draw the Royal Lot which our hid Mark shall bear.
Dismiss them now in peace; but their next crime shall bring
Ruin without redress on Them, and on their King.
The Almighty spoke; th'astonisht people part
With various stamps impressed on every heart.
Some their demand repented, others prais'ed,
Some had no thoughts at all, but star'ed and gaz'ed.
Their dwelt a Man, nam'ed Kis in Gib'eah Town, 1 Samuel 9. 1. Ib v. 2.

For wisdom much, and much for Courage known.
More for his Son, his mighty Son was Saul,
Whom Nature, ere the Lots, to'a Throne did call.
He was much Prince, and when, or wheresoere
His birth had been, Then had he reigned and There.
Such Beauty as great Strength thinks no disgrace,
Smil'ed in the manly features of his Face.
His large black Eyes, filled with a sprightful light,
Shot forth such lively and illustrious Night,
As the Sun beams, on Iet reflecting show,
His Hair, as black, in long curled waves did flow.
His tall, strait Body amidst thousands stood,
Like some fair Pine orelooking all th'ignobler Wood.
Of all our rural sports he was the pride;
So swift, so strong, so dextrous none beside.
Rest was his Toil, Labors his Lust and Game;
No natu'ral wants could his fierce dil'igence tame,
Not Thirst, nor Hunger; he would journeys go
Through raging Heats, and take repose in Snow.
His Soul was nere unbent from weighty care;
25 But active as some Mind that turns a Sphaere.
His way once chose, he forward thrust outright,
Nor stepped aside for Dangers or Delight.
Yet was he wise all dangers to foresee;
But born to affright, and not to fear was He.
His Wit was strong; not Fine; and on his tongue
An Artless grace above all Eloq'uence hung.
These Virtues too the rich unusual dress
Of Modesty adorned and Humbleness. 1 Samuel 9. 21. Ib. 10 v. 22.

Like a clear Varnish ore fair Pictures laid,
More fresh and Lasting they the Colors made.
Till Power and violent Fortune, which did find
No stop or bound, orewhelm'd no less his Mind,
Did, Deluge-like, the natu'ral forms deface,
And brought forth unknown Monsters in their place.
Forbid it God, my Masters spots should be,
Were they not seen by all, disclos'ed by me!
But such he was; and now to Ramah went
(So God dispose'd) with a strange, low intent.
Great God! he went lost Asses to enquire, Ib. v. 8.

And a small Present his small questions hire,
Brought simply with him to that Man to give.
From whom high Heav'ens chief Gift he must receive,
Strange Play of Fate! when might'est humane things
Hang on such small, Imperceptible Strings! 1 Samuel 9. 12.

26 'Twas Samuels Birthday, a glad ann'ual feast
All Rama kept; Samuel his wondering Guest
With much respect leads to it, and does grace
27 With the choice meats of the feast' and highest place. Ib. v. 22, 23, 24.

Which done, him forth alone the Prophet brings,
And feasts his ravished ears with nobler things. Ib. v. 26.

He tells the mighty Fate to him assigned,
And with great rules fills his capacious mind. 1 Samuel 10. 1.

Then takes the sacred Viol, and does shed
28 A Crown of mystique drops around his head.
Drops of that Royal Moisture which does know
No Mixture, and disdains the place below.
Soon comes the Kingly Day, and with it brings 1 Samuel 10. 17.

29 A new Account of Time upon his wings.
The people met, the rites and prayers all past,
Behold, the Heav'en-instructed-Lot is cast.
It Is taught by heaven its way, and cannot miss;
Forth Benjamin, forth leaps the House of Cis.
As Glimm'ering stars just at the 'approach of Day,
Casheer'd by Troops, at last drop all away,
By such degrees all men's bright hopes are gone,
And, like the Sun, Saul's Lot shines all alone.
Ev'en here perhaps the peoples shout was heard,
The loud long shout when Gods fair choice appeared.
Above the whole vast throng he'appear'd so tall,
30 As if by Nature made for the Head of All.
So full of grace and state, that one might know
31 'Twas some wise Eye the blind Lot guided so.
But blind unguided Lots have more of choice
And constancy then the slight Vulgars voice.
Ere yet the Crown of sacred Oil is dry,
Whilst Echoes yet preserve the joyful cry,
Some grow enraged their own vain hopes to miss,
Some envy Saul, some scorn the house of Cis.
Some their first mut'inous wish, A King, repent,
As if, since that, quite spoiled by Gods consent.
Few to this Prince their first just duties pay;
All leave the Old, but few the New obey.
Thus changes Man, but God is constant still
To those eternal grounds, that mov'ed his Will.
And though he yielded first to them, it is fit
That stubborn Men at last to him submit.
32 As midst the Main a low small Island ies,
Assaulted round with stormy Seas and skies.
Whilst the poor heartless Natives ev'ery hour
Darkness and Noise seems ready to devour.
Such Isreal's state appear'ed, whilst ore the West
Philistian clouds hung threatening, and from The East
All Nations wrath into one Tempest joines,
Through which proud Nahas like fierce Lightning shines.
Tygris and Nile to his assistance send,
33 And waters to swollen Iabo'cs Torrent lend.
Seir, Edom, Soba, Amales add their force,
34 Up with them march the Three Arabia's Horse.
And amongst all these none more their hope or pride,
Then those few Troops your warlike land supply'ed.
Around weak Iabes this vast Host doesly, 1 Samuel 11. 1.

Disdains a dry and bloodless Victory.
The hopeless Town for Slave'ry does entreat,
But barb'arous Nahas thinks that grace too great.
He (his first Tribute) their right Eyes demands, Ib. v. 2.

35 And with their Faces shame disarms their Hands. Ver 3.

If unreliev'ed sev'en days by Isreal's aid,
This bargain for ore-rated ^ife is made.
Ah, mighty God, let thine own Israel be
Quite blind it self, ere this reproach it see!
By'his wanton people the new King forsook;
To homely rural cares himself betook. Ver. 5.

In private plenty lived without the state,
Luster and Noise due to a public fate.
Whilst he his slaves and cattle follows home,
Lo the sad Messengers from Iabes come,
Implore his help, 1 Samuel 11. 4.
and weep as if they meant
That way at least proud Nahas to prevent.
Mov'ed with a Kingly wrath his strict command, Ver. 7.

He issues forth t'assemble all the land.
He threatens high, and disobedient they
Wak'ed by such princely terrors learnt to obey. Ver. 8.

A mighty Host is raised; the important cause
Age from their Rest; Youth, from their Pleasure draws.
Armed as unfurnisht Have could them provide,
But Conduct, Courage, Anger that supply'ed.
All night they march, and are at the early dawn
On Iabes health in three fair bodies drawn
Saul did himself the first and strongest band, 1 Samuel 11. 11.

His Son the next, Abner the third command.
But pardon, Sir, if naming Saul's great Son,
I stop with him a while ere I go on.
This is that Jonathan, the Joy and Grace,
The beautifull'st, and best of Humane Race.
That Jonathan in whom does mixed remain
All that kind Mothers wishes can contain.
His Courage such as it no stop can know,
And Victory gains by' astonishing the Foe.
With Lightnings force his enemies it confounds,
And melts their Hearts, ere it the Bosom wounds.
Yet he the Conquered with such Sweetness gains,
As Captive Lovers find in Beauties Chains.
In War the adverse Troops he does assail,
Like an impet'uous storm of wind and Hail.
In Peace, like gentlest Dew that does assuage
The burning Months, and temper Syrius rage.
Kind as the Suns blessed Influence; and where ere
He comes, Plenty and Joy attend him there.
To Help seems all his Power, his Wealth to Give;
To do much Good his sole Prerogative.
And yet this gen'eral Bounty of his Mind,
That with wide arms embraces all Mankind,
Such artful Prudence does to each divide,
With diffe'rent measures all are satisfi'e.
Just as wise God his plenteous Manna dealt, Exodus 16. 18.

Some gather'ed more, but want by none was felt.
To all Relations their just rights he pays,
And worths reward above its claim does raise.
The tendrest Husband, Master, Father, Son,
And all those parts by his Friendship far outdone.
His Love to Friends no bound or rule does know,
What He to Heav'en, all that to Him they ow.
Keen as his Sword, and pointed is his Wit:
His Judgment, like best Armor, strong and fit.
And such an El'oquence to both these does join,
As makes in both Beauty and Use combine.
Through which a noble Tincture does appear
By Learning and choice Books imprinted there.
As well he knows all Times and Persons gone,
As he himself to the future shall be known.
But his chief study is Gods sacred Law;
And all his Life does Comments on it draw,
As never more by Heav'en to Man was giv'en,
So never more was paid by Man to Heav'en.
And all these Virtues were to Ripeness grown,
Ere yet his Flower of Youth was fully blown.
All Autumns store did his rich Spring adorn;
Like Trees in Par'dice he with Fruit was born.
Such is his Soul; and if, as some men tell,
36 Souls form and build those mansions where they dwell;
Whoere but sees his Body must confess,
The Architect no doubt, could be no less.
From Saul his growth and manly strength he took,
Chastis'ed by bright Ahino'ams gentler look.
Not bright Ahino'am, Beauties lowdest Name, 1 Samuel 14. 50.

Till she to'her Children lost with joy her fame,
Had sweeter strokes, Colors more fresh and fair,
More darting Eyes, or lovelier auborn Hair.
Forgive me that I thus your patience wrong,
And on this boundless subject stay so long.
Where too much have ever to end it would be,
Did not his Acts speak what is untold by Me.
Though from the time his hands a Sword could wield,
He never mist Fame and Danger in the field.
Yet this was the first day that called him forth,
Since Saul's bright Crown gave luster to his worth.
'Twas the last morning whose unchearful rise,
Sad Iabes was to view with both their Eyes.
Secure proud Nahas slept as in his Court,
And dreamt, vain man! of that days barb'arous sport
Till noise and dreadful tumults him awoke;
Till into 'his Camp our vi'olent Army broke.
The careless Guards with small resistance killed,
Slaughter the camp, and wild Confusion filled.
Nahas his fatal duty does perform,
And marches boldly up t'outface the storm.
Fierce Jonathan he meets, as he pursues
The Arabian Horse, and an hot fight renewes.
'Twas here your Troops behaved themselves so well,
Till Uz and Iathan their stout Col'onels fell.
'Twas here our Vict'ory stopped, and gave us cause
Much to suspect th'intention of her pause.
But when our thundering Prince Nahas espied,
Who with a Courage equal to his Pride
Broke through our Troops, and tow'ards him boldly pressed,
A gen'erous joy leapt in his youthful breast.
As when a wrathful Dragons dismal light
Strikes suddenly some warlike Eagles sight.
The mighty foe pleases his fearless eyes,
He claps his joyful wings, and at him flies:
With vain, though vi'olent force, their darts they flung;
In Ammons plated belt Ionathans hung,
And stopped there; Ammon did his Helmet hit,
And gliding off, bore the proud crest from it.
Straight with their Swords to the fierce shock they came,
Their Swords, their Armor, and their Eyes shot flame.
Blows strong as Thunder, thick as Rain they dealt;
Which more then They th'engag'ed Spectators felt.
In Ammon force, in Jonathan address,
(Though both were great in both to an excess)
To the well judging Eye did most appear;
Honor, and Anger in both equal were.
Two wounds our Prince receiv'ed, and Ammon three;
Which he enrag'ed to feel, and 'sham'd to see,
Did his whole strength into one blow collect;
And as a Span'el when we our aim direct
To shoot some Bird, impatiently stands by
Shaking his tail, ready with joy to fly
Just as it drops, upon the wounded prey;
So waited Death it self to bear away
The threatened Life; did glad and greedy stand
At sight of mighty Ammons lifted hand.
Our watchful Prince by bending sav'ed the wound,
But Death in other coin his reckoning found:
For whilst the immod'erate strokes miscarry'ing force
Had almost born the striker from his Horse,
A nimble thrust his active En'emy made,
'Twixt his right ribs deep pierc'ed the furious blade,
And opened wide those secret vessels, where
37 Life's Light goes out, when first they let in air.
He falls, his Armor clanks against the ground,
From his faint tongue imperfect curses found.
His amazed Troops strait cast their arms away;
Scarce fled his Soul from thence more swift then they.
As when two Kings of neighbor Hives (whom rage
And thirst of Empire in fierce wars engage,
Whilst each lays claim to the Garden as his own,
And seeks t'usurp the bord'ring flowers alone)
Their well-arm'd Troops drawn boldly forth to fight,
In th'aires wide plain dispute their doubtful right.
If by sad chance of battle either King
Fall wounded down, struck with some fatal sting,
His Armies hopes and courage with him die;
They sheath up their faint Swords, and routed fly.
On the other sides at once with like success
Into the Camp, great Saul and Abner press,
From Ion'athans part a wild mixed noise they hear,
And whatsoere it mean long to be there,
At the same instant from glad Iabes Town,
The hasty Troops march loud and cheerful down.
Some few at first with vain resistance fall,
The rest is Slaughter, and vast Conquest all.
The fate by which our Host thus far had gone,
Our Host with noble heat drove farther on.
Victorious arms through Ammons land it bore;
Ruin behind, and Terror marched before.
Where ere from Rabba's towers they cast their sight,
Smoke clouds the Day, and Flames make clear the Night.
This bright success did Saul's first action bring,
The Oil, the Lot, and Crown less crowned him King.
The Happy all men judge for Empire fit,
And none withstands where Fortune does submit.
Those who before did Gods fair choice withstand, 1 Samuel 11. 12.

The excessive Vulgar now to death demand.
But wiser Saul repealed their hasty doom; Ver. 13.

Conquest abroad, with Mercy crowned at home.
Nor stained with civil slaughter that days pride,
Which foreign blood in nobler purple dy'ed.
Again the Crown th'assembled people give, Ver. 15.

With greater joy then Saul could it receive.
Again, the old Judge resigns his sacred place, 1 Samuel 12. 1.

God Glorifi'ed with wonders his disgrace.
With decent pride, such as did well befit
The Name he kept, and that which he did quit.
The long-past row of happy years he showed,
Which to his heav'enly Government they owed.
How the torn state his just and prudent reign
Restor'ed to Order, Plenty, Power again.
In war what conqu'ering Miracles he wrought;
God, then their King, was Gen'eral when they fought.
Whom they depos'ed with him. And that (said he)
You may see God concerned in it more then Me,
Behold how storms his angry presence shrowed,
Hark how his wrath in thunder threats allowed.
'Twas now the ripen'ed Summers highest rage,
Which no faint cloud durst mediate to assuage.
The Earth hot with Thirst, and hot with Lust for Rain,
Gap'ed, and breathed feeble vapors up in vain,
Which straight were scattered, or devoured by the Sun;
When, Lo, ere scarce the active speech was done,
A vi'olent Wind rose from his secret Cave,
And troops of frighted Clouds before it drove.
Whilst with rude haste the confus'ed Tempest crowds,
Swift dreadful flames shot through th'encountring clouds.
From whose torn womb th'imprison'ed Thunder broke,
And in dire sounds the Prophets sense it spoke.
Such an impet'uous Shower it downwards sent,
As if the Waters 'bove the Firmament
Were all let loose; Horror and fearful noise)
Filled the black Scene; till the great Prophets voice
Swift as the wings of Morn, reduc'ed the Day;
Wind, Thunder, Rain and Clouds fled all at once away.
Fear not (said he) God his fierce wrath removes, 1 Samuel 12 20.

And though this State my service disapproves,
My Prayers shall serve it constantly: No more,
I hope, a pardon for past sins to'implore,
But just rewards from gracious heav'en to bring
On the good deeds of you, and of our King.
Behold him there! and as you see, rejoice
In the kind care of Gods impartial choice.
Behold his Beauty, Courage, Strength and Wit!
The Honor heav'en has clothed him with, sits fit
And comely on him; since you needs must be
Rule'd by a King, you'are happy that it is He.
Obey him gladly, and let him too know
You were not made for Him, but he for You,
And both for God.
Whose gentliest yoke if once you cast away,
In vain shall he command, and you obey.
To foreign Tyrants both shall slaves become,
Instead of King, and Subjects here at home. 1b. v. 25.

The Crown thus several ways confirm'ed to Saul,
One way was wanting yet to crown them all;
And that was Force, which only can maintain
The Power that Fortune gives, or worth does gain. 1 Samuel 13. 2.

Three thousand Guards of big, bold men he took;
Tall, terrible, and Guards ev'en with their Look;
His sacred person two, and throne defend,
The third on matchless Jonathan attend.
Ore whose full thoughts, Honor, and youthful Heat,
Sat brooding to hatch Actions good and great. Ib. 3.

On Geba first, where a Philistian band
Lies, and around torments the fettered land,
He falls, and slaughters all; his noble rage
Mixed with Design his nation to engage
In that just war, which from them long in vain,
Honor and Freedoms voice had strove t'obtain.
Th'accurst Philistian roused with this bold blow, Ib. v. 5.

All the proud marks of enrag'ed Power does show.
Raises a vast, well-arm'd, and glittering Host,
If humane strength might authorize a boast,
Their Threats had reason here; for nere did we
Our selves so weak, or foe so potent see.
Here we vast bodies of their Foot espy,
The Rear out reaches far the extended Eye.
Like fields of Corn their armed Squadrons stand;
As thick and numberless they hide the land.
Here with sharp neighs the warlike Horses sound;
38 And with proud prancings beat the putrid ground.
39 Here with worse noise three thousand Chariots pass
With plates of Iron bound, or louder Brass.
About it forks, axes, and sithes, and spears,
Whole Magazines of Death each Chariot bears.
Where it breaks in, there a whole Troop it mows,
And with lopt panting-limbs the field bestrows.
Alike the Valiant, and the Cowards die;
Neither can they resist, nor can these fly. Ib. v. 5. Ver. 7.

In this proud equipage at Macmas they;
Saul in much different state at Gilgal lay.
His forces seemed no Army, but a Crowd,
Heartless, unarm'ed, disorderly, and loud.
The quick Contagion Fear ran swift through all,
And into trembling Fits the infected fall.
Saul, and his Son (for no such faint Disease
Could on their strong-complexion'd Valor seize)
In vain all parts of virtuous Conduct showed,
And on deaf Terror gen'erous words bestowed.
Thousands from thence fly scattered ev'ery day;
Thick as the Leaves that shake and drop away,
When they the approach of stormy winter find
The noble Tree all bare exposed to the' Wind.
Some to sad Jordan fly, and swim't for have,
And from his farther bank look back at last.
Some into woods and caves their cattle drive,
There with their Beasts on equal terms they live,
Nor deserve better; some in rocks on high,
The old retreats of Storks and Ravens ly.
And were they wing'ed like them, scarce would they dare
To stay, or trust their frighted safety there.
As th'Host with fear, so Saul disturbed with care, Ib. 8.

T'avert these ills by Sacrifice and Prayer,
And Gods blessed will t'enquire, for Samuel sends;
Whom he six days with troubled haste attends.
But ere the seventh unlucky day (the last
By Samuel set for this great work) was past,
Saul (alarmed hourly from the neighboring foe,
Impatient ere Gods time Gods mind to know,
'Sham'd and enrag'ed to see his Troops decay,
Jealous of an affront in Samuels stay,
Scorning that any's presence should appear
Needful besides when He himself was there.
And with a pride too nat'ural thinking Heaven
Had given him All, because much Power t had giv'en)
Himself the Sacrifice and Offring's made,
40 Himself did the high selected charge invade,
Himself inquir'ed of God; who then spoke naught;
But Samuel straight his dreadful answer brought.
For straight he came, and with a Virtue bold,
As was Saul's Sin, the fatal Message told.
His foul Ingratitude to heav'en he chid,
To pluck that Fruit which was alone forbid
To Kingly power in all that plenteous land,
Where all things else submit to his command.
And as fair Edens violated Tree,
To' Immortal Man brought in Mortality:
So shall that Crown, which God eternal meant,
From thee said he) and thy great House be rent, 1 Samuel 13. 14.

Thy Crime shall Death to all thine Honors send,
And give thy' Immortal Royalty an End.
Thus spoke the Prophet, but kind heav'en (we hope)
(Whose threats and anger know no other scope
But Man's Amendment) does long since relent,
And with Repentent Saul it self Repent.
Howere (though none more pray for this then we
Whose wrongs and sufferings might some color be
To do it less) this speech we sadly find
Still extant, and still active in his Mind.
But then a worse effect of it appeared;
Our Army which before Modestly feared,
Which did by stealth and by degrees decay,
Disbanded now, and fled in troops away.
Base Fear so bold and impudent does grow,
When an excuse and color it can show.
Six hundred only (scarce a Princely train)
Of all his Host with distressed Saul remain 1 Samuel 13 15.

Of his whole Host six hundred; and ev'en those
41 (So did wise heaven for mighty ends dispose,
Nor would that useless Multitudes should share
In that great Gift it did for One prepare)
Armed not like Soldiers marching in a war,
But country- Hinds alarmed from afar
By Wolves loud hunger, when the well-known sound
Raises the'affrighted Villages around. Ib. v. 19. 20, 21.

Some goads, flails, plow-shares, forks, or axes bore,
Made for Life's use and better ends before,
Some knotted clubs, and darts or arrows drie'd
42 I'th'fire, the first rude arts that Malice tri'ed,
Ere Man the sins of too much Knowledge knew,
And Death by long Experience witty grew.
Such were the Numbers, such the Arms which we
Had by fate left us for a Victory
Ore well-arm'ed Millions; nor will this appear
Useful it self, when Jonathan was there.
'Twas just the time when the new Ebb of Night
Did the moist world unvail to humane sight.
The Prince, who all that night the field had beat
With a small party, and no en'emy met
(So proud and so secure the en'emy lay,
And drencht in sleep th'excesses of the day)
With joy this good occasion did embrace,
With better leisure, and at nearer space,
The strength and order of there Camp to view;
Abdon alone his gen'erous purpose knew;
Abdon a bold, a brave and comely Youth,
Well-born, well bred, with Honor filled and Truth,
Abdon his faithful Squire, whom much he lov'ed,
And often with grief his worth in dangers prov'ed.
Abdon, whose love to 'his Master did exceed
What Natures Law, or Passions Power could breed,
Abdon alone did on him now attend;
His humblest Servant, and his dearest Friend. 1 Samuel 14. 1.

They went, but sacred fury as they went.
Chang'ed swiftly, and exalted his intent.
What may this be (the Prince breaks forth) I find,
God or some powerful Spirit invade my mind.
From ought but Heaven can never sure be brought
So high, so glorious, and so vast a thought.
Nor would ill Fate that meant me to surprise,
Come clothed in so unlikely a Disguise.
Yon Host, which its proud Fishes spreads so wide,
Ore the whole Land, like some swollen Rivers Tide,
Which terrible and numberless appears,
43 As the thick waves which their rough Ocean bears,
Which lies so strongly e'ncampt, that one would say
The Hill might be removed as soon as they,
We two alone must fight with and defeat;
You Are struck, and startest at a sound so great.
Yet we must do it; God our weak hands has chose
T'ashame the boasted Numbers of our Foes,
Which to his strength no more proportioned be,
Then Millions are of Hours to his Eternity.
If when their careless Guards espy us here,
With sportful scorn they call to 'us to come near, 1 Samuel 14. 9.

We'll boldly climb the Hill, and charge them all;
Not They, but Isreal's Angel gives the call.
44 He spoke, and as he spoke, a Light divine
Did from his Eyes, and round his Temples shine,
Louder his Voice, larger his Limbs appeared;
Less seemed the num'erous Army to be feared.
This saw, and heard with joy the brave Esquire,
As he with Gods, filled with his Masters Fire.
Forbid it Heav'en (said he) I should decline,
Or wish (Sir) not to make your danger mine. 1 Samuel 14. 7.

The great Example which I daily see
Of your high worth is not so lost on me;
If wonder struck I at your words appear,
My wonder yet is Innocent of Fear.
The Honor which does your Princely breast inflame,
Warms mine too, and joins there with Duties name.
If in this Act ill Fate our Tempter be,
May all the Ill it means be aimed at me.
But sure, I think, God leads, nor could you bring
So high thoughts from a less exalted Spring.
Bright signs through all your words and looks are spread,
A rising Vict'ory dawns around your head.
With such discourse blowing their sacred flame,
Lo to the fatal place and work they came.
Strongly encampt on a steep Hills large head,
Like some vast wood the mighty Host was spread. Ib. v. 4.

The' onely'access on neighboring Gabaa's side,
An hard and narrow way, which did divide
Two cliffy Rocks, Boses and Senes named,
Much for themselves, and their big strangeness famed,
More for their Fortune, and this stranger day;
On both their points Philistian out-guards lay;
From whence the two bold Spies they first espied;
And, lo! the Hebrews! proud Elcanor cried;
From Senes top; Lo; from their hungry caves
A quicker fate here sends them to their graves.
Come up (aloud he cries to them below)
Ye' Egyptian Slaves, and to our Mercy ow
The rebel lives long since to our Justice due;
Scarce from his lips the fatal Omen flew,
When th'inspir'd Prince did nimbly understand
God, and his God-like Virtues high command.
It called him up, and up the steep ascent
With pain and labor, haste and joy they went.
Elcanor laughed to see them climb, and thought
His mighty words the affrighted Suppliants brought,
Did new affronts to the great Hebrew Name,
(The barbarous!) in his wanton Fancy frame.
Short was his sport; for swift as Thunders stroke
Rives the frail trunk of some heav'en-threatning Oak,
The Princes Sword did his proud head divide;
The parted scull hung down on either side.
Just as he fell, his vengeful steel he drew
Half way; no more the trembling Joints could do,
Which Abdon snatched, and dy'ed it in the blood
Of an amazed wretch that next him stood.
Some close to earth shaking and grove'ling ly,
Like Larks when they the Tyrant Hobby spy.
Some wonder struck stand fixed; some fly, some arm
Wiloly, at th'unintelligible Alarm.
45 Like the main Channel of an high-swoln Flood,
In vain by Dikes and broken works withstood:
So Jonathan, once climbed th'opposing hill,
Does all around with noise and ruin fill.
Like some large Arm of which another way
Abdon oreflows; him too no bank can stay.
With cries the affrighted Country flies before,
Behind the following waters lowdly roar.
Twenty at least slain on this out-guard ly, 1 Samuel 14. 14.

To th'adjoyn'd Camp the rest distracted fly,
And ill mixed wonders tell, and into'it bear,
Blind terror, deaf disorder, helpless fear.
The Conqu'erors too press boldly in behind,
Doubling the wild confusions which they find.
Hamgar at first, the Prince of Ashdod Town,
46 Chief amongst the Five in riches and renown, 1 Samuel 6. 4.

And General then by course oppos'ed their way,
Till drowned in Death at Ionathans feet he lay,
And cust the Heavens for rage, and bit the ground;
47 His Life for ever spilt staind all the grass around.
His Brother too, who virtuous haste did make
His fortune to revenge, or to partake,
Falls grov'eling ore his trunck, on mother earth;
Death mixed no less their Bloods then did their birth.
Mean while the well-pleased Abdons restless Sword
Dispatched the following train to attend their Lord.
On still ore panting corpse great Jonathan led;
Hundreds before him fell, and Thousands fled.
Prodigious Prince! which does most wondrous show,
Thy' Attempt, or thy Success! thy Fate or Thou!
Who durst alone that dreadful Host assail,
With purpose not to Die, but to Prevail!
Infinite Numbers thee no more affright,
Then God, whose Unity is Infinite.
If heav'en to men such mighty thoughts would give,
What Breast but thine capacious to receive
The vast Infusion? or what Soul but Thine
Durst have believ'ed that Thought to be Divine?
Thou follow'dst Heav'en in the Design, and we
Find in the Act 'twas Heav'en that followd Thee.
Thou ledst on Angels, 1 Samuel 14. 15.
and that sacred band
(The De'ities great Lieut'enant) did command.
It Is true, Sir, and no Figure, when I say
Angels themselves fought under him that day.
Clouds with ripe Thunder charg'ed some thither drew,
And some the dire Materials brought for new.
48 Hot drops of Southern Showers (the sweats of Death)
The voice of storms and winged whirl-winds breath*
The flames shot forth from fighting Dragons Eyes*
The smoaks that from scorcht Fevers Ovens rise,
The reddest fires with which sad Comets glow;
And Sodoms neighboring Lake did spir'its bestow
Of finest Sulphur; amongst which they put
Wrath, Fury, Horror, and all mingled shut
Into a cold moist Cloud t'enflame it more;
And make the enraged Prisoner louder roar.
Th'assembled Clouds burst ore their Armies head;
Noise, Darkness, dismal Lightnings round them spread.
Another Spir'it with a more potent wand
Then that which Nature feared in Moses hand,
And rent the way that pleased, the Mountain struck;
The Mountain felt it; the vast Mountain shook.
Through the wide air another Angel flew
About their Host, and thick amongst them threw
Discord, Despair, Confusion, Fear, Mistake;
And all the Ingredients that swift ruin make.
The fertile glebe requires no time to breed;
It quickens and receives at once the Seed.
One would have thought, this dismal day to'have seen,
That Natures self in her Death-pangs had been.
Such will the face of that great hour appear;
Such the distracted Sinners conscious fear.
In vain some few strive the wild flight to stay;
In vain they threaten, and in vain they pray;
Unheard, unheeded, trodden down they ly,
Beneath the wretched feet of crowds that fly.
Ore their own Foot trampled the vi'olent Horse.
The guidless Chariots with impet'uous course
Cut wide through both; and all their bloody way
Horses, and Men, torn, bruised, and mangled lay.
Some from the Rocks cost themselves down headlong;
The faint weak Passion grows so bold and strong.
To almost certain present death they fly
From aremore and causeless fear to die.
Much diffe'rent error did some troops possess;
And Madness that looked better, though no less.
Their fellow troops for th'entred foe they take; 1 Samuel 14. 20.

And Isra'els war with mutual slaughrer make.
Mean while the King from Gabaas hill did view, Ib. v. 16.

And hear the thickning Tumult as it grew
Still great and loud; and though he knows not why
They fled, no more then they themselves that fly;
Yet by the storms and terrors of the air,
Guesses some vengeful Sp'irits are working there;
Obeys the loud occasions sacred call,
And fiercely on the trembling Host does fall.
At the same time their Slaves and Prisoners rise; Ib. 21.

Nor does their much wished Liberty suffice
Without Revenge; the scattered arms they seize;
And their proud vengeance with the memory please
Of who so lately bore them; Ib. V. 22.
All about
From Rocks and Caves the Hebrews issue out
At the glad noise; joy'd that their foes had shown
A fear that drowns the scandal of their own.
Still did the Prince midst all this storm appear,
Still scattered Deaths and Terrors every where.
Still did he break, still blunt his wearied Swords;
Still slaughter new supplies to'his hand affords.
Where troops yet stood, there still he hotly flew,
And till at last all fled, scorned to pursue.
All fled at last, but many in vain; for still
The Insatiate Conque'ror was more swift to kill
Then they to save their Lives. Till, lo* at last,
Nature, whose power he had so long surpast,
Would yield no more, but to him stronger soes,
Drought, faintness, and fierce Hunger did oppose.
Reeking all ore in dust, and blood, and sweat,
Burnt with the Suns and violent actions heat,
Against an old Oak his trembling Limbs he staid,
For some short ease; Fate in the old Oak had laid
Provisions up for his relief; and Lo!
The hollow trunck did with bright Honey flow.
With timely food his decayed Sp'irits recruit; 1 Samuel 14. 27.

Strong he returns, and fresh to the pursuit,
His strength and sp'irits the Honey did restore;
But, oh, the bitter-sweet strange poison bore!
Behold, Sir, and mark well the treach'erous fate,
That does so close on humane glories wait!
Behold the strong, and yet fantastic Net
T'ensnare triumphant Virtue darkly set!
Could it before (scarce can it since) be thought,
The Prince who had alone that morning fought
A Duel with an Host, had the Host orethrowne,
And threescore thousand hands disarmed with One;
Washed off his Countries shame, and doubly did
In Blood and Blushes the Philistian pride,
Had sav'ed and fixed his Fathers tott'ering Crown,
And the bright Gold new burnisht with renown,
Should be ere night by's King and Fathers breath,
Without a fault, vowed and condemned to death?
Destin'ed the bloody Sacrifice to be
Of Thanks Himself for his own Victory?
Alone with various fate like to become,
Fighting, an Host; Dying, an Hecatombe?
Yet such, Sir, was his case.
For Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 24.
who feared lest the full plenty might
(In the abandon'ed Camp expos'ed to sight)
His hungry men from the pursuit diswade;
A rash, but solemn vow to heav'en had made.
Cursed be the wretch, thrice cursed let him be
Who shall touch food this busy day (said he)
Whilst the blessed Sun does with his fav'ouring light
Assist our vengeful Swords against their flight.
Be he thrice cursed; and if his Life we spare,
On us those Curses fall that he should bear.
Such was the Kings rash vow; who little thought
How near to him Fate the' Application brought.
The two-edged Oath, wounds deep, performed or broke;
Eve'n Perjury its least and bluntest stroke.
'Twas his own Son, whom God and Mankind lov'ed,
His own victorious Son that he devov'ed;
On whose bright head the baleful Curses light;
But Providence, his Helmet in the fight,
Forbids their entrance or their settling there;
49 They with brute sound dissolv'ed into the air.
Him what Religion, or what vow could bind,
Unknown, unheard of, till he 'his Life did find
Entangled in it? whilst wonders he did do
Must he die now for not be'ing Prophet too?
To all but him this Oath was meant and said;
He afar off, the ends for which 'twas made
Was acting then, till faint and out of breath,
He grew half dead with toil of giving death.
What could his Crime in this condition be,
Excus'ed by Ign'orance and Necessity?
Yet the remorseless King, who did disdain
That man should hear him swear or threat in vain,
Though'gainst himself; or fate a way should see
By which attaque'd and conquered he might be.
Who thought Compassion, female weakness here,
And Equity Injustice would appear
In his own Cause; who falsely feared beside
The solemn Curse on Ion'athan did abide,
And the infected Limb not cut away,
Would like a Gangrene ore all Isra'el stray;
Prepar'ed this God-like Sacrifice to kill;
And his rash vow more rashly to fulfill.
What tongue can th'horror and amazement tell
Which on all Israel that sad moment fell?
Tamer had been their grief, fewer their tears,
Had the Philistian fate that day bin theirs.
Not Saul's proud heart could master his swollen Ey;
The Prince alone stood mild and patient by,
So bright his sufferings, so triumphant showed,
Less to the best then worst of fates he ow'ed.
A victory now he ore himself might boast;
He Conquered now that Conqu'eror of an Host.
It charmed through tears the sad Spectators sight,
Did reverence, love, and gratitude excite
And pious rage, with which inspir'ed they now
Oppose to Saul's a better public Vow.
They all consent all Israel ought to be
Accursed and killed themselves rather then He.
Thus with kind force they the glad King withstood,
And sav'ed their wondrous Saviors sacred blood. 1 Samuel 14. 45.

Thus David spoke; and much did yet remain
Behind th'attentive Prince to entertain,
Edom and Zoba's war, Ib. v. 47.
for what befell
In that of Moab, was known there too well.
The boundless quarrel with cursed Am'alecs land; 1 Samuel 15. 3.

Where Heav'en it self did Cruelty command
And practis'ed on Saul's Mercy, nor did ere
More punish Inno'cent Blood, then Pity there. Ib. v. 23.

But, Lo! they 'arriv'ed now at the appointed place;
Well-chosen and well furnished for the Chase.
NOTES UPON THE FOURTH BOOK.
1. THat is, He bowed thrice toward the Sun it self (which Worship is most
notorious to have been used all over the East) and thrice toward the chief
Temple and Image of the Sun standing upon the Hill Phegor. For I have before
declared that Baal was the Sun, and Baal Peor, a surname, from a particular
place of his worship. To which I meet with the opposition of a great person,
even our Seldom, who takes Baal Peor to be Stygian Jupiter, or Pluto (De D.
Syris Synt. j. c. 5.) building it upon the authority of the 105 (according to
our English Translation the 106) Pasl. v. 20. They joined themselves to
Baal-Peor, and eat the Sacrifices of the Dead; which Sacrifices he understands
to be Iusta, or Inferias, Offerings in memory of the Dead. Novendiales ferias.
But why by the name of the Dead may not Idols be meant? The Sacrifices of
Idols? it being usual for the Jews to give Names of reproach and contempt to
the Heathen Gods, as this very Baal-Peor they called Chemos, Ier. 48. 7. and
13, etc. that is, Blindness, in contradiction to his Idolaters, who called him
the Eye of the World? or perhaps they are called Sacrifices of the Dead, in
regard of the immolation of men to him; for Baal is the same Deity with Moloch
of the Ammonites, and had sometimes, though not so constantly, humane
Sacrifices. However, these verses will agree as well with Mr. Seldens
interpretation; for then the sense of them will be, that he bowed first to the
Sun, and next to Baal, another Deity of that Country.

2. Zerith, a place in Moab near the River Arnon.

3. White Horses were most in esteem among the Ancients; such were those
consecrated to the Sun. Herodian calls them (...), Jupiters Horses, which is
the same. This was the reason that Camillus contracted so much Envy for riding
in Triumph with white Horses as a thing Insolent and Profane, Maxim
conspectus ipse est, curru equis albis juncto urbem invectus, parumque id non
civil modo sed humanum etiam visum, Iovis Solisq equis aequiparatum Dictatorem
in religionem etiam trahebant Live. Horace, Barros ut equis praecurreret albis.
Ovid. I. de Art. Am. Quatuor in niveis aureus ibis equis.
Virg. 12: Iungit equos, gaudetque tuens ante ora frementes
Qui candore Nives anteirent curfibus auras.
In which he imitates Homer. (...).

4. Their side. Scal. l. 5. Poer. says, that none but Apollo and Diana wore
their Quivers upon their Shoulders; others, by their Sides, which he collects
out of some places in Virg. 1. Aen. of Diana, -- Illa pharetram
Fert humero, gradiensque Deas supereminet omnes.
Aen. 4. of Apollo, Yela sonant humeris.
But of a Carthaginian Virgin, Succinctam pharetra --
Yet I am afraid the observation is not solid; for Aen. 5. speaking of the
Troop of Ascanius and the Boys, he has, Pars leves humero pharetras.
However Side is a safe word.

5. (...), Like a God, is a frequent Ep there in Homer for a beautiful person.

6. Nebo was a part of the Mountain Abarim in the land of Moab; but not only
that Hill, but the Country about, and a City, was caled so too, Ier. 48. 1.
Deuteronomy. 32. 49.

7. 1 Samuel 9. 21. And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the
smallest of the Tribes of Israel; and my family the least of all the families
of the tribe of Benjamin? Wherefore then speak thou so to me?

8. Josh. 41. 4. From the wilderness and this Lebanon, even unto the great
River, the River Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great
Sea, toward the going down of the Sun, shall be your coast. This was fulfilled
all ways but Eastward, for their Dominion never reached to Euphrates; and it was
but just fulfilled to the Letter, Westward, for they had very little upon the
Mediterranean or Western Main. Their own sins were the cause, which made God
preserve for thorns in their sides those Nations which he had conditionally
promis'ed to root out. It is true, they went Eastward beyond Jordan, but that
was not much; and therefore, like an odd Number in accounts (as presently,
where I say but Thirty Kings) may be left out. Jordan is the most noble and
notorious Boundary.

9. For all the wickednesses and disorders that we read of during the time of
the Judges, are attributed in Scripture to the want of a King. And in those
days there was no King in Israel.

10. For it was the Tribe of Benjamin that was almost extirpated, from whence
Saul the first King descended. David says, Kings, as seeming to suppose that
Saul's Sons were to succeed him.

11. In Eli, who descended from Ithamar, the youngest Son of Aaron, till which
time the High Priesthood had continued in Eleazar the elder Brothers race. This
was the succession, Aaron, Eleazar, Phineas, Abisua, Bukki, Uzzi, and then Eli
of the younger house came in. In which it continued till Solomon's time.

12. The Scepter is not appropriated to Kings, but to the Supreme Magistrates,
as in the famous prophecy, Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till the Shilo come.

13. There is nothing in the whole Scripture that admits of more several
opinions then the time of Saul's and Samuels reign. This I will take in the
first place for granted, that the 40 years assigned by S. Paul (Acts 13. 20.)
to Saul, are to include Samuels Judicature; for else there would be found more
then 480 years from the departure out of Egypt, to the building of Solomon's
Temple, neither could Saul be a young man when he was elected; besides, David
would not have been born at the time when he is said to slay Goliath. We are
therefore to seek how to divide those 40 years between Samuel and Saul.
Josephus gives Saul 38 years, 18 with Samuel, and 20 after his death. Most
Chronologers (says Sulpit. Severus) 30. Ruffin. and diverse others 20, to wit,
18 with Samuel, and two after. None of which can be true; for the Ark was
carried to Cariath-jearim before Saul's reign, and at the end of 20 years was
removed from thence by David to Jerusalem; wherefore Salianus allows Saul 18
years, Calvisius 15, Petavius 12. some 11. Bucolcer 10. Others make Saul to
have reigned but two years, and these considerable Authors, as Arias Montan.
Mercator, Adricom. etc. grounding it upon a Text of Scripture, 1 Samuel 13. 1.
Filius unius anni erat Saul, cuum regnare coepisset, and duobus annis regnavit
super Israel; which others understand to be three years, to wit, two after the
first. Sulpit. Sever. indefinitely, parvo admodum spacio tenuit imperium; which
opinion seems to me extremely improbable: 1. Because cannot well crowd all
Saul's actions into so small a time. 2. Because we David must then have been
about 29 years old when he slew Goliath; for he began to reign at Hebron at 30.
3. Because it is hard, if that be true, to make up the 20 years that the Ark
abode at Cariath-jearim. 4. The Text whereon this is built, does not import it;
for it signifies no more, then that he had reigned one year before his
confirmation at Gilgal, and two when he chose himself Guards. Our Translation
has, Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel, he
chose him 3000 men, etc. To determine punctually how long he reigned, is
impossible; but I should ghess about 10 years, which his actions will well
require, and David will be a little above 20 years old (a fit age) when he
defeated the Giant, and the 20 years of the Arks abiding at Cariath-jearim will
be handsomely made up, to wit, three years before Saul's anointing, and 10
during his Government, and seven whilst David was King at Hebron. So that of
the 40 assigned by the Apostle to Samuel and Saul, there will remain 30 years
for the Government of Samuel.

14. For first, the Israelites knew they were to be governed at last by Kings.
And secondly, they desired it by reason of the great disorders and afflictions
which they suffered for want of it; and it is plain, that this is not the first
time that they thought of this remedy; for they would have chosen Gideon King,
and annexed the Crown to his Race, and did after actually choose Abimelech.

15. See Moses his Prophecy of it, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. and to Abraham God himself
says, Genes. 17. 6. And Kings shall come out of thee.

16. It is a vile opinion of those men, and might be punished without Tyranny,
if they teach it, who hold, that the right of Kings is set down by Samuel in
this place. Neither did the people of Israel ever allow, or the Kings avow the
assumption of such a power, as appears by the story of Ahab and Naboth. Some
indeed did exercise it, but that is no more a proof of the Right, then their
Practice was of the Lawfulness of Idolatry. When Cambyses had a mind to marry
his Sister, he advised with the Magi, whether the Laws did permit it; who
answered, that they knew of no Law that did allow it, but that there was a Law
which allowed the King of Persia to do what he would. If this had been the case
with the Kings of Israel, to what purpose were they enjoined so strictly the
perpetual reading, perusing, and observing of the Law ( Deuteronomy. 17.) if they had
another particular Law that exempted them from being bound to it?

17. The Tetragrammaton, which was held in such reverence among the Jews, that
it was unlawful to pronounce it. It was called therefore (...), Unutterable.
For it they read Adonai; the reason of the peculiar Sanctity of this Name, is,
because other names of God were applyable to other things, as Elohim, to
Princes; but this name Jehovah, or Iave, or Iai (for it is now grown
unutterable, in that no body knows how to pronounce it) was not participated to
any other thing. Wherefore God says, Exodus 3. 16. This is my name for ever, and
this is my memorial to all generations. And Exodus 6. 3. But by my name Jehovah
was I not know unto them. Josephus calls this Tetragrammaton, (...), The Sacred
Letters; and, (...) A name of which it is not Lawful for me to speak; and
again, (...), The Dreadful Name of God. Stat. Triplicis mundi summum, quem
Scire Nefastum est.
Whose name it is not lawful to know.
And Philo relating how Caligula used him and his fellow Ambassadors from the
Jews. You (said Caligula to them) are Enemies to the Gods, and will not
acknowledge me to be One* who am received for such by all the rest of the
world: but by the God that you dare not name ((...)) and then lifting up his
hands to heaven, he spoke out the Word, which it is not lawful so much as to
hear, etc. And the Heathens had something like this custom; for the Romans kept
secret the name of the Tutelar God of their City; lest the enemies, if they
knew how to call him right, might by charms draw him away. And in their Solemn
Evocation of Gods from the Cities which they besieged, for fear lest they
should mistake the Deities proper name, they added always, Sive quo alio nomine
voceris.

18. The Tabernacle, Exodus 39. 9. And thou shall take the anointing oil, and
anoint the Tabernacle, and all that is therein; and shall hallow it, and the
vessels therein; and it shall be holy.

19. The Bells upon the Highpriests Garments, Exodus 38. 25.

20. There want not Authors, and those no slight ones, who maintain that
Samuel was High Priest as well as Judge; as S. Augustine, and Sulpit. Severus,
who says, Admodum senex sacerdotio functus refertur. And some make him to have
succeeded Eli, others Achitoh. But this is a manifest error, for he was not so
much as a Priest, but only a Levite; of the Race of Isahar, the younger Brother
of Amram, from whom Aaron came, and all the succession of Priests, 1 Chronic.
6. It will be therefore asked, Why I make him here perform the office of the
High Priest, and dress him in the Pontifical Habits? for the first, it is plain
by the story that he did often do the duties of the High Priest, as here, and
when Saul was appointed to stay for his coming to celebrate the Sacrifice, etc.
For the latter, I know not why he might not as well wear the Habit, as exercise
the function; nay, I believe the function could not be well exercised without
the habit. I say therefore with Petavius, L. 10. de Doctr. Tempor. That he was
constituted of God, High Priest Extraordinary, and looked upon as such by reason
of the extraordinary visible marks of Sanctity, Prophecy, and Miracles,
without which singular testimonies from God we know that in latter times there
were often two at once, who did execute the Highpriests Office, as Annas and
Caiphas.

21. Well-cut Diadem: i. The Plate of pure Gold tied upon the Mitre, on which
was engraven, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28. 36. and Exodus 39.

22. This Breast Plate is called by the Septuagint, (...), The Oracle of
Judgments: Because whenever the High Priest consulted God, he was to have it
upon his Breast. The Description of it, and the stones in it, see Exodus 28. 15.
These stones so engraven, and disposed as God appointed, I conceive to be the
Urim and Thummim mentioned Verse 30. the Doctrina and Veritas, as the Latin;
the (...), Light and Perfection, as Aquila; the (...), Truth and Demonstration,
as the Septituagint: All which signify no more then Truth and Manifestation,
or, the Manifestation of Truth by those Stones; which some say, was by the
shining of those particular Letters in the Names of the Tribes, that made up
some words or word to answer the question propounded. Others, that when the
stones shone very brightly, it employed an Affirmative to the question; and when
they looked dimly and cloudily, a Negative. But when the Demands required a
prolix, or various answer, that was either given by Illumination of the
Highpriests understanding, making him speak as Gods Organ or Oracle (as the
Devil is believed to have inspired his Sybils and Pythian Priests) or by an
audible voice from within the Sanctum Sanctorum; which latter way I take here,
as most proper for Roetry.

23. The Tabernacle is called a Temple, 1 Samuel 1. 9. 2 Samuel 22. 7. Psalm 18. 3.
Josephus terms it (...), A Moveable Temple -- The Temples bright third Heaven
-- The Tabernacle being Gods seat upon earth, was made to Figure out the
Heavens, which is more properly his habitation; and was therefore divided into
three parts, to signify the same division of the Heavens in Scripture Phrase.
The first was the Court of the Tabernacle, where the Sacrifices were slain and
consumed by fire, to represent the whole space from the earth up to the Moon
(which is called very frequently Heaven in the Bible) where all things are
subject to corruption. The second was the Sanctum, the Holy Place, wherein
stood the Altar of Incense, to represent all that space above which is possessed
by the Stars. The third was the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holiest Place, to
represent the third Heaven (spoken of by S. Paul) which is the Dewlling Place
of God, and his Cherubins or Angels. Neither did the colors of the Curtains
allude to any thing but this similitude betwixt the Tabernacle and Heaven.

24. In all times and all Countries it has been counted a certain sign of the
displeasure of the Deity to whom they sacrificed, if the Fire upon the Altar
burnt not clear and cheerfully. Seneca in Thyest. Et ipse fumus tristis ac
nebula gravis
Non rectus exit, seque in excelsum levans
Ipsos Penates nube deformi obsidet.
And a little after, Vix lucet ignis, etc.

25. According to the old senseless opinion, that the Heavens were divided into
several Orbs or Spheres, and that a particular Intelligence or Angel was
assigned to each of them, to turn it round (like a Mill-horse, as Scaliger
says) to all eternity.

26. How came it to pass that Samuel would make a solemn Sacrifice in a place
where the Tabernacle was not? which is forbid, Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Grotius answers,
first, that by reason of the several removes of the Tabernacle in those times,
men were allowed to sacrifice in several places. Secondly, that the authority
of an extraordinary Prophet was above that of the Ceremonial Law. It is not
said in the Text, that it was Samuels Birthday; but that is an innocent
addition, and was proper enough for Rama, which was the Town of Samuels usual
Residence.

27. A choice part of the meat (for we hear nothing of several Courses) namely
the Shoulder. The Left Shoulder (Grotius observes) for the right belonged to
the Priest, Levit. 7. 32. This Josephus terms (...), The Princely portion. The
men over subtle in Allusions, think this part was chosen to signify the Burden
that was then to be laid upon his shoulders. So Menochius, as Philo says that
Josephus sent a part of the Breast to Benjamin, to intimate his hearty
affection. These are pitiful little things, but the Ancients did not despise
sometimes as odd Allusions. In old time even at feasts men did not eat of
dishes in common amongst them, but every one had his Portion apart; which Plut.
calls, (...), and (...), Homerique Feasts; because Homer makes always his
Heroes to eat so, with whom the better men had always the most commons. Ajax,
(...), has a Chine of Beef, Perpetui tergum bovis. And Diomedes has both more
meat and more cups of drink set before him; of which see Athen. l. 1. c. 11.
who says likewise that (...), a Feast, comes a (...), from dividing equally,
which makes Homer call it so often, (...).

28. See Note 12. on Book 1. That Oil mixed with any other liquor, still gets
uppermost, is perhaps one of the chiefest Significancies in the Ceremony of
Anointing Kings and Priests.

29. The Kingly day. The day for election of a King, which causes a new Era,
or Beginning of Chronological accounts. As before they were wont to reckon,
From the Going out of Egypt, or From the beginning of the Government by Judges:
So now they will, From the Entrance of their Kings. Almost all great changes in
the world are used as Marks for separation of Times.

30. In many Countries it was the custom to choose their Kings for the
comeliness and majesty of their Persons; as Aristotle reports of the
Ethiopians; and Heliogabalus, though but a Boy, was chosen Emperor by the
Roman Soldiers at first sight of him, for his extraordinary beauty. Eurip.
says finely, (...), a countenance that deserved a Kingdom.

31. Aristotle says, L. 6. Pol. That it was a popular Institution to choose
Governors by Lots. But Lots left purely in the hand of Fortune would be sure a
dangerous way of Electing Kings. Here God appointed it, and therefore it was to
be supposed would look to it; and no doubt all Nations who used this custom did
it with reliance upon the care of their Gods. Priests were likewise so chosen.
Laocoon ductus Neptuni sort sacerdos.

32. This Seneca in Th. says, was the case of Ithaca. Et putat mergi sua posse
pauper
Regna Laertes Ithaca tremente.


33. Iaboc, a River, or Torrent in the Country of Ammon, that runs into the
River Arnon.

34. Arabia the Stony, Arabia the Desert, and Arabia the Happy.

35. For some conceive that the reason of this extravagant demand of Nahas, was
to disable them from shooting.

36. It was Themistius his saying, that the Soul is the Architect of her own
dwelling place. Neither can we attribute the Formation of the Body in the womb
to any thing so reasonably as to the Soul communicated in the Seed; this was
Aristotle's opinion, for he says, Semen est artifex, The Seed is a skilful
Artificer. And though we have no Authorities of this nature beyond the Grecian
time; yet it is to be supposed, that wise men in and before David's days had the
same kind of opinions and discourses in all points of Philosophy.

37. In allusion to the Lamps burning in the Sepulchers of the Ancients, and
going out as soon as ever the Sepulchers were opened and air let in. We read
not (I think) of this Invention but among the Romans. But we may well enough
believe (or at least say so in verse) that it came from the Eastern parts,
where there was so infinite expense and curiosity bestowed upon Sepulchers.
That Naas was slain in this battle, I have Josephus his authority; that
Jonathan slew him, is a stroke of Poetry.

38. In emulation of the Virgilian Verse, Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit
ungula campum.

39. The Text says, Thirty thousand Chariots; which is too many for six
thousand Horse. I have not the confidence to say Thirty thousand in Verse.
Grotius believes it should be read Three Thousand. Figures were often mistaken
in old Manuscripts, and this may be suspected in several places of our Bibles,
without any abatement of the reverence we ow to Scripture.

40. I confess I incline to believe, that it was not so much Saul's invasion of
the Priestly office, by offering up the Sacrifice himself (for in some cases
(and the case here was very extraordinary) it is probable he might have done
that) as his disobedience to Gods command by Samuel, that he should stay seven
days, which was the sin so severely punished in him. Yet I follow here the more
common opinion, as more proper for my purpose.

41. 1 Samuel 13. 10. 27. So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was
neither sword nor spear found in the hands of any of the people that were with
Saul and Jonathan; but with Saul and Jonathan his Son there were found, etc.
And before, There was no Smith throughout the land of Israel. But for all that,
it is not to be imagined, that all the people could be without arms, after
their late great victories over the Philistines and Ammonites; but that these
six hundred by Gods appointment were unarmed, for the greater manifestation of
his glory in the defeat of the enemy, by so small and so ill-provided a party;
as in the story of Gideon, God so disposed it, that but three hundred of two
and twenty thousand lapped the water out of their hands, because (says he) the
people are yet too many.

42. At first men had no other weapons but their Hands, etc. Arma antiqua,
manus, ungues, dentesq* suerunt. Then Clubs, Stipitibus duris agitur
sudibusqque praustis. And at last iron, Tum Ferri rigor, etc.
Tum variae venere arts, etc.
Hic torre armatus adusto,
Stipitis hic gravidi nodis, quod cuiqque repertum
Rimanti, telum ira facit.


43. The Mediterranean, upon the coast of which the whole Counitrey of the
Philistines lies, and contains but very few miles in breadth.

44. Hom. 6. Odyss. (...)
(...)
(...)
Vir. Lumenqque juventae
Purpureum, and laetos oculis afflarat honores.


45. Hom. 5. II. (...).
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
And in the 13. Il. there is an excellent comparison of Hector to a River, and
the like too in the 11. so that it seems he pleased himself much with the
similitude. And Virgil too liked it very well, Non sic aggeribus ruptis cum
spumeus amnis
Exiit, etc.
And in several other places.

46. 1 Samuel 6. 4. Five golden Emerods, and five golden Mice, according to the
number of the Lords of the Philistines.

47. His Blood. Moses says often, that the Soul is in the Blood, thrice in one
Chapter, Levit. 17. and he gives that reason for the Precept not to eat Blood.
Virg. Purpuream vomit ille animam.

48. See the Cyclops making of Thunder in Virg. Aen. 8.

49. Brute. That signified nothing. So Thunders from whence the ancients could
collect no Prognostications, were called Brute Thunders; From Brute Beasts,
whose founds are inarticulate.

FINIS.
DAVIDEIDOS,
LIBER PRIMVS.
Authore A. COWLEY.
BElla cano, fatique vices, Regemque potentem
Murato qui Sceptra pedo Solymaeia gessit
Rex olim Vatum; duo maxima munera coeli;
Multa prius tu'it immota discrimina mente
Et Sauli and Barathri furiis imbellibus actus.
Mu^ta quoque and regno; tam longa exercuit ira
Victorem Fortuna suum; nec pulsa quievit.
Ast illam Virtus tandem indefessa domavit
Et populos late fudit, gentesque rebels
Nequicquam numeris and magno milite saevas;
Hi Bello, hic ipso Bellorum Numine fretus!
At Tu, Iessaei qui sanguinis Author and Haeres,
Bethlemiae intacta quondam de Virgin natus,
Qui Ligno, Clavis, Hasta, omnipotentibus armis,
Ipsam (sic visum est) potu^sti occidere Mortem,
Ingentes referens per Tartara victa Triumphos,
Dum tremuit Princeps Erebi metuitque videre
Aeternum amissos divinae Lucis honores.
Qui nuncipse seeds placidi leve pondus Olympi,
Ad dextram Patris, and gaudentia Sydera calcas,
Frontem ibi (quam cinxit merito suffusa rubore
Spina ferox, carus de qua cruor undique fluxit,
Ut preti^sa humilem decoraret gemma Coronam)
Frontem illam innocuae redimitus sidere flammae,
Tu, precor o, sanctum dimitte in corda furorem,
Da mihi Iessiden Iessidae carmine magno,
Et cantu celebrare pari; tua Flamma Ministra,
Isacidum longis ductrix erroribus olim,
Dirigat audaces ignoto in limite gressus,
Producatque sacrae non trita per avia famae.
En sanctos manibus puris ut sumeret Ignes
Vestalem se Musa facit; been libera curis
Libera deliciisque jocisque and amore profano
Consecrat, ecce, tibi reliquos mea Magdalis annos*
Ecce opus hoc solidis numerorum immane Columnis,
Templum ingens statuo, varium and multa art politum.
Ingredere, o Numen, quo te plaudentibus alis
Musa vocat* sanctos Cheruborum imitata recessus.
Si facias, cedent illi Solomonia Templa,
Regis Idumaei cedent, sat tempore longo
Quae finxere sibi coluere Idola Camaenae,
Sed Tu me, Verbum aeternum, tu voce vocasti,
Et novus insolito percussus lumine Paulus,
Prodeo Musarum immensos convertere Mundos,
Et Coelum seris ignotum aperire Poetis.
Ut juvat, o, purgare suis sacra flumina monstris!
Ut vili purgare alga, caenoque profundo,
Et liquidi ingenuos Fontes inducere Very!
Iam paene obductum est Saulo sub pectore vulnus;
Integra Iesidae per tot certamina virtus
Lassatam magnis frangit successibus iram.
Assuetis superare timet concurrere Fatis,
Et famam tantae sine viribus invidet illi
Invidiae; vidit pressam sub pondere palmam,
Et jam paene suae redeuntem in viscera terrae
Mox laetum coelo caput ostentare propinquo
Ipso onere alatam, and sua brachia far sub auras*
Vidit pacatis Iordanem currere lymphis,
Dum fovet amplexu ripas, atque oscula libat,
At siquis motos posito premit objice fluctus
Et notum praecludit iter, mox colligit iras
Ore ^umens rapido, and contorquet vortice silvas,
Tum sonitu ingenti vocat ad nova praelia fluctus,
Longus pone ruit furiosae Exercitus undae.
Cum pecore ac natis montem petit inscius, amens
Pastor, and attonito decrescunt arva Colono.
Hoc metuens Saulus premit alto cord dolorem,
Et vultum induitur placidum, similemque Davidi;
Dat dextram, testemque Deum, amplexusque paternos;
Nec violaturum se sensit pignora tanta;
Nequicquam; nam quid potuit, nescivit and ipse,
Ac Dominos intus gestavit victus acerbus.
Excipiunt plausu Abramidae nova foedera laeti,
Tanta in Iessiden pietas indigna ferentem
Multa diu, and saevi reverentia tanta Tyranni.
Exultant homines, exultant agmina coeli
Sidera, sidereaeque animae; dulcissima Pacis
Nomina Iessidaeque illis; at turba Barathri
Neutrum amat; infernos Concordia nostra Tumultus
Progenerat, magnosque qu^es humana labores.
Subter ubi in matris secreta cubilia Terrae
Descendit solis virtus foecunda Mariti,
Fatalisque Auri videt incunabula flava.
( Auri quod superis simul ac caput extulit oris,
Perstringit mundum, nec vi, nec luce minori)
Subter ubi implumis nido jacet Aura profundo,
Et tener innocuo vagit cum murmr Ventus.
Subter ubi aeterna long sub mole reposti
Thesauri ingentes magnarum arcentur Aquarum,
(Oceanus Maris ipsius, quo Fluminis instar
Fertur, and omnigenas inter confunditur undas)
Nulla ubi sopitos fluctus exuscitat aura,
Nec Dominae i^ritat placidos vis improba Lunae.
Est locus immensum in spacium, immensumqque profundum
Porrectus, quem nox, genuinusque obruit horror.
Illum indefessum nullo objice me^a coercet,
Nec Loca se minus extendunt quam Te^pora poen^.
Non illum recreat dulcis tenuissima co^li
Rima, nec Eois scintilla excussa quadrigis
( Unica quae nomen potuisset far Diei)
Perstringit, solidasve valet terebrare tenebras.
Non hic gemmatis stillantia sidera guttis
^mpugnant saevae jus inviolabile Noctis,
Lucifer hoc late tenet illaetabile regnum
Inter vincla minax, inter tormenta superbus,
Ipso, quem pat^^ur, crudelior Igne Tyrannus.
Dux quondam aethereae praefulgentissimus aulae,
Qualis ubi in cu^ru procedens Hesperus aureo
Militiam aeternam stellar umque agmina ducit.
Fulmine sed c^^idit correptus, Fulminis instar
Ipse ruens, nec enim gemitum dedit ore minorem,
Ut primum sensit medios absorptus in ignes.
At comites ci^cum, conjurataeque catervae
(Ingens turba) cadunt. Aer crepat undique adustus,
Et densa nive flammarum praetexitur ether.
Ex illo aeternae solamina tristia poenae,
Aeternae socios mortales reddere poenae.
To^ti and Carnifices! Hominem tentamine primo
In se armant ipsum; magna and coelo aequa voluptas!
Quos cauta and foelix virtus s^^v aserit hamos,
Victricem bello tandem aggrediuntur aperto,
Et male tentatis succedunt Arma Venenis.
Hac vi Iessiden (neque enim corrumpere sperat)
Oppugnat furvus barathri noctisque Tyrannus,
Exacuitque animos Sauli invidiamque potentem;
Viderat egregio generosam in corpore formam,
Virgineoque maritatam cum flore virilem
Majestatem oris; miracula viderat alti
Nobiliora animi, vastamque in pectore mentem;
Viderat augusta perfusam aspergine frontem,
Divinaeque novos spirantem lucis honores.
Condideratque alto sub cord Oracula sacra
Imperium Iudae quae concessere perenne,
Venturusque Shilo stimulos subjecerat acres,
Et nimium vigiles Erebi sufflaverat ignes.
Scit miser incassum tantis se opponere rebus,
Nec validam fati perrumpere posse catenam,
Vincula sed morsu tentat, dentesque fatigat,
Et vinci certus gaudet tamen* esse rebellis.
Sed jam conversa in melius violentia Sauli,
Consiliumque dolosque and spes turbavit inanes.
Nam multum Saulo, quem longo noverat usu
Fidit, and erubuit falli fraudum ipse Magister.
Quid faciat? quo se rerum hoc in cardine verset?
Ferrati frendet ^er concusto ordine dentis,
Ter quatit iratae rugosa volumina frontis,
Ter fremit horrendum exululans, oculusque cruentus
Commixtum ardenti jaculatur sanguine lumen.
Ferrea lux terret noctem, Manesque perustos
Ignotus trepidos habet and crudelior Ignis.
Et jam vociferans; Nihil ergo possumus? inquit,
Me, me ipsum infoelix puer, and mea regna triumpho
Ducet ovans? dum vos (pudet oh!) torpetis inertes.
Innocui ludunt and adhuc per colla Cerastae?
Nil Furiis dignum and populo memorabile nostro
Quod timeat Deus, and quod vel stupeam Ipse, paratis?
Quae nova Formido, aut pejor formidine Virtus
Corda gelat? quondam (memini) fortissima corda?
Perdidi ob hoc Coelum?
Pectora tum longae percellit verbere caudae,
Iratus tantae quod non suffecerit Irae.
Deinde sedet, vultuque horrendum caetera profert.
Stant Furiae juxta, and se lumine circumspectant,
Dum late loca vasta silent, savaque quiet
Tristis nativi duplicata horroris imago est.
Ipsi flammantes insano sulphur rivi
Iam tacitis serpunt per littora conscia limphis,
Vincula nulla sonant, non Angues sibila mittunt,
Non audent inter tormenta gemiscere Sontes:
Tandem prorepit dirae foedissima turbae
Invidia; impexis crinem serpentibus atrum
It crispata; cutis multum laxata pependit,
Ossaque liquit iners, ossa aspera longo luctu*
Dipsas (monstrum atrox) latitat sub pectore anhelo,
Nocte dieque bibens nigrum insaturata cruorem,
Et ne tam crebro fontem consumeret haustu
Nocte dieque suo compensat damna veneno.
Sanguine deformatam hominum, taboque fluentem
Pallam humeris gerit, and dextra rotat alta flagellum.
Immanem laeva craterae sustinet orbem
Spumantem fell atque absynthia tetra vomentem
Quo bibit assidue, and sese ebria facta flagellat.
Hoc jam torva modo, se pro medio agmine sistit
Invidia; o barathro Furiarum maxima toto
Invidia! o nunquam, nisi cum se punit, amanda!
Sum Pater, clamat stygii Barathri, and mihi Numen,
Se puer imbellis nostros meruisse timores
Iactabit, magnoque Erebrum miscere tumultu
His Colubris, Meque and Te, nostro Principe, salvis?
Te minitante tremet perterrita fabrica mundi,
Et legum errabit Natura oblita suarum,
Te minitante dabunt rapidae responsa procellae
Et timidum horrendo resonabit fulmine coelum.
Tunc and inauratos temere Sol contrahet ignes,
Exilietque, diemque abducet limite noto.
Foedera dirumpet Pontus, supera ardua tangens,
Vicinasque undas Flammarum elementa pavescent,
Ipse Polus fixam sedem and loca jussa relinquet
Sphaerarum que hilarum cessabit lubricus orbis,
Diffugient nitidi huc illuc picta agmina coeli,
Ipse etiam Deus illorum.
Namque olim timuit certe cum sumpsimus arma
Nobilia arma, and quae meruerunt victa triumphum!
O laudanda dies! o ingens gloria nostri!
O iterum talem liceat mihi cernere lucem,
Ipse licet vincat, licet in nova tartara trudat
Et pejora istis, possint si talia fingi.
His par concurret pastor rudis and puer armis?
Quid possunt tortae stridentia verbera fundae?
Quem torvus longaque fame stimulatus and ira^
Non domuit Leo, non infandus membra Goliath,
Hunc mea vox perdet sola, and sub tartara mittet
Multa prius passum, and nequicquam Numine fisum.
Quod si Iessiden tanta pietate foveret
(Sed satis est longo notus mihi tempore) Saulus,
Quanto nos odio premimus, quantoque furore
Ante bis exactos superis ex ordine soles,
Cord novum toto long excutiemus amorem,
Ipsa, and, vos cari, fidissima turba, Colubri.
Me suadente nefas, fraterno sanguine fecit
Cainus, and aetatum dedit Omina laeta sequentum.
Vidi toto ingens connixum corpore saxum
Iactantem, fratris mortem, and monumenta sepulti.
Quis potuit risus (equidem risi ipsa) tenere
Cum sua sic primus nutriret rura Colonus?
Post eadem a tergo spirans furiale venenum,
Divisum pepuli ad ma^mor Pharaona super^um,
Currusque, clypeosque virum, ardentesque caballos,
Me gelidam mortem suadente and frigida fata,
Hauserunt avidi pestis, mentem ipsa manumque
Dathano armavi, cum tela rebellia sumpsit,
Cum Magicum (cujus nomen detestor and Ipsum)
Deseruit pulchra pro liberate Tyrannum.
Huc (vidistis enim) cava per penetralia long
Desiluit, vasto terrarum exhaustus hiatu,
Proque Rogo, nostros descendit vivus in Ignes.
Me suadente, moras quid cesso abrumpere inanes?
Quid nova non agito, dum gesta antiqua recordor?
Iam tibi, Iessides (viden'?) hic tibi sibilat anguis!
Nil tua te pietas, nil te, Puer, ipse juvabit
Cui frustra inservis, Deus; o, si, te juvet, orbis
Late omnis longa compostus pace senescat,
Nec Mores, vel Fata hominum nascantur iniqua.
Ipsa autem his merito dilectis exul ab oris
Contempta evadam in terris, miserandaque Virtus.
Dixerat, at simul ora premunt, and lumina versant,
Mox fremitus currunt obscuraque murmura circum,
Gaudentumque and mirantum; nihil illa movetur,
Sed fremit, and tantas sibi lauds invidet ipsi.
Exilit ardenti solio Rex Di^is acerbi
Amplexusque petit; subito cum mota furore
Ter submissa genu rapida fugit ocyor aura.
Murmura dant Furiae, dant sibila laeta C^lubri.
Nox erat, humanos and vasta silentia sensus
Spargebantque brevi Lethe, plumboque ligabant.
Ipsum etiam regni molem sub cord ferentem
Iactantemque graves curas sopor altus habebat
Cissiden, sopor Invidiam sed nullus habebat.
Illa per Isacidum magnas it saevior urbes,
Utque videt structas ingenti marmore turres,
Atque ebur, and fulvi discrimina clara metalli,
Pergite jam clamat, propriis tumulata ruinis
Haec ego tecta dabo, and solu lucentia flamma.
Substitit in cursu medio, ac fraena remisit
Pallida Luna, novis sudavit floridus H^rmon
Roribus, ipse Sion trepidavit vertice toto.
Iordanes latebram in ripa quaesivit utraque
Territus, and multa tandem caput abdidit alga.
Ecce domum ingreditur Sauli, quae tota tremiscit,
Ipsaque fundamenta tremunt, tremit excita tellus;
Hic veneranda senis sese convertit in ora
Benjamini, oculosque graves, vultumque severum,
Brachiaque, and latos humeros, and fortia membra
Assimilat, pendetque ingens pro pectore barba;
Qualis ubi steterat super atria celsa pala^i,
(Egregium Sculptoris opus) de marmore factus
Ad portam magni laetus vigilare nepotis:
Hac adstans Saulo notae sub imagine formae,
Formae verba sacrae non respondentia fundit.
Surge, age, Rex brevis Abramidum; sic nempe sepultu^
Omen alis fati? Somnus tibi ferreus instat
Atque aeterna quies; Si Regem rit^ vocavi,
Si nondum tua sceptra gerit Past^rculus ille.
Nondum? unqu^mne geret? vigila, and totum indue Saulum.
Nec tu, magne Deus, justi siqua est tibi cura,
(Quod dubito, meliusque irent mortalia vellem)
Dedecus hoc Saulo, atque Mihi pa^iaris inustum,
Abramidisque tuis, sacrae que in saecula genti.
O Cananaea fames! quid non me absumpseris ante
Quam femur in genus exhausis^em fertile tantum?
Heu genus infaelix nullaque in sort beatum,
Donatum magno in poenam atque opprobria Sceptro!
Coctile quid fugistis opus, Memphitica jussa,
Invito Pharaone truci, auspiciisque sinistris?
Quid magicae (infandum) virgae mare paruit ipsum,
Densatumque vias nova per divortia duxit?
Quin, si me auditis, rubri per marmora ponti,
Per nemorum errores, immanisque invia silvae,
Argillam Aegypti, lateresque requirite vestros.
Dedecus hoc quanto minus est Pastore Tyrann^?
Tune potes Domino contentus vivere Servo?
Concedent tua Sceptra Lyrae? jam sceptra supersunt
Sola tibi, titulique and regni nomen inane.
Illum aliae magna laudant formidine gentes,
Illum omnis Iudaea colit, Meministin' ovantem
(Si quicquam in te, Saul, viri est, meminisse necesse est)
Cum cantu rediisse domum, festisque choreis?
Mill viros gladio Saulus confoderit; esto;
Quis dederit letho decies totidem, arduus, audax,
Plusquam Agmen Puer? and vivit tamen ille, tui^que
Perfruitur damnis; illi tua regia servit;
Quam non illa diu Tua? jam diadema capessit,
Conscenditque tuos thalamos, Saulique potentis
Iessidae dabit haredem (pro dedecus!) Uxor.
Hoc struit, hoc sperat Samuel; talem tibi pestem
Molitur, cum dicta Dei crudelia spargit
Per populos passim, cum vana Oracula mendax
Quaeque optat, fingit; Deus est, Deus illa minatus?
Sic te tractasset Rex Divum Homin^m^ue B^alus?
Aut tam aversa suis Astarte magna fuisset?
Quid queritur? sacram te vi rapuisse coronam?
At magnae processerunt justo ordine sorts;
Neve aliter potuit (quid enim taceam?) Ipse jubere;
Non u^quam plus te Sortiive Deove fatebor
Qu^m meritis debere tuis. Quid tempore ab illo
Ipse Deus, populusque dei tibi debeat, ulli
Haud reor obscurum; tanta tu laud coronam
(O mi chare nepos, o magnae maxim gentis)
Divinum tanto cumulasti munere munus,
Nequicquam; nam quae tantis data praemia factis?
Te Puer, and Vates furiosus and omnia vorsant,
Contra Te sanguis tuus, and Natura rebellat,
Ac vanum infidi profertur nomen Amici,
(O furor, o scelus infandum!) Sceptroque Patrique!
Cui causae indormis? quae Manes suscitat ipsos;
Fixa sepulchrorum atque oculorum claustra resignat;
Nec cineres puer ille sinit dormire sepultos
Sed negat aeternae jus indubitabile Noctis:
Quid facis? aut talem quid non interficis hostem
Qui turbat vitamque tuam mortemque tuorum?
Aude, age, nil illo restat tibi triste remoto,
Solus hic objectus (seu Terrae ignobilis umbra
Ausa laboranti quae solemn avertere Lunae)
Ad te ventura and tibi debita munera coeli
Occupat, ac sacri radios intercipit ignis,
Defectum post hunc superant tibi candida fata,
Formosique dies, and vitae lucidus ordo.
Natales nos, Nate, tuos, regaliaque astra
Conscriptamque notis Fortunam vidimus aureis.
Nondum, o, nondumne ardescit tibi pectus honesto
(Ardescit certe) vindictae ac laudis amore?
Magnum aliquid pariat. Memor esto Tuique Meique:
Iamque vale, feror ad coelum sedesque tuorum,
Et luce, and nutu magni revocatus Abrami.
Dixit, and ora viri flatu percussit iniquo;
Intrat Lethalis labefactas aura medullas;
Olli vanescit dubii nubecula somni,
Huc illc fert circum, oculos; tremit inde repent
Dum simulacra videt formis volitantia mixtis,
Quae consuta male in vacuo timor a^re pingit.
Stant crines, sudor perfundit f^igidus artus,
Et toto ingentes decurrunt corpore guttae.
Iam pedibus terram, manibus jam pectora tundens
Incipit; Et verum est; oravit vera, fuique
Israelitis adhuc; pietas me stulta fefell^t,
Me Puer, and Vates furiosus and omnia vors^nt.
Sacrilega, heu, facta est patientia nostra, sepultos
Heu violat cineres, tumulosque recludit avi^os.
Octingentorum minus est Mors ipsa profunda
Annorum, quam quo torpet mea Vita veterno.
Indigno, tu sancte parens, ignosce Nepoti,
Quem propter placidas voluisti linquere seeds,
Mortalesque aegros; miserumque revisere mundum.
Sancte parens, tua justa libens mandata capescam,
Et te vincam odio, and tandem me vivere nosces.
Nec frustra hunc tantum capies, Magna Umbra, laborem.
Non Homines illum nobis, non Sidera coeli,
Non Deus eripiet.
Interea in placidas, Tu Dive, relabere seeds,
Et repete antiquam pacata mente quietem
Su^ terras, ubi Iessiden mox affore tristem
Laetus, and effuso pallentem sanguine cernes.
Post lucem hanc nostros iterum si laedat ocellos,
A Te, magne Pate^, perrumpere discat oportet
Naturae Leges, and ferrea claustra Sepulchri.
His dictis nutrit flammam stimulatque furores;
Iessides secu^us abest; illum Sopor udus
Non iam rore levi, sed plena proluit Urna,
Dormiat, and solidum accipiat per membra soporem,
Qualem animus castus, qualem men's integra dona^,
Quis metus est vigilante Deo, dormire Davidem?
Palantes nubes supra impli^itosque labores
Aetheris, atque volumen inaxtricabile Coeli,
Gau^ia sphaerarum supra and modulamina certa
Supra Orbem, qui perpetuo been pervigil igne
Exiguis Splendet Gemmis, numerumque requirit,
Est Locus immensa qui exhaustus luce fatiscit;
Hic Polus excurrit long, and se pone relinquit,
Nec proprias lassus valet ipse attingere Metas.
Igne tumet blando, and tranquillo fulgure vibrat,
Gloria nec tanto in spacio ^mmoderata tenetur.
Non hic obscuri tremebunda crepuscula Solis
Nativum jubar inficiunt castumque Serenum.
Non hic Luna suis vestitur pallida furtis,
Nec face languenti spargit per inane Tenebras,
Non hic praecipiti Tempus super orb rotatur,
Nec vaga partitur repetitis Saecula gyris
Vertigo; Nihil hic Fuit, and nihil hic* Erit unquam.
Sed constans, immotumque aeternumque sedet Nunc,
^aec domus, hoc magni sanctum penetrale Tonantis;
Hic Labor angusti, dulcis Labor Infiniti,
Occupat atque implet Coelum, sed limite coeli
Contentus nullo; Solus se continet Ipse.
Quondam immane fuit Vacuum; Sint omnia dixit;
Ille simul dixit, parent simul omnia Verbo,
Nam Verbum suit Ipse suum. Turgescere coepit
Foecundum Nihil, and plena cuncta edidit alvo.
Quis vos, O Deus, aut quis vestra palatia pandet
Tres-une!
Hic te perfrueris toto, atque has maximus arces
Plusque tuus colis, interca non deseris orbem
Quem fecisti olim nostrum, sed pondera vasta
Exagitas nutu informans molemque sequacem.
Quod si vim tacitam auferres dextramque potentem
Extemplo turbata fides ac foedera rerum,
Ipse die rector fusis nullo ordine habenis
Retro ageret currus, and mundi cardo coacti
Cum sonitu rueret, laxis discurrere stellis,
Et sine lege hominum confundere fata liceret.
Ipsa etiam rationis egens Natura pararet
In Nihilum properare suum; nam Spiritus aptum
Tornatumque exercet opus, seque addit ubique
Ni faciat subito torperent cuncta, maloque
Tota laborarent somno, aeternoque veterno.
Omnia nobiscum (qui Nos) Deu^ efficit, orsis
Non dedignatus socium se adjungere nostris.
Stant circum aurati, turma officiosa, Ministri;
Atque Dei jussa expectant, gaudentque juberi.
Hinc Domini in vultu immenso sine fine bibentes
Immortalem oculis lucem fixo ore tenentur.
Unum ex his nutu vocat ipse; silentia servat
Regia coelorum, and reverenter tota tremiscit.
Ergone tam subito excidimus? (sic infit ab alto)
Sceptra videt, nec Nos simul? imperioque potitus
Ignorant per quem steterat? credine procellas
Irrita per pontum rapuisse ferocia verba
Injustasque mina^? Surdine effecimus Aures?
Falleris, O demens, audivimus omnia, Saul,
Atque emptum optabis magno nil tale locutum.
Quae mala Iessidae intentas meliora merenti
Cuncta tui in caput unius conversa ferentur.
Diximus: an dictis nostris Gens Terra repugnet?
Ah imbelle lutum! non hoc tua Lingua referret,
Injussa in medio subsisteret icta palato,
Si tibi nota dies fieret, quo tu ipse jacebis
Gilboacos multo deformans sanguine campos,
Ipse miser, natique tui, and capita illa superba
Pendebunt Templis monumentum infame profanis,
Stultorum jocus, and ludibria saeva Deorum.
Dextera Iessidae immerito quae tanta minatur
Iusta aderit vindex, and te, te occiderit ipsum,
Quocum nunc iras atque implacabile bellum
Nequicquam geris, ille tuo lucebit in auro,
Dilectoque nimis cinget diademate frontem,
Et quod tu Solium fecisti infame piabit.
Ergo age, Iessidae insani fer dicta Tyranni;
Ipse nihil; sed enim timeat, properantior ipsam
Arcessitus eat (nam Rex arcesset) ad aulam.
Non ullum metuet, been si nos noverit, hostem.
Incolumem (dixi) qui nunc jubeo ire, reducam.
Sic ait, inflectit sese polus ipse decenter,
Nec non turba poli^ famulatrix; ocyus omnes
Interrupta iterum exercent modulamina Sphaerae,
Angelicaeque simul renovant sacra orgia Turma.
At non qui missus Iessidae Nuncius ibat;
Ille vehens pennis magnum per inane citatis,
Nubila plus solito jam candescentia tranat,
Quaque volat niveus signat vestigia limes.
Aligerum coeli sic vulnerat era fulgur,
Plurima sic primae currit strictura diei,
(Sic aut tarda magis) cum vixdum Sole relict^
Ecce simul terram ferit, atque resurgit in altum.
Vix ipsum rapidi Tempus miracula Motus
Percipit attonitum, and mensuram non habet ullam
Tam curtam, excelso sic praepes ab aethere lapsus
Nuncius astabat Iessidae, ac talia fa^ur*
Surge, bone, insanique exaudi dicta Tyranni
Aspera, nempe tuo jam mane cruore litabit;
Ipse nihil, sed enim timeas; properantior ipsam
Arcessitus eas (nam Rex arcesset) ad aulam.
Tutum (dixit enim) qui te jubet ire, reducet.
Exilit ille toris, and circum lumina versat
Nequicquam; nox undique and undiqque funditur aer.
Spesque Metusque adsunt dubii, vicibusque recursant.
Quos vario exagitans convolvit pectore, donec
Albescunt primo montana cacumina Sole,
Cum Rex Iessiden arcessit saevus, ut aegram
(Incautum specie si fallere posset honesta)
Soletur fidibus mentem, curasque soporet.
Dic mihi, Musa, sacri quae tanta potentia Versus?
(Nam tibi scire datum, and versu memorare potenti,
Cuncta vides, nec te poterit res tanta latere
In regno, Regina, tuo) vim Diva reclusam
Carminis, and late penetralia ditia pande,
Thesaurosque, and opes, and inenarrable Sceptrum*
Quae sprevere homines, tandem ut mirentur amentqque,
Divisqque accedat reverentia justa Poetis.
Ut sacri primum foecundo in pectore Vatis
Indigesta operis surgunt El^menta futuri,
Materies donec paulatim sumere formas
Incipiat, jussoque incedant ordine verba,
Ac been dispositus leni fluat agmine versus:
Talis erat Naturae olim nascentis Imago,
Sic magnum Mundi divino ex ore Poema
Prodit, artificisque informis massa supremam
Imploravit opem, longo impatienter amore.
Indociles nondum subierunt foedere Parts
Fraterno commune jugum; bellumque sine art
Gesserunt discurrentes nullo ordine Motus.
Aeterni Ratio quos tandem Musica verbi
Discrevitque locis, and vincula dulcia victis
Imposuit; Numerosque pios, facilemque tenorem
Elicuit; Medios Aer atque Unda Sonor^^
Concentu referunt muto; l^vis Ignis acutos,
Terra graves rapido Lunam diverberat ictu,
At lentam Saturni operoso pollice Chordam.
Sic celeres Motus cum tardis intertexti,
Iam festum Recti, Curvi, Longique Brevisque
Exercent Ludum, and docto discrimine plaudunt,
Ut peccent magnae vestigia nulla Chorea.
Haec est quae Menti auditur Symphonia dulcis,
Ornatu cernendam alio sese exhibet Auri,
Dives opum, varioque superba Scientia cultu,
Haec habitat vatum libris, haec carmine in isto
Harmonia est; non Cantoris, non illa Legentis
Indiget, in charta multum facunda silenti.
Haec agilis Magni percurrit corpora Mundi,
Haec Parvi toto se miscet corpore Mundi.
Totus Homo Harmonia est; omnes Symmetria census
Congerit hic, omnis Naturae Archiva tenentur.
Ipse ^horum facit Unus, and est Deus ipse Choragus.
Hinc in nos nata est Numerorum sancta potestas,
Nam simul ac portas humani corporis intrant
Inveniunt Fratresque suos, charosque Sodales
Et pariles numeros and respondentia metris
Metra suis; jungunt dextras, redduntque salutem.
Nec nos vi victos capiunt, belloque subactos,
Stant ^ives intus dilecti a partibus Hostis.
Et sese dedunt sine Proditione volentes,
Hoc rerum ingenio mira medicatus ab art
Effusus Sanguis distantia vulnera quaerit
Ignotum per iter, quamque accipit ipse falutem
Absenti gaudet gratus transmittere Fonti.
Haud aliter parili tentis conamine Chordis
Fraterno haec trepidat, cum tangitur altera, motu.
Illa suo* haec solo Naturae vivida pulsu.
Sic Lyra Iessidae, tam dulci callida furto
Aegra subintravit miseri praecorda Regis,
Placavitque aestus animi, saevosque tumultus.
Psalmus 114.
CUm sacra saevis Isacidum manus
Exiret oris, terribilem procul
Audivit, aspexitq, gentem,
Et refluum trepidavit aequor.
Ut qui sequentes antevolans fuga
Evasit hosts, stat procul arduo
De monte respectans, and omnes
Aure sonos bibit inquieta
Erexit undas sic Mare turbidum
Ut signa vidit praetereuntia,
Fluctusque pendentes utrimque
Ut Scopuli steterunt acuti.
Chrystallini non maenia lympida
Mundi figura plus stabili manent
Ex elaborato nitentum
Marmore con^olidata aquarum.
Non audet Amnis ad mare progredi,
Fontem revisit mentis inops suum.
^ato latebrosos recessus
Fons aperit, gremiumque victo.
Circum tremiscunt culmina Montium,
Mul^usque Collis Montibus adsilit,
Ut matris abscondunt sub alis
Se teneri trepidantque Pulli.
Gaudere viso fluctivagum mare,
Gaudere Flumen nobile, nec fuit
Fugisse post Montes fugaces
Mobilibus pudor ullus Undi^
Nobis nocebit nil fuga Montium,
Versi nocebit nil fuga Fluminis,
I Flumen, i formi^olosum,
Et pavidi procul ite Montes.
Aequare summis ima valet Deus.
Descent in altum plana tumescere,
Vallesque turgescent, ferentque
Attonito capita^ alta coelo:
Fontemque Flumen si repetis tuum,
Fontem refundet dura silix novum;
Nec faxa cessabunt, nec ipsae
Flumina suppeditare rupes.
Sic cecinit sanctus vates, digitosque volantes
Innumeris per fila modis trepidantia movit,
Intimaque ^licuit medici miracula plectri.
Audivere sonum, and victi cessere furores.
At non Invidiae Sauli de pectore cessit
Indomitus Serpens; vocem nihil ille salubrem.
Incantatoris nihil irrita carmina curat.
Fingit ad huc morbum, and spumas agit ore Tyrannus,
Et verum falso scelus excusare furore
Heu nimium ingratus tantae oblitusque salutis!)
Sperat, adhuc miser, and nequicquam mente recepta.
Iamque inopinatam sustollens fervidus hastam
(Quam caram sibi pro Sceptro gestare solebat)
Dentibus infrendens, oculisque immane minatus,
Pectora Iessidae crudeli destinat ictu,
Dulcia dum sacrae renovat medicamina vocis,
Nil meritus metuens've mali; volat illa per auras,
Stridens, oppositoque dat irrita vulnera muro.
Namque polo lapsus Miles coelestis ab alto
Detorsitque manu, justoque errore fefellit.
O caecas hominu^^ vires, frustraque superbas!
Arma sui dextram Domini mandataque fallunt,
Ni jubeat Deus infirmumque impellat acumen.
Vulneris ille tui jam faelicisimus error,
Tam been Gilboacis non deluderis in arvis!
Inde tuam excipiet gentem, and fatalia sceptra
Iessides, manesque tuos ea fama (sub imo
Siquid res hominum mersos Acheronte movebunt)
Semper morte nova and faecundo vulnere rodet.
Hinc Deus ipse tuas dedit illi evadere fauces
Incolumem, hinc Parcas jam fila extrema legentes
Instaurare opus, and telam producere jussit.
Ille fugam celerans vix duro elapsus ab host
Sentit adhuc; sed and arma sequi, sed and agmina credit
A tergo; creditque hastam exaudire volantem.
Nec frustra; tantos causa urget honesta timores,
Ipsaque Formido illius divina futuri est.
Nam superaccensa est fato violentia Regis,
Et quae Iessiden non fixit lancea, Saulum
Vulnerat haec ipsum; salvo jam nescit honor
Exuere insanam mentem, nec judicat esse
Regis, inexpletum crudumque relinquere crimen.
Ergo manum lectam juenum quos ipse furentes
Impulerat monitis, scelerumque incoxerat (...),
Vi, ferro, jubet incautum superare Davidem,
Erroremque suum successu abolere ne^as^o.
Sic animo Saulus, contra Deus omnia volvit.
Interea Michole Iessides multa tim^nti,
Multaque ploranti curisque decentibus aegrae,
(Namque oculis plus illa suis, plus lumine coeli
Dilexit, non ipsa minus dilecta, Maritum)
Facta refert, and parva sui discrimina lethi.
Forte super Micholes dotalia tecta, ubi and Hortus
Aethereus mita florebat (...) art,
Parvum ubi multa nemus pandebat citrea malus,
Quamque dedit ucem coeli vicinia, flavis
Reddebat pomis, ut Solu lumina Stellae;
Lenti incedebant manibusque oculisque plicatis,
Plurimaque alloquio lenibant tristia dulci.
Cum Michole (visus nam plusquam aquilinus amantum est)
Heu veniunt diri, veniunt, exterrita clamat,
Carnifices; equitum video agmen, equosq, frementes
Audio; clarescunt med^is in ^rondibus arma,
Saevaaque per densam transmittunt ^ulgura silvam.
Toll gradum citus, and propera, ^uge quolibet, inquit,
Ne morere, O Conjux; ^uge dictis ocyus; adsunt;
Quid nos, quid vinclo junxit pater ipse jugali,
Voce vocans in sacra Deum, veniamque prec^tus?
Bis centum meruisse nihil praeputia credit?
Ingratus! Sudor, sanguis, belliq labores
Dos tibi noster erant. Tum pleno uberrima font
Discurrit, vocisq, vicem pia lacryma servat.
Mox iterum; Nihil efficiet; per aperta fenestrae
Hinc te demittam incolumem; tu qua via caeca,
Arripe iter; fuge mi Conjux; non haec tibi dico
More meo, invisa est tua jam praesentia primum.
Ille refert contra; O cunctis praestantior una
Conjugibus! -- Michole dicturum plurima molli
Occupat amplexu, and raptim multa oscula turbat.
Dum lacrymas Luctus, ac gaudia miscet Amoris.
Parce, ait, incassum pretiosa effundere verba,
Aspice quanta tuae tristis vicinia mortis.
Ergo alacer paret dictis; haec callida lec^o
Iessidae Statuam, mira factam art reponit;
Iamque manus juvenum sese in penetralia fnndit
Dedignata moram sceleris, jamque ensibus ipsum
Illum ipsum exposcunt, and verba haud mollia jactant
At Michole laudanda parat mendacia contra,
Docta piam fraudem, ac dives muliebri bus armis,
Flet scinditque comas, and luctisono ululatu
Tecta replet; tum sic been ficto pectore fatur.
Quid facitis? quem vos prohibetis vivere, duri,
Huic ipsam misero mortem, and sua fata negatis?
Quaeritis exitium Iessida? parcite Vobis;
Nil opus est Scelere; ardentis vis improba morbi
Iamdudum inservit Patri, and vos esse nocentes
Non sinit; ecce illum jamdudum Lingua Oculique
Deficiunt; tantam frustra quid perditis iram?
Nec Mortem, nec Vos, nec vestros sentiet Enses.
Si vos innocui sitis urget tanta cruoris;
(Me miseram!) facite ut lubet, and satiate furorem.
Non faciet brevis hora minus; nec tempore longo
Restabo infelix; Tum lumina jussa decoro
Imbre madent, mirosque oculis dolor afflat honores.
O quem non Luctus dominaeque potentia Formae
Viribus admixtis frangent? turbaimpia discit
Credere jamprimum and miserescere; linquere moestam
Tristis and ipsa domum properat; Statua ipsa recumbit
Fasciolisque voluta caput, stratoque Sepulta
Purpureo, atque refert morientis mortua vultum.
Lugentes famuli circum tacitique ministrant,
Et medicinalis panduntur fercula pompae,
Triste ornamentum mensae; dat and art locata
Horrorem obscurum non clara lucerna cubili;
Scilicet ista favent fraudi; at super omnia Numen,
Suffudit spectantum oculos caligine sacra.
O tandem nullo foelix in crimine cessa
Virtutem imbelli frustra tentare duello,
O manibus decepte tuis, oculisque tuor^m!
Saulus, ut haec audit, Quis talia crederet, inquit?
Illum igitur bis quinque virum qui millia fudit
Illum animam segni tandem deponere letho?
Nim^rum Deus hunc fertur defendere sontem;
Sons've insons've fuat, defend at; sit precor illi
Talis membrorum modus and concordia justa
Qualis erat primis olim mortalibus ante
Quam Scelus, aut sceleris Morbi digniffima merces
Robora fregissent subito nativa veneno;
Nostrum immane odium est, totumque explere Davides
Integer haud poterit; quid se laudem addit in istam
Adjutrix Fortuna m^hi? memorabile nil est
Partita in poena. Pereuntem extinguere lucem
Quid juvat? exhaustae quid faecem emittere vitae,
Et paene attritum feriendo abrumpere filum?
Usque adeone hur^ilem mea vera and nobilis ira
Se dabit? Ah melius! solennis victima nobis
Iessidae vita est, and non nisi opima, litabit.
Nondum vindictae maturus, crescat in iram
Pinguescatque meam; tunc ipse libidine quanta
Singultantem anima multum luctante videbo,
Pugnantemque diu and producta morte cadentem?
Quid loquor? aut qu^ nunc vindictam differo seram
Cunctator?
Forsitan and pietas stulta and clementia segnis
Iuratusque meo Samuel malus hostis honori,
Quae mihi nunc fixa est, mutabunt denique mentem.
Add quod and nostrae vindex Fortuna querelae
Implicitum tenet, and fugiendi copia nulla est;
Hasta impune erret, jam saepe ferire licebit,
Et geminare ictus, totumque haurire cruorem.
Si fato oppetere, and placid a jam morte necesse est;
At videam extremos trepidanti pectore sensus
Fundentem, atque oculos optato funere pascam.
Ergo agite huc, juvenes, Iessiden sistite nobis,
Expirantem animam licet, and suprema gementem.
Iam pulchrae apparent late vestigia fraudis;
At Michole irati jussa incusare Mariti,
Crudelesque minas, and vim praetendere facto.
Saulus ut haec; viximmodica se sustinet ira,
Volventesque premit luctanti pectore curas,
Amens, and rubris suffectus lumina flammis.
Sic olim Hircanae metuenda potentia silvae
Indomitus Leo, cui rabiem jejunia longa
Addiderunt, siquem incautum procul ire juvencum
Aspcit, ille jubam quassat, dapibusque futuris
Accingit sese laetus, tum caeca viarum
Speratam si forte tegunt erroribus escam,
Deluduntque famen, torquet flammantia circum
Lumina, and irato tellurem vulnerat ungue,
Horrendumque fremens silvas rimatur opertas.
Nil opus est vento, trepidant formidine frondes,
Speluncisque feras timor abdit and urget in ipsis.
Moestus ubique horror, nemorumque silentia vasta,
Non audet turbata rugitum imitarier Echo
In medio silvae immensae quae proxima Ramam
Obtegit, illustraitque verendi nominis umbra,
Inclita sanctorum sita sunt Collegia Vatum,
Sub magnis juvenum fervens ubi turba Magistris,
Ad sacros effusa pedes didicere silentes,
Cordaque coelesti stipatunt cerea melle.
Succrescunt palmo veluti radicibus alta
Germina, rore Dei, and materno lacte repasta,
Nunc parva, haud umbras olim factura minores.
Non tam mole sua quam fundatore superbit
Grata Domus, nollet Samuelis nomine marmor
Aut mutare aurum; tantum decus addidit author.
Hanc pius extruxit Vates; modicosque and honestos
Suffecit reditus, paupertatemque decoram.
Nec sese tantum dextrae tamen illa benignae,
Quam Linguae debere putat, quae prodiga sacros
Explicuit census, magnique aeraria coeli.
Doctores illic Samuel cunctosque Prophetas
Sub pedibus laetos vidit; nec gloria tanta
Quod docu^re alios, quam quod dedicere sub illo.
Quadrata exiguis includitur area tectis;
Nam non illa Artis fabricavic inepta libido,
Sed Naturae usus, quae gaudet maxima parvo.
Intus quadratae viridis stat porticus umbrae,
Et densae Solis propellunt spicula Laurus,
Securae coeli, rapidosque ad fulguris ictus
Impavidae; in medioque argentea vena salubris
Exiliebat aquae, violatae carere nullo
Marmoris, aut tristi plangentis vincla susurro,
Sed laetae topho viridi, argu^isque lapillis.
Non minus illa tamen, corpus purgare, levare
Apta sitim, aut sacros accedere pa^per ad usus.
Hic sua cuique data est cella, and sua cuique supellex
( Lautities veterum Sanctorum and copia dives)
Sponda brevis, scamnum, necnon ex abiete eodem
Mensa tripes; portam clausissent plura volenti
Infer; antiqui pomaeria justa Necessi
Servantes, pulchreque ausi contemnere Vana.
Fallimur heu! nec magna opulentum aut plurima reddunt,
Sed forma, ac generi been respondentia vitae.
Impedit, atque onerat dominum numerosa supellex.
In parva congesta domo. Pone altera surgit
Altior, atque usu cultuque augustior aedes.
Ad latus hic laevum se pandunt Aula, Schol^que.
Bibliotheca tenet dextrum, and Synagoga, precantum
Nunquam muta choro. Stat plurima fagina mensa
Ornamentum Aulae; non invidiosa, nec impar
Pellibus instratis, quibus est circumdata, Lectis.
Accumbunt primi capitisq comaeque verendae
Doctores, Socii in gremiis jacuere recepti.
At Iuvenes infra been laeti rebus egenis
Graminibus super aggestis, ulvaque palustri
Decumbunt; Lectos, Mensasque Dapesque ministrat
Terra ferax, and Sole Coquo convivia gaudent.
Bibliotheca fuit paucis decorata libellis,
Non ^nerata malis; nondum insatiata libido
Scribendi (pestis jucunda) invaserat orbem,
Nec Medicina Arts curand is mentibus aptae
In morbum fucrant ipsae scabiemque pudendam
Conversae, quae nunc late contagia serpunt.
Scilicet hos importunos exclusit Amantes
Virgo Musa, novae gemmanti in flore juventae
Spectari pavida, and vultum velata modestum.
Nunc fugit amplexus Merctrix deperdita nullos,
Garrula, vana, procax, cultu mendica superbo,
Et populo compressa (nefas) parit horrida Monstra.
Quis furor hic tanto frustra sudare labor
Desidiam, miseroque insanae more Sibyllae
Scribere, quo volitent vacuis ludibria Ventis?
Diversas illic artesque modosque videres,
Queis brevis atque fugax Verborum Natio vitam
Exuit aeriam, and firmum sibi vindicat aevum.
Tesserulis quaedam leviter commissa caducis,
Ast alia in solido deposta fideliter aere,
Palmarum haec foliis vano mandata labor
Ni cognata Oleum praeberet Cedrus amicum.
Hic longa arboreis scribuntur carmina libris,
Tam been florenti non vixit in arbore cortex;
Illic Pictor is signata elementa videres,
Hic Textoris acu, doctaeque volumina vestis.
Illic ceratasque stilo perarante tabellas,
Ast hic membranas tenues, biblonque palustrem,
Tunc iudia, atque artis nova tentamenta futurae,
Nec non and paries perfungitur ipse Scholarum
Munere librorum; to^us describitur orbis,
Aequoreaeque viae, sparsaeque per aequora terrae,
Aetheriaeque Plagae, palantesque aethere Stellae.
Adduntur Sententiolae, monitusque vcrendi,
H^storiaeque breves; pars clara and aperta legenti,
At pars Niliacis animantum obscura figuris.
Hic sociatorum sacra Constellatio Vatum
(Quos foelix virtus evexit ad aethera, nubes
Luxuriae supra, Tempestatesque Laborum)
Dispersit late radios, tenebrasque fugavit,
Doctrinae effundens Lucem Influxumque benignum:
Astrorum Nathanus viresque viasque latentes,
Aureaque explicuit superi penetralia mundi.
Haud magico coelis deducens Sydera versu
Sobuti utrosque polos conversa luce salutat
Gaudentes; sequiturque volubilis Annus euntem.
Quam gravibus numeris argentea Scena supern^,
Procedit, quantaque coercita lege vagatur
Ipse quidem Vates, sed enim ^^l debuit Astris;
Contemnens Rivos, and Font replecus ab ipso
Materiam ingenti Mahol insectatur amore,
Per gyros, per maeandros, per caeca viarum
Venatur, sugit illa levis, premit ille ^ugacem,
Oraque vertentem, and tentantem evadere furto.
At solidas signare notas in pulvere docto
Gaddus, and aeternas gaudet turbare figuras.
Necnon and long Numeros sine fine vagantes
Producit patiens Comes; exuperabile nunquam
Tentat adire jugum, punctoque ascendit ab Uno.
Pyramidem inversam, and crescentem semper acervum,
Defunctis victura struit monumenta Seraias,
Condit aromatica prohibetque purrescere laud.
Et quos praeteriti vastum Mare Temporis annos
Absorp^it, fundo petit Urinator ab imo.
Quam celer occasus, tardumque sit incrementum
Imperiis; and quae fabricat solerria Fatum
Edocet; at Samuel divina oracula fidus
Explicat interpres; nec caecos more ferarum
Sed laetos parere homines jubet, atque scientes.
Saepe etiam abreptus mentis violen tibus a^^s,
Temporis ingreditur (...), celsa (...)
Implumesque videt nidis (...) annos.
Hae reliquaeque Arts hic excipluntur amico
Hospitio tantum; poterat sed sancta Poesis
Hoc nata atque educta loco, and regnate videri.
Non magis assiduo resonat domus aurea cantu
Angelici coeli; nullo non sp^rat ab ore
Carmen; dulcisonumque chorum moderantur Asaphu^
Hemanusque ambo genio excellent Poei^,
Voce pares liquida, digitisque, (...) ambo.
Part alia Synagoga pio pulcherrima luxu
Splendebat (nam sunt illic dispendia frugi)
Perstringunt oculos auro laquearla fulvo,
Spectantum; sed quos recreant aulaea vicissi^^
Caeruleo, sacroque color; (...) Pr^ce forti
Terque die soliti vim coelo infer volenti,
Ter^ die sanctum Mosis versare volumen,
Terque piis, totisque Deum resonantibus Hymnis,
Exercent laetam stadio ^eptemplice vocem.
Talis erat quondam, tam celso Musa volatu
Sprevit humum, generis memor, atque superb^ decenter.
Carmen e^at Deus hunc Mund^m qua voce loqa^utus;
Namque prius tenebrae diffundebantur inanes,
Immensumque Nihil, Vacuique informis hiatus.
Plenus ubi;q sui, propria ipse Palatia sedit
Omnipotens, sese contentus and Omnia Solus.
Ille autem totus Bonitas, Sapientia totus,
Totus Amor, voluit gratis producere cuncta;
Cuncta Voluntati, nondum producta gerebant
Artifici morem, and late capita alta ferebant.
Ante alia imperio citius sese extulit ingens
Immane, indigestum Aliquid; sine lumine formae,
Et sine honor jacens; ( Monogramma Exordia Mundi!)
Festinosse illud scires, dum sancta capescit
Iussa libens, rebu^que aliis praecurrere gaudet.
Hoc tamen in gremio, and nil promittente recessu,
Ditia cunctarum glomerantur semina rerum.
Emicat hinc subito lucenti vortice Flamma,
Ascenditque Polum, and multo sese implicat orb;
Olli se jungit comitem and vestigia tent at
Fusus circum Aer; Tellus onerosa gravisque
Ad Mundi medium nativo pondere se dat
Mersa mari; sed mox densae penetralia terrae
Vasta aperit Pater, and magnum descendere Pontum,
Voce jubet, penitusque cavis habitare latebris.
At timidi contra non audent hiscere fluctus,
Inque uterum terrae sine murmr delabuntur.
Convexa accendit coeli meliore metallo,
Iamque nova arcano prorumpit gloria font,
Atque implet Solemn exundans; hinc flumine vivo
Lucis inexhaustae mundum se spargit in omnem
Magnum, quo facta est, Numen studiosa refer.
Inde rudem Lunae massam, simplexque polivit
Voce opus, and radios aurato pectine compsit.
Surge, ait, and moestae regnum vigil accipe noctis;
Surrexit, traxitque sacrae vaga Syrmata lucis.
Attollunt famulas hinc atque hinc sidera taedas,
Et pulchram cingunt Dominam, and comitantur euntem:
Turget humus foecunda, and pubescentibus herbis
Miratur risumque suum, insolitosque colores.
Iamque iter aerium radunt impune volantes,
Exultantque alacres passim formidine nulla,
Nondum luxuries illis humana minata est,
Nondum laethalis modulamina rupit arundo.
Tum magnum tenui cecinerunt gutture Numen
Securae fraudum; Numen nam^, omnia laudant,
Fluctivagi P^sces, mutum genus; illius ipsi
Munus erant, Montesque maris, volventia Cete,
Quique suas parvo superant vix corpore arenas.
Inde ferae immissae silvis, coelestia jussa;
Quidnam ultra potuit; Coeli Terrae catenam,
Ipsum Hominem potuit; quo miscuit omnia in uno:
Admirandum opus, and co^pendia ditia Mundi.
Tum vero magni monitrix clementia Patris
Carmen erat, raraeque irae, fulmenque coactum,
Impia cum sacras damnassent crimina terras,
Unda ruens victrix magno sonituque ruinaque
Omnia vasta dedit; frondentia tecta volucrum
Implicuere hilares frustra, nov^ retia, pisces.
Naufragi^m passa est Natura; os Phoebus ab alto
Extulit, and solos percussit lumine fluctus.
Non tamen haec homines memori sub pectore condunt
Insani, fervetque iterum furiosa libido;
Cum subito ardescunt nubes, incendia coelo
Tetra micant, totusque in poenam excandet Olympus.
Mox Sodom as tabescentes, liquefact^que tecta
Corripuit rapidus flammanti sulphur nimbus.
Senserunt vivi membris crepitantibus ^gnem
Qui nunc aeternum miseros post funera torret.
Long alia implicuit pestis Pharaona superbum.
Cum fluctus conjurati, and commilito ventus
Auxilium Abramidis tulerant; pecus omne profundi
Miratur, Regumque sedent in curribus aureis
Regum corporibus satiati; in gurgite toto
Apparent semesi artus, natat unda cruore,
Nec Mare jam vano censetur nomine Rubrum.
Plurimus ipse etiam in carmen veniebat Abramus,
Cujus iter genti mansurum in saecula nomen
Hebraeae dedit, and Moses, Nunnique propago
Bellipotens; quantosque illi fregere Tyrannos,
Sihonem, membrisque superbum ingentibus Oggum,
Zipporidenque Hohamumque trucem, fortemque Debirum,
Quos dextra Isacidum divina potentia stravit.
Sic fragilis vitae fugientia tempora prendunt,
Pacatisque animis coelum labuntur in ipsum.
Non illos aurum perstringit fulgure sacro
Dulce malum, ignotum saeclis quibus Aurea Now^n.
Cujus nunc ergo sudore ad tartara multo
Heu non a miseris tantum effossaribus itur.
Quantum o stultorum turbam superabat avaram
Dives opum contemptus, and ingens copia mentis!
Non illos Bomby x^ pretioso sedulus ornat
Funere, nec Tyrio deformant corpora suco
Gloria, nunc animis aeternoque empta dolor,
Aura illic visa est levis, and sine pondete nomen.
Accipit ingenuum fessos durumque cubile.
Quodque been extremi iubeat meminisse sepulchri;
In medium facilis per silvam quaeritur esca,
Nec populant fluvios. crudeli, aut era ventre,
Nec crudo hesternas accusant pectore coen^s
Conturbat nunquam tali Natura (...)
Et rerum usuram expendet, sed sarte relicta.
Haec bona mundities animi est; rubigine nulla
Inficitur vitii, nitidum sic sord^ bus aevum
Deterget miseris, puroque incedit amictu.
Hinc Deus intrat agens sacro praecordia mo^u,
Nec propriam coeli praesentior incolit aedem.
Hinc alacres justo funguntur munere Sensus,
Nec titubant, revocantve, gradum Ratione magistra.
Hinc simulacra animo depingit mystica Somnus
Molliter in victos simul ac defluxit ocellos.
Transilit admisso praesentia Tempora saltu,
Aetatumque inter silvas, and amaena vireta
Ambulat, atque annos jam nunc exire parantes,
Fraenaque mordentes cernit; micat undique fati
Ordo ingens, valvaeque patent, longique recessus.
O fortunatos nimeum, and bona qui sua norunt!
O quam praecelso despectant culmine mundum!
Et nubes rerum, and jactatum turbine Saulum!
Haec domus hospitio Iessiden laeta recepit
Solantem curas, and densa pericula cantu,
At manus huc juvenum (quo non penetraverit ir^
Invidiaeque oc^lus?) Regisque suoque furore
Saeva venit; votis d^mnati immanibus omnes.
Segnis erat qui non pestem juraverat amens
Iessida, membrumque aliquod pr^miserat ensi.
Sic absens totum partita est Ira cadaver.
Iamque adsunt, subitoque (...) corda sereno,
Ignotum insinuat sese per pectora coelum.
Lascivit paulatim horror, vultusque recedit
Fulgur atrox; and jam pacato ^idere vernat.
Venarum casto gandentes flumine rivi,
Lene micant; signat divinus tempora candor.
Mira dies frontis, facto quae susa pudore
Prima rubet; ponit belli caed^sque cupido,
Dum Numen pacis celebrant, and carmind sumdunt
Pacis opus; bis jamque alios, bis Iusus eisdem
Miserat exemplis, ipsum jam plena Tyrannum
Ire jubet rabies laesamque ulc^^^iet iram.
Cum melior subito furor implet mentem animumque
Perque omnes sensus, per^, (...) pertinet ossa.
Tum chlamidem illusam geminis, (...) rigeutem
Exuit, and capitis deponit noble pondus.
Ah puduit regni decus atque insignia far
Turpe jugum vitii, and servilia jura ferentem;
Tum primum Rex Saulus erat; lux unabeatae (...)
Instar habet vitae, and longum ^rpan^
Miratur populus, dictumque emanat ubique
Ipsum etiam vatum turbae se adjungere (...).
Balamus sic Beorid^^ Moabitida venit,
Ut benedictam ageret diris and carmine gentem,
Et pretio infaelix fatalia venderer ora,
Sic secum; at didicit tandem (mirabile dictu)
Ipso Asino sapere, ac fari meliora magistro.
O magnum Isacidum decus! o pulcherrima castra!
O arma ingentes olim paritura triumphos!
Non sic herbarum vario subridet amictu,
Planities pictae vallis, montisve supini
Clivus, perpetuis cedrorum versibus altus.
Non sic aestivo quondam nitet hortus in anno,
Frondesque fructusque ferens, formosa secundum
Flumina, mollis ubi viridisque supernatat umbra.
Quid video? mortem Isacidum super arma sedentem!
Laeta sedet, praedamque expectat avara futuram.
Plures Isacidae gladios, plura arma parate;
Scilicet haec crebro Victoria conteret usu.
Cum Leo se attollit Iudae, torvumque tuetur,
Omnia diffugient pressis animalia long
Auribus; and medio si forte recumbit in antro,
Murmura tum ponent silvae, metuendaque Tigris
Praetereuns ipso vel dormitante tremiscet.
Quae mala, quis Iudae vel prospera fata precatur,
Omnia in ipsius caput ingeminata ferentur.
FINIS.

