The Royal Heart


The Hare


The Stagg


The fox


The Hind


The Badger


The Buck


The Otter


The Roe Buck


The ancient Hunting Noats with Marshs additions Names of the Noats -- tone ton
tavern, ton-tavern, ton-ton-tavern etc. To call the Company in the morning The
Strokes to the field. To uncouple the Hounds When the Hounds hunta Game unknown
A Recheate when the Hounds hunt a right Game The double Recheate The trebble or
Sr Hervits Recheate The Earthing of a ffox if recoverable If not to call away
The death of a Hare The death of a Buck The death of a Staag or Heart The death
of a ffox The call for a Keeper in Park or fforrest The prize of a Heart Royal
The Strokes for the Terriers when the ffox is earthed To draw the Company out
of the ffield A Recheate or ffarewell at Parting


These Noats are Taught and Sold by Michaell Marsh at ye Haintsman at Holborne
Bridge



THE GENTLEMAN'S Recreation: In Four Parts, VIZ. HUNTING, HAWKING, FOWLING,
FISHING Wherein These Generous EXERCISES are largely Treated of, and the Terms
of Art for HUNTING and HAWKING more amply Enlarged than heretofore. Whereto is
prefixed a large Sculpture, giving easy Directions for blowing the Horn, and
other Sculptures inserted proper to each Recreation. With an ABSTRACT at the
end of each SUBJECT of such LAWS as relate to the same.

The Third EDITION, With the Addition of a HUNTING-HORSE.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Jos. Phillips at the Seven Stars in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and Hen. Rodes next door to the Swan-Tavern, near
Bride-Lane in Fleetstreet, 1686.

To the Right Honorable JAMES Lord NORREYES BARON of RICOT, His Majesty's
Lord Lieutenant OF OXFORDSHIRE.
IF to admire Worth and Honor were a Crime, it would highly concern me to beg
your Lordships pardon for the presumption of this Address. For that is the
Cause, this the Effect. It is true, the obscurity of my Condition, and
remoteness of my Situation, have placed me out of the reach of your Lordships
Knowledge; yet your Lordships Fame Ecchoing out of Oxfordshire through all the
very Corners of the Kingdom, could hardly escape my Ears, were I not
particularly entitled to the same County, which has given me thereby the
greater opportunity both to know, and admire the Greatness of your Generosity,
the Magnificence of your Living, and Prudence of your Governing, accompanied
with all other Qualifications and Endowments requisite to render any person
both Great and Good: As also, that though your Lordship is a great improver of
your own natural parts by your elaborate studies, and of others Knowledge by
your Edifying Conversation; yet to obviate Idleness, and to antidote Sickness,
as also the better to enapt your active Body to suit your Loyal Mind for
Martial Employments, should the concerns of your King and Country call you
forth into the Field, your Lordship is a most indefatigable user of all active
Sports and Recreations, and consequently become the great Oracle and Master of
them all, and all their Artful Terms. Under what other Wing then could this
little Treatise on those Subjects so properly creep for shelter and Protection?
Under no other certainly, without some kind of Injustice to your Lordship, and
real Injury to the Work it self. Be pleased therefore a little to unbend your
Thoughts (I humbly beseech your Lordship) from your more serious Studies,
allowing your Eyes to run over these few Leaves, and either vouchsafe to
correct their Errors, (if any have escaped those Judicious Sports-men who have
been pleased to be my Guides in perusing this Work, and purging it from many
Errors and Mistakes of the former Edition) or stamp them with the
unquestionable authority of your Lordships Approbation. This will oblige all
true Lovers of the same generous Recreations to become greedy purchasers of
these Rules, both to improve their Knowledge, and reduce their Language to the
same significant terms, to the great satisfaction of the Buyers, and the
benefit of Proprietor and Seller, who humbly craves leave to lay himself at
your Lordships Feet, in the quality of

(May it please your Lordship) Your Lordship's Most devoted humble Servant,
Nicholas Cox.

THE GENTLEMAN'S Recreation: OR, A TREATISE Giving the best Directions for
HUNTING, AND KILLING all manner of CHASES used in ENGLAND. With the Terms of
Art belonging thereunto. ALSO, A short Account of some peculiar Beasts not
usually Hunted in ENGLAND. First Collected from Ancient and Modern Authors; and
now very much Corrected and Enlarged by many Worthy and Experienced Artists of
this Recreation. With an Abstract of such Statute-Laws as relate to FORESTS and
HUNTING.

The First Part.

London: Printed by J. C. and F. C. for N. C.

OF HUNTING. The Introduction.
HUNTING is a Game and Recreation commendable not only for Kings, Princes, and
the Nobility, but likewise for private Gentlemen: And as it is a Noble and
Healthy Pastime, so it is a thing which has been highly prized in all Ages.

Besides, Hunting trains up Youth to the use of manly Exercises in their riper
Age, being encouraged thereto by the pleasure they take in hunting the Stately
Stag, the Generous Buck, the Wild Boar, the Cunning Otter, the Crafty Fox, and
the Fearful Hare; also the catching of Vermin by Engines, as the Fitchet, the
Fulimart, the Ferret, the Polecate, the Moldwarp, and the like. Exercise herein
preserves Health, and increases Strength and Activity. Others inflame the hot
Spirits of young men with roving Ambition, love of War, and seeds of Anger: But
the Exercise of Hunting neither remits the Mind to Sloth nor Softness, nor (if
it be used with moderation) hardens it to inhumanity; but rather inclines men
to good Acquaintance, and generous Society. It is no small advantage to be
enured to bear Hunger, Thirst, and Weariness from ones Childhood; to take up a
timely habit of quitting ones Bed early, and loving to sit well and safe upon
an Horse. What innocent and natural delights are they, when he sees the day
breaking fortl. those Blushes and Roses which Poets and Writers of Romances
only paint, but the Huntsman truly courts? When he hears the chirping of
small Birds pearching upon their dewy Boughs? when he draws in the fragrancy
and coolness of the Air? How jolly is his Spirit, when he suffers it to be
imported with the noise of Bugle-Horns, and the baying of Hounds, which leap up
and play round about him.

Nothing does more recreate the Mind, strengthen the Limbs, whet the Stomach,
and clear up the Spirit, when it is heavy, dull, and over-cast with gloomy
Cares: from whence it comes, that these delights have mcrited to be in esteem
in all Ages, and even amongst barbaroas Nations, by the Lords, Princes, and
highest Potentates.

Then it is admirable to observe the natural instinct of Enmity and Cunning,
whereby one Beast being as it were confederate with man, by whom he is
maintained, serves him in, his designs upon others. How perfect is the Scent
or Smell of an Hound, who never leaves it, but follows it through innumerable
changes and varieties of other Scents, even over and in the Water, and into the
Earth? Again, how soon will a Hound fix his Eye on the best and fattest Buck of
the Herd, single him out, and follow him, and him only, without changing,
through a whole Herd of rascal Game, and leave him not till he kills him?
Moreover, is it not delightful and pleasant to observe the Docibleness of Dogs,
which is as admirable as their Understanding? For as a right Huntsman knows the
Language of his Hounds, so they know his, and the meaning of their own kind,
as perfectly as we can distinguish the voices of our friends and acquaintance
from such as are strangers.

Again, how satisfied is a curious Mind, nay exceedingly delighted, to see the
Game fly before him! and after that it has withdrawn itself from his sight, to
see the whole Line where it has passed over, with all the doublings and cross
works which the amazed and afrighted Beast has made, recovered again; and all
that Maze wrought out by the intelligence which he holds with Dogs! this is
most pleasant, and as it were a Masterpiece of natural Magic. Afterward,
what Triumph there is to return with Victory and Spoils, having a good Title
both to his Appetite and Repose! Neither must it be omitted, that herein there
is an especial need to hold a strict Rein over our affections, that this
Pleasure, which is allowable in its season, may not entrench upon other
Domestical affairs. There is great danger lest we be transported with this
Pastime, and so our felves grow Wild, haunting the Woods till we resemble the
Beasts which are Citizens of them; and by continual conversation with Dogs,
become altogether addicted to Slaughter and Carnage, which is wholly
dishonorable, being a servile employment. For as it is the privilege of Man,
who is endued with Reason, and Authorized in the Law of his Creation, to subdue
the Beasts of the Field; so to tyrannize over them too much, is brutish in
plain English.

Mistake me not, I intend this Reflection not for the Nobility and Gentry of
this Nation, whose expense of time in this noble and delightful Exercise can no
ways prejudice their large Possessions, since it is so far from being very
chargeable, that it is exceeding profitable to the bodily health of such who
can dispense with their staying at home without any injury to their Families.

I might much enlarge my self in the commendation of Hunting, but that I am
loath to detain you too long from the knowledge of what will make a right and
perfect Huntsman. I shall therefore thus conclude: No Music can be more
ravishingly delightful than a Pack of Hounds in full Cry, to such a man whose
Heart and Ears are so happy to be set to the tune of such charming Instruments.

HUNTERS TERMS.
BEfore we shall treat of the Method that is to be used in the obtaining
pleasure in the prosecution of this Royal Game, it will be very requisite, as
an Introduction to this Work, first to understand those Terms of Art Huntsmen,
Foresters, and Wood-men use, when they are discoursing of their commendable and
highly recreative Profession. And first, let us consider

Which are Beasts of Forest, or Venery, or Venary, Chase, and Warren.
Old Foresters and Wood-men, with others well acquainted with Hunting, do
reckon that there are five Beasts of Venery, (that are also called Beasts of
Forest) which are these: the Heart, the Hind, the Hare, the Boar, and Wolf:
this is the Opinion of Budaeus likewise, in his Treatise of Philologie,
speaking of the former Beasts, Semper Forestae and Veneris habentur Bestiae:
These (says he) are always accounted Beasts of Venery and Forest.

Some may here object and say, Why should the Heart and Hind, being both of
one kind, be accounted two several Beasts? To this I answer, That though they
are Beasts of one kind, yet they are of several seasons: for the Heart has his
season in Summer, and the season of the Hind begins when the Hart's is over.

Here note, that with the Heart is included the Stag, and all other Red Deer of
Antlier.

There are also five wild Beasts that are called Beasts of Chase; the Buck the
Do, the Fox, the Martron, and the Roe.

The Beasts and Fowls of Warren, are the Hare, the Coney, the Pheasant, and the
Partridge; and none other, says Mr. Manwood, are accounted Beasts nor Fowls of
Warren.

My Lord Cook is of another Opinion, in his Commentary on Littleton 233. There
be both Beasts and Fowls of the Warren, says he: Beasts, as Hares, Coneys, and
Roes: Fowls of two sorts, Terrestres, ( and they of two sorts) Silvestres, and
Campestres. The first, Pheasant, Wood-cock, etc. The second, Partridge, Quail,
Rail, etc. Then Aquatiles, as Mallard, Hern, etc.

There is great difference between Beasts of Forest, and Chase; the first are
Silvestres tantum, the latter Campestres tantum. The beasts of the Forest make
their abode all the daytime in the great Coverts and secret places in the
Woods; and in the night-season they repair into the Lawns, Meadows, Pastures,
and pleasant feeding places; and therefore they are called Silvestres, Beasts
of the Wood. The Beasts of Chase do reside all the daytime in the Fields, and
upon the Hills or high Mountains, where they may see round about them afar off,
to prevent danger; but upon nights approach they feed as the rest in Meadows,
etc. and therefore these are called Campestres, Beasts of the Field.

Let us in the next place discover their Names, Seasons, Degrees, and Ages of
Forest or Venery, Chase and Warren: and because the Heart is the most noble,
worthy, and stately Beast, I shall place him first; and must call a Heart

The first year, a Hinde-calf, or Calf.

The second year, a Knobber.

The third year, a Brocke.

The fourth year, a Staggard.

The fifth year, a Stag.

The sixth year, a Heart.

If hunted by the King, a Heart Royal. If he escape, and Proclamation be made
for his safe return without let or detriment, he is then called a Heart Royal
Proclaimed.

It is a vulgar error, according to the Opinion of Mr. Guillim, to think that
a Stag, of what age soever he be, shall not be called a Heart till he be hunted
by the King or Queen, and thence he shall derive his Title. Mr. George
Turbervile says positively, he shall not obtain that Name till he be hunted or
killed by a Prince. But late Huntsmen do agree, he may be called a Heart at and
after the age of six years old.

Now if the King or Queen shall happen to hunt or chase him, and he escape with
life, he shall ever after be called a Heart Royal: But if he fly so far from the
Forest or Chase, that it is unlikely he will ever return of his own accord to
the place aforesaid, and that Proclamation be made in all Towns and Villages
thereabouts, that none shall kill or offend him, but that he may safely return
if he list; he is then called a Heart Royal Proclaimed.

The second Beast of Venery is called a Hind.

And she is called the first year, a Calf.

The second year, a Hearse; and sometimes we say Brockets Sister, etc.

The third year, a Hind.

The next and third, which by old Foresters is called the King of all Beasts of
Venery, is the Hare.

And is called the first year, a Leveret.

The second year, a Hare.

The third year, a Great Hare.

The fourth Beast of Venery is called the Wilde-Boar.

The first year, he is a Pig of the Sounder.

The second year, he is a Hog.

The third year, he is a Hogs Steer.

The fourth year, he is a Boar; at which age, if not before, he leaves the
Sounder, and then he is called a Singler or Sanglier.

The fifth and last Beast of Venery is the Wolf.

The names of the Beasts of Chase according to their Ages.
The first is the Buck.

It is called the first year, a Fawn.

The second year, a Pricket.

The third year, a Sorel.

The fourth year, a Sore.

The fifth year, a Buck of the first Head.

The sixth year, a Great Buck.

The second Beast of Chase is the Do or Do.

She is called the first year, a Fawn.

The second year, a Tegg.

The third year, a Do.

The third Beast of Chase is the Fox.

And is called the first year, a Cub.

The secound year, a Fox, and afterward an old Fox.

The fourth Beast of Chase is the Martern.

The first year, it is called a Cub.

The second year, a Martern.

The fifth and last Beast of Chase is called the Roe.

The first year, it is called a Kid.

The second year, a Gyrle

The third year, a Hemuse.

The fourth year, a Roe-Buck of the first Head.

The fifth year, a Fair Roe-Buck.

As for the Beasts of the Warren, the Hare has been spoken of already. The
Coney is called the first year a Rabbet, and afterward an old Coney.

The Seasons of Beasts.
A Heart or Buck begins at the end of Fencer Month, which is 15 days after
Midsummer-day, and lasts till Holy-rood-day. The Fox at Christmas, and
lasts till the Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin. The Hind or Do begins
at Holy-rood-day, and lasts till Candlemas. The Roe-Buck begins at Easter,
and lasts till Michaelmas. The Roe begins at Michaelmas, and lasts till
Candlemas. The Hare begins at Michaelmas, and lasts till the end of
February. The season of the Wolf is said to be from Christmas till the
Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary. Lastly, The Boar begins at Christmas, and
continues to the Purification of our Lady.

Terms to be used for Beasts of Venery and Chase, as they are in Company one
with the other.
A Herd of Hearts.

A Herd of all manner of Deer.

A Bevy of Roes.

A Sounder of Swine.

A Rout of Wolves.

A Richess of Marterns.

A Brace or Lease of Bucks.

A Brace or Lease of Foxes.

A Brace or Lease of Hares.

A Couple of Rabbets.

A Couple of Coneys.

Terms for their Lodging.
A Heart Harbors.

A Buck Lodges.

A Roe Beddeth.

A Hare Seateth, or Forms.

A Coney Sits.

A Fox Kennelleth.

A Martern Treeth.

An Otter Watches.

A Badger Eartheth.

A Boar Coucheth.

Terms for their Dislodging.
Unharbour the Heart.

Rouse the Buck.

Start the Hare.

Bolt the Coney.

Unkennel the Fox.

Tree the Martern.

Vent the Otter.

Dig the Badger.

Rear the Boar.

Terms for their Noise at Rutting time.
A Heart Belleth.

A Buck Growneth or Troateth.

A Roe Belloweth.

A Hare Beats or Tappeth.

An Otter Whineth.

A Boar Freameth.

A Fox Barketh.

A Badger Shricketh.

A Wolf Howleth.

A Goat Ratleth.

Terms for Copulation.
A Heart or Buck goes to Rut.

A Roe goes to Tourn.

A Boar goes to Brim.

A Hare and Coney goes to Buck.

A Fox goes to Clickitting.

A Wolf goes to Match or to Make.

An Otter hunteth for his Kind.

Terms for the Footing and Treading of all Beasts of Venery and Chase.
Of a Heart, the Slot.

Of a Buck and all Fallow Deer, the View.

Of all Deer, if on the Grass, and scarce visible, then it is called Foiling.

Of a Fox, the Print; and other such Vermin, the Footing.

Of an Otter, the Marks.

Of a Boar, the Tract.

Of a Hare, diversely; for when she is in open Field, she Soreth: When she winds
about to deceive the Hounds, then she Doubleth: When she beats on the hard
Highway, and her Footing can be perceived, then she Pricketh; and in the Snow,
it is called the Trace of the Hare.

Terms of the Tail.
Of a Heart, Buck, or other Deer, the Single.

Of a Boar, the Wreath.

Of a Fox, the Brush or Drag; and the Tip at the end is called the Chape.

Of a Wolf, the Stern.

Of a Hare and Coney, the Scut.

Terms for their Ordure.
Of a Heart, and all Deer, their Excrement is called Fewmets or Fewishing.

Of a Hare, Crotiles or Crotising.

Of a Boar, Lesses.

Of a Fox, the Billiting; and all other such Vermin, the Fuants.

Of an Otter, the Spraints.

Terms for the Attire of Deer.
Of a Stag, if perfect, the Bur, the Pearls (the little Knobs on it) the Beam,
the Gutters, the Antlier, the Sur-Antlier, Royal, Sur-Royal, and all at top the
Croches.

Of a Buck, the Bur, the Beam, the Brow-Antlier, the Back-Antlier, the
Advancer, Palm, and Spellers.

If the Croches grow in form of a man's Hand, it is then called a Palmed Head.
Heads bearing not above three or four, the Crotches being placed aloft all of
one height, are called Crowned Heads. Heads having doubling Croches, are called
Forked Heads, becase the Croches are planted on the top of the Beam like Forks.

If you are asked what a Stag bears, you are only to reckon Croches he bears,
and never to express an odd number: As, if he has four Croches on his near
Horn, and five on his far, you must say, he bears ten, a false Right on his
near Horn (for all that the Beam bears are called Rights.) If but four on the
near Horn, and fix on the far Horn, you must say he bears twelve, a double
false Right on the near Horn; for you must not only make the number even, but
also the Horns even with that distinction.

When a Heart breaks Herd, and draws to the Thickets or Coverts, we usually
say he takes his Hold, or he goes to Harbor.

All kind of Deers fat is called Sewit; and yet you may say, This Deer was a
high Deer of Grease. The fat of a Boar is called Grease. The fat of a Roe only
is called Beavy Grease.

We say the Deer is broken up. The Fox and Hare is cased

It is A Litter of Cubs. A Nest of Rabbets. A Squirrels Dray.


Venison, or Venaison, is so called, from the means whereby the Beasts are
taken, quoniam ex Venatione capiuntur; and being hunted, are most wholesome.

Beasts of Venary (not Venery, as some call it) are so termed, because they are
gotten by Hunting.

No Beast of the Forest that is Solivagam and nocivum is Venison, as the Fox,
the Wolf, the Martin, because they are no meat. The Bear is no Venison, because
not only that he is Animal nocivum and Solivagam; but because he is no beast
of the Forest, and whatsoever is Venison must be a beast of the Forest; sed non
e converso. On the other side, Animalia gregalia non sunt nociva, as the Wild
Boar; for naturally the first three years he is Animal gregale; and after
trusting to his own strength, and for the pleasure of man, becomes Solivagum.
He is then called Sanglier, because he is Singularis: but he is Venison, and to
be eaten. The Hare is Venison too, which Martial prefers before all others.
Inter Quadrupedes gloria prima Lepus.

So are the Red-Deer and Fallow-Deer Venison: vide Cook Inst. 4. page 316. Give
me leave to insert here out of the same Author two Conclusions in the Law of
the Forest, which follow from hence. First, Whatsoever Beast of the Forest is
for the food of man, that is Venison: and therewith agrees Virgil, describing
of a Feast, Implentur Veteris Bacchi pinguisque ferinae.

They had their belly full of Old Wine and Fat Venison. So Venison was the
principal Dish of the Feast. Secondly, Whatsoever Beast is not for the food of
man, is not Venison. Therefore Capriolus, or the Roe, being no Beast of the
Forest, is by the Law of the Forest no Venison unless Hunted. Nature has
endewed the Beasts of the Forest with two qualities, Swiftness, and Fear; and
their Fear increases their Swiftness. -- Pedibus timor addidit alas.

Vert is any thing that bears green Leaf, but especially of great and thick
Coverts, and is derived a Viriditate. Vert is of diverse kinds; some that
bears Fruit that may serve for food both for man and beasts, as
Service-trees, Nut-trees, Crab-trees, etc. and for the shelter and defense of
the Game. Some called Hautboys, serving for Food and browse of and for the
Game, and for the defense of them; as Oaks, Beeches, etc. Some Hautboys for
Browse, Shelter, and Defense only; as Ashes, Poplars, etc. Of Sub-boys, some
for Browse and Food of the Game, and for Shelter and Defense; as Maples, etc.
Some for Browse and Defense; as Birch, Sallow, Willow, etc. Some for Shelter
and Defense only; as Elder, Alder, etc. Of Bushes and other Vegetables, some
for Food and Shelter, as the Hiw-thorn, Black-thorn, etc. Some for hiding and
shelter, as Brakes, Gorse, Heath, etc. Vert, as I said, comes a Viridi; thence
Viridarii, because their Office is to look after the preservation of the Vert,
which in truth is the preservation of Venison.

Terms for Flaying, Stripping, and Casing of all manner of CHASES.
The Heart and all manner of Deer are slain: Huntsmen commonly say, Take off
that Deer's Skin. The Hare is Stripped or Cased; and so is the Boar too,
according to the opinion of the Ancients. The Fox, the Badger, and all manner
of Vermin are cased, beginning at the Snout or Nose of the Beast, and so turn
his Skin over his Ears down to the Body till you come to the Tail.

Proper Terms for the Noises of Hounds.
When Hounds are first cast off, and find some Game or Chase, we say. They
Challenge. If they are too busy before they find the scent good, we say, They
Bawl. If they be too busy after they find good scent, we say, They Babble. If
they run it end-ways orderly, making it good, and then hold in together
merrily, we say, They are in full Cry. When Spaniels open in the string, (or a
Greyhound in his course) we say, They Lapse. When Hounds hang behind, and
beat too much upon the scent or place, we say, Thy Plod. And when they have
either Earthed a Virmin, or brought a Deer, Boar, or suchlike to turn head
against them, then we say, They Bay.

Different Terms for Hounds and Greyhounds.
Of Greyhounds, two make a Brace; of Hounds, a Couple. Of Greyhounds, three
make a Leace; and of Hounds, a Couple and half.

We let slip a Greyhound, and cast off a Hound. The string where with we lead
a Greyhound, is called a Leace; and for a Hound, a Lyome. The Greyhound has
his Collar, and the Hound has his Couples. We say, a Kennel of Hounds, and a
Pack of Beagles. Some other differences there are, but these are the most usual.

Where we find Deer have lately passed into Thickets, etc. by which we guess
their greatness, and then put the Hounds or Beagles thereto for the View, we
account such places Entries.

The Impression where any Deer has reposed or harbored, we call a Layr.

When the Hounds or Beagles hit the scent of their Chase contrary, as to hit it
up the wind when they should it down, we then say, they Draw amiss.

When the Hounds or Beagles take fresh scent, hunting another Chase, until they
stick and hit it again, we say, they Hunt Change.

When the Hounds or Beagles hunt it by the Heel, we say, they Hunt Counter.

When the Chase goes off, and comes on again traversing the same ground, to
deceive the Hounds or Beagles, we say, they Hunt the Foil.

When we set Hounds in readiness where we expect the Deer will come by, and
then cast them off when the other Hounds are passed by, we account that a Relay.

When Hounds or Beagles have finished their Chase by the death of what they
pursued, and then in requital are fed by the hands of the Huntsman or others,
we call that their Reward.

Huntsmen when they go drawing in their Springs at Hart-Hunting, usually make
Dew-rounds, which we call Ringwalks.

When any Deer is hard hunted, and then betakes himself to swimming in any
River, etc. then we say, he takes Soil.

When Deer cast their Horns, we say, they Mew.

The first head of a Fallow-Deer is called Prick.

When Huntsmen endeavor to find a Heart by the Slot, etc. and then mind his
step to know whether he is great and long, they then say, they know him by his
Gate.

When Deer rub and push their heads against Trees to cause the Pills of their
new Horns come off, we say, they Fray.

When Deer, after being hard run, turn head against the Hounds, we say, they
Bay.

When Hounds or Beagles run long without opening or making any cry, we say,
they run Mute.

When Hounds or Beagles at first finding the scent of their Game presently open
and cry, we then say, they Challenge.

When Hounds run at a whole Herd of Deer, we say, they Run Riot.

When the Hounds touch the scent, and draw on till they rouse or put up the
Chase, we say, they Draw on the Slot.

When a Roe crosses and doubles, it is called Trajoning.

When a Hare, as sometimes (though seldom) takes the ground like a Coney, we
then say, she Goes to the Vault.

When we beat the Bushes, etc. after the Fox, we call it Drawing.

When a Hare runs on rotten ground, or in a Frost sometimes, and then it sticks
to her Feet, we say, she Carries.

When the Fox has young ones in her, we say, she is with Cub.

When Beagles bark and cry at their Prey, we say, they Yearn.

A Red Male Heart of an year old, is called a Spitter.

A Rayn-Deer, is a beast like an Heart, but has his Head fuller of Antliers.

A Pricker, is a Huntsman on Horseback.

Engines that we take Deer withal, are called Wiles.

When we set Hounds or Beagles in readiness, expecting the Chase to come by,
and then cast them off before the rest come in, we call it a Vauntlay.

When Hounds or Beagles find where the Chase has been, and made a proffer to
enter, but returned, we say, there is a Blemish.

We say How to a Deer.

When we start a Hare, we say, That, that, or There, there.

The Call, a Lesson blowed on the Horn to comfort the Hounds.

A Recheat, a Lesson likewise blown on the Horn. The Mort or Death, is blown at
the death of any Deer. There are several other Lessons, which you may find in
the Sculpture of Notes for blowing on the Horn.

There are several Hounds and Beagles which we have different Titles for; as
Gaze-hound, Blood-hound, Staunch-hound, Harrier, and Terrier, etc. But we
generally in all our Kennels and Packs rank them under these heads: Enterers,
Drivers, Flyers, Tyers, etc.

And now to conclude our discourse of general Terms at this place, give us
leave to insert, for such young Gentlemen as in time may keep a Kennel, some
usual Names of Hounds and Beagles.

A CATALOGUE of some general Names OF HOUNDS and BEAGLES.
BAnger Beauty Blue-man Blue-cap Boman Bonny Bouncer. Captain Capper Chanter
Countess Crier Caesar. Dido Driver Drunkard Drummer Damosel Darling Duchess
Dancer Daphne. Fancy Fiddler Flippant Flurry Fuddle. Gallant Gaudy. Hector.
Juggler Jewel Jocky Jenny Joler Jollyboy Jupiter Juno. Keeper Kilbuck. Lively
Lovely Lady Lilly Lillups. Madam Maulkin Merryboy Mopsie Motley Music. Nancy
Nacter. Plunder Pleasant Pluto. Rockwood Ringwood Rover Ranter Ratler Ruler
Ranger Royal Rapper Rusfler. Spanker Singwel Sweetlips Soundwel Stately. Troler
Thunder Thisbe Truman True Love Tickler Tattler Tulip Truelips Touchstone
Traveller Tracer Touler Tunewel Tidings Trouncer Trusty Truescent Tryer. Venus
Vulcan Violet. Wanton Wonder Winder Whipster. Yerker Younker.
Some other Terms and Descriptions relating more particularly to Forest and
Forest-Laws.
A Forest, is a place privileged by Royal Authority and differs from Park,
Warren, and Chase, and is on purpose allotted for the peaceable abiding and
nourishment of the Beasts and Fowls thereto belonging. For which there are
certain peculiar Laws, Officers, and Orders; part of which appear in the Great
Charter of the Forest.

A Forester, is an Officer of the Forest, sworn to preserve the Vert and
Venison therein, and to attend the wild beasts within his Bailiwick, and to
watch, and endeavor to keep them safe by day and night. He is likewise to
apprehend all Offenders in Vert and Venison, and to present them to the Courts
of the Forest to the end they may be punished according to their offenses.

A Purlieu, is all that ground adjoining to Forests, which being made Forest by
Henry the second, Richard the first, or King John, were by perambulations
granted by Henry the third, and severed again from the same.

A Purlieu-man, is he that has ground within the Purlieu, and has 40 s. a
year Freehold; and such a one with some caution may hunt within his own
Purlieu.

A Regarder, is an Officer of the Kings Forest, that is sworn to take care of
the Vert and Venison, and to view and enquire of all the offenses committed
within the Forest, and of all the Concealments of them; and whether all other
Officers do execute their Office or not.

Woodgeld, is the gathering or cutting of Wood in the Forest, or the money paid
for it to the use of the Foresters; or an Immunity for this by the King's Grant.

A Raunger, In some Forests there are twelve Raungers, whose Offices are to
look after the Purlieu, and drive back the wild Beasts into the Forest again;
and to see, hear, and enquire of offenders there, and to present their offenses.

A Verderor, is an Officer of the King's Forest, and chosen by the Freeholders
of the County where the Forest is, by the Kings Writ directed to the Sheriff
for that purpose. Their Office is chiefly to look after the Wood and Grass in
the Forest.

An Agistor, is an Officer of the Forest that takes in to feed the Cattle of
Strangers, and receives for the Kings use all such tack-Money as becomes due
from those Strangers.

A Chase, is a place used for the receipt of Deer and Beasts of the Forest: It
differs from a Forest and Park. It may be in the hands of a Subject, which a
Forest in its proper nature cannot be. Neither is it enclosed as a Park always
is; and it has a larger compass, more store of Game, and more Keepers and
Overseers.

Expeditate, is (says Mr. Crompton) the cutting out the ball of the Foot of
great Dogs in the Forest; but (says Mr. Manwood) it is the cutting off the
three fore-Claws by the Skin; and that the owner of every such Dog,
unexpeditated in the Forest, shall forfeit 3s. 4d.

Fence Month, has 31 days, begins 15 days before Midsummer, and ends 15 days
after: In which time it is unlawful for any to hunt in the Forest, or to go
amongst the Deer to disquiet them; because it is the time of Fawning.

Frank Chase, is a liberty of free Chase in a Circuit annexed to a Forest,
whereby all men that have ground within the circuit are forbidden to cut down
Wood, or discover, etc. within the view of the Forester, though it be his own
Demesne.

Green-hue, or Vert, they both signify one thing, it being every thing that
does drow and bear green Leaf within the Forest, that may cover and hide the
Deer.

Over Vert, is all manner of high Wood.

Nether Vert, is all sorts of under-wood. Brushwood is called Cablish.

Horngeld, is a Tax within the Forest for all manner of horned beasts.

Footgeld, is an Amercement on such as live within the Forest, for not
expeditating their Dogs. And to be quit of Footgeld, is a privilege to keep
Dogs there Unlawed without Punishment or Controlement.

Pawnage, is Money taken by the Agistors for the feed of Hogs with the Mast of
the Kings's Forest; but (Mr. Crompton says) it is most properly the Mast,
Woods, Lands, or hedged Rows, or Money due to the owners of the same for it.

A Scotale, is where any Officer of the Forest does keep an Alehouse in the
Forest by color of his Office, causing men to come to his House, and to spend
their money there for fear of having displeasure; but this is forbidden by
Charta Forest.

Perambulation, is the admeasurement and setting down of Bounds and Limits to
the Forest.

Drift of the Forest, is an exact view and examination taken at certain times,
as occasion shall serve, to know what beasts are there; that none Common there
but such as have right; and that the Forest be not overcharged with the beasts
of Foreigners.

An Assart, is a great offense committed in the Forest, by grubbing up the
Woods, Coverts, and Thickets, and making them plain as Arable Land, or the like.

Minoverie, is a Trespass or Offense committed by some Engine set up in the
Forest to catch Deer, or the like.

Tritis, is a freedom that one has from holding a Greyhound in ones hand when
the Lord of the Forest is hunting there, or to be amerced for his default.

Protoforestarius, was a great Officer heretofore in Windsor Forest.

Stablestand, is when one is found standing in the Forest with his Bow ready
bent to shoot at any Deer or, with his Greyhound in a Lease ready to slip.

Swainmote, or Swannimote, is a Court appointed to be held thrice in a year
within a Forest; the first, 15 days before Michaelmas; the second, about
Martinmas; and the third, 15 days before St. John Baptist.

Chiminage, is taken by Foresters in fee throughout their Bailiwick for Bushes,
Timber, etc. and signifies the same with Toll.

Afforest, is to turn Land into Forest.

Disafforest, is to turn Land from being Forest to other uses.

Let what has been said be sufficient for an Introduction, and let us conclude
it with a persuasion to all generous Souls not to slight this noble and worthy
Exercise, (wherein is contained so much health and pleasure) for the besotting
Sensualities, and wicked Debaucheries of a City, in which the course of Nature
seems to be inverted, Day turned into Night, and Night into Day; where there is
little other Recreation but what Women, Wine, and a Bawdy Play can afford them;
whereby, for want of Labor and Exercise, Men's Bodies contain as many Diseases
as are in a sickly Hospital.

Of DOGS in general.
AS there is no Country in the World wherein there is not plenty of Dogs, so no
Animal can boast of greater variety both in shape and kind.

Some Dogs are very great, as the Wolf-dog, which is shaped like a Greyhound,
but by much taller, longer, and thicker; some are for the Buck, others for the
Boar, Bear, and Bull; some for the Hare, Coney, and Hedgehog; some are both
for Water and Land, and they are called Spaniels; other are called Lurchers,
Tumblers, Brachers, Beagles, etc. As for Shepherds Dogs, foisting Curs, and
such whom some fond Ladies make their daily, nay nightly Companions too, I
shall pass over, being neither worthy to be inserted in this Subject, nor
agreeable thereunto: wherefore I shall only treat of such whose natures do
incline them to Game, for man's Pastime and Recreation.

In the first place, let us consider the Nature of Dogs in general, wherein
they agree, and their common properties of Nature, such as are not destroyed in
the distinction of kinds, but remain like infallible Truths, and invariable in
every kind and Country through the Universe. Dogs (as it is to be observed) are
generally rough; and their Hair indifferently long (which in Winter they lose
every year) is a sign of a good constitution; but if it grow overlong, the
Mange will follow. The outward proportion of the Head alters as the kind
alters, having no commissure or seam in the Skull, being a continued bone
without separation.

The best Dogs (in Pliny's Opinion) have flat Nostrils, yet round, solid, and
blunt: Their Teeth are like Saws, which they change in the fourth month of
their age: and by them is their age discerned; for while they are white and
sharp, it discovers the youth of a Dog; but when they grow blackish or dusky,
broken and torn, they demonstrate the elder age.

The Breast of a Dog is narrow, so is his Ventricle: for which cause he is
always in pain in the discharging his Excrements.

After they have run a Course, they relieve themselves by tumbling and rolling
to and fro. When they lie down, they turn round in a circle two or three times
together; which they do for no other cause, but that they may the more
commodiously lie round, and from the Wind.

In their sleep they often dream, as may appear by their barking. Here observe,
that they who love to keep Dogs, must have a special care that they let them
not sleep too much, especially after their Meat, when they are young: for as
they are very hot, so in their sleep does their heat draw much pain into their
Stomach and Ventricle. The time of their Copulation is for the most part at a
year old; yet the Females will lust after it sooner; but they should be
restrained from it, because it debilitates their Body, and dulls their
Generofity. After the expiration of a year, they may be permitted to copulate;
it matters not whether in Winter or Summer, but it is best in the beginning of
the Spring: but with this caution, that Whelps of a Litter, or of one and the
same Bitch, be never suffered to couple; for Nature delights in variety.

In ancient time, for the more ennobling of their race of Dogs, they would not
permit them to engender till the Male was four year old, and the Female three;
for by that means the Whelps would prove more strong and lively. By Hunting,
Labor, and Travel, the Males are made more fit for Generation, and they prove
best which have their Siers of equal age. When they grow proud, give them
Leaven mingled with Milk and Salt, and they will not stray and ramble abroad.

It is not good to preserve the first or second Litter, but the third: and
after they have littered, it is good to give the Bitch Whey and Barley-bread;
for that will comfort her, and increase her Milk: or take the Bones of broken
Meat, and sees them in Goats-Milk: which nutriment will strengthen very much
both Dam and Whelps.

There is no great regard to be had as to the Food of a Dog, for he will eat
any thing but the Flesh of his own kind; for that cannot be so dressed by the
art of Man, but they find it out by their Nose, and avoid it. It is good to let
the Whelps suck two Months before they be weaned, and that of their own Dam.

Put Cummin now and then in their bread, it will cure or prevent Wind in their
bellies; and if Oil be mingled with that Water they lap, they will prove more
able and swift to run. If he refuse and loath his Meat, give him a little hot
Bread, or dip brown Bread in Vinegar, and sqeeze the liquor thereof into his
Nose, and it will ease him.

There is some difficulty to choose a Whelp under the Dam that will prove the
best of the Litter. Some observe that which sees last, and take that for the
best: others remove the Whelps from the Kennel, and lay them several and apart
one from the other; then watch they which of them the Bitch first takes and
carries into her Kennel again, and that they take for the best; or else that
which vomiteth last of all. Some again give for a certain rule to know the
best, that the same which weighs least while it sucketh will prove the best,
according to the Verses of Nemesian:

Pondere nam Catuli poteris perpendere viris,
Corporibusque leves gravibus pernoscere cursu.
But this is certain, that the lighter Whelp will prove the swifter, and the
heavier will be the stronger.

As soon as as the Bitch has littered, it is requisite to choose them you
intend to preserve, and throw away the rest: keep the black, brown, or of one
color, for the spotted are not much to be accounted of; but of Hounds, spotted
are to be valued.

There is not any Creature irrational, more loving to his Master, nor more
serviceable than a Dog, enduring blows from his hands, and using no other means
to pacify his displeasure, than Humiliation and prostration; and after
beating, turns a Revenge into a more fervent Love. Irrational, did I say,? I
may mistake, if what AElianus reports be true, who thought Dogs have Reason,
and use Logic in their Hunting; for they will cast about for the Game, as a
Disputant does for the truth; as if they should say, the Hare is gone either on
the left hand, the right, or straight forward; but not on the left or right,
Therefore straight forward. Whereupon he runs forthright after the true and
infallible footsteps of the Hare.

Of Dogs for Hunting. Of the Hound Rache and SLUTH-HOUND, so called in
Scotland, and by the Germans SCHLATHUND.
THere are to England and Scotland two kinds of Hunting-Dogs, and no where
else in all the World: The first kind is called Ane Rache, and this is a
Foot-scenting creature both of wild Beasts, Birds, and Fishes also, which lie
hid among the Rocks: The Female hereof in England is called a Brache. A Brach,
is a mannerly name for all Hound-Bitches. The second in Scotland is called a
Sluth-hound, being a little greater than the Hunting-Hound, and in color for
the most part brown or sandy spotted. The sense of Smelling is so quick in
these, that they can follow the Footsteps of Thieves, and pursue them with
violence until they overtake them: nay, should the Thief take the Water, so
eager they are in their pursuit, that they will swim after them; and are
restless till they find the thing they seek after: For this is common in the
Borders of England and Scotland, where the people were wont to live much upon
Theft: and if the Dog brought his Leader to any house where they may not be
suffered to enter, they take it for granted that there is both the stolen
Goods, and the Thief also.

Of the BLOOD-HOUND.
THe Blood-hound differs nothing in quality from the Scottish Sluth-hound,
saving that they are more largely sized, and not always of one and the same
color: for they are sometimes Red, Sanded, Black, White, Spotted, and of all
colors with other Hounds, but most commonly either brown or red.

The Germans call this beast Langhund, because their Ears are long, thin, and
hanging down; and they differ not from vulgar Dogs in any other outward
proportion, than only in their Cry and Barking. Their nature is, being set on
by the voice and words of their Leader, to cast about for the sitting of the
present Game; and having found it, will never cease pursuing it with full cry,
till it is tired, without changing for any other. They seldom bark, except in
their Chase, and are very obedient and attentive to the Voice of the Leader.

They which are white, are said to be the quickest scented, and surest Nosed,
and therefore best for the Hare: The black ones for the Boar; and the red for
the Heart and Roe. This is the Opinion of some, but none of mine; because their
color (especially the latter) are too like the Game they Hunt: although there
can be nothing certain collected of their color, yet is the black Hound
hardier, and better able to endure cold than the other which is white. They
must be tied up till they hunt, yet so as they be let loose now and then a
little to ease their Bellies; for it is necessary that their Kennel be kept
sweet and dry. It is questionable how to discern a Hound of excellent sense:
yet some are of the Opinion that the square and flat Nose is the best sign
thereof; likewise a small Head, having all his Legs of equal length; his Breast
not deeper than his Belly, and his Back plain to his Tail; his Eyes quick, his
Ears hanging long; his Tail nimble, and the beak of his Nose always to the
Earth; and especially such as are most silent, and bark least.

Consider now the diverse and variable dispositions of Hounds in their finding
out the Beast. Some are of that nature, that when they have found the Game,
they will stand still till the Huntsman come up, to whom in silence, by their
Face, Eye, and Tail, they show the Game: others, when they have found the
footsteps, go forward without any voice or other show of Ear or Tail: Another
sort when, when they have found the footings of the Beast, prick up their Ears
a little, and either bark or wag their Tails; and others will wag their Tails,
and not move their Ears.

There are some again that do none of these, but wander up and down barking
about the surest marks, and confounding their own footsteps with the Beasts
they hunt; or else forsake the way, and so run back again to the first head;
but when they see the Hare, are afraid, not daring to come near her, except
she start first. These, with the other which hinder the cunning labors of
their Colleagues, trusting to their Feet, and running before their betters,
deface the best mark, or else hunt counter, and take up any false scent for the
truth; or, which is more reprehensible, never forsake the Highways, and yet
have not learned to be silent: Unto these you may also add those which cannot
discern the Footing or Pricking of a Hare, yet will they run speedy when they
see her, pursuing her hotly in the beginning, and afterward tire, or hunt
lazily. All these are not to be admitted into a Kennel of good Hounds.

On the contrary, those Hounds which are good when they have found the Hare,
make show thereof to the Huntsman, by running more speedily, and with gesture
of Head, Eyes, Ears, and Tail, winding to the Fourm or Hares Muse, never give
over prosecution with a gallant noise: they have good and hard Feet, and
stately Stomachs.

Now whereas the nature of the Hare is sometimes to leap and make headings,
sometimes to tread softly with but a very small impression in the Earth, or
sometimes to lie down, and ever to leap or jump out and into her own Form, the
poor Hound is so much the more busied and troubled to retain the small scent of
her pricking which she leaves behind her; for this cause it is requisite that
you help the Hound, not only with Voice, Eye, and Hand, but with a seasonable
Time also: for in frosty weather the scent freezeth with the Earth, so that
there is no certainty of hunting till it thaw, or that the Sun arise. Likewise
if very much Rain fall between the starting of the Hare and time of hunting, it
is not convenient to hunt till the Water be dried up; for the drops disperse
the scent of the Hare, and dry weather collecteth it again. The Summertime
also is not for hunting, because the heat of the weather consurneth the scent;
and the night being then but short, the Hare travelleth not far, feeding only
in the morning and evening: besides, the fragrancy of Flowers and Herbs then
growing, obliterates the scent the Hounds are guided by.

The best time for hunting with these Hounds is in Autumn, because then the
former Odours are weakened, and the Earth barer than at other time.

These Hounds do not only chase their Game while it lives, but being dead
also by any manner of casualty, make recourse to the place where it lies,
having in this point an assured and infallible Guide, namely, the Scent and
Savor of the Blood sprinkled here and there upon the ground: for whether the
Beast being wounded does notwithstanding enjoy life, and escapes the hands of
the Huntsman; or whether the said Beast, being slain, is conveyed cleanly out
of the Park, (so that there be some marks of bloodshed) these Dogs, with no
less facility and easiness, than avidity and greediness, disclose and bewray
the same by Smelling, applying to their pursuit agility and nimbleness, without
tediousness; for which consideration, of a singular speciality they deserved to
be called Sanguinarii, Bloodhounds: And although a piece of flesh be subtly
stolen, and cunningly conveyed away, with such proviso's and precaveats, as
thereby all appearances of Blood is thereby prevented or concealed; yet these
kind of Dogs, by certain direction of an inward assured notice and private
mark, pursue these desperate Deer-stealers through craggy Ways, and crooked
Meanders, till they have found them out: yea, so effectual is their foresight,
that they can discover, separate, and pick them out from an infinite multitude;
creep they never so far into the thickest throng, they will find them out
notwithstanding.

Of the GAZE-HOUND.
THis Dog is little beholding in Hunting to his Nose or Smelling, but to
sharpness of Sight altogether, by the virtue whereof it makes excellent sport
with the Fox and Hare.

This Dog will choose and separate from amongst a great Flock or Herd, and such
a one will it take by election, as is not lank or lean, but full, fat, and
round.

If a Beast be wounded and go astray, this Dog will seek after it by the
sreadfastness of the Eye; if it happen to return, and be mingled with the
residue of the Herd, this Dog will soon spy it out, leaving the rest untouched:
and after he has set sure sight upon it, he separateth it from the company;
and having so done, never cease till he has wearied it to death.

This Dog is called in Latin Agasaeus, because the beams of the Sight are so
steadfastly settled, and unmoveably fastened. These Dogs are much used in the
Northern parts of England, much more than in the Southern; and on Champion
ground rather than in bushy and woody places: Horsemen use them more than
Footmen.

If it happen so at any time that this Dog take a wrong way, the Master making
some usual sign, and familiar token, he returns forthwith, and takes the
right and ready course, beginning his Ghase afresh, and with a clear Voice, and
a swift Foot, follows the Game with as much courage and nimbleness as he did
at the first.

Of the GREYHOUND.
AMong the diverse kinds of Hunting-dogs, the Greyhound, by reason of his
Swiftness, Strength, and Sagacity to follow and pursue his Game, deserves the
first place; for such are the conditions of this Dog as a Philosopher
observes, that he is reasonably scented to find out, speedy and quick of foot
to follow, and fierce and strong to take and overcome; and yet silent, coming
upon his Prey at unawares, according to the observation of Gratius:

Sic Canis illa suos taciturna supervenit hosts.
The best Greyhound has a long Body, strong, and reasonable great, not so big
as the Wolf-dog in Ireland; a neat sharp Head, and splendant Eyes; a long
Mouth, and sharp Teeth; little Ears, and thin Gristles in them; a straight
Neck, and a broad and strong Breast; his fore Legs straight and short, his
hinder Legs long and straight; broad Shoulders, round Ribs, fleshy Buttocks,
but not fat; a long Tail, strong, and full of Sinews. Thus Nemesian eloquently
describes the best of Greyhounds:

-- Sit cruribus altis,
Costarum sub fine decenter prona carinam:
Renibus ampla satis validis deductaque coras
Sit rigid is, multamque gerat sub pectore lato,
Quae sensim rursus ficca se collig at alvo:
Cuique nimis molles fluitent in cursibus Aures.
Elige tunc cursu facilem, facilemque recursu,
Dum superant vires, dum laeto flore juventus.
Of this kind, that is always the best to be chosen among the Whelps, which
weighs lightest; for it will be soonest at the Game, and so hang upon it,
hindering its swiftness, till the stronger and heavier Dogs come to help and
offer their assistance; and therefore besides the marks or necessary good parts
of a Greyhound already spoken of, it is requisite that he have large sides,
and a broad midriff, that so he may take his breath in and out more easily: his
Belly must be small; if otherwise, it will hinder the swiftness of his course:
likewise he must have long Legs, thin and soft Hairs. And these must the
Huntsman lead on his left hand, if he be afoot; and on the right, if on
Horseback.

The best time to try them and train them to their Game, is at twelve Months
old; yet some begin sooner with them, that is, at ten Months if they are Males,
and at eight if Females: yet it is surest not to strain them, or permit them to
run a long Course, till they be twenty Months old. Keep them also in the Slip
while they are abroad, until they can see their Course; and loosen not a young
Dog, until the Game have been on foot for a good season, lest being over-greedy
of the Prey, he strain his limbs too much.

The Greyhounds which are most in request among the Germans, are called
Windspil, alluding to compare their swiftness with the Wind; but the French
make most account of those that are bred in the Mountains of Dalmatia, or in
any other Mountains, especially of Turkey; for such have hard Feet, long Ears,
and bristle Tails.

The Greyhound (called by the Latins Leporarius) has his name from the word
Gre, which word sounds Gradus in Latin, in English Degree; because among all
Dogs, these are the most principal, having the chiefest place, and being simply
and absolutely the best of the gentle kind of Hounds.

Of the HARRIER and TERRIER.
THe Harrier in Latin is called Leverarius, or Sagax; by the Greeks,
Ichneuten, of tracing or chasing by the Foot.

Nature has endewed this Creature with an admirable gift of Smelling, and is
bold and courageous in the pursuit of his Game. There are several sorts of
them, and all differ in their Services: some are for the Hare, the Fox, the
Wolf, the Heart, the Buck, the Badger, the Otter, the Polecat, the Weasle, the
Coney, etc. some for one thing, some for another.

As for the Coney, we use not to hunt, but take it sometimes with a Net,
sometimes with a Ferret, and sometimes with a Lurcher or Tumbler. Among the
several sorts of Harriers, there are some which are apt to hunt two diverse
Beasts, as the Fox sometimes, and otherwhiles the Hare; but they hunt not with
that good success and towardness, who stick not to one sort of Game.

The Terrier hunteth the Fox and the Badger or Gray only: And they are called
Terriers, because they (after the manner and cusiom of Ferrets in searching.
for Coneys) creep into the ground, and by that means affright, nip, and bite
the Fox and the Badger, in such sort, that either they tear them in pieces with
their Teeth, (being in the bosom of the Earth) or else hale and pull them by
force out of their lurking Angles, dark Dungeons, and close Caves; or at the
least, through conceived fear, drive them out of their hollow Harbors,
insomuch, if they are not taken by Net or otherwise, they are compelled to
prepare for flight; and being desirous of the next, though not the safest
refuge, they are oft-times entrapped with Snares and Nets laid over Holes for
the same purpose.

Of LEVINER or LYEMMER.
THe Leviner is singular in Smelling, and in Swiftness incomparable. This is as
it where a middle kind between the Harrier and the Greyhound, as well for his
kind, as the frame and shape of his Body. It is called in Latin Levinarius, a
Levitate, of lightness, and therefore may well be called a Light-Hound. This
Dog, for the excellency of his Conditions, namely, Smelling, and swift Running,
does follow the Game with more eagerness, and takes the Prey with a jolly
quickness.

Of the TUMBLER.
THe word Tumbler undoubtedly had its derivation from the French word Tumbier,
which signifies to Tumble; to which the Latin name agrees, Vertagus, from
Vertere to turn, and so they do: for in Hunting they turn and tumble, winding
their Bodies about circularly, and then fiercely and violently venturing on the
Beast, do suddenly gripe it at the very entrance or mouth of their Holes or
Receptacles, before they can make any recovery of self-security.

This Dog uses another craft and subtilty, namely, when he runs into a
Warren, or fetches a course about a Coney-borough, he hunts not after them, he
no ways affrights them, he shows no spite against them; but dissembling
friendship, and pretending favor, passes by with silence and quietness,
marking their Holes diligently, wherein he seldom is deceived. When he comes
to a place where there is a certainty of Coneys, he coucheth down close with
his Belly to the ground, provided always by his Skill and Policy that the Wind
be against him in that Enterprise, and that the Coneys, discover him not where
he lurketh; by which means he gets the benefit of the scent of the Coneys,
which is carried to him by the Wind and Air, either going to their Holes, or
coming out, either passing this way, or running that way; and so orders the
business by his circumspection, that the silly Coney is debarred quite from his
Hole, (which is the Haven of their hope, and the Harbor of their safety) and
fraudulently circumvented and taken before they can get the advantage of their
Holes. Thus having caught his Prey, he carries it speedily to his Master,
waiting his Dogs return in some convenient lurking corner.

These Dogs are somewhat lesser than the Hounds being lanker, leaner, and
somewhat prick-ear'd. By the form and fashion of their Bodies they may be
justly called Mungrel-Grey-hounds, if they were somewhat bigger. But
notwithstanding they countervail not the Greyhound in greatness, yet will he
take in one days space as many Coneys as shall arise to as big a burden, and
as heavy a load as a Horse can carry: For Craft and Subtilty are the Instruments
whereby he makes this spoil, which pernicious properties supply the places of
more commendable qualities.

Let this suffice for a taste: now, after such Dogs as serve Hunting, will
follow such as serve for Hawking and Fowling; among which, the principal and
chiefest is the Spaniel, called in Latin Hispaniolus, borrowing his name from
Hispania; wherein we Englishmen, not pronouncing the Aspiration H, nor the
Vowel I, for quickness and readiness of speech, say, Spaniel.

Of the SPANIEL.
THere are two sorts of Dogs which necessarily serve for Fowling. The first
finds Game on the Land, the other on the Water. Such as delight on the Land,
play their parts either by swiftness of foot, or by often questing to search
out and to spring the Bird for further hope of reward, or else by some secret
sign and privy token, discover the place where they fall. The first kind of
such serve the Hawk; the second, the Net or Train. The first kind have no
peculiar names assigned them, except they are named after the Bird which by
natural appointment he is allotted to take; for which consideration, some are
called Dogs for the Falcon, the Pheasant, the Partridge, and suchlike: they
are commonly called by one name, viz. Spaniels, as if they originally came from
Spain.

The Spaniel, whose service is required in Fowling on the Water, partly through
natural inclination, and partly by diligently teaching, is properly called
Aquaticus, as Water-Spaniel, because he has usual recourse to the Water, where
all his Game lies, namely, Waterfowl, which are taken by their help in their
kind.

His size is somewhat big, and of a measurable greatness, having long, rough,
and curled Hair, which must be clipped in due season: for by lessening that
superfluity of Hair, they become more light and swist, and are less hindered in
swimming. Ducks and Drakes are his principal Game; whereupon he is likewise
named a Dog for a Duck, because in that quality he is excellent.

Of the WHITE-HOUND.
THose Hounds which are all of one color, as all white, are the best Hounds;
in like manner those which are spotted with red: but those which are spotted
with a dun color, are of little value, being fainthearted, and cannot endure
much labor. But should they happen to be whelpt coal-black, which is but
seldom, they commonly prove incomparable Hounds. But if white Hounds are
spotted with black, experience tells us, they are never the best Hare-hunters.
White, and black and white, and gray streaked white, are also the most
beautiful.

Of FALLOW-HOUNDS.
THey are hardy, and of good scent, keeping well their Chase without change;
but not so swift as the white. They are of a strong constitution, and do not
fear the Water; running surely, and are very hardy, commonly loving the Heart
beyond any other Chase.

The best complexion for these Fallow-Hounds, is the lively red, and such as
have a white spot in their Forehead, or have a Ring about their Neck: but those
which are yellowish, and spotted with black or dun, are of little estimation.
Those which are well joynted, having good Claws, are fit to make Bloodhounds:
and those which have shagged Tails, are generally swift runners. These Hounds
are fitter for Princes than private Gentlemen, because they seldom run more
than one Chase; neither have they any great stomach to the Hare or other small
Chases: and, which is worst of all, they are apt to run at tame Beasts.

Of the DUN-HOUND.
THese are good for all Chases, and therefore of general use. The best colored
are such as are dun on the Back, having their four quarters tanned, or of the
complexion of a Hare's Legs: But if the Hair on the Back be black, and their
Legs freckled with red and black, they then usually prove excellent Hounds: and
indeed there are few dun-coloured to be found bad; the worst of them are such
whose Legs are of a whitish color. It is wonderful, in these creatures, to
observe how much they stick upon the knowledge of their Master, especially his
Voice, and Horn, and none's else. Nay, farther, they know the distinct Voices
of their Fellows, and do know who are Babblers and Liars, and who not; and will
follow the one, and not the other.

Now for Hounds, the West-country, Cheshire, and Lancashire, with other
Wood-land and Mountainous Countries, breed our Slow-hound; which is a large
great Dog, tall and heavy. Worcestershire, Bedford-shire, and many well-mixt
soils, where the Champaign and Covert are of equal largeness, produce a
middle-sized Dog, of a more nimble composure than the former. Lastly, the
North-parts, as Yorkshire, Cumberland, Northumberland, and many other plain
Champaign Countries, breed the Light, Nimble, Swift, Slender, Fleet Hound.
After all these, the little Beagle is attributed to our Country; this is that
Hound, which in Latin is called Canis Agasaeus, or the Gaze-hound. Besides our
Mastiff, which seems to be an Indigena, or Native of England, we train up most
excellent Greyhounds (which seem to have been brought hither by the Galls) in
our open Champaigns. All these Dogs have deserved to be famous in adjacent and
remote Countries, whither they are sent for great rarities, and ambitiously
sought for by their Lords and Princes; although only the fighting Dogs seem to
have been known to the ancient Authors; and perhaps in that Age Hunting was not
so much cultivated by our own Countrymen.

The marks of a good and fair Hound.
His Head ought to be of a middle proportion, rather long than round; his
Nostrils wide; his Ears large; his Back bowed; the Fillets great; the Haunches
large; the Thighs well trussed; the Ham straight; the Tail big near the Reins,
and the rest slender to the end; the Leg big; the Soal of the Foot dry, and
formed like a Fox's, with the Claws great.

Of the Election of a Dog and Bitch for good Whelps.
Your Bitch must come of a good kind, being strong, and well proportioned in
all parts, having her Ribs and Flanks great and large. Let the Dog that lines
her be of a good fair breed; and let him be young, if you intend to have light
and hot Hounds: for if the Dog be old, the Whelps will participate of his Dull
and heavy nature.

If your Bitch grow not naturally Proud so soon as you would have, you may make
her so, by taking two heads of Garlic, half a Gastor's Stone, the juice of
Cresses, and about twelve Spanish Flies, or Cantharides: boil these together in
a Pipkin which holds a pint, with some Mutton, and make Broth thereof; and of
this give to the Bitch twice or thrice, and she will infallibly grow proud. The
same Pottage given to the Dog, will make him desirous of copulation.

When your Bitch is lined, and with Puppy, you must not let her hunt, for that
will be the way to make her cast her Whelps; but let her unconfined walk up and
down in the House and Court, and never lock her up in her Kennel; for she is
then impatient of food; and therefore you must make her some hot Broth once a
day.

If you would spay your Bitch, it must be done before she ever had Litter of
Whelps: And in spaying her, take not away all the Roots or Strings of the
Veins; for if you do, it will much prejudice her Reins, and hinder her
swiftness ever after: but by leaving some behind, it will make her much the
stronger and more hardy. Whatever you do, spay her not when she is proud; for
that will endanger her life: but you may do it fifteen days after. But the best
time of all is, when the Whelps are shaped within her.

How to enter young Hounds to Hunt the Heart; and what Quarries and Rewards you
shall give them.
Having first taught your Hounds to know your Hallow, and the sound of your
Horn, then, about eighteen months old, you must lead them once a Week into the
fields, and not oftener.

The best manner to teach your Hounds, is to take a live Hare, and trail her
after you upon the Earth now one way, now another; and so, having drawn i^ a
convenient space, hide it in the Earth: afterward se^ forth your Hound near the
Trail, who taking Wind runs to and fro near the Woods, Fields, PAstures,
Path-ways, and Hedges, until he find which way the Hare is gone; but with a
soft and gentle pace, until at length coming near the lodged Hare, he mendeth
his pace, and bestirreth himself more speedily, leaping o^ his Prey, and
killing it, loadeth himself with his conquest and bringing it to his Master
with Triumph, h^ must receive both Dog and it with all tokens of love i^ to his
Bosom.

When you hunt, let your Heart be in prime of grea^^ for then he is heavier than
in April or May, and cann^^ stand up so long.

Then choose your Forest wherein the Relays are (...) equal proportion: then
place all your young Houn^^ with five or fix old to enter them; and then lead
the^ to the farthest and last Relay, and cause the Heart to (...) hunted unto
them. Being come up, uncouple your o^^ Hounds; and having found the Track of
the Heart, being well entered in cry, uncouple likewise your young Hound^ and if
you find any of them lag behind, you must beat or whip them forward.

In what place soever you kill the Heart, immediately flay his Neck, and reward
your Hounds: for it is best whilst it is hot so to do.

There are several ways of entering Hounds. As first, by taking a Heart in Nets,
and after you have cut off one of his Feet, let him go: a quarter of an hour
after, assemble your young Hounds; and having found out the View or Slot of the
Heart or Buck by your Bloodhounds, uncouple your young Hounds, and let them
hunt. Secondly, you may bring them to quarry, by taking half a dozen Huntsmen,
swift of foot, each whereof shall have two couple to lead in Liams; and having
unlodg'd the Heart, pursue him fair and softly, so that you tire not too much
your young Hounds. After the Heart has ran two or three hours, and that you
find he begins to sink, you may then cast off your young Hounds: but beware it
be not when he is at Bay, and his Head full summed; for so you may endanger the
lives of your Hounds.

But the best way of entering Hounds is at the Hare; for thereby they will learn
all Doubles and Turns, better know the Hallow, will be more tender-nosed, and
better scented, by using the beaten ways and Champion grounds.

Here note, that with whatsoever you first enter your Hounds, and therewith
reward them, they will ever after love that most. Wherefore, if you intend them
for the Heart, enter them not first with the Hind. And for the better hunting
the Heart, enter not your young Hounds within a Toil; for there a Heart does
nothing but turn and cast about, since he cannot run end-long, and so they are
always in sight of him. If then afterward you should run him at force out of a
Toil, and at length, and out of sight, you will find the Hounds to give him
over quickly.

Lastly, enter not your Hounds nor teach them in the Morning; for if so, you
will find them apt to give over in the heat of the day.

Of COURSING with Greyhounds.
I Need not declare the Excellencies which are contained in the noble and
worthy Exercise of Coursing with Greyhounds, since it is so well known to all
Gentlemen who take delight in this pleasant and healthy Pastime: I shall
therefore only insist upon the breed of Greyhounds, their Shape, their Diet,
and the Laws belonging to the same, according as they were commanded, allowed,
and subscribed by the Duke of Norfolk, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

First, for the Breeding of Greyhounds, in this you must have respect to the
Country, which should be Champain, Plain, or high Downs. The best Valleys are
those of Belvoir, White-horse, and Evesholm, or any other where there are no
Coverts, so that a Hare may stand forth and endure a Course of two or three
miles: as for high Downs or Heaths, the best are about Marlborough, Salisbury,
Cirencester, and Lincoln.

Though these places are very commodious for the breeding and training up of
Greyhounds; yet, in my opinion, the middle, or most part arable grounds are
the best: and yet those Gentlemen who dwell on Downs or plain grounds, to keep
up the reputation of their own Dogs, affirm, that they are more nimble and
cunning in turning than the Vale-Dogs are and Mr. Markham confesses that he
has seen a Vale-Dog so much deceived, that upon a turn he has lost more
ground than has been recoverable in the whole Course after: however, with a
little care, in a short time this error may be rectified; and then you will
experimentally find The good Dogs upon the Deeps will ever beat the good Dogs
upon the Plains.

It is a received opinion, that the Grey-hound-Bitch will beat the
Grey-hound-Dog, by reason the excels him in nimbleness: but if you consider
that the Dog is longer and stronger, you must look upon that opinion no more
than as a vulgar error.

Here note, as to the breeding of your Greyhounds, that the best Dog upon an
indifferent Bitch, will not get so good a Whelp as an indifferent Dog upon the
best Bitch.

Observe this in general as to breeding, let your Dogs and Bitches, as near as
you can, be of an equal age, not exceeding four years old: however, to breed
with a young Dog and an old Bitch, may be the means of producing excellent
Whelps, the goodness whereof you shall know by their Shapes in this manner.

If they are raw-bon'd, lean, loose-made, sickle or crooked-hough'd, and
generally unknit in every Member; these are the proper marks of excellent shape
and goodness: but if after three or four months they appear round and
close-trust, fat, straight, and as it were full summed and knit in every
Member, they never prove good, swift, nor comely.

The goodness of shape in a Greyhound after a year and a half old, is this:
his Head must be lean and long, with a sharp Nose, rush-grown from the Eye
downward; a full clear Eye, with long Eyelids; a sharp Ear, short and close
falling; a long Neck a little bending, with a loose hanging Weasand; a broad
Breast, straight Forelegs, hollow Side, straight Ribs; a square slat Back,
short and strong Fillets, a broad space between the Hips, a strong Stern or
Tail, a round Foot, and good large Clefts.

The Dieting of Greyhounds consists in these four things: Food, Exercise,
Airing, and Kennelling.

Food of a Greyhound is two fold: general, that is, the maintaining of a Dog
in good bodily condition; and particular, when the Dog is dieted for a Wager,
or it may be for some Distemper he is afflicted with.

A Grey-hound's general Food ought to be Chippings, Crusts of Bread, soft Bones
and Gristles. Your Chippings ought to be scalded in Beef, Mutton, Veal or
Venison-Broth; and when it is indifferent cool, then make your Bread only
float with good Milk, and give it your Greyhounds Morning and Evening; and
this will keep them in good state of body.

But if your Dog be poor, sickly, and weak, then take Sheeps-heads, Wool and
all, clean washed, and having broken them to pieces, put them into a Pot; and
when it boils, scum the Pot, and put therein good store of Oatmeal, and such
Herbs as Pottage is usually made of; boil these till the Flesh be very tender:
then with the Meat and Broth feed your Dogs Morning and Evening, and it will
recover them.

If you design your Greyhound for a Wager, then give him this Diet-bread:
Take half a peck of the finest and driest Oat-meal, and a peck of good Wheat,
having ground them together, boult the Meal, and scattering an indifferent
quantity of Liquorish and Anniseeds well beaten together; knead it up with the
Whites of Eggs, new Ale and Barm mixed together, and bake it in small Loaves
indifferent hard; then take it and soak it in Beef or any of the aforesaid
Broths; and half an hour after Sunrising, and half an hour before its setting,
having first walk and air'd your Greyhound, give it him to eat. This will not
only increase his strength, but enlarge his Wind.

Having thus spoken of a Grey-Hound's Feeding, either generally or
particularly, either for keeping him in health, or restoring it when it is
lost, I shall in the next place proceed to his Exercise; and this likewise
consists in two things, that is, Coursing, and Airing.

As to the first, he ought to be Coursed thrice a week, in such manner that you
usually reward him with Blood, which will animate and encourage him to
prosecute his Game: but be not unmindful to give the Hare all just and lawful
advantage, so that she may stand long before the Greyhound, that thereby he
may show his utmost strength and skill before he reap the benefit of his labor.

If he kill, suffer him not to break the Hare, but take her from him; and
having cleans'd his Chaps from the Wool of the Hare, then give him the Liver,
Lights, and Heart, and so take him up in your Leash; and having led him home,
wash his Feet with some Butter and Beer, and then put him into the Kennel, and
feed him half an hour afterward.

Upon your Greyhounds Coursing-days, give him in the Morning before you air
him, a Toast and Butter or Oil, and nothing else; then Kennel him till he go to
his Course.

The reason of Kennelling your Greyhounds is this, because it breeds in Dogs
Lust, Spirit, and Nimbleness; besides, it prevents several dangerous
Casualties, and keeps the Pores from spending till time of necessity: and
therefore do not permit your Dog to stir out of the Kennel but in the hours of
Feeding, Walking, Coursing, or other necessary business.

The Laws of the Leash or Coursing.
Though the Laws of Coursing may alter according to some men's swaying Fancies;
yet these, subscribed by the chief of the Gentry, were ever held authentical.
Take them thus in order, according to my collection out of Mr. Markham.

First, it was ordered, that he who was chosen Fewterer, or Letter-loose of the
Greyhounds, should receive the Greyhounds Match to run together into his
Leash as soon as he came into the Field, and follow next to the Hare-finder
till he came unto the Form: and no Horseman or Footman, on pain of disgrace,
to go before them, or on any side, but directly behind, the space of forty
yards or thereabouts.

2. That not above one Brace of Greyhounds do course a Hare at one instant.

3. That the Hare-finder should give the Hare three Sohoe's before he put her
from her Lear, to make the Greyhounds gaze and attend her rising.

4. That the Fewterer shall give twelve-score Law ere he loose the Greyhounds,
except it be in danger of losing sight.

5. That Dog that gives the first Turn, if after the Turn be given there be
neither Coat, Slip, nor Wrench extraordinary; I say, he which gave the first
Turn shall be held to win the Wager.

6. If one Dog give the first Turn, and the other bear the Hare, then he which
bare the Hare shall win.

7. If one give both the first and last Turn, and no other advantage be between
them, the odd Turn shall win the Wager.

8. That a Coat shall be more than two Turns, and a Go-by, or the Bearing of
the Hare equal with two Turns.

9. If neither Dog turn the Hare, then he which leads last at the Covert
shall be held to win the Wager.

10. If one Dog turn the Hare, serve himself, and turn her again, those two
Turns shall be as much as a Coat.

11. If all the Course be equal, then he which bears the Hare shall win only;
and if she be not born, the Course must be adjudged dead.

12. If he which comes first in to the death of the Hare takes her up, and
saves her from breaking, cherishes the Dogs, and cleanses their Mouths from
the Wool, or other filth of the Hare, for such courtesy done he shall in right
challenge the Hare: but not doing it, he shall have no Right, Privilege, or
Title therein.

13. If any Dog shall take a fall in the Course, and yet perform his part, he
shall challenge the advantage of a Turn more than he gives.

14. If one Dog turn the Hare, serve himself, and give diverse Coats, yet in the
end stand still in the field, the other Dog, without Turn giving, running home
to the Covert; that Dog which stood still in the field shall be adjudged to
lose the Wager.

15. If any man shall ride over a Dog, and overthrow him in his Course, (though
the Dog were the worse Dog in opinion, yet) the party for the offense shall
either receive the disgrace of the Field, or pay the Wager; for between the
Parties it shall be adjudged no Course.

16. Lastly, those which are chosen Judges of the Leash shall give their
judgments presently before they depart from the Field, or else he in whose
default it lies shall pay the Wager by a general Voice and Sentence.

Here note, that it lies in the power of him that has the Office of the Leash
conferred on him, to make Laws according to the Customs of Countries, and the
Rule of Reason.

Of the Styles of Hunting different from the English both Antique and Foreign.
THe Hunting used by the Ancients was much like that way which is at present
taken with the Rain-Deer, which is seldom hunted at force or with Hounds, but
only drawn after with a Blood-hound, and forestalled with Nets and Engines. So
did they with all Beasts, and therefore a Dog is never commended by them for
opening before he has by signs discovered where the Beast lies in his Layre,
as by their drawing stiff our Harbourers are brought to give right judgment.
Therefore I do not find that they were curious in the Music of their Hounds,
or in a composition of their Kennel or Pack, either for deepness, or loudness,
or sweetness of cry like to ours. Their Huntsmen were accustomed to shout and
make a great noise, as Virgil observes in the third of his Georgicks: Ingentem
clamore premes ad retia Cervum.

So that it was only with that confusion to bring the Deer to the Nets laid
for him.

But we comfort our Hounds with loud and courageous Cries and Noises, both of
Voice and Horn, that they may follow over the same way that they saw the Heart
pass, without crossing or coasting.

The Sicilian way of Hunting was this: when the Nobles or Gentry were informed
which way a Herd of Deer passed, giving notice to one another, they appointed a
meeting, and every one brought with him a Cross-bow, or a Long bow, and a
bundle of Staves. These Staves had an Iron-spike at the bottom, and their Head
is bored, with a Cord drawn through all of them; their length is about four
foot: Being thus provided, they come to the Herd, and there casting themselves
about into a large Ring, they surround the Deer; and then every one of them
receives a peculiar stand, and there, unbinding his Faggot, ties the end of his
Cord to the other who is set in the next station; then to support it, sticks
into the ground each Staff, about the distance of ten foot one from the other.
Then they take out Feathers, which they bring with them, dyed in Crimson for
this very purpose, and fastened upon a Thread which is tied to the Cord, so that
with the least breath of wind they are whirled round about. Those which keep
the several Stands, withdraw and hide themselves in the next Covert. After
this, the chief Ranger enters within the Line, taking with him only such
Hounds which draw after the Herd; and coming near with their cry, rouse them:
Upon which the Deer fly till they come toward the Line, where they turn off
toward the left, and still gazing upon the shaking and shining Feathers,
wander about them as if they were kept in with a Wall or Pale. The chief Ranger
pursues, and calling to every one by name, as he passes by their Stand, cries
to them, that they shoot the first, third, or sixth, as he shall please; and if
any of them miss, and single out any other than that which was assigned by the
Ranger, it is counted a disgrace to him: by which means, as they pass by the
several Stations, the whole Herd is killed by several hands. This Relation is
of undoubted truth, as you may find it in Pierius his Hieroglyphics, Lib. 7.
Chap. 6.

Boar-hunting is very usual in France, and they call it Sangtier. In this sort
of Hunting the way is to use furious terrible Sounds and Noises, as well of
Voice as Horn, to make the Chase turn and fly; because they are slow, and trust
to their Tusks and defense: which is Agere Aprum, to bait the Boar. Yet this
must be done after his Den or Hold is discovered, and the Nets be pitched.

The Huntsmen give judgment of the Wild-Boar by the print of his Foot, by his
Rooting. A wild Swine roots deeper than our ordinary Hogs, because their Snouts
are longer; and when he comes into a Cornfield, (as the Caledonian-Boar in
Ovid) turns up one continued Furrow, not as our Hogs, routing here and there;
and then by his soil he soils and wallows him in the mire: these are his
Volutabra Silvestria, where his greatness is measured out; then coming forth,
he rubs against some Tree, which marks his height; as also when he sticks his
Tusk into it, that shows the greatness thereof. They observe the bigness of his
Lesses, and the depth of his Den; where note, that they call his Dung by the
name of Lesses.

Whenever the Boar is hunted and stands at Bay, the Huntsmen ride in, and
with Swords and Spears striking on that side which is from their Horses, wound
or kill him. This is in the French Hunting: but the ancient Romans standing on
foot, or setting their Knees to the ground, and charging directly with their
Spear, did Opponere ferrum, and Excipere Aprum: for such is the nature of a
Boar, that he spits himself with fury, running upon the Weapon to come at his
Adversary; and so, seeking his revenge, he meets with his own destruction.

Though these Wild-Boars are frequent in France, we have none in England; yet
it may be supposed that heretofore we had, and did not think it convenient to
preserve that Game: For our old Authors of Hunting reckon them amongst the
beasts of Venery; and we have the proper terms belonging to them, as you may
find them at the beginning of the Book. Of Boar-hunting you will read more
hereafter.

There are no Roe-Deer in England; but there are plenty of them in Scotland, as
Sir James Lindsay an old Scottish Writer testifies.

Yet it may be thought that they have been more common in England, because our
ancient Huntsmen acknowledge the proper terms for this Chase; and in the first
place we have distinct Ages for these Dorces, which you shall find in the Terms
aforesaid. They make good Chase, stand long, and fly end-way. Compellere
Dorcas, is to force the Bevy; and to drive them into the Toyls.

Although we have no Wolves in England at this present, yet it is certain that
heretofore we had Routs of them, as they have to this very day in Ireland; and
in that Country are bred a race of Greyhounds, (which are commonly called
Wolf-Dogs) which are strong, fleet, and bear a natural enmity to the Wolf. Now
in these the Greyhounds of that Nation there is an incredible force and
boldness, so that they are in great estimation, and much sought after in
foreign parts, so that the King of Poland makes use of them in his hunting of
great Beasts by force. Wherefore it may well be intended of the great
fierceness which these Dogs have in assaulting, that when the Romans saw them
play, they thought them so wonderful violent, as that they must needs have been
Ferreis caveis advecti, brought up in Iron Dens.

In Poland when the King hunts, his servants are wont to surround a Wood,
though a Mile in compass, with Toyls which are pitched on firm Stakes. This
being done, the whole Town, all Sexes and Ages promiscuously rush into the
Enclosure, and with their ^oud shouts rear all the Beasts within that Wood;
which making forth, are intercepted in the Nets. Their small and great Beasts
are entangled together, after the same manner as when amongst us we draw a Net
over a Pond, and after beating it all over with Poles, we bring out not only
Pike and Carp, but lesser Fry; so they enclose at once Deer, Boar, Roe-buck,
and Hare: For so they order their Nets, that the space of those Meshes which
are twisted with greater Cords, for the entangling of greater Beasts, that
space, I say, is made up with smaller Whip-cord, for the catching smaller Prey.

He has a great race of English Mastiffs, which in that Country retain their
generosity, and are brought up to play upon greater beasts. It is not counted
among them disagreeable to the Laws of the Chase, to use Guns. I shall now
proceed to the manner of English-Hunting both ancient and modern, according to
the best information I could gather either out of Books, experienced Huntsmen,
and my own practice.

Of Hart-Hunting.
A Heart can naturally swim a great way; insomuch that I have heard of some so
sore hunted in Forests near the Sea, that they have plunged into it, and have
been killed by Fishermen a dozen miles from land.

It is reported of them when they go to Rut, and must for that purpose cross
some great River or Arm of the Sea, they assemble in great Herds, the strongest
goes in first, and the next of strength follows him, and so one after the
other, relieving themselves by staying their Heads on the Buttocks of each
other.

The Hind commonly carries her Calf eight or nine months, which usually falls
in May, although some later: some of them have two at once, eating the Skin up
wherein the Calf did lie.

As the Calf grows up, she teaches it to run, leap, and the way it must keep
to defend it self from the Hounds.

Hearts and Hindes are very long-lived, living commonly an hundred years and
upwards.

The nature of a Heart.
The Heart is strangely amazed when he hears any one call, or whistle in his
Fist; For trial of which, some seeing a Heart in the Plain in motion, have
called after him, saying, Ware, Ware, or Take heed; and thereupon have seen him
instantly turn back, making some little stand. He hears very perfectly when
his Head and Ears are erected; but hears imperfectly when he holds them
down. When he is on foot, and not afraid, he wonders at every thing he sees,
and takes pleasure to gaze at them.

They bear sometimes few, and sometimes more Croches; and that is the reason
that many men have erred in their judgments as to their age.

Hearts are bred in most Countries; but the Ancients do prefer those of Britain
before all others, where they are of diverse colors.

These do excel all others in the beauty of Horns; which are very high, yet do
not grow to their Bones or Scalps, but to their Skin, branching forth into many
Speers, being solid throughout, and as hard as Stones, and fall off once a
year: but if they remain abroad in the Air, and that thereby they are sometimes
wet and dry, they grow as light as any vanishing or other substance, as I have
proved by experience, finding some which have been lost by them in the Woods;
wherefore I gather, that they are of an earthly substance, concrete, and
hardened with a strong heat, made like unto Bones. They lose these Horns every
year in the Spring. At one year old they have nothing but Bunches, that are
small significators of Horns to come: at two years they appear more perfectly,
but straight and simple: at three years they grow into two Spears: at four,
into three; and so increase every year in their Branches till they be six; and
above that time their age is not certainly to be discerned by their Head.

Having lost their Horns in the daytime, they hide themselves, inhabiting the
shades, to avoid the annoyance of Flies, and feed, during that time only, in
the night. Their new Horns come out at first like Bunches, and afterward (as I
said before) by the increase of the Sun's heat they grow more hard, covered
with a rough Skin, which is called a Velvethead; and as that Skin dries, they
daily try the strength of their new Heads upon Trees; which not only scrapeth
off the roughness, but by the pain they feel thus rubbing them, they are taught
how long to forbear the company of their fellows: for at last, when in their
chafing and fretting of their new Horn against the Tree they can feel no longer
pain and smart in them, they take it for high time to forsake their solitary
dwellings, and return again to their former condition.

The reason why Hearts and Deers do lose their Horns yearly, are these: First,
because of the matter whereof they consist; for it is dry and earthy, like the
substance of green Leaves which have an yearly fall, likewise, wanting glewing
or holding moisture to continue them; wherefore the Horn of a Heart cannot be
bent. Secondly, from the place they grow upon; for they are not rooted upon the
Skull, but only within the Skin. Thirdly, from the efficient cause; for they
are hardened both with the heat of Summer, and cold of Winter; by means whereof
the Pores to receive their nourishing Liquor are utterly shut up and stopped,
so as of necessity their native heat dies; which falls not out in other
Beasts, whose Horns are for the most part hollow, and fitted for longer
continuance; but these are of lesser, and the new Bunches swelling up toward
the Spring, do thrust off the old Horns, having the assistance of Boughs of
Trees, weight of the Horns, or by the willing excussion of the Beast that
bears them.

It is observed, that when a Heart pricketh up his Ears, he windeth sharp, very
far, and sure, and discovers all treachery against him; but if they hang down
and wag, he perceives no danger. By their Teeth is their Age discerned, and
they have four on both sides wherewith they grind their meat, besides two
other, much greater in the Male than in the Female. All these Beasts have Worms
in their Head underneath their Tongue, in a hollow place where the Neck-bone is
joined to the Head, which are no bigger than Flie-blows. His Blood is not like
other Beasts, for it has no Fibers in it, and therefore it is hardly
congealed. His Heart is very great, and so are all those of fearful Beasts,
having in it a Bone like a Cross. He has no Gall, and that is one of the
causes of the length of his life; and therefore are his Bowels so bitter, that
the Dogs will not touch them unless they be very fat. The Genital part is all
nervy; the Tail small; and the Hind has Udders betwixt her Thighs, with four
Speans like a Gow. These are above all other four-footed Beasts, both ingenious
and fearful, who although they have large Horns, yet their defense against
other four-footed Beasts is to run away.

And now if you will credit Gesner as a Huntsman, pray here observe what
account he gives of Hunting the Heart: This wild deceitful and subtle Beast
(says he) by windings and turnings does often deceive its Hunter, as the Hearts
of Meandros flying from the terrible cry of Diana's Hounds. Wherefore the
prudent Hunter must frame his Dogs as Pythagoras did his Scholars, with words
of Art to set them on, and take them off again at his pleasure; wherefore he
must first of all compass in the Beast (en son giste) in her own Layr, and so
unharbour her in the view of the Dogs, that so they may never lose her Slot or
Footing: neither must he set upon every one, either of the Herd or those that
wander solitary alone, or a little one but partly by sight, and partly by their
Footing and Fumets, judge of their Game; also he must observe the largeness of
his Layr. Being thus informed, then Discouples les chiens, take off your
Dog-Couplings; and some on Horseback, others on foot, follow the Cry with
greatest art, observation and speed, remembering and preventing (cer fruze) the
subtle turnings and headings of the Heart; straining with all dexterity to leap
Hedge, Pale, Ditch, nay Rocks; neither fearing Thorns, down Hills, nor Woods,
but providing fresh Horse if the first tire, follow the largest Head of the
whole Herd, which you must endeavor to single out for the Chase; which the
Dogs perceiving must follow, taking for a prohibition to follow any other.

The Dogs are animated by the winding of Horns and voices of the Huntsmen, like
Soldiers to the battle, by the noise of Trumpets and other Warlike
Instruments. But sometimes the crafty great beast seodeth forth his little
Squire to be sacrificed to the Dogs and Huntsmen, instead of himself; lying
close in the mean time: Then must a Retreat be sounded, and (rompre le chiens)
the Dogs be broken off, and taken in (le Limier) that is, Leame again, until
they be brought to the fairer Game; who arises in fear, yet still striveth by
flight, until he be wearied and breathless.

The Nobles call this beast (Cerf sage) a wise Heart, who, to avoid all his
Enemies, runs into the greatest Herds, and so brings a Cloud of error on
the Dogs, to keep them from further prosecution; sometimes also beating some of
the Herd into his Footings, that so he may the more easily escape, and procure
a Labyrinth to the Dogs; after which he betaketh himself to his Heels again,
running still with the Wind, not only for refrigeration, but because he may
the more easily hear the voice of his pursuers, whether they be far or near. At
last, being for all this found out again by the observance of the Hunters, and
skilful Scent of the Dogs, he flies into the Herds of Cattle, as Cows, Sheep,
etc. leaping on an Ox or Cow, laying the foreparts of his body thereon, that so
touching the Earth only with his hinder Feet, to leave a very small or no
scent at all behind for the Hounds to descern.

The chief Huntsman to Lewis the twelfth, called (le Grand Venieur) affirms,
that on a time, they having a Heart in chase, suddenly the Hounds were at a
fault, so as the Game was out of sight, and not a Dog would once stir his foot,
whereat the Hunters were all amazed; at last, by casting about, (as it is usual
in such cases) they found the fraud of the crafty beast, which is worth the
memory.

There was a great White-thorn, which grew in a hadowy place as high as a Tree,
and was environed with other small shrubs about it; into the which the said
Heart leaped, and there stood aloft the Boughs spreading from one another, and
there remained till he was thrust through by a Huntsman, rather than he would
yield to the angry and greedy Hounds. Yet their manner is when they see
themselves every where intercepted, to make force at him with their Horns who
first comes unto him, except prevented by Sword or Spear; which being done, the
Hunter with his Horn windeth the fall of the Beast, and then every one
approaches, luring with triumph for such a conquest, of whom the skilfullest
opens the Beast, rewarding the Hounds with what properly belongs unto them
for their future encouragement; and for that purpose the Huntsmen dip Bread in
the Skin and Blood of the Beast, to give unto the Hounds their full
satisfaction.

Veloces Spartae catulos, acremque Mollossum
Pasce fero pingui, etc.
Much more might be said of this present subject, which is not proper in this
place; wherefore I shall refer you to what follows, and your own experience.

Of the Rut of Hearts.
The time of their Rutting is about the midst of September, and continues two
months: the older they are, the hotter, and the better beloved by the Hindes;
and therefore they go to Rut before the young ones; and, being very fiery, will
not suffer any of them to come near the Hindes till they have satisfied their
Venery. But the young ones are even with the old for when they perceive the old
are grown weak by excess of Rutting, the young will frequently attaqu^ them,
and make them quit the place, that they may be masters of the sport.

They are easily killed in Rutting-time: for they follow the scent of the
Hindes with such greediness, laying their Noses to the ground, that they mind
that solely, and nothing else.

They are such great lovers of the sport, it is very dangerous for any man to
come near them at this season, for then they will make at any living creature
of different kind.

In some places, in October their Lust arises, and also in May; and then,
whereas at other times the Males live apart from the Females, they go about
like lascivious Lovers, seeking the company of their Females, as it were at the
Market of Venus.

The Males in their raging desired Lust have a peculiar noise, which the French
call Reere. One Male will cover a many Females, continuing in this carnal
appetite a month or two. The Females are chaste, and unwilling to admit of
Copulation, by reason of the rigor of the Male's Genital; and therefore they
sink down on their buttocks when they begin to feel his Seed, as it has been
often observed in tame Hearts; and if they can, the Females run away, the Males
striving to hold them back within their fore-Feet. It cannot be well said, that
they are covered standing, lying, or going, but rather running; for so are they
filled with greatest severity. When one month or six weeks is over of their
Rutting, they grow tamer by much, and laying aside all fierceness, they return
to their solitary places, digging every one by himself a several Hole or Ditch,
wherein they lie, to assuage the strong savor of their Lust; for they stink
like Goats, and their Face begins to look blacker than at other times: and
in those places they live till some Showers distill from the Clouds; after
which, they return to their Pasture again, living in Flocks as before.

The Female, thus filled, never keeps company again with the Male until she
is delivered of her burden, which is eight months; and but one at a time,
seldom two, which she lodges cunningly in some Covert: If she perceive them
stubborn and wild, she will beat them with her Feet till they lie close and
quiet.

Oftentimes she leads forth her young, teaching it to run and leap over
bushes, stones, and small shrubs; and so continues all the Summer long, while
their own strength is most considerable.

It is very pleasant to observe them when they go to Rut, and make their Vaut.
For when they smell the Hind, they raise their Nose up into the Air, looking
aloft, as though they gave thanks to the God of Nature, who gave them so great
delight and pleasure. And if it be a great Heart, he will turn his Head and look
about to see whether there be none near to interrupt or spoil his sport. Hereat
the young fly away for fear: but if there be any of equal bigness, they then
strive which shall Vaut first; and in the opposing each other, they scrape the
ground with their Feet, shocking and butting each other so furiously, that you
shall hear the noise they make with their Horns a good half mile, so long, till
one of them is Victor. The Hind beholding this Pastime, never stirs from her
station, expecting, as it were, the Vauting of him who has the Mastery; and
having got it, he bellows, and then instantly covers her.

During the time of their Rut, they eat but very little; for they feed only on
what they see before them, minding more the track of the Hindes. Their chief
meat is the red Mushrome, which helps them to evacuate their Grease: they are
then extraordinary hot, insomuch, that every where as they pass and find
waters, they tumble and lie therein.

The time of Hearts Mewing, or Casting the Head.
The old Heart casts his Head sooner than the young: and the time is about the
months of February and March.

Here note, that if you geld an Heart before he has an Head, he will never bear
any; and if you geld him when he has it, he will never after Mew or cast it:
and so, if you geld him when he has a Velvethead, it will ever be so, without
fraying or burnishing.

Having cast their Heads, they instantly withdraw unto the Thickets, hiding
themselves in such convenient places where they may have good Water, and strong
Feeding, near some ground where Wheat or Pease is sown: But young Hearts do
never betake themselves to the Thickets till they have born their third Head,
which is in the fourth year.

After they have Mewed, they will begin to Button in March and April; and as
the Sun grows strong, and the season of the year puts forward the Crop of the
Earth, so will their Heads increase in all respects: so that in the midst of
June their Heads will be summed as much as they will bear all the year.

Of the Coats and Color of Hearts.
The Coats of Hearts are of three sundry sorts, Brown, Red, and Fallow; and of
every of these Coats there proceeds two sorts of Hearts, the one are great, the
other little.

Of brown Hearts, there are some great, long, and hairy, bearing a high Head,
red of color, and well beamed, who will stand before Hounds very long, being
longer of breath, and swifter of foot than those of a shorter stature.

There are another sort of brown Hearts, which are little, short, and well-set,
bearing commonly a black Main, and are fatter and better Venison than the
former, by reason of their better feeding in young Copses.

They are very crafty, especially when in grease; and will be hardly found,
because they known they are then most enquired after: besides, they are very
sensible they cannot then stand long before the Hounds. If they be old, and
feed in good ground, then are their Heads black, fair, and well branched, and
commonly palmed at the top.

The Fallow- Hearts bear their Heads high, and of a whitish color, their Beams
small, their Antliers long, slender, and ill-grown, having neither Heart,
Courage, nor Force. But those which are of a lively Red-fallow, having a black
or brown List down the Ridge of the Back, are strong, bearing fair and high
Heads, well furnished and beamed.

Of the Heads and Branches of Hearts, and their diversities.
As there are several sorts of Hearts, so have they their Heads in a diverse sort
and manner, according to their Age, Country, Rest, and Feeding. Here note, that
they bear not their first Head, which we call Broches, and in a Fallow- Deer
Pricks, until they enter the second year of their Age. In the third year they
bear four, six, or eight small Branches: At the fourth, they bear eight or ten:
at the fifth, ten or twelve: at six, fourteen or sixteen: and at the seventh
year they bear their Heads Beamed, Branched, and Summed with as much as ever
they will bear, and do never multiply but in greatness only.

How to know an old Heart by the Slot, Entries, Abatures and Foils, Fewmets,
Gate and Walks, Fraying-Stocks, Head and Branches.
I shall proceed in order, and first of the Slot. You must carefully look on
the Treadings of the Hart's Foot: If you find the Treadings of two, the one
long, the other round, yet both of one bigness; yet shall the long Slot declare
the Heart to be much larger than the round.

Moreover, the old Hart's hind-foot does never overreach the fore-foot; the
young one's does.

But above all, take this Observation: When you are in the Wood, and have found
the Slot of a Heart, mark what manner of Footing it is, whether worn, or sharp;
and accordingly observe the Country, and thereby judge whether either may be
occasioned thereby. For Hearts bred in mountainous and stony Countries, have
their Toes and sides of their Feet Worn, by reason of their continual climbing
and resting themselves thereon, and not on the Heel: whereas in other places
they stay themselves more on the Heel than Toes: For in soft or sandy ground
they slip upon the Heel, by reason of their weight; and thus by frequent
staying themselves thereon, it makes the Heel grow broader and greater. And
thus you may know the age of a Heart by his Slot or Treading.

The next thing to be considered, is the Fewmishing; and this is to be judged
of in April or May. If the Fewmets be great, large, and thick, they signify
the Heart to be old.

In the midst of June and July, they make their Fewmets or Fewmishing in great
Croteys, very soft; and from that time to the end of August, they make them
great, long, knotty, anointed and gilded, letting them fall but few and
scattered. In September and October there is no longer judging, by reason of
the Rut.

Thirdly, If you would know the height and thickness of the Heart, observe his
Entries and Galleries into the Thickets, and what Boughs he has over-stridden,
and mark from thence the height of his Belly from the ground.

By the height of the Entries, we judge the age of a Heart: for a young Deer is
such as creeps usually; but the old is stiff and stately.

His greatness is known by the height of his creeping as he passes to his
Harbor; the young Deer creeping low, which the old will not stoop to.

Fourthly, Take notice of his Gate, by which you may know whether the Heart be
great and long, and whether he will stand long before the Hounds or not. For
all Hearts which have a long step will stand up very long, being swift, light,
and well breathed; but if he leave a great Slot, which is the sign of an old
Deer, he will never stand long when he is chased.

Lastly, Take notice of his Fraying-post: Where note, the elder the Heart is,
the sooner he goes to Fray, and the greater is the Tree he seeks to Fray
upon, and such as he cannot bend with his Head.

All Stags as they are burnished, beat their Heads dry against some Tree or
other, which is called their Fraying-post: The younger Deer against weaker and
lesser Trees, and lower; the elder against bigger and stronger, and Fray
higher; so that accordingly we confidently judge of their age, and of the
nearness of their Harbor; for that is the last Ceremony they use before they
enter it.

As to the Head and Branches, the Heart is old, First, when the compass of the
Bur is large, great, and well pearl'd.

Secondly, when the Beam is great, burnished, and well pearl'd, being straight,
and not made crooked by the Antliers.

Thirdly, when the Gutters therein are great and deep.

Fourthly, when the first Antlier, called Antoiller, is great, long, and near
to the Bur; the Surantlier near unto the Antlier: and they ought to be both
well pearl'd.

Fifthly, The rest of the Branches which are higher, being well ordered and
set, and well grown, according to the bigness and proportion of the Head; and
the Croches, Palm or Crown being great and large according to the bigness of
the Beam, are the signs of an old Heart.

Now since many men cannot understand the names and diversities of Heads
according to the Terms of Hunting, I shall in the following Chapter give you a
brief account thereof.

The Names and diversities of Heads, according to Hunting-Terms.
The thing that bears the Antliers, Royals, and Tops, is called the Beam; and
the little streaks therein are called Gutters.

That which is about the Crust of the Beam, is termed Pearls: and that which is
about the Bur it self, formed like little Pearls, is called Pearls bigger than
the rest.

The Bur is next the Head; and that which is about the Bur, is called Pearls.
The first is called Antlier; the second, Surantlier: All the rest which grow
afterward, until you come to the Crown, Palm, or Croche, are called Rovals,
and Sur-royals: The little Buds or Broches about the Top, are called Croches.

Their Heads go by several Names: The first Head is called a Crowned Top,
because the Croches are ranged in form of a Crown.

The second is called a Palmed Top, because the Croches are formed like a man's
Hand.

Thirdly, all Heads which bear not above three or four, the Croches being
placed aloft, all of one height, in form of a cluster of Nuts, are to be called
Heads of so many Croches.

Fourthly, all Heads which bear two in the Top, or having their Croches
doubling, are to be called Forked Heads.

Fifthly, all Heads which have double Burs, or the Antliers, Royals, and
Croches turned downwards, contrary to other Heads, are only called Heads.

How to seek a Heart in his Haunts or Feeding-places according to the seasons of
the year.
All Hearts do change their manner of Feeding every month; and therefore I shall
treat orderly of every one till I have concluded the year; beginning with that
month which is the conclusion of their Rutting-time, and that is November, in
which month they feed in Heaths and Broomy places.

In December they Herd together, and withdraw themselves into the strength of
the Forests, to shelter themselves from the cold Winds, Snows, and Frosts, and
do feed on the Holm-trees, Elder-trees, Brambles, with whatsoever other green
thing they can find; and if it snow, they will skin the Trees like a Goat.

In January, February, and March, they leave Herdding, but will keep four or
five in company, and in the corners of the Forest will feed on the
Winter-pasture; sometimes making their incursions into the neighboring
Cornfieldsd, if they can perceive the blades of Wheat, Rye, or suchlike,
appear above ground.

In April and May they rest in their Thickets, and other bushy and shady
places, during that season, and stir very little till Rutting-time, unless they
are disturbed.

There are some Hearts are so cunning, that they will have two several Layrs to
harbor in, a good distance one from the other; and will frequently change (for
their greater security) from the one to the other, taking still the benefit of
the Wind.

In these months they go not to the Soil, by reason of the moisture of the
Spring, and the Dew that continually overspreadeth the Grass.

In June, July, and August, they are in their pride of grease, and do resort to
Spring-Copses, and Cornfields; only they seldom go where Rye or Barley grow.

In September and October they leave their Thickets and go to Rut; during which
season they have no certain place either for food or harbor.

In what manner the Huntsman shall go drawing in the Springs.
Let him not come too early into the Springs or Hewts where he thinks the
Heart feeds, and is at relief. For they usually go to their Layrs in the
Springs; and if they be old crafty Deer, they will return to the border of the
Copse, and there listen whether they can hear any approaching danger: and if
they chance once to vent the Huntsman or the Hound, they will instantly
dislodge.

Now is the Huntsman's proper time. Let him beat the outsides of the Springs or
Thickets: if he find the Track of an Heart or Deer, let him observe whether it
be new; which he may know thus; the Dew will be beaten off, the Foil fresh, or
the ground broken or printed, with other tokens: so he may judge his Game
lately went that way.

Having found this Slot or Treading, and the Hound sticking well upon it, let
him hold him short, for he shall better draw being so held, than if he were let
at length of the Lyam: and thus let him draw till he is come to the Covert, if
possible, taking notice by the way of the Slot, Foils, Entries, and the like,
till he has harbored him. That done, let him plash down small Twigs, some
above, and some below, as he shall think fit: and then, whilst the Hound is
hot, let him beat the outsides, and make his Ring-walks twice or thrice about
the Wood, one while by the great and open ways, that he may help himself by the
Eye; another while through the thick and Covert, for fear lest his Hound should
overshoot it, having still better Scent in the Coverts than Highways.

If he doubt the Heart is gone out of the Ring-walks, or fears he has drawn
amiss; then let him go to the marks which he plashed, and draw counter, till he
may take up the Fewmet.

The directions for Harboring a Stag are these:
The Harbourer having taught his Hound to draw mute always round the outside of
the Covert, as soon as his Hound challenges, which he knows by his eager
flourishing, and straining his Lyam, he then is to seek for his Slot: If he
finds the Heel thick, and the Toe spreading broad, it argues an old Deer,
especially if it is fringed, (that is, broken on the sides.) However, if the
ground be too hard to make any judgment from the Slot, he is to draw into the
Covert, as he passes observing the size of the Entries; the larger and higher,
the elder the Deer; as also his Croppings of the Tenders as he passes: (the
younger the Deer, the lower; the elder the Deer, the higher he branches.) Also
observe his Fewmishings as you pass, whose largeness bespeak the largeness of
the Deer; also be curious in observing his Fraying-post, which usually is the
last opportunity you have to judge by, the eldest Deer Fraying highest against
the biggest Trees; and that found, you may conclude his Harbor not far off;
therefore draw with more circumspection, checking your Draught-hound to secure
him from spending when he comes so near as to have the Deer in the Wind: and
then by his eagerness you having discovered that, ought to draw him; and having
retired some distance back, you are with your Hound to round the place first at
a considerable distance; and then, if you find him not disturbed, a little
within that make your second round; which will not only secure you that he is
in his Harbor, but will also secure his continuance there; for he will not
(unforced) pass that Taint your Hound has left in the rounding of him. So that
having broken a bough for his direction, he may at any time unharbour that Heart.

How to find a Heart lost the night before.
A Huntsman may fail of killing a Heart diverse ways; sometimes by reason of
great heat, or overtaken with the night, and the like. If any such thing should
happen, then thus you must do. First, they which follow the Hounds, must mark
the place where they left the Chase, and at break of day bring your Blood-hound
to it with your Kennel after him. If any hound vents, whom he knows to be no
Lier or Babbler, he shall put his Hound to it, whooping twice, or blowing two
Notes with his Horn, to call all his fellows about him: and if he find where
the Heart is gone into some likely Govert or Grove, then must he draw his Hounds
about it, and beat cross through it. And if there he renews his Slot or View,
let him first consider whether it be the right or not: if it be the right, let
him blow his Horn. Now if he find five or six Layrs, let it not seem strange;
for Hearts hunted and spent, do frequently make many Layrs together, because
they cannot stand, but lie and feed.

Hearts which are hunted, most commonly run up the Wind, and straight forwards
as far as they are able, and finding any Water or Soil, do stay a long time
therein; by which means their Joints are so benumbed and stiffned, that coming
out they cannot go far, nor stand up long; and therefore are compelled to take
any Harbor they can find, which may be a present Covert to them.

How to find a Heart in high Woods.
In the seeking of a Heart in high Woods, regard must be had to two things; that
is, the Thickets of the Forest, and the Season.

If it be in very hot weather, Gnats, Horse-flies, and suchlike, drive the
Deer out of the high Wood, and they disperse themselves into small Groves and
Thickets near places of good feeding. According to the Coverts which are in the
Forest, so accordingly the Huntsman must make his enquiry. For sometimes the
Hearts lie in the Tufts of White-thorn; sometimes under little Trees;
otherwhiles under great Trees in the high Woods; and sometimes in the Skirts of
the Forest under the shelter of little Groves and Copses. And therefore the
Huntsman must make his Ring-walk great or small, according to the largeness of
those Harbors or Goverts.

How to Unharbour a Heart, and cast off the Hounds.
When the Relays are well set and placed, let the Huntsman with his Pole walk
before the Kennel of Hounds: Being come to the Blemishes, let him take notice
of the Slot, and such other marks as may be observed from the View of the Deer,
to the intent he may know whether the Hounds run Riot or not. Then let the
Huntsmen cast abroad about the Covert, to discover the Heart when he is
unharboured, the better to distinguish him by his Head or otherwise. The
Huntsman having unharboured him, all the Hounds shall be cast off, they crying
one and all, To him, to him; That Is he, that is he, with such words of
encouragement.

If the Blood-hound as he draws chance to overshoot, and draw wrong or
counter, then must the Huntsman draw him back, and say, Back, back, Soft, soft,
until he has set him right again: and if he perceive that the Hound has
mended his fault, by his kneeling down, and observing the Slot or Ports, he
must then cherish him, by clapping him on the Back, and giving him some
encouraging words. Thus let him draw on with his Hound till the Deer be
descried.

Now some are so cunning and crafty, that when they are unharboured from their
Layr, they will coast round about to find some other Deer, whereby the Hounds
may be confounded in the change of hunts.

If the Huntsman have the Heart in view, let him still draw upon the Slot,
blowing and hollowing until the Hounds are come in. When he sees they are in
full cry, and take it right, he may then mount, keeping under the Wind, and
coast to cross the Hounds that are in chase, to help them at default, if need
require.

What subtilties are used in Hunting a Heart at force.
Let the Huntsman never come nearer the Hounds in cry, than fifty or threescore
paces, especially at the first uncoupling, or at casting off their Relays. For
if a Heart make Doublings, or wheel about, or cross before the Hounds, as he
seldom does; if then you come in too hastily, you will spoil the Slot or View;
and so the Hounds, for want of Scent, will be apt to overshoot the Chase: but
if after hunting an hour, the Huntsman perceive that the Heart makes out
end-ways before the Hounds, and that they follow in full cry, taking it right,
then he may come in nearer, and blow a Recheat to the Hounds to encourage them.
Hereupon the Heart will frequently seek other Deer at Layr, and rouse them, on
purpose to make the Hounds hunt change, and will lie down flat in some of their
Layrs upon his Belly, and so let the Hounds over-shoot him: and because they
shall neither scent or vent him, he will gather up all his four Feet under his
Belly, and will blow and breath on some moist place of the ground, in such
sort, that I have seen the Hounds pass by such a Heart within a yard, and never
vent him.

For which cause Huntsmen should blemish at such places they see the Heart enter
into a Thicket, to this end, that if the Hounds should fall to change, they may
return to those Blemishes, and put their Hounds to the right Slot and View,
until they have rouzed or found him again.

The Heart has another way to bring the Hounds to change; and that is, when he
sees himself closely pursued, and that he cannot shun them, he will break into
one Thicket after another to find Deer, rouzing and herding with them,
continuing so to do sometimes above an hour before he will part from them, or
break Herd. Finding himself spent, he will break herd, and fall a doubling and
crossing in some hard Highway that is much beaten, or else in some River or
Brook, in which he will keep as long as his breath will permit him: and if he
be far before the Hounds, it may be then he will use his former device, in
gathering his Legs up under his belly as he lies flat along upon some hard and
dry place. Sometimes he will take soil, and so cover himself under the water,
that you shall perceive nothing but his Nose.

In this case the Huntsman must have a special regard to his old Hounds, who
will hunt leisurely and fearfully; whereas the young Hounds will over-shoot
their Game.

If it so chance that the Hounds are at a default, and hunt in several
companies, then it may be guessed that the Heart has broken herd from the fresh
Deer, and that the fresh Deer have separated themselves also: then regard how
the old Staunch-hounds make it, and observe the Slot; and where you see any of
the old Hounds challenge, cherish and encourage him, hastening the rest in to
him, by crying Hark to such a Hound, calling him by his Name.

Here is to be noted, that they cannot make it so good in the hard Highways as
in other places, because they cannot have there so perfect a scent, either by
reason of the Tracks or Footing of diverse sorts of beasts, or by reason of the
Sun drying up the moisture, so that the dust covers the Slot: now in such
places (such is the natural subtilty of that beast for self-preservation) the
Heart will make many Corsses and Doublings, holding them long together, to make
the Hounds give over the Chase.

In this case, the first care of the Huntsman is, to make good the Head, and
then draw round apace, first down the Wind, though usually Deer go up the Wind:
and if the way is too hard to Slot, be sure to try far enough back. This expert
Hounds will frequently do of themselves.

But if a Heart break out into the Champion-country, and that it be in the heat
of the day, between Noon and three of the clock; then if the Huntsman perceive
his Hounds out of breath, he must not force them much, but comfort them; and
though they do not call upon the Slot or View, yet it is sufficient if they but
wag their Tails; for, being almost spent, it is painful for them to call.

The last Refuge of a Heart sorely hunted is the Water, (which, according to
Art, is termed the Soil) swimming oftnest down the Stream, keeping the middle,
fearing lest by touching any bough by the Waterside he may give scent unto the
Hounds.

Always when you come to a Soil, (according to the old Rule: He that will his
Chase find, let him first try up the River, and down the Wind) be sure if your
Hounds challenge but a yard above his going in, that he is gone up the River:
for though he should keep the very middle of the Stream, yet will that, with
the help of the Wind, lodge part of the Stream, and Imbosh that comes from him
on the Banks, it may be a quarter of a mile lower, which has deceived many.
Therefore first try up the Stream: and where a Den first breasts soil, both Man
and Hound will best perceive it.

Now the ways to know when a Heart is spent, are these: First, He will run
stiff, high, and lompering. Secondly, If his Mouth be black and dry without any
Foam upon it, and his Tongue hanging out; but they will often close their
Mouths, to deceive the Spectators. Thirdly, By his Slot: for oftentimes he will
close his Claws together, as if he went at leisure; and straightway again open
them wide, making great glidings, and hitting his Dew-claws upon the ground,
following the beaten Paths without Doublings; and sometimes going all along by
a Ditch-side, seeking some Gap, having not strength to leap it otherways: yet
it has been often seen, that Dead-run Deer have taken very great leaps.

Thus must a Huntsman govern himself according to the subtlety and Craft of the
Deer, observing their Doublings and Crossings, and the places where they are
made; making his Rings little or great, according to the nature of the place,
time, and season: For Hounds are subject to shoot where Herbs and Flowers have
their most lively scent and odoriferous smell. Neither must you be unmindful of
the perfection and imperfection of your Hounds. Thus doing, it will be very
hard luck if you loose a Heart by default.

How to kill a Heart at Bay.
It is very dangerous to go in to a Heart at Bay, and especially at
Rutting-time; for then they are most fierce.

There are two sorts of Bays; one on the Land, the other on the Water. If now
the Heart be in a deep Water, where you cannot well come to him, then couple up
your Dogs; for should they long continue in the Water, it would endanger
surbating or foundering. Get then a Boat, or swim to him with a Dagger; or else
with a Rope that has a Noose, and throw it over his Horns: for if the Water be
so deep that the Heart swims, there is no danger in approaching him; otherwise
you must have a care.

As to the Land-bay, if the Heart be burnished, then must you consider the
place: For if it be in a plain and open place, where there is no Wood nor
Covert, it is dangerous and hard to come in to him; but if it be in a
Hedge-side or thicket, then, whilst the Heart is staring on the Hounds, you may
come covertly among the bushes behind him, and cut his Throat. If you miss
your aim, and the Heart turn head upon you, then make some Tree your refuge; or
when the Heart is at Bay, couple up your Hounds; and when you see the Heart turn
head to fly, gallop in roundly to him, and kill him with your Sword.

Directions at the Death of Buck or Heart.
The first Ceremony when the Huntsmen come in to the Death of a Deer, is to cry
Ware Haunch, that the Hounds may not break into the Deer; which having secured,
the next is cutting his Throat, and there blooding the youngest Hounds, that
they may the better love a Deer, and learn to leap at his Throat; then, having
blown the Mort, and all the company come in, the best person, that has not
taken Say before, is to take up the Knife that the Keeper or Huntsman is to lay
cross the Belly of the Deer, standing close to the left Shoulder of the Deer,
some holding by the Forelegs, and the Keeper or Huntsman drawing down the
Pizle, the person that takes Say, is to draw the edge of the Knife leisurely
along the very middle of the Belly, beginning near the Brisket; and drawing a
little upon it, enough in the length and depth to discover how fat the Deer is,
then he that is to break up the Deer first slits the Skin from the cutting of
the Throat downward, making the Arber, that so the Ordure may not break forth;
and then he is to pounch him, rewarding the Hounds therewith. Next, he is to
present the same person that took the Say with a drawn Hanger, to cut off the
Head; which done, and the Hounds rewarded therewith, the concluding Ceremony
is, if a Buck a double, if a Stag a treble Mort blown by one, and then a whole
Recheat in Consort by all that have Horns; and that finished, immediately a
general Whoo whoop.

It was formerly termed, Wind a Horn, because (as I suppose) all Horns were
then compassed; but since straight Horns are come into fashion, we say, Blow a
Horn, and sometimes, Sound a Horn.

In many cases heretofore, Leasing was observed; that is, one must be held,
either cross a Saddle, or on a man's back, and with a pair of Dog-couples
receive ten pound and a Purse; that is, ten stripes, (according to the nature
of the Crime, more or less severe) and an eleventh, that used to be as bad as
the other ten, called a Purse.

There are many Faults, as coming to late into the Field, mistaking any term of
Art; these are of the lesser size: of the greater magnitude, hallowing a wrong
Deer, or leaving the Field before the death of the Deer, etc.

Buck- Hunting.
THis Beast is common in most Countries, being as corpulent as a Heart; but in
quantity resembles more a Roe, except in color.

The Males have Horns, which they lose yearly; but the Females none at all.
Their colors are diverse, but most commonly branded or sandy on the back,
having a black list all down along on the back; their bellies and sides spotted
with white, which they lose by their old age: and the Does do especially vary
in color, being sometimes all white, and therefore like unto Goats, except in
their hair, which is shorter.

In their Horns they differ not much from a Heart, except in quantity, and that
they grow out of their Heads like Fingers out of the Hand; such is this
Fallow-Deer, being therefore called Cervus Palmatas. As for their other parts,
they much resemble a Roe-buck. Their flesh is excellent for nourishment, but
their blood ingenders too much Melancholy.

Now know, the Buck is Fawned about the latter end of May, and its nature and
properties differ little from the Heart.

There is not so much art and skill in Lodging a Buck, as in the Harboring a
Heart; neither is there required so much drawing after, but only you are to
judge by the View, and mark what Grove or Covert he enters; for he will not
wander and rove up and down so often as a Heart, nor so frequently change his
Layr.

He makes his Fewmishings in diverse manners and forms, as the Heart does,
according to the diversity of Food, and time of the day, Morning and Evening;
but most commonly they are round.

The Heart and Buck differ thus in parallel. When the Buck is hunted, he
oft-times betakes himself to such strong Holds and Coverts as he is most
acquainted with, not flying far before the Hounds, not crossing nor doubling,
using no such subtleties as the Heart is accustomed to.

The Buck will beat a Brook, (but seldom a great River, as the Heart) but it
must not be so deep; nor can he stay so long at Soil as the Heart will do: only
he leapeth lightlier at Rut than the Heart; and groaneth or troateth, as a Heart
belleth, but with a lower Voice, rattling in the Throat. And here is to be
noted, they love not one another, nor will they come near each other's Layr.

Buck Venison is incomparable food, and is dressed like Hart-Venison; only
this last will be preserved longer than the former.

The Buck herds more than the Heart, and lies in the driest places: but if he
be at large, unconfined within the limitary Precincts of a Park, he will herd
but little from May to August, because the flies trouble him. He takes great
delight in hilly places; but the Dales are his joy to feed in.

Bucks have seldom or never any other Relays than the old Hounds.

The greatest subtlety a Huntsman need use in the Hunting of the Buck, is to
beware of Hunting Counter or Change, because of the plenty of Fallow-Deer,
which use to come more directly upon the Hounds than the Red-Deer does. Now
upon the breaking up of a Buck the Hounds Reward is the same with that of the
Heart.

Roe- Hunting.
THe Roe-Buck is called by the Greeks and Latins by one name, viz. Dorcas.
These beasts are very plentiful in Africa, Germany, and Helvetian Alps.

Their swiftness does not only appear upon the Earth, but also in the Waters,
cutting them when they swim as with Oars; and therefore they love the Lakes and
strong Streams, breaking the Floods to come at fresh Pasture, feeding
deliciously on sweet Rushes, and Bull-rushes. Horns only grow upon the Male,
and are set with six or seven branches, not palmed, but branchy, yet shorter
than Follow Deer: They differ not much from common Deer, but in their Horn: and
whereas the Horns of other Beasts are hollow toward the root, whereinto
enters a certain long substance; the Horns of these, as also of the vulgar
Buck and Elk, are solid whithout any such emptiness, only they are full of
Pores.

It is supposed by the Learned, that a Roe was called in Greek Dorcas, by
reason of the quickness of her sight; and that she can see as perfectly in the
night as in the day. Physicians have observed a certain viscous humor about
her bowels, which by anointing Eyes that are dark, heavy, and near blind,
quickens the sight most wonderfully.

It is reported of them, that they never wink no not when they sleep; for which
conceit their blood is prescribed for them who are dim-sighted or pur-blinde.
The tail of this beast is lesser and shorter than a Fallow-Deer's; insomuch
that it is doubtful whether it be a tail or not.

They keep for the most part in the Mountains among the Rocks, being very
swift; and when they are hunted ( Martial says) they hang upon the Rocks with
their Horns, to delude the Dogs, after a strange manner, ready to fall and kill
themselves, and yet receive no harm, where the Dogs dare not approach, as
appears in his Epigram.

Pendentem fumma Capream, de rupe videbis,
Casuram speres, decipit illa Canes.
This might be more properly meant of the Wild- Goat.

They are most easily taken in the Woods. When they are chased, they desire to
run against the wind, because the coldness of the Air refreshes them in their
course; and therefore they who hunt them place their Dogs with the Wind. They
are often taken by the counterfeiting of their Voice, which the skilful
Huntsman does by the assistance of a Lease in his Mouth.

This Beast is very easy to hunt, and goes to Rut (or Tourn most properly) in
October, the extent whereof consists of fifteen days, and never parts with
the Do till Fawning-time.

The Do, finding her self near her time, secretly departs from the Buck, and
sawneth as far from him and his knowledge as she can; for could he find the
Fawn, he would kill it. Now when the Fawn grows big, and can run and feed, she
then returns to the Buck again very lovingly, with all expedition: the cause
whereof, is the Roes fawning Twins, which are commonly Buck and Do; so that
being accustomed together in youth, they do love to keep company ever after.

As soon as the Roe-Buck comes from Rut, he casts his Horns; and there are few
after two years old which Mew not at Alhallontide, but their Heads grow quickly
out again.

The Venison of a Roe is never out of season, being never fat, and therefore
they are to be hunted at any time: only this, some favor ought to be shown
the Do whilst she is big with Fawn, and afterward till her Fawn is able to
shift for himself: besides, some Roe-Does have been killed with five Fawns in
their belly.

They usually when hunted, take a large first Ring, and afterward hunt the
Hounds.

When they are hunted, they turn much and often, and come back upon the Dogs
directly: When they can no longer endure, they then take Soil, as the Heart
does, and will hang by a bough in such manner, that nothing shall appear of
them above Water but their Snout, and will suffer the Dogs to come just upon
them before they will stir.

He is not called by the skilful in the Art of Hunting a Great Roe-Buck, but a
Fair Roe-Buck. The Herd of them is called a Beavy: And if he has not
Beavygrease on his Tail when he is broken up, he is more fit to be Dogs-meat
than Mans-meat.

The Hounds must be Rewarded with the Bowels, the Blood, and Feet slit asunder,
and boiled all together. This is more properly called a Dose than a Reward. For
what might be said farther concerning Roe-Hunting, I shall refer you to the
Chapters of Heart and Buck-Hunting.

Rain-Deer-Hunting.
THe Rain-Deer is not unlike a Heart, only his Head is fuller of Antliers,
being bigger and wider in compass; for he bears four and twenty branches and
more according to his age, having a great Palm on the top, as a Heart, and his
Fore-Antliers are Palmed also.

He flies end-ways when he is Hunted, by reason of the great weight of his
Head. When he has stood up a great while, doubled, crossed, and used other
crafty tricks to shun the Hounds, he makes a Tree his last refuge; so planting
himself, that nothing can assault him but just before, placing his buttock and
Haunches against the Tree, and hanging down his Head low to the ground, whereby
all his Body is covered.

As the Heart strikes with his Head, the Rain-Deer strikes with his Feet against
any one that comes in to him to help the Dogs, not in the least turning his
Head, that being his chiefest defense, and seems very terrible to the Hounds.

He feeds like the Heart, and makes his Fewmets sometimes long, and sometimes
flat, and bears fatter Venison, when he is in pride of Grease, than any other
Deer does, and is very long lived. He is more commonly drawn after with a
Blood-hound, than hunted, and intrapped with Nets and Engines, and that in the
thick and greatest Holds, if it may be; which is the best and speediest way, by
reason of his great and spreading Head. Since there are but few of them in
England, I shall desist from discoursing farther concerning him.

Of the Nature and Properties of a Hare.
AN Hare is called in Hebrew Arnebet in the Feminine gender, which word
possessed a great many that all Hares were Females: He is called Lagws by the
Greeks, for his immoderate Lust; and by the same Nation Ptoox, for his Fear;
and by the Latins Lepus, quasi Levi-pes, signifying Swiftness of feet ( alias)
Lightfoot.

There are four sorts of Hares; some live in the Mountains, some in the Fields,
some in the Marshes, some every where, without any certain place of abode. They
of the Mountains, are most swift; they of the Fields, less nimble; they of the
Marshes, most slow; and the wandering Hares are most dangerous to follow; for
they are so cunning in the ways and muses of the Fields, running up the Hills
and Rocks, because by custom they know the nearer way, with other tricks, to
the confusion of the Dogs, and dis-encouragement of the Hunters.

In the next place, a description of the parts of an Hare will not be
unnecessary, since it is admirable to behold how every Limb and Member of this
Beast is composed for celerity. In the first place, the Head is round, nimble,
short, yet of convenient longitude, prone to turn every way. The Ears long, and
lofty, like an Asses: for Nature has so provided, that every fearful and
unarmed creature should have long and large Ears, that by hearing it might
prevent its Enemies, and save it self by flight. The Lips continually move
sleeping and waking; and from the slit they have in the middle of their Nose,
comes the term of Harre-lips which are so divided in men.

The Neck of an Hare is long, small, round, soft, and flexible: The
Shoulder Bone straight and broad, for her more easy turning: her Legs before
soft, and stand broader behind than before, and the hinder Legs longer than
the former: a Breast not narrow, but fitted to take more breath than any Beast
of that bigness: a nimble Back, and fleshy Belly, tender Loins, hollow Sides,
fat Buttocks, filled up, strong and nervous Lines. Their Eyes are brown, and
they are subtle, but not bold; seldom looking forward, because going by jumps.
Their Eyelids coming from the Brows are too short to cover their Eyes, and
therefore this Sense is very weak in them: when they watch they shut their
Eyes, and when they sleep they open them.

They have certain little Bladders in their Belly filled with matter, out of
which both the one and the other Sex suck a certain humor, and anoint their
Bodies all over therewith, and so are defended against Rain.

Though their sight be dim, yet they have visum indefessum, an indefatigable
sense of Seeing; so that the continuance in a mean degree, countervaileth in
them the want of excellency.

They feed abroad, because they would conceal their forms; and never drink, but
content themselves with the Dew, and for that cause they often fall rotten. As
it is before, every Limb of a Hare is composed for celerity, and therefore she
never travelleth, but jumpeth: her Ears lead her the way in her Chase; for with
one of them she harkneth to the cry of the Dogs, and the other she stretches
forth like a Sail, to hasten her course; always stretching her hinder beyond
her former, and yet not hindering them at all; and in Paths and Highways she
runs more speedily.

The Hares of the Mountains do often exercise themselves in the Valleys and
Plains, and through practice grow acquainted with the nearest ways to their
Forms or places of constant abode. So that when at any time they are hunted in
the Fields, such is their subtle dodging, that they will dally with the
Huntsmen till they seem to be almost taken, and then on a sudden take the
nearest way to the Mountains, and so take Sanctuary in the inaccessible places,
whither Dogs nor Horse dare ascend.

Hares which frequent Bushes and Brakes, are not able to endure labor, and not
very swift, by reason of the pain in their Feet, growing fat through idleness
and discontinuance of running. The Campestrial or Field- Hare, being leaner of
Body, and oftener chased, is taken with more difficulty, by reason of her
singular agility; she therefore when she begins her course, leapeth up from
the ground as if the flew, afterward passes through Brambles, and over thick
Bushes and Hedges with all expedition; and if at any time she come into deep
Grass or Corn, she easily delivers her self, and slideth through it, always
holding up one Ear, and bending it at her pleasure to be the Moderator of her
Chase. Neither is she so unprovident and prodigal of her strength, as to spend
it all in one Course, but observes the force of her Prosecuror, who if he be
slow and sluggish, she is not profuse of her celerity, but only walks gently
before the Dogs, and yet safely from their Clutches, reserving her greatest
strength to her greatest necessity: for the knows she can outrun the Dogs at
her pleasure, and therefore will not trouble her self more than she is urged.
But if there be a Dog following her more swiftly than the residue, then she
sets forward with all the force she can; and when she has left both Hunters
and Dogs a great way behind her, she gets to some little Hill or rising of
the Earth, where she raises her self upon her hinder-Legs, that thereby she
may observe how far or near her Pursuers are distant from her.

The younger Hares, by reason of their weak Members, tread heavier on the Earth
than the elder; and therefore leave the greater Scent behind them. At a year
old they run very swift, and their Scent is stronger in the Woods than in the
plain Fields; and if they lie down upon the Earth (as they love to do) in red
Fallow-grounds, they are easily descried.

Their footsteps in the Wintertime are more apparent than in the Summer,
because, as the Nights are longer, so they travel farther: neither do they
scent in the Winter-mornings so soon as it is day, until the Frost be somewhat
thawed; but especially their footsteps are uncertain at the Full of the Moon,
for then they leap and play together, scattering and putting out their scent or
savor; and in the Springtime also, when they do engender, they confound one
another footsteps by multitudes.

Hare- Hunting.
IT is the judgment of all, that a Hare does naturally know the change of
Weather from twenty four hours to twenty four hours. When she goes to her
Form, she will suffer the Dew to touch her as little as she can, but follows
the Highways and beaten Paths.

They go to Buck commonly in January, February, and March, and sometimes all
the warm Months; sometimes seeking the Buck seven or eight miles distant from
the place where they usually sit, following the Highways, etc.

If when a Hare rises out of her Form, she couches her Ears and Scut, and runs
not very fast at first, it is an infallible sign that she is old and crafty.

You may know a Buck- Hare as you hunt him to his Form by his beating the hard
Highways. He feeds farther out into the Plains, and makes his doublings and
crossings much wider, and of greater compass than the Female does: for she will
keep close by some Covert-side, turning and winding in the bushes like a Coney;
and if she go to relief in the Cornfieldsd, she seldom crosses over the
Furrows, but follows them along, staying upon the thickest tufts of Corn to
feed.

Likewise you may know a Buck at the rising out of his Form by his
Hinder-parts, which are more whitely; or if you observe his Shoulders before he
rise, which will be redder than the Does, having some loose long Hairs growing
on them. Again, his Head is shorter, and better trussed; his Hairs about his
Lips longer; and his Ears shorter and more gray. The Hairs upon the Female's
Chine will be of a blackish gray.

Besides, when Hounds hunt a Female- Hare, she will use more crossing and
doubling, seldom making out end-ways before the Hounds: whereas the Male acts
contrary; for having once made a Turn or two about his Form, then farewal
Hounds; for he will frequently lead them five or six miles before ever he will
turn his head.

When you see that your Hounds have found where an Hare has passed to Relief
upon the High-way-side, and has much doubled and crossed upon dry places, and
never much broken out nor relieved in the Corn, it is a sign she is but lately
come thither; and then commonly she will stay upon some high place to look
about her, and to choose out a place to form in, which she will be loath to part
with.

Of the Craft and Subtlety of an Hare.
As of all Chases the Hare makes the greatest pastime and pleasure; so it is a
great delight and satisfaction to see the craft of this little poor Beast in
her own self-preservation.

And that you may understand what these Subtleties are, you must first take
notice what Weather it is. If it be rainy, then the Hare will hold the
Highways more than at any other time: and if she come to the side of any young
Grove or Spring, she will scarcely enter, but squat down by the side thereof
until the Hounds have over-shot her; and then she will return the self-same way
she came to the place from whence she was started, and will not by the way go
into any Covert, for fear of the wet and Dew that hang upon the Boughs.

In this case, let the Huntsman stay a hundred paces before he comes to the
Wood-side, by which means he shall perceive whether she return as aforesaid;
which if she do, let him hallow in his Hounds, and call them back, and that
presently, that the Hounds may not think it the Counter she came first.

The next thing to be observed, is the place where the Hare sits, and upon
what wind she makes her Form: for if she form either upon the North or
Southwind, she will not willingly run into the Wind, but run upon a side or
down the Wind. But if she form in the Water, it is a sign she is foul and
measled. If you hunt such a one, have a special regard all the day to the
Brook-sides, for there and near Plashes she will make all her crossings,
doublings, etc.

I have seen a Hare so crafty, that as soon as she heard the sound of a Horn,
she would instantly start out of her Form, thought it was a quarter of a mile
distant, and go swim in some Pool, and there rest her self upon some Rush-bed
in the midst thereof, from whence she would not stir till she hears the Horn
again; and then I have seen her start out again swimming to Land, and she has
stood up before the Hounds four hours before we could kill her, swimming, and
using all her Subtleties and crossings in the Water.

Such is the Natural craft and subtlety of a Hare, that sometimes, after she
has been hunted three hours, she will start a fresh Hare, and squat in the
same Form. Others, having been hunted a considerable time, will creep under the
Door of a Sheep-coat, and there hide themselves among the Sheep; or when they
are hard hunted, will run in among a flock of sheep, and cannot be gotten out
from among them by any means, till the Hounds are coupled up, and the Sheep
driven into their Pens. Some (and that is something strange) will take the
ground like a Coney, and that is called going to the Vaut. Some Hares will go
up one side of the Hedge, and come down the other, the thickness of the Hedge
being the only distance between the courses.

I have seen a Hare, that being sorely hunted, got upon a Quick-set-hedge, and
ran a good way upon the top thereof, and then lept off upon the ground. And
they will frequently betake themselves to Furz-bushes, and will leap from one
to the other, whereby the Hounds are frequently in default. Nay, which is more,
I have heard of a Hare, that being hunted two hours or more, at length, to save
her self, got upon an old Wall six foot high from the ground, and hid her self
in the hole that was made for a Scaffold: and that several have swam over Trent
and Severn.

A Hare lives not above seven years at most, especially the Buck; and if he
and the Do shall keep one quarter together, they will never suffer any strange
Hare to sit by them; and therefore it is proverbially said, The more you hunt,
the more Hares you shall have; because when you have killed one Hare, another
will come and possess his Form.

An Hare has greater Scent, and is more eagerly hunted by the Hounds, when she
feeds and relieveth upon green Corn, than at any other time in the year: and
yet there are some Hares which naturally give a greater Scent than others; as
the great Wood- Hares; and such as are foul and measled, and keep near to the
Waters: But the little red Hare, which is not much bigger than a Coney, is
neither of so strong a Scent, nor so eagerly hunted. Such as feed upon the
small branches of wild Time, or suchlike Herbs, are commonly very swist, and
will stand long up before the Hounds. In like manner you have some Hares more
subtle and cunning than others. Young Hares which have not been hunted are
foolish, and are neither of force nor capacity to use such subtleties and
crafts, but hold on end-ways before the Hounds most commonly, and do squat and
start again oftentimes, which does much encourage the Hounds, and enters them
better than if the Hare flies and-ways, as sometimes they will five or six mile
an end.

The Females are more crafty and politic than the Bucks; for they double and
turn shorter than they, which is displeasant to the Hounds; for it is
troublesome for them to turn often, delighting more in an end-way-chase,
running with all their force: for such Hares as double and cross so often, it
is requisite at default to cast the greater compass about, when you beat to
make it out, for so you will find all her subtilties, and yet need to stick
upon none of them, but only where she went on forwards: By this means you will
abate her force, and compel her to leave doubling and crossing.

How to Enter Hounds to the Hare.
Let the Huntsinan be sure in the first place to make his Hounds very well
acquainted with him and his Voice, and let them understand the Horn; and to
this end let him never blow his Horn or hallow but when there is good cause for
so doing, and let him be sure that his Hounds want no encouragement.

Here by the way observe two remarkable things. The first is, if you intend to
enter a young Kennel of Hounds, you must take notice of the Country where you
will make your first Quarry, and whereof you make it. For according to the
places wherein they are first entered, and the nature of the Quarry given them,
they will prove accordingly for the future. Thus if they are first entered in
the Plains and Champain-countries, they will ever after more delight to hunt
there than in any other place: and so it is the same with the Coverts.

But, say some of our Huntsmen, all strange Countries that differ from that to
which Hounds are accustomed, causes them at first to be at seek: But good
Hounds will soon be master of any Country; and therefore he that would have the
best Hounds, must use them to all kinds of Hunting: And it is easy to bring
Hounds to enjoy a Scent from a bleak Down to a fresh Pasture. And therefore
many of us love to enter in the worst Countries.

Do not accustom your Hounds to hunt in the Morning, because of the Dew and
moisture of the Earth: and besides, you will find by experience, that if
afterward you hunt them in the heat of the day, they will soon give over the
chase; neither will they call on willingly or cheerfully, but seek out the
shades to sleep in. Yet many of us agree, that to hunt both early and late in
the morning by Trayling, advantageth the Hounds to use their Noses; and by
keeping them sometimes in the heat of the day, or till night, moves them to
stoutness.

The best season to enter your young Hounds is in September and October; for
then the weather is temperate, neither too hot nor too cold; and then is the
time to find young Hares which have never been hunted, which are foolish, and
ignorant of the politic crossings, doublings, etc. of their Sires, running
commonly end-ways, frequently squatting, and as often starting, by which
encouragement the Hounds are the better entered.

A Hare has greater Scent, and is more eagerly hunted by the Hounds, when she
feeds and relieveth on green Corn, than at any other time of the year.

Moreover, some Hares have naturally a greater scent than others, as the great
Wood- Hares, and such as are foul and measled, having their greatest resort
near the Water and Plashes.

The little small red Hare, not much bigger than a Coney, is very feeble, and
not much covered by the Hounds, having a bad scent: but such as feed on the
small branches of wild Time are commonly very swift, and will stand up a long
time before the Hounds.

The Does are much craftier than the Bucks, doubling and turning oftener and
shorter, which is very vexatious and troublesome to the Hounds. Now for such
Hares as double and cross so often, it is requisite at a default to cast the
greater compass about when you draw to make it out; so shall you find all their
subtilties; though it is needless to stick upon any, but where they went
onwards: by so doing you will abate the force of a Hare, and force her from
crossing and doubling.

Some Hares hold the high beaten ways only, where the Hounds can have no
scent: wherefore when the Huntsman finds his Hounds at a default in the
Highway, let him hunt on until he find where the Hare has broken from the
Highway, or has found some Dale or fresh place where the Hounds may recover
scent, looking narrowly on the ground as he goes, if he can find the Footing
or Pricking of the Hare.

There are other places wherein a Hound can find no scent; and that is in fat
and rotten ground, and it sticks to the Foot of the Hare, which is called
Carrying, and so consequently she leaves no scent behind her. So likewise
there are certain Months wherein a Hound can find no scent, and that is in the
Springtime, by reason of the fragrant smell of Flowers, and the like.

Shun, as much as you can, hunting in hard frosty weather, for so you will
surbate or founder your Hounds, and make them lose their Claws: besides, at
that time a Hare runs better than at any other time, the Soals of her feet
being hairy.

To conclude, the best way of entering your young Hounds, is by the help of old
Staunch-Hounds; so will they the better learn to cast for it at a doubling or
default.

What time of the year is best for Hare-Hunting: How to find her, start her,
and chase her.
The best time to begin Hare-Hunting, is about the middle of September, ending
toward the latter end of February, lest you destroy the early brood of
Leverets. Moreover, upon the approach of Winter the moistness and coolness of
the Earth increases, which is agreeable to the nature of the Hounds, and very
acceptable, they ever hating extreme heats and hot weather.

Your Hounds being two years old and upwards, you may exercise them thrice a
Week, and they will be the better for so often hunting, provided you feed well;
and keep out your Hounds the greatest part of the day, both to try their
stoutness, and to make them stout.

If there be any Hound which has found the Trail of a Hare where she has
relieved that night, let the Huntsman then forbear being overhasty, but let
the Hounds make it of themselves: and when he shall perceive that they begin to
draw in together, and to call on freshly, then let him encourage them,
especially that Hound which hunteth best, frequently calling him by his name.

Here note, that a Hare leaves better scent when she goes to relief, than
when she goes toward her Form: for when she relieveth in the Field, she
coucheth her body low upon the ground, passing often over one piece of ground,
to find where lies the best food; and thus leaves the better Scent, crotying
also sometimes.

Besides, when she goes to her Form, she commonly takes the Highways,
doubling, crossing, and leaping as lightly as she can; in which places the
Hounds can have no scent, (as is said before) by reason of the dust, etc. And
yet they will squat by the sides of the Highways; and therefore let the
Huntsman beat very well the sides of those Highways.

Now having found where a Hare has relieved in some Pasture or Corn-field,
then must you consider the season of the year, and what Weather it is: for if
it be in the Springtime, or Summer, a Hare will not then sit in the Bushes,
because they are frequently offended with Pismires, Snakes and Adders, but will
sit in Cornfields and open places.

In winter they love to sit near Towns and Villages in Tufts of Thorns and
Brambles, especially when the Wind is Northerly or Southerly.

According to the season and nature of the place where the Hare is accustomed
to sit, there beat with your Hounds and start her; which is much better sport
than Trailing of her from her Relief to her Form.

When the Hare is started and on foot, then step in where you saw her pass, and
hallow in your Hounds until they have all undertaken it and go on with it in
full cry: then Recheat to them with your Horn, following fair and softly at
first, making neither too much haste nor noise with Horn or Voice: for at the
first Hounds are apt to over-shoot the chase through too much heat. But having
ran the space of an hour, and that you see the Hounds are well in with it,
sticking well upon it, then you may come in nearer with the Hounds, because by
that time their heat will be cooled, and they will hunt more soberly. But above
all things mark the first doubling, which must be your direction for the whole
day; for all the doublings that she afterward shall make will be like the
former: and according to the policies that you shall see her use, and the place
where you hunt, you must make your compasses great or little, long or short, to
help the defaults, always seeking the moistest and most commodious places for
the Hounds to scent in.

To conclude, those who delight in the commendable Exercise of Hunting the
Hare, must rise early, lest they be deprived of the scent of her footsteps, by
which means the Dogs will be incapacitated to follow their Game; for the nature
of the scent is such, that it will not remain long, but suddenly, in a manner
every hour, vanishes away.

Of Parks and Warrens.
HAving thus discoursed of the Nature and Properties of the Hare, together with
the manner of hunting them; in the next place I hold it not improper in short
to speak something of Parks and enclosed Warrens, wherein Hares, Coneys, Deer,
etc. may always be ready as it were out of a Storehouse or Seminary to serve
the use and pleasure of their Masters.

The first Roman that ever enclosed wild Beasts, was Fulvius Herpinus; and
Varro had the first Warren of Hares. The largest Hare-Parks that ever I heard
of, and the best furnished with those fearful, yet subtle Creatures, are in
Ireland; the one belongs to the Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, near Dublin;
and the other in the North, and belongs to the Lord of Mazareen. It will be a
tedious task for me to give you an account of the variety of Parks and Warrens
within the three Kingdoms; I shall therefore only tell you in what manner they
are erected, and that very briefly.

The Walls or Pales must be high, or close joynted, so as neither Badger nor
Cat can creep through, nor Wolf, nor Fox can leap over; wherein ought also to
be Bushes and broad Trees to cover the Beasts against heat and cold, and other
secret places to satisfy their natures, and to defend the lesser beasts, as
Hares, Conveys, etc. from Hawks, Kites, and other ravening Fowls: in which
three or four couple of Hares will quickly multiply into a great Warren.

It is very good to sow Gourds, Misceline, Corn, Barley, Pease, and suchlike,
wherein Hares delight, and will thereby quickly grow fat.

Warreners have a very crafty device to fatten Hares, which by experience is
found effectual, and that is by putting Wax into their Ears, and so make them
deaf; then turn them into the place where they should seed, where being freed
from the fear of Sounds (for want of hearing) they grow fat before other of
their kind.

Here note, that when you have pitched your Hays for Coneys, sound a Trumpet in
some of the Buroughs, and scarce a Coney in the whole Warren but will start
abroad.

I shall end this Chapter with Martial's praise of a Hare and a Thrush.

Inter Aves Turdus si quis in Judice certet,
Inter Quadrupedes gloria prima Lepus.
Amongst all Birds none with the Thrush compare,
And no Beast has more glory than the Hare.
Of Coney-Catching.
BEfore we speak of the Hunting of the Coney, it will not be amiss to take
notice of her nature and properties, which are these: the carries her young in
her Belly thirty days; as soon as she has kindued she goes to Buck. They begin
to breed in England at a year old (but sooner in other places) and so coutinue,
bearing at least seven times in a year if they Litter in March; this is the
reason that a small stock will serve to increase a large Warren. The Does
cannot suckle their young till they have been with the Buck, which must be done
presently, or she will not be inclined fourteen days after.

When the Buck goes to Do, he will beat very strongly with his fore-Foot upon
the ground, and by that means he heateth himself. When he has buckt, he is
accustomed to fall backwards, and lie as if he were in a Trance or half dead,
at which time he is easily taken.

The Latins call a Coney, Cuniculus, because it makes holes in the Earth; and
Cuniculus was a Latin word for a Hole or Cave in the Earth, before it was
taken for a Coney.

The Bucks will kill the young if they can come at them, like to your
Bore-cats; and therefore the Do prevents that mischief, by covering her Stop
or Nest with Earth or Gravel, that so they may not easily be discovered.

Those who keep Coneys tame for profit, may give them to eat Vine-leaves,
Fruits, Herbs, Grass, Bran, Oatmeal, Mallows, Milk-thistles, Apple-parings,
Cabbage, Lettise, or Carret-tops. In Winter they will eat Hay, Oats, and Chaff,
being given to them thrice a day: but when they eat green things, they must not
drink at all, because of the Dropsy which will follow: At all other times a
little drink must serve their turn, and that must be always fresh. Here note,
give them not too much green juicy meat, unless you entermix therewith what is
dry, as Oats, Chaff, etc. otherwise they will be Cathed, or tun-bellied.

Now the way of taking them is either by small Curs or Spaniels bred up for
that sport; and their places for hunting are among Bushes and Hedges; or else
by coursing them with small Greyhounds. In their default they are commonly
driven into their Burrows; and therefore it will be very requisite to set
Purse-nets on the Holes, then put in a Ferret close muzzled, and she will make
the Coneys, bolt out again into the Purse-nets, and so you may take them. Some
say the Drone of a Bag-pipe, put into a Coney-borrow, and blown on a sudden,
will make Coneys bolt.

For want of a Ferret; you may take the powder of Orpine and some Brimstone,
and therewith make a smother in the Burrows, and so they will bolt out. But
this way is not to be approved of; for by that means the Coneys will forsake
those Burrows, and so in a little time a Warren will be destroyed, should this
course be used frequently.

But above Nets and Ferrets, Hays are to be preferred for the taking of Coneys;
neither is the drawing Ferret to be despised when they are young. Likewise
there is excellent sport to be made with our Tumblers, who will kill Coneys
abundantly.

Let this suffice, since any farther discourse hereof is neither proper, nor
pertinent to my present purpose.

Of the Ferret.
THe Ferret is a little creature that is not bred in Spain, Italy, France, nor
Germany; but in England they breed naturally, and are tamed for the benefit of
such who keep Warrens, and others.

It is a bold and audacious Beast, Enemy to all others but his own kind,
drinking and sucking in the blood of the beast it biteth, but eats not the
flesh.

When the Warrener has an occasion to use his Ferret, he first makes a noise
in the Warren to frighten what Coneys are abroad into their Burrows, and then
he pitcheth his Nets; after that, he puts his Ferret into the Earth, having a
long Strick, with Bells about her Neck, whose Mouth must be muzzled, so that he
may not seize, but frighten the Coneys out of their Burrows, and afterward
driven by Dogs into the Nets or Hays so planted for them.

The Body is longer for the proportion than the quantity may afford. Their
color is variable, sometimes black and white on the Belly, but most commonly
of a yellowish sandy color, like Wool died in Urine. The Head is little, like
a Mouse's; and therefore into whatsoever Hole she can put it in, all her body
will easily follow after. The Eyes are small, but fiery like red-hot Iron, and
therefore she sees most clearly in the dark. Her Voice is a whining cry
without changing it: She has only two Teeth in her neither Chap, standing
out, and not joined and growing together. The Genital of the Male is of a bony
substance, and therefore it always stands stiff, and is not lesser at one
time than another. The pleasure of the sense in Copulation is not in the
Genital-part, but in the Muscles, Tunicles, and Nerves wherein the said Genital
runs. When they are in Copulation the Female lies down, or bends her
Knees, and continually cries like a Cat, either because the Male claweth her
with his nails, or by reason of the roughness of his Genital.

She usually brings forth seven or eight at a time, carrying them forty days in
her little belly: The young ones newly littered are blind thirty days together;
and within forty days after they can see, they may be used as their dam for
profit and recreation.

When tamed, they are nourished with Milk or with Barley-bread, and they can
fast a very long time. When they go, they contract their long back, and make it
stand upright in the middle round like a Bowl: when they are touched, they
smell like a Martel; and they sleep very much. Thus much of the Ferret, which I
thought good to place after the Chapter of Coney-catching, because this little
Animal is such a necessary Instrument for that purpose.

Of Fox-Hunting.
HIs Shape and Proportion is so well known, being a beast so common, that it
will be needless to describe him.

His nature in many respects is like that of a Wolf, for they bring as many
Cubs at a Litter one as the other: but thus they differ; the Fox Litters deep
under the ground, so does not the Wolf,

A Bitch- Fox is hardly to be taken when she is bragged and with Cub; for then
she will lie near her Burrow, into which she runs upon the hearing of the least
noise. And indeed at any time it is somewhat difficult; for the Fox (and so the
Wolf) is a very subtle crafty creature.

Fox-hunting is very pleasant; for by reason of his strong hot scent he makes
an excellent Cry: And as his scent is hottest at hand, so it dies soonest.
Besides, he never flies far before the Hounds, trusting not on his Legs,
Strength, or Champion ground, but strongest Coverts. When he can no longer
stand up before the Hounds, he then takes Earth, and then must he be dug
out.

If Greyhounds course him on a Plain, his last refuge is to piss on his Tail,
and flap it in their Faces as they come near him; sometimes squirting his
thicker Excrement upon them, to make them give over the Course a pursuit.

When a Bitch- Fox goes a clicketing and seeks sot a Dog, she cries with a
hollow Voice, not unlike the howling of a mad Dog; and in the same manner she
cries when she misseth any of her Cubs: but never makes any cry at all when she
is killing, but defend her self to the last gasp.

A Fox will prey upon any thing he can overcome, and feeds upon all sorts of
Carrion; but their dainties and the food which they most delight in, is
Poultry. They are very destructive and injurious to Coney-Warrens, and will
sometimes kill Hares by deceit and subtilty, and not by swift running.

The Fox is taken with Hounds, Greyhounds, Terriers, Nets, and Gins.

Of Terriers there are two sorts, The one is crookedleg'd, and commonly
short-hair'd: and these will take Earth well, and will lie very long at Fox or
Badger. The other sort is shagged and straight Legged: and these will not only
hunt above-ground as other Hounds, but also enter the Earth with much more fury
than the former; but cannot stay in so long, by reason of their great eagerness.

The time of entering these Terriers, is when they are near a twelvemonth old;
for if you enter him not in within this time, you will hardly after bring him
to take the Earth. And to encourage the young Terrier the more, put in an old
one before him, that can better endure the fury of the Fox or Badger: and be
careful that neither of them be old when you engage your young Terrier with him.

The entering and fleshing them may be done several ways. In the first place
thus: When Foxes and Badgers have young Cubs, then take your old Terriers and
enter them in the ground; and when they begin to bay, you must then hold every
one of your Terriers at a sundry Hole or Mouth of the Earth, that they may
listen and hear the old ones Bay. Having taken the old Fox or Badger, and that
nothing remains within but the young Cubs, then couple up all your old
Terriers, and put in the young in their stead, encouraging them by crying, To
him, to him, to him. And if they take any young Cub within the ground, let them
alone to do what they please with him; and forget not to give the old Terriers
their reward, which is the Blood and Livers, fried with Cheese and some of
their own Grease, showing them the Heads and Skins to encourage them. Before
you reward them, wash them with Soap and warm Water, to clear their Skins from
Earth and Clay that is clodded to the Hair, otherwise they are apt to be
mangie. You may also enter them in this manner: Take an old Fox, or Badger, and
cut away the neither Jaw, but meddle not with the other, leaving the upper to
show the fury of the Beast, although it can do no harm therewith. Then dig an
Earth in some convenient place in your own grounds, and be careful to make it
wide enough, to the intent the Terriers may turn therein the better, and that
there may be room enough for two to enter together: then cover the Hole with
boards and Turf, putting the Fox or Badger first therein, and afterward put in
your Terriers both young and old, encouraging them with words that are the
usual terms of Art. When they have bay'd sufficiently, then begin to dig with
Spades and Mattocks, to encourage them against such time as you are to dig over
them: then take out the Fox or Badger with the Clamps or Pinchers, killing it
before them, or let a Greyhound kill it in their sight, and make them reward
thereof. Here note, that instead of cutting away the Jaw, it will be every whit
as well to break out all his Teeth, to prevent him from biting the Terriers.

Now to say the truth, there is not much pastime or pleasure in Hunting of a
Fox under ground; for as soon as that subtle creature perceives the Terriers,
if they bay hard, and lie near unto them, they will bolt out immediately,
unless it be when the Bitch has young Cubs, then they will sooner die than
stir.

They make their Earths as near as they can in ground that is hard to dig, as
in Clay, Stoney-ground, or amongst the Roots of Trees; and their Earths have
commonly but one Hole, and that is straight a long way in before it come at
their Couch. Sometimes craftily they possess themselves of a Badger's old
Burrow, which has variety of Chambers, Holes, and Angles.

When a good Terrier does once bind the Fox, he then yearns, and defends
himself very notably, but not so strenuously as the Badger, nor is his biting
half so dangerous. Here note, if you take a Bitch- Fox when she goes a
Clicketing, and cut out that Gut which contains her Sperm, together with the
Kidneys which Gelders deprive Bitches of when they spay them, and cut them into
small gobbets, mingling therewith the Gum of Mastick, and put them hot as they
are into a Pot, and cover the same close, it will serve for an excellent Train
for a Fox, and will keep the whole year round. Take the Skin of Bacon, and
broil it well on a Gridiron, then dip it in the ingredients of the Pot
aforesaid, and make a train thereof, you will experimentally find, that if
there be any Fox near to any place where the train is drawn, he will follow it;
but let him who makes the train rub the soals of his Feet with Cow Dung, lest
the Fox vent his footing: and thus you may train a Fox to a standing, and kill
him in an Evening with Gun or Cross-bow. It is likewise found by experience,
that if a Terrier be rubbed with Brimstone, or with Oil of Cade, and then put
him into an Earth where either a Fox or Badger is, they will leave that Earth,
and come not to it again a good while after.

I shall conclude this discourse with what I have observed in Gesner's History
of Beasts tending to the same purpose: says he, As he frequently cheats the
Badger of his Habitation by laying his Excrements at the mouth of his Earth or
Burrow; so, for as much as the Wolf is an Enemy to the Fox, he lays in the
mouth of his Earth an Herb called a Sea-onion, which a Wolf naturally hates,
and is so averse thereunto, that he will never come near the place where it
either lies or grows.

Of Fox-Hunting above ground.
To this purpose you must draw with your Hounds about Groves, Thickets, and
Bushes near Villages: for a Fox will lurk in such places, to prey on young Pigs
and Pullein.

But it will be necessary to stop up his Earths, if you can find them, the
night before you intend to hunt; and the best time will be about midnight, for
then the Fox goes out to seek his Prey. You may stop his Holes by laying two
white sticks a cross before them, which will make him imagine it is some Gin or
Trap laid for him: or else you may stop them up close with black-Thorns and
Earth together.

The best hunting a Fox above-ground, is in January, February, and March, for
then you shall best see your Hounds hunting, and best find his Earthing;
besides, at those times the Fox's Skin is best in season.

Again, the Hounds best hunt the Fox in the coldest weather, because he leaves
a very strong scent behind him; yet in cold weather it chills fastest.

At first only cast off your sure Finders, and as the Drag mends, so add more
as you dare trust them.

Shun casting off too many Hounds at once, because Woods and Coverts are full
of sundry Chases, and so you may engage them in too many at one time.

Let such as you cast off at first be old Staunch-Hounds, which are sure; and
if you hear such a Hound call on merrily, you may cast off some other to him;
and when they run it on the full cry, cast off the rest: and thus you shall
complete your pastime.

The words of comfort are the same which are used in the other chases, attended
with the same Hallowings and other ceremonies.

Let the Hounds kill the Fox themselves, and worry and hare him as much as they
please: many Hounds will eat him with eagerness.

When he is dead, hang him at the end of a Pike-staff, and hallow in all your
Hounds to bay him: but reward them not with any thing belonging to the Fox; for
it is not good, neither will they eat it.

Of Badger-Hunting.
A Badger is called by several names, viz. a Gray, Brock, Boreson or Bauson,
and in France Tausson. The Male is called a Badger or Boar-pig; and the Female
is called a Sow.

These Beasts are plentiful in Naples, Sicily, Lucane, and in the Alpine and
Helvetian Coasts; so are they also here in England.

There are two kinds of this beast, (says Gesner) one resembling a Dog in his
feet, and the other a Hog in his cloven hoof: they differ too in their snout
and color; for the one resembles the snout of a Dog, the other of a Swine: the
one has a greyer coat, or whiter coat than the other, and goes farther out in
seeking of its prey. They differ also in their meat, the one eating Flesh and
Carrion like a Dog, the other Roots and Fruits like a Hog: both these kinds
have been found in Normandy, France, and Sicily.

Mr. Turbervil makes mention of two sorts of Badgers likewise, but in a
different manner. For the one (says he) casts his Fiaunts long like a Fox,
and have their residence in Rocks, making their Burrows very deep. The other
sort make their Burrows in light ground, and have more variety of Cells and
Chambers than the former. The one of these is called the Badger-pig, and the
other the Badger-whelp; or call one Canine, and the other Swinish. The first
has his Nose, Throat, and Ears yellowish like a Martern's Throat; and are much
blacker, and higher Legged than the Badger-whelp. Both sorts live upon all
Flesh, hunting greedily after Carrion. They are very mischievous and hurtful to
Warrens, especially when they are big with young.

Badgers when they Earth, after by digging they have entered a good depth, for
the clearing of the Earth out, one of them falls on the back, and the other
lays Earth on the belly, and so taking his hinder feet in his mouth, draws
the Belly-laden- Badger out of the Hole or Cave; and having disburdened her
self, reenters, and does the like till all be finished.

These Badgers are very sleepy, especially in the daytime, and seldom stir
abroad but in the night; for which cause they are called Lucifugae, avoiders of
the Light.

It is very pleasant to behold them when they gather materials for their Couch,
as straw, leaves, moss, and suchlike; for with their Feet and their Head they
will wrap as much together as a man can well carry under his arm, and will make
shift to get it into their Cells and Couches.

He has very sharp Teeth, and therefore is accounted a deep biting beast: his
back is broad, and his legs are longer on the right side than the left, and
therefore he runs best when he gets on the side of an Hill, or a
Cart-road-way. His Forelegs have very sharp Nails, bare, and apt to dig
withal, being five both before and behind, but the hinder very much shorter,
and covered with hair. His savor is strong, and much troubled with Lice about
the secrets. Both Male and Female have under their Hole another Hole outwardly,
but not inwardly in the Male. If she be hunted abroad with Hounds, she biteth
them most grievously wherever she lays hold on them. For the prevention
thereof, the careful Huntsmen put great broad Collars made of Grays Skins about
their Dogs Necks Her manner is to fight on her back, using thereby both her
Teeth and her Nails; and by blowing up her Skin after a strange and wonderful
manner, she defends her self against any blow and teeth of Dogs; only a
small stroke on her Nose will dispatch her presently; you may thrash your heart
weary on her back, which she values as a matter of nothing.

In Italy they eat the flesh of Badgers, and so they do in Germany, boiling it
with Pears: some have eaten it here in England, but like it not, being of a
sweet rankish taste.

The flesh is best in September if it be fat; and of the two kinds, the Swinish
Badger is better flesh than the other.

They love Hogs-flesh above any other; for take but a piece of Pork and train
it over a Badger's Burrow, if he be within, you shall quickly see him appear
without.

Their nature is very cold; and therefore when it snoweth they will not come
out of their holes for three or four days together.

They live long, and by mere age will grow blind; then will they not stir out
of their Holes, but are fed by those who have their sight.

This subtilty they have, that when they perceive the Terriers begin to yearn
them, they will stop the hole between the Terriers and them: if the Terriers
continue baying, they will remove their baggage with them, and go into another
apartment or chamber of the Burrow, (for know that some of their Houses have
half a dozen rooms at least;) and so will remove from one to the other, till
they can go no further, barricadoing the way as they go.

The Hunting of a Badger must be after this manner: You must first seek the
Earths and Burrows where he lies, and in a clear Moonshine night go and stop
all the holes but one or two, and therein place some Sacks fastened with some
drawing Strings, which may shut him in as soon as he straineth the Bag.

The Sacks or Bags being thus set, cast of your Hounds, and beat all the
Groves, Hedges, and Tufts within a mile or two about. What Badgers are abroad,
being alarmed by the Dogs, will straight repair to their Earths or Burrows, and
so be taken.

Let him that stands to watch the Sacks, stand close, and upon a clear Wind,
for else the Badger will soon find him, and fly some other way for safety. But
if the Hounds either encounter him, or undertake the chase before he can get
into his Earth, he will then stand at bay like a Boar, and make most
incomparable sport.

What Instruments are to be used in digging, and how to dig for Badger or Fox.
In the first place, you must have such as are able to dig: next, you must have
so many Terriers garnished with Bells hung in Collars, to make the Fox or Badga
bolt the sooner; besides, the Collars will be some small defense unto the
Terriers.

The Instruments to dig withal are these: a sharp pointed Spade, which serves
to begin the Trench when the ground is hardest, and broader Tools will not so
well enter; the round hollowed Spade, which is useful to dig amongst Roots,
having very sharp edges; the flat broad Spade, to dig withal when the Trench is
better opened and the ground softer; Mattocks and Pick-axes, to dig in hard
ground where a Spade will do but little service the Coal-rake, to cleanse the
Hole, and to keep it from stopping up; the Clamps, whereby you may take a Fox
or Badger out alive to make sport therewith afterward. And it would not be
amiss to have a Pail of Water, to refresh your Terriers after they are come out
of the Earth to take breath.

In this order you may besiege a Fox or Badger in their strongest Holes or
Castles, and may break their Casmats, Platforms, Parapets, and work to them
with Mines and Counter-mines, until you have obtained your satisfaction. But
there is a shorter method than this, which by reason of its commonness I shall
forbear to mention.

Of the Otter.
IT is supposed by some that the Otter is of the kind of Beavers, being it is
an amphibious creature living both in the Water and on the Land; besides, the
outward form of the parts bears a similitude of that beast. Some say, were
his tail off, he were in all parts like a Beaver, differing in nothing but
habitation: For the Beaver frequenteth both the Salt Water and the Fresh; but
the Otter never goes to the Salt.

Though the Otter live in the Water, yet it does not breath like Fishes through
the benefit of the Water, it does breath like other four-footed beasts, yet it
will remain a long time underneath the Water without respiration.

If he want prey in the Waters, then will he quit them for the Land; and if by
painful hunting ashore he cannot fill his belly, he will feed on Herbs, Snails,
or Frogs: neither will he take less pains in the water to satisfy hunger; for
he will swim two miles together against the stream, that so, when his belly is
full, the current of the stream may carry him down again to his designed
Lodging, which is near the water, very artificially built with boughs, sprigs,
and sticks couching together in excellent order, wherein he sits to keep him
from the wet.

In the hunting of Fish he often pops his Nose above water to take breath: It
is a creature of wonderful swistness and nimbleness in taking his prey, and for
greediness takes more than he knows what to do with.

It is a very subtle and crafty beast, and endowed with a wonderful sagacity
and sense of smelling, insomuch that he can directly wind the Fishes in the
waters a mile or two off.

The flesh of this beast is both cold and filthy, because it feeds on
stinking Fish, and therefore not fit to be eaten; yet it is eaten in Germany;
and the Carthusian Friars, who are forbidden to eat all manner of flesh of
other four-footed beasts, yet they are not prohibited the eating of Otters.
There are those in England, who lately have highly valued an Otter-pie, much
good may it do them with it.

These Otters must be hunted by special Dogs, such as are called Otter hounds,
and also with special Instruments called Otter-spears. When they find
themselves wounded with a spear, they then come to Land, where they fight with
the Dogs furiously; and except they be first wounded, they forsake not the
Water: for they are not ignorant how safe a refuge the Waters are un to them,
and how unequal a combat they shall sustain with Men and Dogs upon the Land:
yet, because the cold Water annoyeth their green wounds, therefore they spin
out their lives to the length of the thread, choosing rather to die in torments
among Dogs, than to die in the Waters.

The Food of an Otter (as I said) is Fish; and her abode is commonly under the
Root of some Tree near Rivers, Brooks, Pools, Meers, or Fish Ponds; and
sometimes she will lie in a hollow Tree four or five foot above ground: and no
Vermin can be more destructive to a Warren, than the Otter is to a Fish Pond;
for she diveth and hunteth under water after that most wonderful manner, that
few fish escape her, unless they are very swift and great.

An Otter and Ferret grow salt much about the same time, and bring forth their
young much after the same manner, neither having their constant number.

There is much craft and cunning in the hunting them; yet with pains-taking you
may ensnare them under the water, and by River-sides, as you may a Hare with
Hare-pipes and suchlike Gins. They bite sore and venomously, and when occasion
serves they will desend themselves stoutly. If after their ensnaring they
chance to abide there long, they will soon enlarge themselves with their teeth.

These creatures are footed like your Waterfowl, having a web between their
claws, and have no heel, but a round ball under the soal of their Feet: and
their Track is called their Mark, as the Slot of a Heart; and their Excrements
are called Spraints.

An Otter will not abide long in a place; for he is apt to be afraid and take
distasle, (having an excellent Ear and Nose, for hearing and smelling;) and
then he will forsake his Couch, and shift a mile or two up or down the River:
and this he will do according as he finds scarcity of fishing.

In hunting of the Otter observe this, to send some to one side of the River
whilst you are on the other, and so beat on the banks with your Dogs, and so
you will soon find if there be an Otter in that quarter: for an Otter cannot
endure long in the water, but must come forth to make his Spraints, and in the
night sometimes to feed on Grass and such Herbs as the fields afford.

If any of the Hounds find out an Otter, then look in the soft grounds and
moist places to see which way he bent his head: if the marks make no discovery,
you may partly perceive it by the spraints, and so follow the Hounds, and lodge
him as a Heart or Deer. If you find not the Otter quickly, you may then imagine
he is gone to couch somewhere farther off from the River: for sometimes he will
seek his food a mile from the place of his rest, choosing rather to go up the
River than down, because upwards he meets with better scent of Fish; and
bearing his nose into the wind, he shall the sooner find any fault that is
above him.

Remember, in the Hunting of the Otter, that you and your friends carry your
Otter-spears to watch his Vents, for that is the chief advantage: and if you
perceive where the Otter swims under water, then strive to get to a stand
before him where he would vent, and there endeavor to strike him with your
spear; but if you miss, pursue him with the Hounds, which if they be good
Otter-hounds, and perfectly entered, will come chaunting and trailing along by
the Riverside, and will beat every Tree-root, every Osier-bed and tuft of
Bullrushes; nay, sometimes they will take the Water, and beat it like a
Spaniel. And by these means the Otter can hardly escape you.

Of the Squirrel.
THe first Author that ever wrote of this little Animal was Oppianus who lived
in the days of Antonius Caesar, and wrote a Book also of Hunting.

A Squirrel is greater in compass than a Weasle, but the latter is longer than
the other; the back-parts and all the body is reddish except the belly, which
is white. In Helvetia they are black and branded, and they are hunted at the
fall of the Leaf, when the Trees grow naked: for they run and leap from bough
to bough in a most admirable and agile manner; and when the Leaves are on, they
cannot be so well discerned. They are of three colors, in the first age black,
in the second of a rusty Iron-colour, and lastly, when old, they are full of
white hoar Hairs. Their Teeth are like the Teeth of Mice, having the two
under-Teeth very long and sharp. Their Tail is always as big as their Body, and
it lies continually on their back when they sleep or sit still, and it seems
to be given them for a covering.

In the Summertime they build them Nests (which by some are called Drays) in
the Tops of the Trees very artificially with Sticks and Moss, with other things
the Woods afford, and then they fill it with Nuts for Winter-provision, and do
sleep like the Alpine Mouse most part thereof very soundly, in such sort, that
the beating of the outside of their Drays will not wake them.

When they leap from Tree to Tree, they use their Tail instead of VVings,
leaping a great distance, and are supported without sinking to any one's
appearance; nay, they will frequently leap from a very high Tree down to the
ground, and receive no harm.

Many must go together to hunt them, and must carry Dogs with them: and the
fittest place for the exercise of this sport, is in little and small slender
Woods, such as may be shaken by the hand. Bows are requisite to remove them
when they rest in the twists of Trees; for they will not be much terrified with
all the hallowing, except they be struck now and then by one means or other.
Well do they know what harbor a high Oak is unto them, and how secure they
can lodge therein from Men and Dogs; wherefore since it is too troublesome to
climb every Tree, that labor must be supplied with Bows and Bolts, that when
the Squirrel rests, presently he may be thumpt by the blow of an Arrow: the
Archer need not fear to do her much harm, except he hit her on the head, for by
reason of a strong backbone, and fleshy parts, she will abide as great a
stroke as a Dog.

If they be driven to the ground from the trees, and they creep into Hedges, it
is a sign of their weariness: for such is the lofty mind of this little beast,
that while her strength lasts she saves her self in the tops of high trees;
but being wearied, she descends, and falls into the mouths of the yelping
curs that attend her.

The admirable wit of the Squirrel appears (if it be true) in her swimming,
or passing over a River; for when hunger constrains her so to do, she seeks
out some rind, or small bark of a tree, which she sets upon the water, and
then goes into it, and holding up her Tail like a Sail, lets the wind drive
her to the other side; and carry meat in their mouths, to prevent famine
whatsoever should befall them.

Of the Martern and Wild- Cat.
A Martern is about the bigness of a Cat, having a longer body, but shorter
legs, with head and tail like a Fox; its skin is commonly brown, white on the
throat, and somewhat yellowish on the back.

Their teeth are exceeding white, and unequal, being above measure sharp; the
canine teeth both above and below hang out very long.

This and the wild- Cat are a sort of Virmine which we use here in England
commonly to Hunt, and as necessary to be hunted as any Virmin can be: For the
question may be doubtful, whether either Fox or Badger do more hurt than the
wild- Cat does, since there are so many Warrens every where throughout the
Kingdom of England which are very much infested by the wild- Cat.

It is the opinion of long-experienced Huntsmen, that she leaves as great
scent, and makes as good a cry for the time as any Vermin that is Hunted,
especially the Martern passes all other Vermin for sweetness of scent, and her
Case is a noble Fur. The wild- Cat's Case is not so good, but it is very warm,
and medicinable for several Aches and Pains in the bones and joints: also her
Grease is very good for Sinews that are shrunk.

These two Chases are not to be sought purposely, unless the Huntsman do see
them where they prey, and can go readily to them; but if a Hound chance to
cross them, he will hunt it as soon as any Chase, and they make a noble cry as
long as they stand up; when they can do it no longer, they will take a tree,
and so deceive the Hounds; but if the Hounds hold in to them, and will not give
it over so, then they will leap from one tree to another, and make great shift
for their lives, with much pastime to the Huntsmen.

When they are killed you must hold them up upon a piked staff, and hallow in
all your Hounds, and then reward them with some meat; for the flesh of these
Vermin is naught for Hounds.

A short Account of some particular Beasts that are not Hunted in England, but
in Foreign Countries.
The Nature and Properties of a Wolf, and the manner of its Hunting.
HEretofore I read that there were many Wolves in England, but now there are
none; however they are still in Ireland, but their number is very much
decreased within these thirty years; and that they may more and more decrease,
being so pernicious to all sorts of Cattle, I thought good to publish the
nature and manner of their Hunting.

First, as to their Nature; they go a Clicketing in February, and continue in
that manner ten or twelve days. Where many Wolves are, many will follow one
Bitch, as Dogs will follow a Bitch that is salt, but she will be only lined
with one.

A notable story I have heard when I was in Ireland, and attested for a truth
by the Inhabitants: That a Bitch- Wolf proud, will suffer a great many of the
Male to follow her, and will carry them after her sometimes eight or ten days
without Meat, Drink, or Rest; and when they are so tired that they cannot
travel farther, she will first lie down, then will the rest follow her example:
when she perceives that they are all asleep, and through weariness snore, then
will she arise and awake that Wolf which she observed to follow her most, and
having so done, entice him with her far from the rest, and suffer him to line
her: the rest awaking and finding her missing, pursue her by the scent, and
finding how she has cunningly deluded them, they fall instantly on her
Companion who has been beforehand with them, and revenge themselves on him by
depriving him of his life; which verifies the proverb: Never Wolf yet ever saw
his Sire.

Their Whelps are able to engender at twelve months end, at which age they part
with their Dam, that is, when those Teeth are grown which they cast the first
half year, and being grown, they never shed them again: and here see their
gratitude, (though bloody cruel creatures) after they have preyed for
themselves, if they chance to meet their Dam or Sire (for Turbervile does not
believe the aforesaid story) they will fawn upon them and lick them, rejoicing
at the sight of them.

The Dog will never bring any of his Prey to his whelps till he has filled his
own belly; whereas the Bitch will not eat a bit till she has served them
first: they go nine weeks with whelp, and sometimes a little longer, and grow
salt but once a year. As to number of whelps, they have more or less as Dogs
have; for doubtless both the Wolf and the Fox are but a kind of wild Mastiffs
and wild Curs.

They prey upon all kind of things, and will feed on Carrion, Vermin, etc. They
will kill a Cow or a Bullock; and as for a Sheep, Goat, or good Porket, they
will roundly carry him off in their Mouths, not touching ground with it, and
will run so fast away, notwithstanding the load, that they are hardly to be
stopped but by Mastiffs or Horsemen. There is no Beast which runs faster
than the Wolf, and holds wonderfully also. When he is hunted with Hounds, he
flies not far before them; and unless he be coursed with Greyhounds or
Mastiffs, he keeps the Covert like the Bear, or Boar, and especially the
bearen ways therein. Night is the usual time of his preying, though hunger will
force him to prey by day. They are more subtle and crafty (if more can be)
than the Fox or any other beast: When they are hunted, they will take all their
advantages; at other times they will never run over-hastily, but keep
themselves in breath and force always.

A Wolf will stand up a whole day before a good Kennel of Hounds, unless that
Greyhounds or Wolf-dogs course him. If he stand at bay, have a care of being
bitten by him; for being then mad, the wound is desperate, and hard to be cured.

When a Wolf falls into a flock of Sheep, with his good will he would kill them
all before he feed upon any of them, and therefore all means should be used to
destroy them, as by hunting at force, or with Greyhounds or Mastiffs, or caught
in Gins and Snares; but they had need be strong. For encouragement to the
meaner sort in Ireland, whosoever took a sucking-Whelp, or preying Cub, a Dog
or a Bitch Wolf, and brought but the heads of either to the next Justice of
Peace, for reward for the first, he received twenty shillings; for the second,
forty; for the third, five pound; and for the last, six pounds: which late
encouragement has in a manner cleared that Kindom of them.

They bark and howl like unto Dogs; and if there be but two of them together,
they make such a terrible hideous noise, that you would think there could be no
less than twenty of them in a body.

When any one would hunt the Wolf, he must train him by these means: First let
him look out some fair place, a mile or more from the great woods, where there
is some close standing to place a brace of good Greyhounds in, if need be, the
which should be closely environed, and some pond of water by it: there he must
kill a Horse that is worth little, and take the four legs thereof and carry
them into the Woods and Forests adjoining; then let four men take every man a
leg of the beast and draw it at his Horsetail all along the paths and ways in
the Woods, until they come back again to the place where the Carcass of the
said Beast lies; there let them lay down their trains. Now when the Wolves go
out in the night to prey, they will follow the scent of the train till they
come to the carcass where it lies. Then let those who love the sport, with
their Huntsmen come early and privately near the place; and if they are
discernable as they are seeding, in the first place let them consider which way
will be the fairest course for the Greyhounds, and place them accordingly, and
as near as they can let them forestal with their Greyhounds the same way that
the Wolves did or are flying either then or the night before; but if the Wolves
be in the coverts near the carrien that was laid for them to feed upon, then
let there be hewers set round the coverts to make a noise on every side, but
only that where the Greyhounds do stand; and let them stand thick together,
making what noise they can to force them to the Greyhounds: Then let the
Huntseman go with his Leamhound, and draw from the carrion to the
thickets-sides where the Wolves have gone in, and there the Huntsman shall cast
off the third part of their best Hounds; for a Wolf will sometimes hold a
covert a long time before he will come out.

The Huntsmen must hold near in to the Hounds blowing hard, and encouraging
them with their voice: for many Hounds will strain courtesy at this chase,
although they are strong and fit for all other chases.

When the Wolf comes to the Greyhounds, they who hold them will do well to
suffer the Wolf to pass by the first rank until he come further, and let the
last Rank let slip their Greyhounds full in the face of the Wolf, and at the
same instant let all the other Ranks let slip also: so that the first Rank
staying him but ever so little, he may be assaulted on all sides at once, and
by that means they shall the more easily take him.

It is best entering of Hounds at young Wolves which are not yet past half a
year or a year old; for a Hound will hunt such more willing, and with less fear
than an old Wolf; or you may take Wolves alive in Engines, and breaking their
Teeth, enter your Hounds at them.

A man may know a Dog- Wolf from a Bitch by the tracks of his Feet; for the Dog
has a greater Heel, a greater Toe, greater Nails, and a rounder Foot. Besides,
the Bitch casts her Fiaunts commonly in the midst of an Highway, whereas the
Dog casts them either on the one side or the other of the Path.

The Reward of the Dogs is thus: when they have bit and shaked the dead Wolf,
let the Huntsman then open his Belly straight along, and taking out his bowels,
let him throw in Bread, Cheese, and other Scraps, and so let the Dogs feed
therein.

Wild-Goat-Hunting.
I Never could read or hear that there was ever any such Chase in England as
the Hunting of the wild- Goat: But since there may be such sport in Wales, as
there has been elsewhere, it will not be much amiss to give some short account
thereof.

The Wild- Goat is as big as a Heart, but not so long, or so long Legged, but is
as fleshy. They have Wreaths and wrinkles on their horns, which declare what
their age is: for according to the quantity of the wreaths, such is the number
of their years; which wreaths he meweth, but not his beam, the which may be, if
he be an old Goat, as big as a man's leg.

They have a great long beard, and are of a brownish gray color very shaggy,
having a long black list down the ridge of the back, and the track is bigger
than the slot of a Heart.

They fawn as a Hind or Do in May, and have but one fawn, which they suckle
and bring up as the tame Goat does her kid.

They feed like Deer, only they will eat besides ivy, moss, and suchlike. In
spring they make their fumets round, and afterward broad and flat, as the Heart
when he comes to feed well.

They go to rut about Alhallontide, and continue therein a month or five weeks;
that season being over, they descend from the mountains and rocks, their abode
for the summer-season, and herd themselves, not only to avoid the snow, but
because they can find no food any longer; and yet they come not very low, but
keep at the foot of the mountains, feeding there till Easter: then they return
again, every one choosing some strong hold in the rocks, as the Hearts in the
thickets.

About fawning-time the females separate from the males, attending till
rutting-time: in this interval they will run at man or beast, and fight as
Hearts do one amongst the other.

When he goes to rut, his throat and neck is much bigger than usual: he is
very strong backed; and (which is wonderful) though he should fall from on high
ten poles length, he will receive no harm; and will walk as securely on the
sharp tops of rocks, as a horse in the highway.

Alhallontide is the chiefest season for hunting these wild Goats, observing
very well before you hunt, the advantages of the coasts, the rocks and places
where the Goats do lie.

Having thus done, set nets and toils toward the rivers and bottoms; for you
cannot expect your hounds should follow a Goat down every place of the
mountains.

Also it will be needful that some stand on the top of the rocks, and throw
down stones as they see occasion. Where the Goat goes down to the small brooks
or waters in the bottom, there place your relays, and let the relays never
tarry till the hounds come in which were cast off: and this is your best help;
for a man can neither follow on foot nor horseback.

Hunting of the Wild- Boar.
THe Boar is ever pigg'd with as many teeth at first as he shall have ever
after, which will only increase in bigness, not number. Amongst the rest, they
have four which are called tushes, or tusks, whereof the two biggest do not
hurt when he strikes, but serve only to whet the other two lowest, with which
they frequently kill.

They feed upon all kind of corn and fruits which they can come at; also roots.
In April and May they feed on the buds of plumb-trees, and ches-nut-trees, and
all other sweet buds they can find, especially on the buds of broom and
juniper, and are never measled, as our tame swine. Being near the seacoast,
they will feed on all manner of shell fish.

Their season begins in the midst of September, and ends about the
beginning of December, at which time they go a brimming. A Boar will commonly
abide the bay before he goes out of his den; and he lies most commonly in the
strongest holds of thorns and thick bushes.

If it so chance that there is a sounder of them together, then if any break
sounder, the rest will run that way: and if you hunt a Boar from a thick and
strong covert, he will not fail to go back by the same way he came thither: and
when he is reared he never stays, but flies continually till he comes to the
place where he was farrow'd and brought up. This Mr. Turbervile observed
himself when he was in France; attesting he saw a Boar hunted from a thicket,
which returned the same way he came to the place of his farrowing, which was
distant seven French leagues. And this was performed by the track of his feet.

If he be hunted in a forest or hold where he was bred, he will hardly be
forced out of it. Sometimes he will take head, and seem to go out, and will
draw to the outsides of the wood; but it is only to hearken on every side: and
if he hear the noise of the hounds, then will he return, and will not be
compelled to go that way till night. But having broken out of a forest and
taken head end-ways, he will not be put out of his way either by man, dog,
voice, blowing, or any thing.

A Boar, especially a great one, will not cry when you kill him: The sows and
young swine will sometimes.

Terms to be used in Boar-Hunting.
If it should be demanded what you will call a Boar of three years old; you may
answer, He is a young Boar which has lately left the sounder. An old Boar you
must call a Singular, or Sanglier, that has left the sounder four or five
years since. In making of a report, if you are asked where the Boar fed the
night before, you may say, he fed in the corn; but if in the fields or meadows,
you must then say, he has been routing and worming in such a place, or such a
fern-field. Where note, that whatsoever he feeds on, excepting roots, is called
feeding; the other is called routing, worming, or fearning: but when he feeds
and routeth not, you must then call that grasing.

Boar-Hunting with Hounds at Force.
Be advised not to hunt a young Boar of three years old at force; for he will
stand up as long, if not longer than any light young Deer which bears but
three in the top: but in the fourth year you may hunt him at force, as you do a
Heart at ten.

In the rearing of your Boar, you need not be afraid to come near him, for he
values you not, and will lie still, and will not be reared by you alone.

Here note, that if a Boar intends to abide in his den, couch, or fort, then
will he make some crossing or doubling at the entry thereof upon some highway
or beaten path; by such means a huntsman, being early in the woods, may judge
of the subtilty of the Boar, and accordingly may make preparations for his game.

If he be a great Boar, and one that has lain long to rest, let him hunt him
with good store of hounds, and such as will stick close to him; and let him on
horseback be ever amongst them, charging the Boar, to discourage him: for if
you hunt such a Boar with half a dozen couple of dogs, he will not value them;
and they having chased him, he will take courage and keep them still at bays,
running upon any thing he sees before him. But if he be charged home, and hard
laid unto with the hounds, he will turn head and fly.

If you strike at him with your sword or Boar-spear, strike not low, for then
you will hit him on the snout, which he little values; for he watches to take
blows upon his tusks or thereabouts: but lifting up your hand, strike right
down, and have a special care of your horse; for if you strike and hurt him, so
will he you if he can.

It behooves the hunters of Boars to be very wary; for he will run fiercely
without fear upon his pursuers: in which encounter, if he receive not his
deaths wound, he overthrows his adversary, except he fall flat on the ground,
and then he need not fear much harm; for his teeth cannot cut upward but
downward: but it is otherwise with a female; for she will bite and tear any way.

It is good to raise this beast early in the morning before he has made water,
for the burning of his bladder does quickly make him weary.

When the Boar is first raised out of the wood, he snuffeth in the wind,
lifting up his nose to smell what is with him, and what against him; and rarely
strikes a man till he be first wounded himself.

The hunting-spear must be very sharp and broad, branching forth into certain
forks, so that the Boar may not break through them upon the huntsman: The best
places to wound him in therewith, are the middle of his forehead betwixt his
eyelids, or else upon the shoulder; either of these wounds is mortal.

If the Boar make head against the hunter, he must not fly for it, but must
meet him with his spear, holding one hand on the middle of it, and the other at
the end, standing one foot before another, having an especial eye to the head
of the beast which way soever he windeth or turns the same: for such is the
nature of the Boar, that-sometimes he snatcheth the spear out of their hands,
or else recoileth the force back again upon the hunter, by both which means he
is in great danger of life: whenever this happens there is but one remedy,
which is; another of his companions must come and charge the Boar with his
spear, and then pretend to wound him with his dart, but not casting it for fear
of hurting the hunter. The Boar seeing this, forsakes the first man, and
rusheth upon the second, who must look to defend himself with all dexterity,
composing his body, and ordering his weapons according to artificial
Boar-hunting: in the mean time he that was overthrown must rise again, taking
fresh hold on his spear, and with all courage assault his adversary, and assist
his friend who was the cause of the saving of his life.

When he feels himself so wounded that he cannot live, were it not for the
forks of the Boar-spear, he would press it on his vanquisher, and so revenge
his death: For such is the fury of this beast, that he will endeavor to wound
and kill, although he feel upon him the pangs of death; and what place soever
he biteth, whether man or dog, the heat of his teeth causes the wound to be
inflamed: and for this cause, if he but touch the hair of a dog, he burns it
off: nay, huntsmen have tried the heat of his teeth, by laying hairs on them as
soon as he was dead, and they have shrivel'd up as with a hot-iron.

To conclude; the same devises, diligence, labor, prosecution, and
observations are to be used in the hunting of the Boar, which are prescribed
for the hunting of the Heart. Not but that there are several policies and
stratagems which have been invented, and are still used in several countries,
whereby to take them without the pursuit of dogs; to the knowledge whereof I
shall refer the reader to Blondus, Oppianus, Gesner, Turbervile, and many
others both ancient and modern writers, who have largely treated on this
subject.

Of the Nature and Properties of a Bear, and after what manner Hunted.
THere are two sorts of Bears, a greater and lesser; the last is more apt to
climb trees than the other.

Bears are bred in many countries; in the Helvetian Alpine region they are so
strong and courageous, that they can tear in pieces both oxen and horses; for
which cause the inhabitants are studiously laborious in the taking them.

A Bear is of a most venereous and lustful disposition; for night and day the
females with most ardent inflamed desires do provoke the males to copulation;
and for this cause at that time they are most fierce and angry. The time of
their copulation is in the beginning of winter, and the manner of it is like to
a man's; the male moving himself upon the belly of the female, which lies flat
on her back, and they embrace each other with their fore-feet: they remain a
very long time in that act; in so much (as some have observed, how true I
cannot say) that if they were very fat at their first entrance, they dis-joyn
not themselves again till they be lean.

There is a strange report in history, (if it be true) That in the mountains of
Savoy a Bear carried a young maid into his den by violence, where in a venereal
manner he had the carnal use of her body; and while he kept her in his den, he
daily went forth and brought her the best fruits he could get, presenting them
to her as food, as courtly as he could do it; but always when he went to
forage, he rolled a very great stone to the mouth of his den, that the virgin
should not make her escape from him: at length her parents, with long search,
found their daughter in the Bear's den, who delivered her from that beastial
captivity.

They are naturally very cruel and mischievous unto all tame beasts, and are
very strong in all parts of their body but their head, whereon a small blow
will kill them.

They go to mate in the beginning of the winter, some sooner, some later,
according to their rest and feeding; and their heat lasts not passing fifteen
days.

When the she- Bear perceives her self with whelp, she withdraws her self into
some cave, or hollow rock, and there remains till she brings forth her whelps,
where without meat they grow very fat, especially the males, only by sucking
their fore-feet. When they enter into their den, they convey themselves
backward, that so they may put out their footsteps from the sight of the
hunters.

The nature of all of them is to avoid cold, and therefore in the wintertime
they hide themselves, choosing rather to suffer famine than cold; lying for the
most part three or four months together and never see the light, whereby in a
manner their guts are clung together: coming forth, they are so dazzled by long
darkness, being in the light again, that they stagger and reel to and fro; and
then by a secret instinct they remedy the straightness of their guts by eating
an herb called Arum, in English Wake-robbin or Calvesfoot, by the acidity
whereof their guts are enlarged; and being recovered, they remain more fierce
and cruel than at other times, during the time their young are with them: and
this is the herb, some say, which they eat to make them sleep so long in winter
without sense of cold or hunger.

They are whelped most commonly in March, sometimes two, and not above five in
number; the most part of them are dead one whole day after they are whelped;
but the Bear does so lick them and warm them with her breath, and hug them in
her bosom, that she quickly revives them again.

It is commonly received as a truth, (though it be a palpable vulgar error)
That the whelps of Bears at their first littering are without all form and
fashion, and nothing but a little congealed blood like a lump of flesh, which
afterward the old one frames with her tongue by licking them to her own
likeness. This opinion may be easily disproved; for they are only littered
blind without hair, and the hinder-legs not perfect, the forefeet folded up
like a fist, and other members deformed, by reason of the immoderate humor or
moistness in them; which also is one cause why she cannot retain in her womb
the seed to the perfection of the young ones, whereof Joachimus Rheticus is an
eyewitness.

As soon as the dam perceives her cubs to grow strong, she suckleth them no
longer, by reason of their curstness; for they will sorely bite her if they
cannot get suck enough. After this she preyeth abroad upon any thing she can
meet with, which she eats, and casts up again to her young ones, and so feeds
them till they can prey for themselves: They will climb a tree for the fruit.

If they be hunted, they will follow a man, but not run upon him unless they
are wounded. They are very strong in their paws, in such sort, that they will
so hug a man or dog till they have broke his back, or squeezed his guts out of
his belly: with a single paw they will pull a lusty dog to their tearing and
devouring mouth. They bite very severely; for they will bite a man's head to
the very brains; and for an arm or leg, they will crash it as a dog may do a
slender bone of mutton.

When they are hunted, they are so heavy that they make no speed, and so are
always in sight of the dogs. They stand not at bay as a Boar, but fly
wallowing; but if the hounds stick in, they will fight valiantly in their own
defense; sometimes they stand up straight on their hinder-feet, and then take
that as a sign of fear and cowardice; they fight stoutest and strongest on all
four.

They have an excellent scent, and smell further off than any other beast
except the Boar; for in a whole forest they will smell out a tree laden with
mast.

They may be hunted with hounds, mastiffs, or greyhounds; and they are chased
and killed with bows, Boar-spears, darts, and swords; so are they also taken in
snares, caves, and pits, with other engines.

They do naturally abide in great mountains; but when it snoweth, or in hard
weather, then they descend into valleys and forests for provision. They cast
their lesses sometimes in round croteys, and sometimes flat like a bullock,
according to their feeding.

They go sometimes a gallop, and at other times an amble; but they go most at
case when they wallow.

When they come from their feeding they beat commonly the highways and beaten
paths: and wheresoever they go out of the highways, there you may be sure they
are gone to their dens; for they use no doublings nor subtilties.

They tumble and wallow in water and mire as swine, and they feed like a dog.
Some say their flesh is very good food, let who will eat it for me, who are not
so nicely palated as my self.

The best finding of a Bear is with a leam-hound; and yet he who is without one
may trail after a Bear as we do after a Buck or Roe, and you may lodge and hunt
them as you do a Buck. For the more speedy execution, mingle mastiffs among
your hounds; for they will pinch the Bear, and so provoke her to anger, until
at last they bring her to the bay; or else drive her out of the plain into the
covert, not letting her be at rest till she fight in her own defense.

Of the Beaver.
A Beaver differs but a little from an Otter but in his tail: his color is
somewhat yellow and white aspersed with ash color, which stand out beyond the
shorter hairs, double their length; and are neat and soft like an Otters.

There is plenty of them in the river Pontus, whence the Beaver by some is
called Canis Ponticus: They are also bred in Spain, some few in France,
Germany, Polonia, Sclavonia, Russia, Prussia, Lithuania; and abundance of them
in New England.

These beasts are amphibious, living both on land and water both fresh and
salt, keeping the last in the daytime, and the first in the night: Without
water they cannot live; for they participate much of the nature of fish, which
may be gathered from their tails and hinder-legs.

They are about the bigness of a country cur; their head short; their ears
small and round; their teeth very long, the under-teeth standing out beyond
their lips three fingers breadth, and the upper about half a finger, being very
broad, crooked, strong, and sharp, standing very deep in their mouth, wherewith
they defend themselves against beasts, take fishes as it were upon hooks, and
will gnaw in sunder trees as big as a man's thigh.

Their fore-feet are like dogs, and their hinder like geese, made as it were on
purpose to go on the land, and swim in the water; but the tail of this beast is
most strange of all, being without hair, and covered over with a skin like the
scales of a fish, it being like a Soal, and for the most part six fingers
broad, and half a foot long. They are accounted a very delicate dish, and eat
like Barbels: the manner of their dressing is by roasting them first, and
boiling or stewing them afterward; they must be food that is very sweet, since
this proverb proceeded from them: Sweet is that fish which is no fish at all.

As for the wonderful manner of their building, I shall let that alone, since
it is at large described by Gesner in his History of Beasts, page 36.

There is nothing so valuable in this beast as his stones; for they are in
great esteem, and a precious commodity.

It has been the opinion of some, that when a Beaver is hunted, and is in
danger to be taken, he biteth off his own stones, knowing that for them only
is he thus pursued: but this is found to be a mere fiction; for their stones
being small, and placed like a Boar's, it is impossible for them to come at
them.

They are taken for their skins, tails, and cods, and that many ways. First,
when their caves are found: (in which are several chambers built one over
another by the waterside, to ascend or descend according as the water rises
or falls) I say, their abode being found, they make a breach therein, wherein
is put a little dog, which the Beaver perceiving, flies instantly to the end of
her cave, and there defends her self with her teeth, till all her building be
raised, and she laid open to her enemies, who kill her with instruments for
that purpose. These dogs for the Beaver are the same which hunt Otters.

They cannot dive long time under water, but must put up their heads for
breath; which being seen by those who are hunting them, they kill them with
gunshot or Otter-spears: His nature is, if he hear any noise, to put up his
head above water, whereby he is discovered, and so loses life. Those skins are
best which are blackest.

Of the Elk.
THis beast is twice as big as a Heart, whose upperlip is so great, and hangs
over the nether so far, that he cannot eat going forward; but as he eats he
goes backward, and so gathers up his sustenance.

His mane is diverse both on the top of his neck, and underneath his throat,
which buncheth like a beard, or curled lock of hair; his neck is very short,
disproportionable to his body.

He has two very large horns bending toward the back in a plain edge, and the
spires stand forward to the face: both males and females have them; they are
solid at the root and round, but afterward branched; they are broader than a
Hart's, and are very heavy, being not above two foot long; and these horns they
mew every year: He is colored for the most part like a Heart, and has cloven
feet, but without joints (like an Elephant) in his forelegs, and therefore
sleeps leaning to posts or trees; and fights not with his horns, but
fore-feet.

It is a most timorous creature, not desiring to stir much, unless provoked
thereunto by hunting. There is no danger in hunting this beast, except a man
come right before him: for if this beast fasten his fore-feet on him, he cannot
escape alive; but if it receive any small wound, it instantly dies.

They are taken by nets and toils, or as Elephants are taken: for when they
have found the trees where-unto they lean, they so cut and saw them, that when
the Elk comes, he overthrows the tree and falls with it; and being not
able to rise, is so taken alive. When they are chased eagerly, and can find no
place to rest themselves in and lie secret, they run to the waters, and therein
stand, taking up waters into their mouths; and in a little time do so heat it,
that squirting it out upon the dogs, the heat thereof so scaldeth them, that
they dare not come nigh or approach them any more.

Many more exotic beasts I might here insert, describing their natures, and
the manner of their Foreign hunting; but, since they are not to be found in
England, let these suffice which I have already described.

Dogs Diseases Remedied, and their Hurts Healed, according to the best
Prescriptions of Ancient and Modern Huntsmen.
Of a Five-fold Madness in a Dog: the Symptoms of the Maladies, and their CVRE.
THe ancients have derived Rabies, Madness, from Ravies, hoarseness of voice,
for mad dogs have no perfect voice: but it is more probable, that Rabies comes
a Rapiendo; because when a dog begins to go mad; he biteth, runs,
snatcheth, and roves to and fro, to his own perdition. A mad dog is most
dangerous in the Dog Days; for at that time the very foam or spittle falling on
a man breeds danger.

There are properly seven sorts of Madnesses which afflict a dog, whereof two
of them are incurable, and therefore I shall speak little of them; only so
much as may give you warning to shift them from your other dogs, because their
disease is infectious; and that you may beware of them your self, lest they
injure you; for their biting is dangerous.

The first of these incurable Madnesses is called the Hot burning Madness, and
is known by these symptoms. First, when they run, they raise their tails
bolt-upright, and run upon any thing that stands before them, having no respect
where nor which way they run: also their mouths will be very black, having no
foam in nor about them. They will not continue thus above three or four days,
after which time they die, their pain being so intolerable. Where note, that
all those dogs they have bitten and drew blood from, will be mad in like manner.

The second is called the running Madness, and is less dangerous, however
incurable. The dogs that are troubled with this madness run not on men, but
dogs, and on no other beasts. The symptoms are, they will smell on other dogs,
and having smelt them, will shake and bite them, yet shaking their tails, and
seeming to offer no harm: with other tokens I omit for brevity sake.

Of the Dumb Madness.
The five Madnesses (or rather Sicknesses) which are curable, are these:

The first is called the Dumb madness, and is thus known: the dog that is
troubled therewith will not feed, but holds his mouth wide open continually,
putting his feet to his mouth frequently, as if he had a bone in his throat.

The cure is thus: Take four ounces of the juice of Spathula putrida, and put
it into a pot; then take the like quantity of the juice of black Hellebore, and
as much of the juice of Rue: having strained them all well through a fine
cloth, put them into a glass: then take two drams of Scammony unprepared, and
having mingled it with the former juices, put it into a horn or funnel, and
convey it down his throat, keeping his head up straight, lest he cast it up
again: then bleed him in the mouth, cutting three or four veins in his gums
that he may bleed the better; and in a short time you will find amendment. Or
you may only take eight drams of the juice of an herb called Hartshorn, or
Dogs-tooth, and you will find it a most excellent receipt against any madness
whatsoever.

Of the Falling Madness.
The second is called the Falling Madness: the disease lies in their heads,
which makes them reel as they go, and fall.

The cure is thus: Take four ounces of the juice of Piony, with the like
quantity of the juice of Briony, the like of the juice of Cruciata, and four
drams of Stavesacre pulverized: mingle these together, and give it your hound
or dog as aforesaid: then let him blood in the cars or the two veins which come
down the shoulders; and if he is not cured at first, give it him a second or
third time.

Of the Lank Madness.
The third kind of madness is called the Lank Madness, by reason of the
leanness of their bodies occasioned by skummering.

The cure is thus: First, purge your dog with this portion: Take an ounce and a
half of Cassia fistularis well cleansed, two drams and a half of Stavesacre
pulverized, and the like quantity of Scammony prepared in White-wine-vinegar,
and four ounces of Oyl-olive; temper these and warm them over the Fire, and
give it your dog. In the morning put him into this bath fasting as follows:
Put into six pails full of water ten handfuls of Mugwort, of Rosemary, of
red-Sage, of the roots or leaves of Marshmallows, of the roots or leaves of
Wall-wort, of the roots or stalks of Fennel, of the leaves or stalks of
Elecampane, Baulm and Rue, Sorrel, Bugloss and Mellilot; let these boil
together in two thirds of water and the other Wine, until one third be
consumed: the bath being no hotter than your dog can endure it, bathe him
therein for the space of an hour; then taking him out, put him in some warm
place for sear of catching cold. Do this four or five times in the same bath,
and it will cure.

Of the Sleeping Madness.
The fourth Madness is called the Sleeping Madness, and is caused by some
little Worms breeding in the mouth of the Stomach from corrupt Humors, the
vapors and sumes whereof ascending into the head, make the dog sleep
continually, and frequently he dies sleeping.

For the cure, you must take five ounces of the juice of Wormwood, with two
ounces of the powder of Hartshorn burned, and two drams of Agarick: mingle
these together; and if they be too thick, thin them with White Wind, and give
it your dog to drink.

Of the Rhcumatick or Slavering Madness.
This Madness is called so, because, when a dog has got it, his head swells,
his eyes are as yellow as a Kite's-foot, and he commonly slavereth at the mouth.

The Cure is thus: Take six ounces of the juice of Fennel-roots, and the like
quantity of the juice of Misseltoe, four ounces of the juice of lvy, four
ounces of the powder of the roots of Polypodie; boil these in White Wind, and
give it your dog to drink as hot as he can suffer it.

Here note, that when a dog has any of these kinds of Madnesses he will have
no desire to eat, fasting frequently eight or nine days, and so starving to
death. Nay, if they are troubled with any distemper they will refuse their
meat, nay, the daintiest bit you can give them, until they have eaten grass,
and have cleared their stomach of what did offend it, and then they will eat.

Concerning the Madness of Dogs, and their Venomous Bitings.
I think no reasonable man ought to question why the teeth of a mad dog should
do more harm than those of a sound one; because in rage and anger the teeth of
every beast and creature receive venom and poison from the head, whereby when
they bite at that time they do much more harm.

Against the simple biting of a dog, take the urine of a dog, which is
sufficient, since there is but little venom in those wounds. To lay the hair
of the same dog thereon, (though so much talked on) I look upon as a mere
foppery. Or being bit by a dog, take vinegar, and with your hand rub the wound
very well; then pour into it vinegar mixed with water or Nitre; then wet a
sponge in the same liquids, and so let it remain bound up three days; then take
Pellitory of the wall, mingled and beaten with Salt, or any other plaster for
green wounds.

Diverse are the cures and remedies for biting of mad dogs; which I omit in this
place, as belonging not to my subject, but to Physic.

A Remedy against the common Mange.
This distemper befalls a dog frequently for want of fresh water to drink when
he desires it, and sometimes by foul kennelling, and sometimes by foundering
and melting his grease.

You may cure it in this manner: Take two handfuls of wild Cresses, two
handfuls of Elecampane, and as much of the leaves and roots of Roerb and
Sorrel, and two pound of the roots of Frodels; make them all boil well in lie
and vinegar: having strained the decoction, put therein two pound of gray soap;
and when it is melted therein, then rub your degs with it four or five days
together, and it will cure them.

A brief Discourse of the Cure of Maladies belonging to Spaniels, with other
accidents happening.
HOw necessary a thing a Spaniel is to Faulconry, and for those that delight in
that noble recreation, keeping Hawks for their pastime and pleasure, I think no
body need question, as well to spring and retrive a fowl being flown to the
mark, as also diverse other ways to help and assist Faulcons and Goshawks.

Now since they are subject to many diseases and casualties, I shall endeavor
to propound a suitable cure for them; and first, I shall begin with the Mange,
as the capital enemy to the quiet and beauty of a brave Spaniel, wherewith poor
creatures they are often grievously tormented, and as frequently infect others.

For the cure of this distemper, take a pound of Barrow-flick, common Oil three
ounces, Brimstone well pulverized foar ounces, Salt well beaten to powder,
Ashes well sifted and searced, of each two ounces; boil all these in a kettle
or earthen-pot, and when they are all well incorporated together, anoint your
Spaniel with this thrice every other day, either against the Sun or Fire:
having so done, wash him all over with good strong Lie, and this will kill the
Mange. Remember you shift his kennel and litter often.

If the Spaniel lose its Hair, as it often happens, then bathe your Spaniel in
the water of Lupines or Hops, and anoint him with stale Barrows-flick.

This ointment, besides the cure, makes his skin look slick and beautiful, and
kills the fleas, the dogs disquieters, and enemies to his ease.

If this be not strong enough to destroy this malady, then take two quarts of
strong vinegar, common oil six ounces, brimstone three ounces, soot six ounces,
brayd salt and searced two handfuls: boil all these together in the vinegar,
and anoint your dog as aforesaid. This receipt must not be administered in cold
weather, for it may hazard his life in so doing.

If a Spaniel be not much troubled with the Mange, then it is easy to cure him
thus:

Make bread with wheaten-bran, with the roots, leaves, and fruit of Agrimony,
beating them well in a mortar, and, making it into a paste or dough, bake it in
an oven, and so made, give thereof to your Spaniel, giving him no other bread
for some time, letting him eat as long as he will.

Cure of the Formica.
In the summertime there is a scurvy malady which very much afflicts a
Spaniel's ears, and is accasioned by flies and their own scratching with their
feet: We term it a Mange, the Italians, Formica, and the French, Fourmier.

For the cure, take Gum-dragaganth four ounces infused in the strongest Vinegar
may be gotten, for the space of eight days, and afterward bruised on a
marble-stone, as painters do their colors, adding unto it Roch-allum and Galls
beaten to powder, of either two ounces; mingle all these well together, and lay
it on the place afflicted.

For Swelling in the Throat.
By reason of a humor distilling from the brain, the throat of a Spaniel will
often swell unreasonably. For cure whereof, anoint the grieved place with oil
of Camomile; then wash it with vinegar not over-strong mixed with salt.
Probatum est.

Of Worms breeding in the Hurts and Mangy parts of a Spaniel.
These worms do hinder the cure of the mange or wounds, causing them to
continue at one stay, or to grow worse and worse. To remove this hindrance,
take the gum of Ivy and convey it into the wound, and let it there remain a day
or two, washing the wound with Wine; and after that anoint it with
Bacon-grease, oil of Earthworms, and Rue.

The powder of wild Cucumbers is excellent good to kill these worms, and will
prove a good corrosive, also eating away the dead flesh, and increasing the
good.

If the worms be within the body, you must destroy them in this manner: Cause
your Spaniel, by fair means or foul, when fasting, to eat the yolk of an egg
with two scruples of Saffron pulverized and confected with the same egg,
keeping him after it fasting till night.

When a Spaniel is hurt, as long as he can come to lick the wound with his
tongue he needs no other remedy; his tongue is his best Surgeon: but when he
cannot do that, then such wounds as are not venomous you may cure with the
powder of Matresilva dried in an oven, or in the Sun. If it be a bite of a Fox,
anoint it with oil wherein Earthworms and Rue have been boiled together. If by
a mad dog, let him lap twice or thrice of the broth of Germander, and eat the
Germander too boiled.

Others bore the skin of his neck through with a hot-Iron just betwixt his
ears, so as the fire may touch both sides of the hole made: after that,
plucking up the skin of the dog's shoulders and flanks backwards, thrust it
through with a hot-Iron in like manner: by giving the venom this vent, it is a
ready way to cure him.

To help a Spaniel that has lost his sense of Smelling.
Spaniels, sometimes, by reason of too much rest and grease, or some other
accident, do lose their sense of smelling, so as they cannot spring or retrive
a fowl after their usual manner: To recover it again, take Agarick two drams,
Sal Gemma one scruple; beat these into powder, and incorporate them with
Oxymel, making a pill as big as a nut, cover it with butter, and give it the
dog by fair means or foul. This will bring him into a quick scent, as I have
oftentimes proved it.

The benefit of cutting off the tip of a Spaniel's Tail or Stern.
It is necessary for several reasons to cut off the tip of a Spaniel's stern
when it is a whelp. First, by so doing worms are prevented from breeding there;
in the next place, if it be not cut, he will be the less forward in pressing
hastily into the covert after his game; besides this benefit, the dog appears
more beautiful.

An Abstract of such Penal LAWS As relate to HUNTERS and HUNTING.
STat. 13 R. 2. cap. 13. No man who has not lands of 40 s. per ann. nor Clerk
who has not 10 l. revenue per an. shall have or keep any Greyhound, Hound,
Dog, Ferret, Net, or Engine to destroy Deer, Hares, Coneys, or any other
Gentleman's Game, in pain of one whole years imprisoment, which Justices of
Peace have power to inflict.

Stat. 1 H. 7. cap. 7. If any shall hunt within Forests, Parks, or Warrens in
the nightime, or disguised, one of the Kings Council, or a Justice of Peace
to whom information shall be made, shall by his Warrant cause the Offender to
be brought before himself, or some other Councellor or Justice of Peace to be
examined; where if he conceal the Fact, such hunting shall be deemed Felony;
but being confessed, the Offense is only Finable at the next general Sessions.
And here a Rescous of the Execution of any such Warrant shall be also deemed
Felony.

Stat. 19 H. 7. cap. 11. None shall keep any Deer-hays, or Buck-stalls (save in
his own Forest or Park) in pain to forfeit for every Month they are so kept 40
s. Neither shall any stalk with any Bush or Beast to any Deer, except in his
own Forest or Park, on pain of 10 l.

Stat. 14, 15 H. 8. cap. 10. None shall trace, destroy, or kill any Hare in the
Snow, in pain of 6 s. 8 d. for every such Offense: which penalty assessed in
Sessions shall go to the King; but in a Leet, to the Lord thereof.

Stat. 3 Jacob. cap. 13. None shall (without the Owners License) kill or chase
any Deer or Coneys in any Parks, or enclosed Grounds, in pain to suffer three
months imprisonment, to pay treble damages to the party grieved, and to be
bound with two good Sureties to the good behavior for seven years: But the
party grieved, having satisfaction, has liberty to release the Behavior.

II. By the same Statute it appears, that if any person not having 40 l. per
annum in Lands, or 200 l. in Goods, or some enclosed Ground used for Deer or
Coneys worth 40 s. per ann. at least, shall use any Gun, Bow, or Cross-bow to
kill any Deer or Coneys, or shall keep any Buck-stall, Ferret, Dog, Net, or
other Engine, it shall be lawful for any person (having Lands worth 100 l. per
ann.) to take such Gun, etc. from any such person, and to convert it to his own
use.

Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 20. None shall unlawfully Course, Kill, Hunt, or carry
away any Deer in any Forest, Chase, Purliew, Wood, Park, or other Ground where
Deer have been usually kept, within England and Wales, without the consent of
the Owners or Party chiefly trusted with the custody thereof, or he aiding or
assisting therein, upon pain, being convicted by confession, or one Witness,
before any Istice of the Peace within sit months after the Offense, of 201. to
be levied by distress by Warrant of the said Justices: one moity to the
Informer, the other to the Owner of the Deer: And for want of distress, to be
committed to the House of Correction, or common Goal, for one year, and not
discharged till sufficient Sureties be given for the good behavior.

II. It is nevertheless provided, that upon punishment of this Statute the
penalty of no other Law be incurred.

Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 25. It is Enacted, That all Lords of Mannours or
other Royalties, not under the degree of an Esquire, may by Writing under their
Hands and Seals, authorize one or more Game-keepers within their respective
Mannours or Royalties; who being thereunto so authorized, may take and seize
all such Guns, Bows, Greyhounds, Setting-dogs, Lurchers, or other Dogs to kill
Hares or Coneys, Ferrets, Crammels, Low-bells, Hayes, or other Dets,
Hare-pipes, Snares, or other Engines for the taking and killing of Coneys,
Hares, Pheasants, Partridges, or other Game, as within the Precincts of such
respective Mannours shall be used by any person or persons who by this Act are
prohibited to keep or use the same. And if any person or persons by this Act
prohibited to keep or use any Guns, Dogs, etc. as aforesaid, be upon good
ground suspected to have or keep in his or their custody, any Guns, Bows, or
any sort of Dogs, etc. to destroy Hares, Coneys, etc. Then may the said
Game-keeper or Game-keepers, or other person (being thereunto Authorized by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace of the same County,
Division, or Place) in the daytime, search the Houses, Dut-houses, or other
places of such persons so suspected: and if any Gun, Greyhound, Bows,
Setting-dogs, etc. be there found, the same he shall seize, detain, and keep,
to and for the use of the Lord of the Manor or Royalty where the same shall
be so found or taken; or otherwise to cut in pieces or destroy, as things by
this Act prohibited to be kept by their degree.

II. None having Lands or Cenements, or some other Estate of Inheritance in his
own or his Wifes right, of the clear value of 1001. per ann. or for term of
life, or having Lease or Leases of 99 years at least of the clear value of
1501. Nor the Son and heir apparent of an Esquire, or other person of higher
degree, who are hereby declared to be the persons declared by the Laws of this
Realm not allowed to have or keep any Guns, Bows, Greyhounds, Setting-dogs,
ferrets, Coney-dogs, Lurchers, Hays, Dets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or
other Engines aforesaid: But shall be, and are hereby prohibited to have, keep,
or use the same. All Owners and Keepers of Forests, Parks, Warrens, or Chases,
being stockt with Deer or Coneys for their necessary use, in respect of the
said Forests, Parks, Warrens, or Chases are allowed to keep, etc.

III. None may enter wrongfully into any Warren or ground lawfully used or kept
for the breeding or keeping of Coneys; (although the same be not enclosed) nor
take, kill, or chase any Coneys there without the consent of the Owner thereof,
not having any lawful Title or Authority so to do, on pain to yield to the
party grieved treble damages and cost; besides shall suffer three months
Imprisonment, and after till they find Sureties for their good abearing: the
person offending being convict by one Witness upon Dath, or his own confession
is sufficient.

IV. No person or persons shall take in the nightime any Coneys upon the
borders of any Warren, or other grounds, lawfully used for the breeding or
keeping of any Coneys, except such as shall be owners of the Soil, or lawful
occupier or possessor of the ground, or any persons employed by him, her, or
them, whereon such Coneys shall be so killed or taken; upon pain that every
Offender, lawfully convict as aforesaid, shall give the party or parties
injured such recompense or satisfaction for his or their damages, and within
such time as shall be appointed by the Justice before whom such Offender shall
be convicted; and over and above pay down presently to the Overseers for the
use of the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed, such sum
of money, not exceeding 10 s. as the said Justice shall think meet. And if such
Offender or Offenders do not make recompense or satisfaction to the said party
or parties injured, and also pay the said sum to the Poor as aforesaid; then
the said Justice shall commit the said Offender or Offenders to the House of
Correction, for such time as the said Justice shall think fit, not exceeding
one month.

V. Provided that what is mentioned in this Act of 22 and 23 Car. 2. extend not
to abridge any Royalty or Prerogative of his Majesty; nor to abridge, change,
or alter any Forest-Laws, but the same to be of force, and remain as if this
Act had not been made.

A further Abstract of some Penal LAWS as concern FORESTS, CHASES, etc.
I. There shall be three Swainmotes in the Year, viz. one 15 days before
Michaelmass; another about Martinmass; and the third 15 days before Midsummer.
At the first two of which none shall appear by distress, but the Fosters,
Uerdors, and Gest-takers; and at the other only the Fosters and Uerdors:
howbeit the Fosters and Uerdors shall meet every forty days, to see the
Attachment of the Forests, as well for Green-hue, as Hunting: And the
Swainmotes shall not be kept, but in the Counties where they have used to be
kept.

II. Lawing of Dogs shall be made in Forests, from 3 years to 3 years by the
view and testimony of lawful men, and not otherwise: Howheit such Lawing of
Dogs shall not be but where it has been used from the Coronation of Hen. 2d.

III. No Foster or Beadie shall make Scotal, or gather Garhe, Oats, Lamb, or
Pig, but by the sight of the 12 Rangers when they shall make their Range: And
there shall be so many Rangers assigned for the keeping of Forests, as shall
seem reasonably sufficient for the same.

IV. Any person having a Wood in the Forest may agest it, and take his pawnage
there at his pleasure; he may also drive his Dogs through the Kings Woods, or
elsewhere for that purpose; and if they ly all night in the Forest, he shall
not be questioned for it.

V. None shall lose Life or Member for killing of Deer, but shall be fined for
it if he have any thing; if not, he shall be imprisoned a year and a day: and
(if he can find good Sureties) shall then be delivered; but if not, he shall
absure the Realm.

VI. A Peer of the Realm, being sent for by the King, in coming and returning
may kill a Deer or two in the Forest through which he passes: howbeit, it must
not be done privily, but by the view of the Foster, if present; but if absent,
by causing one ta blow a Norn for him, lest he seem to steal the Deer.

VII. No Chimage or Coll shall be taken in Forests, but by a Forester in fee,
that farms his Bailiwick, and only of such as buy their Bushes, Cimber, Bark,
or Coals, to sell it again, viz. 2 d. for a Cart, and 1 d. for an Dorse, to be
taken half-yearly; and it shall only he taken where it has used to be taken,
and not elsewhere: Neither shall any Chimage be taken of such as carry burdens
of Bushes, Bark or Coal, albeit they sell it, unless they take them out of the
Kings Demesne Woods. Thus far Charta Foresta.

A Forester, Parker, or Warrener shall not be questioned for killing a
Crespasser, who (after the peace cried to him) will not yield himself, so it be
not done out of some other former malice. Stat. 21 Ed. 1.

No Minister of the Forest shall be put upon any Assize, Jury, or Inquest to be
taken without the Forest. Ordin. Forestae.

Stat. 1 Ed. 3. cap. 8. None shall be taken or Imprisoned for Uert or Uenison,
unless he be taken with the manner, or else indicted according to the form of
the Stat. 34. Ed. 1. And then the Warden of the Forest shall take him to
Mainprise, until the Air of the Forest, without taking any thing for his
deliberance. And if the Warden will not so do, he shall have a Writ out of the
Chancery of Old ordained for persons indicted to be bailed till the Air.

Stat. 1 Ed. 3. cap. 2. Any man having Wood within the Forest, may take
Horse-boot and Hay-boot in his said Wood, without being Attached for the same
by the Ministers of the Forest, so that it be done by the view of the Foresters.

Stat. 7. R. 2. cap. 4. No Officer of the Forest shall take or imprison any
without due Indictment, or per main ouvre (with his hand at the work) that is,
being taken with the manner, or trespassing in the Forest; nor shall constrain
any to make Obligation or Ransom against his will, and the Assise of the
Forest, in pain to pay the party grieved double damages, and to be ransomed at
the King's will.

16 and 17 Car. cap. 16. An Act for the certainty of Forests, and of the Meers,
limits and bounds thereof: See the Statute at large.

17 Car. cap. 16. No place within England or Wales, where no Justice Seat,
Swainmote, Court, or Attachment has been made, or Uindosers chosen, or Regard
made within 20 years, shall be accounted Forest.

II. Tenants and Owners of all excluded Land, shall enjoy their common and
other profits.

Stat. 20. Car. 2. cap. 3. Ten Thousand Acres of waste Lands in the Forest of
Dean shall be enclosed, and kept in severalty, for the growth and preservation
of Timber; and be under the regard and Government of Forest Law.

FINIS.
THE GENTLEMAN's Recreation: BEING A TREATISE OF HAWKING AND Faulconry. Fitted
for the Delight and Pleasure of all Noblemen and Gentlemen. Collected from
Ancient and Modern Authors, and Rectified by the Experience of the most Skilful
Artists of these Times. With an Abstract of such Statute-Laws as concern this
Recreation.

The Second Part.

London: Printed by J C. and F. C. for N. C.

OF HAWKING.
The Introduction.
THe Element wherein the Faulconer uses to trade, is the Air; and though he
deals sometimes in the Water, yet he prefers the Air before it, that yielding
him most Recreation; for it is unable to stop the high soaring of his generous
Faulcon: in it she flies to such a height, that, being lost to the sight of
Mortals, she seems to converse with Heaven alone; and, like Icarus, endangers
her Wings to be scorcht by the Sunbeams; and yet is fearless, cutting the
fluid Air with her nimble Pinions, making her Highway over the steepest
Mountains and deepest Rivers, and in her lofty career looks down with a seeming
contempt on the greatest Glories we most estimate: and yet such is her Loyalty
and Obedience to her Master, that a word from his mouth shall make her stoop
and condescend.

This Element of Air is not only to be praised for the Recreation it affords
the Faulconers, but for its Usefulness to all, no creature being in a condition
to live without it: for if the inspiring or expiring Organ of any creature be
stopped, it must speedily die, and pay the Debt that is due to Nature.

And as this Element justly merits praise, so do its winged Inhabitants, both
feeding and refreshing Mankind: with their Bodies they perform the first, and
the latter with their harmonious Voices.

The number of Heaven's airy Quire is so great, I cannot here well enumerate
them; yet I must not pass by these nimble Musicians of the Air, which warble
forth such curious Notes as puzzle Art to imitate.

I mean to speak of few, and first of the Lark: When she means to recreate her
self and hearers, she quits the Earth, and sings as she ascends; and having
made an end of her heavenly Ditty, she seems to swound to think she must
descend again unto the dull Earth, which she would scorn to tread but for
necessity.

Again, observe how the Blackbird and the Thrush contend who shall with their
unimitable Voices bid the best welcome to the fragrant Spring.

Nor does the Nightingale come short in breathing out her loud Music through
the small Organ of her Throat. How have I often admired in a still night the
clearness of her Airs, the sweetness of her Descants, her natural Risings and
Fallings, her Doublings and Redoublings!

Much more might be said of these, which I shall wave, being a digression from
my purpose, which is to treat of another Bird of Pleasure, viz. the Hawk

HEre note, that the Hawk is distinguished into two kinds; the Long-winged,
and Short-winged Hawk.

Of the first kind there are these, which are here amongst us most in use: The
Gerfaulcon and Jerkin, Faulcon and Tiercel-gentle, Lanner and Lanneret,
Bockerel and Bockeret, Saker and Sakaret, Merlin and Jack-merlin, Hobby and
Jack, The Stelletto of Spain, The bloud-red Rook of Turkey, The Waskite from
Virginia.


Of the Short-winged Hawks there are these: The Eagle and Iron, Goshawk and
Tiercel, The Sparrow-hawk and Musket, Two sorts of the French Pie.


Of inferior sort there are these: The Stanyel or Ring-tail, The Raven and
Buzzard, The Forked Kite and bold Buzzard, The Hen-driver, etc.


It is not to be expected that we should treat of all these and many others
bearing different Names, but only such which are most in use, of which I shall
regularly treat concerning their Eyries, Mewings, Castings, Renovation of
Feathers, etc. with their Reclaiming, Dieting, Diseases, Cures, and Method of
Practice.

Terms of Art in Faulconry, as they were used by Ancient Faulconers, and are
now by Modern Practitioners, with their Explanations.
THe Age of a Hawk: The first year, a Soarage. The second year, an Enterview.
The third year, a White Hawk. The fourth year, a Hawk of the first Coat.
Arms, are the Legs from the Thigh to the Foot.
Bate, is when the Hawk fluttereth with her Wings either from Perch to Fist,
as it were striving to get away. Bathing, is when the Hawk washes her self at
home or abroad. Beak, is the upper part of the Bill that is crooked. Beam
Feathers, are the long Feathers of the Hawk Wings. Beavy of Quails, are a brood
of young Quails. Bewits, are the Leathers with Bells buttoned about the Hawks
Legs. Binding, is tyring, or when a Hawk seizes. Bowet, is when a young Hawk
draws any thing out of her Nest, and covets to clamber on the bows. Bowsing,
is when the Hawk drinks often, and yet continually thirsts for more. Branch
or Stand, is to make the Hawk leap from Tree to Tree till the Dog springs the
Partridge. Brancher, is a young Hawk newly taken out of the Nest.
Cadge, is that circular piece of Wood on which Hawks are carried when they are
exposed to sale. Canceleer, is when a high-flown Hawk in her stooping turns
two or three times upon the wing, to recover her self before she seizes.
Carry, is flying away with the Quarry. Cast your Hawk to the Perch, is to put
your Hawk on the Perch. Casting, is when you give your Hawk any thing to
cleanse and purge her Gorge. Carvist; a Hawk may be so called at the beginning
of the year, and signifies as much as to carry on the Fist. Catarast, a Disease
in Hawks so called. Cauterizing-Irons, are Irons to sear with. Cawking-time, is
Treading-time. Crabbing, is when Hawks, standing too near, fight with one
another. Creance, is a fine small long Line of strong and evenwound Pack-thread
which is fastened to the Hawk's Lease or Leash when she is first Lured. Check,
that is when the Hawk forsakes her proper Game to fly at Pies, Crows, or the
like, crossing her in her flight. Clap, is the nether part of the Hawk's Beak.
Coping-Irons, are used in coping or paring the Hawks Beak, Pounces, or Talons,
when overgrown. Cowring, is when young Hawks quiver and shake their Wings, in
testimony of obedience toward the old ones. Crinets, are the small black
Feathers like Hairs about the Sere.
Disclosed, is when the young just peep through the shell. Dropping, is when
the Hawk muteth directly downward in several drops, not yerking it straight
forwards.
Endew, is when the Hawk digesteth her meat, that she not only discharges her
Gorge thereof, but likewise cleanses her Panel. Enseame, is the purging of a
Hawk of her glut and Grease. Enter a Hawk is when she first begins to kill.
Eyess, is a young Hawk newly taken out of the Nest, not able to prey for
himself. Eyrie, is that place where Hawks build, and hatch their young.
Feaking, is when the Hawk wipeth her Beak after feeding. Filanders, a sort of
little red Worms that usually breed in Hawks. Flags, Feathers next the
principal Feathers in the Hawk's Wing. Fly on head, is missing her Quarry, and
betaking her self to the next Check, as Crows, etc. Formale, is the Female-
Hawk. Formica, a Disease in Hawks so called. Frounce, is a Disease common in
the Mouth or Throat of a Hawk.
Gleam, after a Hawk has cast, she Gleamith, or throws up filth from her
Gorge. Glut, is the slimy substance that lies in the Hawks Panel. Gorge, is
called in other Fowl the Craw or Crop. Gurgiting, is when she is stust and
suffecated.
Hack, is the place where the Hawk's Meat is laid. Hawk keeps her mark, is when
she wait at the place where she lays in Partridge, or the like, until it be
retrived. Hern at seidge, is when you find a Hern standing by the waterside
watching for Prey, or the like.
Jack, is the Male- Hawk. Jesses, are those short straps of Leather which are
sastned to the Hawks Legs, and so to the Lease or Leash by Varvails, and
suchlike. Imp, is to insert a Feather into the Wing of a Hawk in the place of
one that is broken. Ink, is the Neck from the Head to the Body of any Bird
which the Hawk does prey upon. Intermewing, is from the first exchange of the
Hawks Coat, till she turn white: and this is so called from the first Mewing.
Jouketh, is when she sleeps.
Luce, that is when a young Hawk is called by the Faulconer thereunto, and is
made of Feathers and Leather not much unlike a Fowl, which he casts up into
the Air. Lease or Leash, is a small long thong of Leather by which the
Faulconer holds his Hawk fast, folding it many times about his Finger. Lean,
is when the Hawk holds in to you.
A Make-Hawk, is an old Staunch- Hawk which used to fly, will easily instruct a
young Hawk. Managing a Hawk, is to use her with Art and Skill. Make out, is
when the Hawk goes forth at Check. Mailes, are the Breast-feathers. Manning, is
making a Hawk to endure company. Mantleth, is when the Hawk stretches one of
her Wings after her Legs, and so the other. Mew, is the place where you set
down your Hawk during the time she raises her Feathers. Muting, is the
Excrements or Dung of a Hawk, and so it is of a Hern. Mites, are a sort of
Vermin that trouble the Head and Nares of a Hawk.
Nares, are the little holes in a Hawk's Beak. Perch, is the Hawk's
resting place when she is off the Faulconers Fist. Pelt, is the dead body of
any Fowl the Hawk has killed. Pill or Pelf, is what the Hawk has left of her
prey after she is relieved. Plume, is the general mixture of Feathers and
Colors by which the Constitution of a Hawk is known. Plumage, are small
Feathers given the Hawk to make her cast. Pluming, is after the Hawk has
seized her Prey, and dismantles it of the Feathers. Panel, is the Pipe next
the Fundament of a Hawk, where she digesteth her meat from her body. Pantas, a
Disease in Hawks so called. Pendant-Feathers, those Feathers behind the Thigh
of a Hawk. Petty-singles, arethe Toes of the Hawk. Pounces, are the Claws of
the Hawk. Principal-Feathers, are the two longest Feathers in the Hawk's Wings.
Pruneth, is when the Hawk picketh her self. Put over, is when a Hawk removes
her Meat from the Gorge into her Bowels, by traversing with her Body, but
chiefly with her Neck.
Quarry, is the Fowl which the Hawk flies at dead or alive.
Raised in flesh, is when a Hawk grows fat. Rake, is when the Hawk flies out
too far from the Fowl. Ramage, is when a Hawk is wild, and difficult to be
reclaimed. Rangle, is when we give a Hawk Gravel to bring her to her Stomach.
Retrive, is when Partridges, having been sprung, are to find again. Rouse, is
when a Hawk lifts her self up and shakes her self. Ruff, is when the Hawk
hits the Prey, and yet not trusses it. Rufter-hood, is a plain and easy
Leather-hood, being large, wide, and open behind, and is to be worn by a Hawk
when you first draw her. Reclaim, is to make a Hawk tame, gentle, and familiar.
Sails, are the Wings of a Hawk: Sear or Sere, is the yellow between the Beak
and Eyes of the Hawk. Seeling, is when a Hawk first taken is so blinded with a
Thread run through the Eyelids, that she sees not, or very little, the better
to make her endure the Hood. Seizing, is when a Hawk gripes her Prey, or any
thing else, fast within her Foot. Setting down, is when the Hawk is put into
the Mew. Slice, is when a Hawk muteth a great distance from her. Sliming, is
when a Hawk muteth without dropping. Sniting, is when a Hawk as it were
sneezeth. Soar-hawk, that is from the first taking her from the Eyries till she
has Mewed her Feathers. Spring, is when any Partridge or Pheasant rise.
Stooping, is when the Hawk is aloft upon her Wing, and then descends to strike
her Prey. Summed, is when the Hawk is in all her Plumes. Swivel, is that which
keeps a Hawk from twisting.
Tiercel or Tassel, is the Male- Hawk. Tiring, is when you give your Hawk a Leg
or Pinion of a Pullet, Pidgeon, etc. to pluck at. Train, is the Tail of the
Hawk. Trassing, is when she raises any Fowl aloft, and soaring with it, at
length descends with it to the ground.
Varvels, little Rings of Silver at the end of the Jesses, whereon the owners
of the Hawk have their Names engraven. Unreclaimed, is when a Hawk is wild.
Unseeling, is when you take away a Thread that runs through the Hawks Eyelids,
and hinders her sight. Unstrike the hood, is to draw the Strings, that it may
be in a readiness to pull off. Unsumm'd, is when the Feathers of a Hawk are not
fully grown. Urines, are Nets to catch Hawks withal.
Warbling, is after a Hawk has mantled her self she crosses her Wings together
over her Back. Weathering, is when you air your Hawk in Frost, Sun, or by the
Fireside. Whur, is the rising and fluttering of Partridge or Pheasant.
The Names and Natures of Hawks in general: and first of the Haggard-Faulcon.
I Begin with the Haggard-Faulcon, since it is a Hawk which most men nowadays
covet, to fit and prepare for their delight and pleasure; although heretofore I
hear less spoken of her praise by the Ancients than she deserves.

Some of old have preferred the Faulcon-gentle for mettle and courage, being of
a loving disposition, strong and daring, and hardy in all seasons; and by a
mere mistake have undervalued the Haggard-faulcon, condemning her as being a
Bird too tender to endure rough and boisterous weather.

Experience confutes this Opinion, she being known to be able to endure as much
the extremity of weather, or more than the Tiercel, Faulcon-gentle, or most
other Hawks whatsoever; and therefore she shall first take place in this manner.

The Haggard-faulcon, wild, and unreclaimed, takes a large liberty to her self
for her abode, either by Sea or Land; and is so absolute in her power, that
wherever she comes, all flying Fowl stoop under her subjection. Nay, the
Tiercel-gentle, although her natural companion, dares not sit by her or come
near her residence but in cawking-time, and that is in the Spring; and then for
procreation sake, she will admit him to come near her with submission, which he
manifests by bowing his head at his approach, and by calling and cowring with
his Wings, as the young ones do, in testimony how fearful he is of incurring
her displeasure.

Whilst she is very young (and so will a Passenger-Soar-faulcon) she will prey
upon Birds which are too big to encounter withal; and this she does for want of
understanding: and she continues this rashness and folly, till experience and a
sound beating have reclaimed her.

The Haggard faulcon will prey on any other Fowl she can meet with
advantageously, especially tame Pigeons, or such as belong to a Dove-house;
for these they frequently meet withal.

This Hawk is an incessant Pains-taker; no weather discourageth her from her
Game, but that only wherein no Fowl can well stir abroad to seek for
sustenance; otherwise she is continually working, either in the Air or
elsewhere, unless she stoop and miss of her Prey, and then she will rest a
little, to take breath and renew her courage. Nay, if she has labored in
boisterous and tempestuous weather three or four days together, she will be so
far from being the worse for it, that she will appear much better, and more
lively. And therefore it is a vulgar error, for men not to fly their Hawks but
after three or four days rest, some a week or fortnight. For old Staunch-hawks,
I judge a little rest will do no harm; but for the young, till she is blouded
give her but little; and if you can fly her every day, you will find it so much
the better.

When the Faulcon unreclaimed has seized her Prey and broke her Neck, (in
artificial terms, her Ink) she then falls on the Crop, and feeds first on what
is there contained, afterward on other parts; and having filled her Gorge, she
will fly to some solitary place which is near water, or what likes her best,
and there she will sit all day: upon the approach of night she takes Wing, and
flies to some convenient place she has before purposed, to perch therein till
the morning.

Thus much of her as she is wild and un-reclaimed. In the next place it will be
requisite to inform you with the manner of reclaiming of a Haggard-faulcon, and
her entry to the Lure.

Having taken or purchased one of them, set her down, and let her rest quietly
the first night in a Rusterhood.

The next day take her up easily on your Fist, and carry her up and down that
whole day; using a Feather to stroke her withal instead of your hand. When you
find her not impatient of being touched, take her Hood off speedily, and put it
on again as speedily, observing thus to do till she is willing to feed: then
frequently offer her food, but let her have but a little at a time; never
pulling her Hood off or on but you must gain her love with a bit or two, using
your voice unto her when you are taking off her Hood, and all the while she is
feeding, and no longer; that by that means, after she is reclaimed, she may
know by your voice she shall be fed.

Having thus done, teach her to come to your Fist from the Perch by doing
thus: Let her stand on a Perch about breast-high; if lower, kneel, for this
low posture will less affright than any other: after this, unstrike her Hood,
and lure her, using your voice; and have a special care that you affright her
not or distaste her, and so cause her to bate from you. But you must, before
you unstrike her Hood, encourage her with a bit or two, which will make her the
more eager to come to you: For it is her Stomach that rules her, and is the
Bridle that keeps her in subjection, pricking her forward to perform her duty:
wherefore if you keep not her Appetite sharp and truly edged, instead of
Submission, you will find Disobedience. When you find she will willingly feed
from and come to your hand, you may then let her sit barefaced, now and then
diverting her starting about by giving her a bit or two, to direct her face
toward you: after this you may set her to the Lure.

When you find she will come readily to the Lure, garnisht with meat in the
Creance, fearing lest she scorn this way of Luring, fix a live Pidgeon to the
Lure, and lure her therewith. When she has killed the Pidgeon and eaten the
Head, take her up gently with a bit of meat, and put on her Hood; then unstrike
her Hood and lure her to the Pelt, doing thus twice or thrice, and no more: if
you do it oftener, she will become in time very loath to part with the Pelt, and
by this means you will provoke her to carry. This is a great fault, and more
incident to and worse in Field-Hawks than such as are fitted for the River.

But be sure you lure her not far till her Stomach be perfect; for otherwise
she may discover something by the way which she has a greater esteem for, and
so be lost for that time; which will be very detrimental to her, although you
should happen to recover and reclaim her afterward.

Here observe, in the time of her making (while she is on the ground either
pluming or feeding) forget not to walk round her, using your voice, and giving
her many bits with your hand; continuing so to do till you have won her to a
more than ordinary familiarity.

But above all, mark this; spring her some living Doves between the Man and the
Lure, and let them be given in a long Creance, that she may kill them near you,
in such manner that she may truss them over your head: by this means she will
not be afraid when you come to her from afar off; the neglect whereof will make
her timorous: thence will proceed her dragging and carrying from you; nay
sometimes she will leave her Prey, and totally forsake you.

There are some Hawks will not be taken up without striking or rapping in the
Creance, which must be infallibly the loss of such a Hawk without such a
device: this is a great fault in the Hawk, and argues great negligence in the
Faulconer, in suffering, and not remedying that ill property in her first
making.

Rules for ordering a Haggard-faulcon in the Luring: with the Causes and
Remedies of Carrying, and other ill qualities.
Having thus far acquainted your Hawk with the Lure, take her out some
convenient Evening, and be no farther from her than she can see and hear you;
then hold in your Lure, and suffer her to fly about you, holding her as near
you as you can with your Voice and Lure, teaching her to do her business, and
work it on your head; and then cast up a live Dove: Which some disapprove of,
because (say they) the lightness of the Dove inclines the Hawk to that ill
quality of Carrying; but I rather impute that fault to the ignorance, or
negligence and harshness of the Faulconer, who has been either unskilful,
remiss, or has not used that gentleness which is requisite in Reclaiming a
Hawk in her first Making: so that instead of gaining her love by fair
Allurements, he has converted it into Hatred, Abhorrency, and Disdainful
Coyness.

Another cause of this Dragging or Garrying proceeds from the Keepers ill or
slender Rewarding his Hawk in the Luring, in giving her the Pelt of a Pidgeon
or some other dead thing, which gives her no delight. It is the pleasure she
takes in the Reward that engages her coming to you: If then she chance to find
her expectation frustrated in her usual satisfaction, she will ever after shun
you; and though you should throw her a live Pidgeon, she may seize it, and keep
close to it, or remove it as you approach, for fear that your unkindness should
deprive her of it. Wherefore you must have a special care you disoblige her not
in her Luring.

There are several other errors which must be rectified in a Haggard-faulcon,
Faulcon-gentle, or Slightfaulcons, (which naturally are all of one kind, yet
differ much in quality and condition) which I shall leave to the study of the
ingenious and industrious Faulconer or Keeper. I say, the first fault is, that
though you have lured your Hawk well, and given her all the content and
satisfaction imaginable, yet will she not tarry with you, but take her slight
and forsake you. This argues an aversion in her from you to something else.
This fault Mr. Turbervile, and Mr. Latham say they have known remedied: but
because I look upon the trouble therein to be so great, and the future
satisfaction so small and uncertain, I shall not lay down what means are
commonly made use of in the cure of this ill quality.

But there is another fault, which at first may be easily prevented; and that
is, an aspiring quality and working humor, when although the Hawk never showed
any dislike to the Keeper or discontent, yet by observation she has been found
conceited, and would not endure the society of another Hawk; and having been
well blouded on Fowl, she would not be kept down near her Keeper. To remedy
this, let no scope be given to the Haggard in the time of making; let her not
fly high, but be held down and near you: and if you should let this Hawk in to
another Hawk, and find her fall to her work without any regard or notice taken
of the other Hawk, suspect her instantly, and let her see Fowl in due time,
lest when she comes to her due place, she go her way; for she will prove
impatient: wherefore the shorter work you make with her, the greater delight
you give her, and so consequently you engage her love continually toward you.

Having taught your Hawk to sit barefaced in the Evening among company
undisturbed, and that she knows your Voice, and will come to the Lure, then
give her every night stones, till you find her Stomach good: after that, profer
her Casting, and let her not receive it unless she likes it well; otherwise she
is apt to take a dislike, and will never afterward receive it willingly.

These Stones aforesaid prepare and make ready the way for casting, stirring,
and dissolving whatever is offensive within, and fitting it to be carried,
downward in her Mutes, or upward in her Castings. The time for giving these
Stones is, when she has put away her Supper from above; then give her half a
dozen above the hand, if you have so much skill; if not, otherwise as you are
able. Do thus often, until such time as you shall give her such things whereof
she shall take Plumage in her living or training. But of this, more hereafter.

How to know the Nature and Disposition of several HAWKS, and what must be
observed from thence.
THere is a certain Hawk called a Blank Hawk, which is a kind, loving, and
docible Hawk; for she will diligently listen and give ear unto you and your
voice; she will soon learn to come to hand, being very eager and hot to seize
on what you shall either throw or give her, and will be very familiar: I astly,
having done your will on the ground, she will look up for your Fist, and will
readily jump thereon.

They are much subject to little Grubs, which are ingendered in the Guts, and
discover themselves in their Mutes, crawling out from them, shrinking
themselves up, and so instantly dying. These Worms do little harm, and that
Hawk which has them is seldom bad. The color of these Worms is red in a
Slight Faulcon, and red in a Barbary-Faulcon; and when dead, in both white.

There is a sort of Swarthy black-plum'd Hawk, that is good-mettled, and a high
flier, yet hard to be reclaimed: for she will neither mind you nor your voice;
but when you lure her, will look any other way than that she should. However,
you must show your self very loving toward her, though you shall get no more
from her than what you extort by force. For her due reclaiming, lessen her
pride by ordering her Diet with measure, with respect had unto the Weather;
which if it be mild and temperate, you need not fear to hold her down until you
have quarried her: and as you shall see her amend her manners, alter her Diet,
and add to her strength according to reasonable expedition; which will be soon
obtained if the be sound, and the weather moderate. But if the weather be
frosty, have a care of abating flesh.

When at any time you fly any one of these black or tawny Hawks, and she stoops
foul and falls in her flight, you must take her down with some living thing.

If the be young, suffer not her (or any other Hawk) to fly too long; for
nothing is more prejudicial and distasteful to a young Hawk at her first
making, than to let her toil and make many stoopings before the be served: by
this dislike she is induced to fly wide and carelessly, and frequently to go
away through displeasure.

Now to the intent I may go on methodically, and with as little confusion as
may be, I shall in the next place here nominate what Hawks I intend to treat
of, and in the same order as I name them, in like manner I will discourse of
them. Take them thus:

Faulcon, Gerfaulcon, Mylion, Merlin, Hobby, Goshawk, Sparrow-hawk Lanner,
Their Males.
Tiercel-gentle, Jerkin, Tiercel, Jack, Robbin, Tiercel, Musket, Lannerct.


Here note, that the Female of all Birds of Prey are much larger, and of
greater bulk than the Male, and are more serviceable, being more watchful,
hardy, and bold: but of such Birds as do not Prey, the Cocks are the larger.

The Faulcon, Gerfaulcon, Mylion, Merlin, and Hobby do stoop and seize their
Prey with their Foot, breaking with their beak the Neck-bone of the Fowl,
without pluming or tiring thereupon till the Fowl has left busking and bating
on the foot.

The Goshawk with her Male the Tiercel, and the Sparrow-harvk, kill their Game
by strength and force of Wing at random, and do instantly plume and tire upon
their Prey.

Of the Faulcon.
THere are seven kinds of Faulcons, viz.

Faulcon-gentle, Haggard-faulcon, Barbary or Tartaret-faulcon, Gerfaulcon,
Saker, Lanner, and Tunician.
The Faulcon-gentle is so called for her familiar courreous disposition; she is
withal valiant, strong, and better able to endure any sort of weather than any
other Hawk.

She has a natural inclination and love to fly the Hern every way, either from
her Wings to the downcome, or from the Fist and afore-head. She is most
excellent at the Brook or River, especially at large Fowl, as the Shoveler,
Wild-goose, etc. If she be an Eyess, you may venture her at the Crane;
otherwise she will not be so hardy and bold. Where note, Hawks prove valiant or
cowards according as they are first quarried: and if you take them out of the
Eyrie before they are fully summed and hard penned, you must never expect their
Wings should grow to perfection, but their Legs will be apt to wear crooked,
and their Train, their long Feathers and their Flags also will be full of
Taints.

In the choice of your Faulcon, observe that she have wide Nares; high and
large Eyelids; a great black Eye; a round Head, somewhat full on the top; a
short, thick, azure Beak; and indifferent high Neck; barb Feathers under the
clap of the Beak; a good large, round, fleshy Breast: let her be strong, hard,
and stiff bonded, broad-shouldered; having slender Sails, full Sides, long and
great Thighs; strong and short Arms; large Feet, with the Sear of the Foot soft
and bluish; black Pounces, long Wings, and crossing the Train, which Train
must be short and very pliable.

Here observe, that Faulcons of one kind differ much, and are diversely named,
according to the time of their first Reclaiming, places of Haunt, and Countries
from whence they come; as Mew'd-Hawks, Rammage-Hawks, Soar-Hawks, Eyesses: and
these again are divided into large Hawks, mean Hawks, and slender Hawks. All
these have different Males and Plumes, according to the nature of the Countries
from whence they come; as some are black, some blank, or russet: and they
differ in disposition; some are best for the Field, others for the River.

Names are bestowed on a Faulcon according to her Age or Taking.

The first is an Eyess, which Name lasts as long as she is in the Eyrie. These
are very troublesome in their feeding, do cry very much, and are difficultly
entered; but being well entered and quarried, prove excellent Hawks for the Hern,
River, or any sort of Fowl, and are hardy and full of mettle.

The second is a Rammage-faulcon, and reserves the name after she has left the
Eyrie, being so called May, June, July, and August. These are hard to be
manned, but being well reclaimed, they are not inferior to any Hawk.

The third is a Soar-hawk, so called September, October and November. The first
Plumes they have when they for sake the Eyrie, they keep a whole year before
they mew them, which are called Soar-feathers.

The fourth is termed Murzarolt, (the latest term is Carvist, as much as to
say, Carry an the Fist:) they are so called January, February, March, April,
and till the middle of May, during which time they must be kept on the Fist.
They are for the most part very great Baters, and therefore little eaters: They
are bad Hawks, frequently troubled with Filanders and worms, and are rarely
brought to be good for any thing.

The fifth are called Enter-mews, from the middle of May, to the latter end of
December. They are so called because they cast their Coats. They were excellent
Hawks, could they be trusted; therefore they must be kept hard under, and must
make your Fist their Perch. Having discoursed of the Names and Nature of the
Faulcon, I next come to his Manning, Luring, Flights, and Mewing in every
condition: which course I shall orderly take in my ensuing discourse of the
other Hawks I have only named heretofore. And because what Diseases or
Casualties are incident to one are likewise to all, I shall put their Cures at
the latter end all together.

Of the Manning, Luring, Flights and Mewing of a Faulcon, with other things
properly belonging to an Ostrager.
Having taken a Faulcon, you must Seel her, in such manner, that as the Seeling
slackens, the Faulcon may be able to see what provision is straight before her,
which she will better see so than any other way: and be sure you Seel her not
too hard.

A Hawk newly taken ought to have all new Furniture, as new Jesses of good
Leather, mailed Leases with Buttons at the end, and new Bewets. You must have a
small round stick likewise hanging in a string, with which you must frequently
stroke your Hawk: the oftener you do it, the sooner and better you will man her.
She must have two good Bells, that she may the better be found and heard when
she either stireth or scratteth: Her Hood must be well fashioned, raised and
bossed against her Eyes, deep, and yet straight enough beneath, that it may the
better fasten about her Head without hurting her: and you must cope a little
her Beak and Talons, but not so near as to make them bleed.

Take notice, if you take a Soar-faulcon which has already past the Seas,
although she be very hard to be reclaimed, yet she is the best of Faulcons.

Her food must be good and warm twice or thrice a day, until she be full
gorged; which food must be either Pigeons, Larks, or other live Birds: and the
reason is, because you must break her by degrees off from her accustomed
feeding.

When you feed her, you must whoop and lure as you do when you call a Hawk,
that she may know when you will give her meat.

You must unhood her gently, giving her two or three bits; and putting on her
Hood again, you must give her as much more, and be sure that she be close
Seeled: and after three or four days lessen her diet: and when you go to bed,
set her on some Perch by you, that you may awaken her often in the night. Thus
you must do till you observe her grow tame and gentle: and when you find she
begins to feed eagerly, then give her a Sheep's-heart. And now you may begin to
unhood her by daytime, but it must be far from company; first giving her a bit
or two, then hood her again gently, and give her as much more. Be sure not to
afright her with any thing when you unhood her. And when you perceive her to be
acquainted with company, and that she is sharp set, unhood her, and give her
some meat, holding her just against your Face and Eyes, which will make her
less afraid of the countenances of others. If you can, reclaim her without
over-watching.

You must bear her continually on the Fist till she be thoroughly Manned,
causing her to feed in company, giving her in the Morning about Sunrising the
Wing of a Pullet, and in the Evening the Foot of a Coney or Hare cut off above
the joint, flayed and laid in Water; which having squeezed, give it her with
the Pinion of a Hen's Wing.

For two or three days give her washed meat, and then Plumage, according as you
think her foul within. If she Cast, hood her again, and give her nothing till
she Gleam after her Casting: having gleamed and casted, then give her a
beaching of hot meat in company; and toward the Evening let her plume a Hen's
Wing in company also.

If the Feathers of her Casting be foul or slimy, and of a yellowish
complexion, then be sure to cleanse her well with washed meat and Casting: if
clean within, give her gentle Castings, as the Pinions of an old Hens Wing, or
the Neck-bone chopped four or five times between the joints, washed and steeped
in fair Water.

Having well reclaimed her, thoroughly manned her, and made her eager and sharp
set, then you may venture to feed her on the Lure.

But before you show her the Lure, you must consider these three things: 1.
That she be bold in and familiar with company, and no ways afraid of Dogs and
Horses. 2. That she be sharp set and hungry, regarding the hour of the Morning
and Evening when you will Lure her. 3. And lastly, she must be clean within,
and the Lure must be well garnished with meat on both sides, and you must
abscond your self when you intend to give her the length of the Lease.

You must first unhood her, giving her a bit or two on the Lure as she sits
on your Fist: afterward take the Lure from her, and so hide it that she see it
not; and when she is unseized, cast the Lure so near her that she may catch it
within the length of her Lease. When she has seized it, use your voice
according to the custom of Faulconers, and feed her upon the Lure on the
ground with the Heart and warm Thigh of a Pullet. Having so lured her, in the
Evening give her but a little meat; and let this luring be so timely, that you
may give her Plumage and a Juck of a joint.

In the Morning betimes take her on your Fist, and when she has cast and
gleamed, give her a little beaching of warm meat. Toward Noon take a Creance
and tie it to her Lease, and go into some pleasant Field or Meadow, and give
her a bit or two on the Lure; then unseize her: and if you find she is sharp
set, and has seized on the Lure eagerly, then give her some one to hold, to
let her off to the Lure, then unwind the Creance, and draw it after you a good
way, and let him which holds the Hawk hold his right hand on the Tassel of the
Hawks Hood in readiness, so that he may unhood her as soon as you begin to lure:
and if she come well to the Lure, and stoop upon it roundly, and seize it
eagerly, then let her eat two or three bits thereon; then unseize her and take
her off the Lure, hood her, and deliver her to him again that held her, and
going farther off lure her, feeding her as before with the accustomed voice.
Thus lure her every day farther and farther off, till she is accustomed to come
freely and eagerly to the Lure.

After this, lure her in company, but have a care that nothing affright her:
and when you have used her to the Lure on foot, then lure her on Horseback;
which you may effect the sooner, by causing Horsemen to be about you when you
lure her on foot: also you may do it the sooner by rewarding her upon the Lure
on Horseback among Horsemen. When this way she grows familiar, let some body
afoot hold the Hawk, and he that is on Horseback must call and cast the Lure
about his Head; then must the holder take off the Hood by the Tassel: and if
she seize eagerly on the Lure without fear of Man or Horse, then take off the
Creance, and lure her at a greater distance. And if you would have her love
Dogs as well as the Lure, call Dogs when you give her Tiring or Plumage.

Of Bathing a Faulcon lately reclaimed; how to make her Flying, and to hate the
Check.
Having weaned your Faulcon from her Rammage-fooleries, being both ways lured,
rewarded, and thoroughly reclaimed, offer her some Water to bathe her self in,
in a Basin wherein she may stand up to the Thighs, choosing a temperate clear
day for that purpose. Then having lured your Hawk, and rewarded her with warm
meat, in the morning carry her to some Bank, and there hold her in the Sun till
she has endewed her Gorge, taking off her Hood that she may prune and pick her
self: that being done, hood her again, and set her near the Basin, and taking
off her Hood, let her bathe again as long as she pleases: After this, take her
up, and let her pick her self as before, and then feed her. If she refuse the
Basin to bathe in, show her some small River or Brook for that purpose.

By this use of bathing she gains strength and a sharp appetite, and thereby
grows bold: but that day where in the batheth give her no washed meat.

If you would make your Faulcon upwards, the next day after she has bathed get
on Horseback, either in the Morning or Evening, and choose out some field
wherein are no Rooks or Pigeons; then take your Lure well garnished on both
sides, and having unhooded your Hawk, give her a bit or two on the Lure, then
hood her: afterward go leisurely against the Wind, then unhood her: and before
she bate, or find any Check in her Eye, whistle her off from your Fist fairly
and softly. As she flies about you, trot on with your Horse, and cast out your
Lure, not suffering her to fly long about you at first: continue thus doing
Morning and Evening for seven or eight days. But if you find your Hawk
unwilling to fly about you or stop to the Lure, then must you let her fly with
some Hawk that loves the company of others, and will not rove at any change or
check; and that must first be done at the Partridge, for they will not fly far
before the Hawk. If she has flown twice or thrice, cast out the Lure, and
reward her on Horseback. If the Fowl you flew her at be killed by another Hawk,
let her feed with him a little, and then farther reward her on the Lure.

If you would have your Faulcon prove upwards and a high-flying Hawk, you must
let her fly with such as are so qualified. If the love the company of others,
and is taught to hold in the Head, then if the Fowl be in Pool, Pit, or Plash,
cast off your high-flying Hawk, and let him that has your new-lur'd Hawk get
under the Wind, and when he sees his advantage, let him unhood her; and if she
bate, then it is to get up to the other Hawk.

Let him then cast her off, and before she get up to the other near his full
pitch, lay out the Fowl: if she kill her Game, reward her with the Heart, and
let her participate of the Breast with the other Hawks.

To take your Faulcon from going out to any Check, thus you must do: If she
has killed a Check, and has fed thereon before you could come in, rebuke her
not severely at first, but take her down to the Lure, give her a bit or two,
hood her, and fly her not in three or four days; and if you do, let it be where
no Checks are: but if you come in before she has tasted the Check she has
killed, then take the Gall of an Hen, and anoint the Breast of that Check she
has killed, (any other bitter thing will do) and this will make her hate to go
at Check again.

How to enseam a Faulcon with her Castings and Scowrings.
When you feed your Faulcon, call and lure as if you called her to the Lure,
and every day profer her Water, and every night give her Castings accordingly
as she endeweth. Take off her Hood frequently in company; and that you may
hinder her from bating, hold always the Hood ready by the Tassel in your hand.

In the Evening by candlelight take off her Hood among company, until she
Rouse and Mewt; then set her on the Perch, and not before, setting a light
before her.

Every Faulcon ought to have a Make-Hawk to teach her to hold in the Head: if
that will not do, cut off some part of her two Principals in each Wing, the
long Feather and that next to it, which will force her to hold in.

Be sure to reward your Hawk well at the beginning, and let her feed well on
the Quarry; which will so encourage her, that she will have no fancy to go out
to the Check. When she is well in blood and well quarried, then let her fly
with other Hawks.

If you would make your Faulcon to the Crane, her Lure should be a counterfeit
Crane. If you would make her to the Hare, her Lure should be then a Hares Skin
stuffed with some light matter: When she is well lured, and you would enter her,
tie the Hares Skin so stuffed to the end of a Creance, and fasten it to your
Saddle-pummel, by which means when you gallop it will resemble a running Hare:
then unhood your Hawk, and cry, Back with the Dogs, back with the Dogs. When
you find she has seized it, let go your Creance, and suffer her to fasten
thereon; then instantly reward her upon it, and encourage her as much as is
possible.

When she is well entered after this manner, take a living Hare and break one of
her hinder Legs, and having before well acquainted your Faulcon with your Dogs
by continual feeding among them, I say then put your Hare out in some fair
place with your Dogs, and the Faulcon will stoop and ruff her until the Dogs
may take her; then take the Hare from the Dogs, and cast her out to the
Faulcon, crying, Back, back there.

If you would make your Hawk flying to the Partridge or Pheasant after she is
reclaimed and made, then every time you lure her, cast your Lure into some low
Tree or Bush, that she may learn to take the Tree or Stand: if she take the
Stand before she sees the Lure, let her stand a while; and afterward draw the
Lure out before her, and cry with what words you have acquainted her to
understand you by, and then reward her well. After this manner she will learn
to take Stand.

Feed her always on the ground, or in some thick place; for in such places she
must encounter with the Pheasant at Perch.

At first fly with her at young Pheasant or Partridge, to encourage her by
advantage, and afterward at the old.

If a Faulcon will not take Stand, but keep on the Wing, then must you fly her
in plain places where you may always see her upon you.

Draw your Faulcon out of the Mew twenty days before you Enseam her: If she
truss and carry, the remedy is to cope her Talons, her Powlse and Pettysingle.

Never reward your Hawk upon River-sowl but upon the Lure, that she may the
better love and esteem thereof.

The Crane ought to be flown at before Sunrising; for she is a slothful Bird,
and you may cast off to her a Cast or Lease of Faulcons, or a Coshawk from the
Fist, without Dogs. You must fly but once a day at the Crane, after which you
must reward your Hawk very well, ever succouring her with a Greyhound, which
is the best of Dogs for that purpose.

Give your Faulcon a Beaching very early in the morning, and it will make her
very eager to fly when it is time for it.

If you would have her a high-flying Hawk; you must not feed her highly, but
she should be fed nine days together before Sunrising, and at night late in
the cool of the Evening.

The Faulcon will kill the Hern naturally if she be a Peregrin or Traveller:
yet you will do well to give her Trains.

A Faulcon may fly ten times in a day at a River, if the season be not extreme;
but more is inconvenient.

A Hawk ought to have forty Castings before she be perfectly made. And indeed
all Hawks ought to have Castings every night, if you would have them clean and
sound: for Hawks which have not this continual nocturnal Casting will be
surcharged with abundance of superfluous Humors, which ascending to the Brain,
bred so great a disturbance that they cannot fly so high as otherways they
would. And it is good to give them Tiring or Plumage at night, especially
field- Hawks, but not River- Hawks, for fear of weakening their Backs.

When your Hawk has flown or bated, feed her not so long as she pants, (but
let her be first in breath again;) otherways you may bring her into a Disease
called the Pantas.

If a Faulcon or other Hawk will not Seize nor Gorge, take the Quill of a
Wild-goose, and tie it under her long Single; then will she Seize and Gripe.
When she begins to seize, take away the said Quill, and she will seize long
afterward.

If you cannot give Covert to your Faulcon or Goshawk, then cast her off with
the Sun in her back.

When you draw your Hawk out of the Mew, if she be greazie, (which you shall
know by her round fat Thighs and her full Body, the flesh being round, and as
high as her Breast Bone) and if she be well mewed, and have all her Feathers
summed, then give her at feeding-time in the morning two or three bits of hot
meat; and at night give her less, unless it be very cold; and if she feed well
and without compulsion, give her washed meat. Thus prepared, take the Wings of a
Hen for her Dinner and wash them in two Waters. In the morning give her the
Legs of a Hen very hot, at Noon meat temperately warm, a good Gorge; then let
her fast till it be late in the Evening. If she have put over her meat, and
there is nothing left in her Gorge, then give her warm meat, as in the morning.
Thus diet her till it be convenient to give her Plumage, the which you may know
by these tokens: First, the Flesh of the end of the Pinion of the Hawk's Wing
will seem softer and tenderer than it did before she did eat washed meat.
Secondly, if her Mewts be white, and the black thereof be very black, and not
mingled with any other color. Lastly, if she be sharp set, and does plume
eagerly, you may give her Casting either of a Hare's or Coney's Foot, or the
small Feathers on the joint of the Wing of an old Hen.

Having set her on the Perch, sweep clean underneath, that you may see whether
the Mewt be full of streaks, or skins, or slimy: if it be, then continue this
sort of Casting three or four nights together; but if you find the Feathers
digested and soft, and that her Casting is great, then take the neck of an old
Hen, and cut it between the joints, then lay it in cold water, and give it your
Faulcon three nights together; in the daytime give her washed meat, after this
Casting or Plumage, as you shall see requisite: and this will bear all down
into the Panel.

When you have drawn her out of the Mew, and her principal Feathers are summed,
give her no washed meats, but quick Birds with good Gorges, and set her out in
open places.

General Instructions for an Ostrager or Faulconer.
LEt his Jesses and Bewets be of good Leather, having Bells big and shrill
according to the proportion of the Hawk, with a Hood that is bossed at the
Eyes, and sizable for the Head.

He must use his Hawk in such manner, that he may make her grow familiar with
him alone or in company, and to that end he must often unhood and hood her
again.

In nine nights the Faulconer ought not to let his Hawk Jouk at all, nor suffer
her to perch, but keep her during that time continually on his Fist.

When the Faulconer would call his Hawk, let him set her on the Perch, unhood
her, and show her some meat within his Fist, call her so long till she come to
it, then feed her therewith: if she come not, let her stand without food till
she be very sharp set. Observe this order for about nine days.

When you would lure her give her some man to hold, and call her with a Lure
well garnisht with meat on both sides, and give her a bit: use her to this six
or seven days; then cause her to be held farther from you, and cast the Lure
about your Head, and throw it on the ground a little way from you: if she come
to it roundly, reward her bountifully. Having used her to this some certain
days, take your Lure garnished as aforesaid, and every day call her to you as
far as it is possible for her to see or hear you, and let her be loose from all
her Furniture, without Loins or Creance. If she come freely, reward her, and
stop her now and then in her feeding; for that will make her come the better.
You may do well to stop the Lure upon her sometimes, and let her fly upon you.
Here note, it is requisite to bathe her before you take this course, lest when
she is at liberty she rangle to see Water, and in the mean time you lose your
Hawk; wherefore bathe her every seven or eight days, for her nature requires
it.

When you have thus manned, reclaimed, and lured your Hawk, go out with her
into the fields, and whistle her off your Fist, stand still to see what she
will do, and whether she will rake out or not: but if she fly round about you,
as a good Hawk ought to do, let her fly a turn or two, and fling her out the
Lure, and let her foot a Chicken or Pullet, and having killed it, let her feed
thereon.

Unhood her often as you bear her; continue so doing till she has endewed and
mewted sufficiently.

Your Hawk being thus made and manned, go abroad with her every morning when it
is fair, and let the place where you intend to fly her be plashy, or some
narrow Brook; and when you cast her off, go into the Wind so far, that the Fowl
may not discover you. When she is cast off, and begins to recover her Gate,
make then to the Brook or Plash where the Fowl lie, always making your Hawk to
lean in upon you: and when you see her at a reasonable pitch, (her Head being
in) lay out the Fowl, and land it if you can; and if you cannot, take down your
Hawk, and let her kill some Train; to which end you must always carry some live
Fowl with you, as a Duck, etc. And having slipped one of her Wing feathers,
thrust it through her Nares, and cast her up as high as you can underneath your
Hawk that she may the better know your hand.

If you would have your Hawk fly at one particular Fowl more than at another,
you must then feed her well upon a Train of the same kind, as thus: Take a
Creance, and tie that Fowl you would accustom her to fly to by the Beak, with
meat on her Back, and cause one to stand close that shall hold the Creance;
then standing afar off, unhood your Hawk, and let the Fowl be stirred and drawn
with the Creance until your Hawk perceive it stir; and if she foot it, make
another Train thus: Take a living Fowl that can fly, half seel it and cast it
out; then let your Hawk fly to it; and if she kill it, reward her well upon it.

Of the Rammage-faulcon.
If a Faulconer chance to recover a Rammage-hawk that was never handled before,
let him immediately seel her, and at that instant put on her Jesses made of
soft leather; at the end thereof fix two Varvels, the one may bear your Coat of
Arms, the other your Name, that if she chance to be lost, they that take her up
may know where to return her: put her on also a pair of Bells with two proper
Bewets. Having thus furnished her, you must begin her manning by gentle
handling. To avoid the danger of her Beak, you must have a smooth Stick about
half a foot in length, with which you must stroke your Hawk about the Pinions
of her Wings, and so downwards thwart her Train. If she offer to snap at the
Stick, withdraw not your hand, and let her bite thereon, the hardness whereof
will soon make her weary of that sport.

If you would man her well, you should watch all the night, keeping her
continually on your Fist.

You must teach her to feed seel'd; and having a great and easy Rufter-hood,
you must hood and unhood her often, seel'd as she is, handling her gently about
the head, coying her always when you unhood her, to the intent she may not be
displeased with her Keeper.

Let her plume and tire sometimes upon a Wing on your Fist, keeping her so day
and night, without pearthing, until she be weary, and will suffer you to hood
her without stirring.

If your Hawk be so rammage that she will not leave her snapping or biting,
then take a little Aloes succotrina, and when she offers to snap, give it her
to bite; the bitterness whereof will quickly make her leave that ill quality.
Garlic I have heard will do the like, the strong scent thereof being equally
offensive.

How to Hood a Hawk.
Having seel'd your Hawk, fit her with a large easy Hood, which you must take
off and put on very often, watching her two nights, handling her frequently and
gently about the Head as aforesaid. When you perceive she has no aversion to
the Hood, unseel her in an Evening by Candlelight; continue handling her
softly, often hooding and unhooding her, until she takes no offense at the
Hood, and will patiently endure handling.

Take this Observation by the way, That it is the duty of a Faulconer to be
endowed with a great deal of Patience; and in the next place he ought to have a
natural love and inclination to Hawks; without these two Qualifications, all
the Professors of this Art will prove Mar-Hawks instead of good Faulconers.

But to return where I left off: If your seel'd Hawk feeds well, abides the
Hood and handling without striking or biting, then by Candlelight in an
Evening unseel her, and with your Finger and Spittle anoint the place where the
Seeling-thread was drawn through; then hood her, and hold her on your Fist all
night, often hooding, unhooding, and handling her, stroaking her gently about
the Wings and Body, giving her sometimes a bit or two, also Tiring or Plumage.
Being well reclaimed, let her sit upon a Perch; but every night keep her on
the Fist three or four hours, stroaking, hooding, and unhooding, etc. as
aforesaid: and thus you may do in the daytime, when she has learned to feed
eagerly without fear.

How to make a Hawk know your Voice, and her own Feeding.
Having manned your Hawk so that she feeds boldly, acquaint her with your
Voice, Whistle, and such words as Faulconers use: you may do it by frequently
repeating them to her as she is feeding on your Fist, etc. But I think the best
way of making her acquainted with them, is by your experience and practice.

When she feeds boldly, and knows your Voice and Whistle, then teach her to
know her Feeding, and to bate at it in this manner: Show her some meat with
your right hand, crying and luring to her aloud; if she bate or strike at it,
then let her quickly and neatly foot it, and feed on it for four or five bits.
Do thus often, and she will know her Feeding the better.

After this, give her every night some Casting either of Feathers, or Cotton
with Cloves or Aloes wrapped up therein, etc. These Castings make a Hawk clean
and eager.

How to make your Hawk bold and venturous.
In the first place, to make her hardy, you must permit her to Plume a Pullet
or large Chicken in a place where there is not much light: her Hood in a
readiness, you must have either of the aforesaid alive in your hand; then
kneeling on the ground, luring and crying aloud to her, make her plume and pull
the Pullet a little; then with your Teeth drawing the Strings, unhood her
softly, suffering her to pluck it with her Beak three or four times more; then
throw out the Pullet on the ground, and encourage her to seize it. When you
perceive she breaks it and takes blood, you must lure and cry aloud to her,
encouraging her all the ways imaginable: then hood her gently, and give her
Tiring of the Wing or Foot of the said Pullet.

How to make a Hawk know the Lure.
Your Hawk having three or four times thus killed a Pullet or large Chicken in
some secret place, then thus reach her to know the Lure.

Having fastened a Pullet unto your Lure, go apart, giving your Hawk unto
another, who must draw loose the strings of her Hood in readiness: Being gone a
little way, take half the length of the String, and cast it about your Head,
luring with your voice at the same time; then let your Hawk be unhooded as you
are throwing your Lure a little way from her, not ceasing luring all the while.
If she stoop to the Lure and seize, suffer her to plume the Pullet, still
coying and luring with your voice; then let her feed on the Pullet upon the
Lure: After that, take her on your Fist together with her meat, then hood her,
and let her tire as aforesaid. And thus you may teach her to come by degrees to
a very great distance.

How to make a Hawk flying.
When your Hawk or Haggard-faulcon will come and stoop to the Lure roundly
without any fear or coyness, you must put her on a great pair of Luring-bells;
the like you must do to a Soar-hawk: by so much greater must the Bells be, by
how much your Hawk is giddyheaded, and apt to rake out at Check.

That being done, and she sharp set, go in a fair morning into some large Field
on Horseback, which Field must be very little encumbered with Wood or Trees:
having your Hawk on your Fist, ride up into the wind, and having loosned her
Hood, whistle softly to provoke her to fly; and then you will observe she will
begin to bate, or at least to flap with her Flags and Sails, and to raise her
self on your Fist: then suffer her until she rouse or Mewt: when she has done
either of them, unhood her, and let her fly with her Head into the Wind; for
thereby she will be the better able to get upon the Wing; then will she
naturally climb upwards, flying in a circle.

When she has flown three or four Turns, then cry and lure with your Voice,
casting the Lure about your head, unto which you must first tie a Pullet: and
if your Faulcon come in and approach near you, then cast out the Lure into the
Wind; and if she stoop to it, reward her as before.

There is one great fault you will often find in the making of a Hawk flying,
and that is, when she flies from the Fist she will not get up, but take stand
on the ground; a frequent fault in Soar-faulcons. You must then fright her up
with your Wand, riding in to her; and when you have forced her to take a Turn
or two, take her down to the Lure and feed her. But if this do no good, then
you must have in readiness a Duck seeled, so that she may see no way but
backwards, and that will make her mount the higher. This Duck you must hold by
one of the Wings near the body in your right hand, then lure with your voice to
make your Faulcon turn the head: when she is at a reasonable pitch, cast up
your Duck just under her, that she may perceive it: if she strike, stoop, or
truss the Duck, permit her to kill it, and reward her, giving her a reasonable
Gorge. Use this custom twice or thrice, and your Hawk will leave the Stand,
delighting on the Wing, and will become very obedient.

Here note, that for the first or second time it is not convenient, to show
your Hawk great or large Fowl, for it often happens that they slip from the
Hawk into the wind; the Hawk not recovering them, raketh after them, which puts
the Faulconer to much trouble, and frequently occasions the loss of his Hawk.

But if it so chance that your Hawk so rake out with a Fowl that she cannot
recover it, but gives it over and comes in again directly upon you, then cast
out a seeled Duck; and if she stoop and truss it, cross the Wings, and permit
her to take her pleasure, rewarding her also with the Heart, Brains, Tongue,
and Liver. For want of a quick Duck, take her down with the dry Lure, and let
her plume a Pullet, and feed her upon it.

By so doing, your Hawk will learn to give over a Fowl that rakes out, and
hearing the Lure of the Faulconer, will make back again to the River, and know
the better to hold in the Head.

A Flight for a Haggard.
When you intend a Flight for a Haggard, for the first, second, and third time,
make choice of such a place where there are no Crows, Rooks, or the like, to
take away all occasion of her raking out after such Check.

Let her not fly out too far on head at the first, but run after and cry, Why
lo, why lo, to make her turn Head. When she is come in, take her down with the
Lure, unto which must be fastened a live Pullet, and let her Tire, Plume, and
feed as aforesaid.

Sometimes a Haggard out of pride and a gadding humor will rangle out from her
Keeper: then clog her with great Luring-bells, and make her a Train or two with
a Duck seeled, to teach her to hold in and know her keeper: take her down often
with the dry Lure, and reward her bountifully, and let her be ever well in
blood, or you may whoop for your Hawk to no purpose.

How to make a Soar-faulcon or Haggard kill her Game at the very first.
If she be well lured, flies a good Gate, and stoopeth well, then cast off a
well-quaried Hawk, and let her stoop a Fowl on Brook or Plash, and watch her
till she put it to the plunge: then take down your Make-Hawk reward her, hood
her, and set her; so you may make use of her if need require.

Then take your Hawk un-entred, and going up the wind half a Bow-shot, unloose
her Hood, and softly whistle her off your Fist, until she have rouzed or
mewted: then let her fly with her Head into the wind, having first given notice
or warning to the company to be in readiness against the Hawk be in a good
Gate, and to show Water, and to lay out the Fowl.

When she is at a good pitch, and covering the Fowl, then notify that all the
company make in at once to the Brook upon the Fowl, to land her: if your
Faulcon strike, stoop, or truss her Game, run in to help her, and crossing the
Fowls Wing, let her take her pleasure thereon.

If she kill not the Fowl at first stooping, give her then respite to recover
her Gate. When she has got it, and her Head in, then lay out the Fowl as
aforesaid, until you land it at last; nor forgetting to help her as soon as she
has seized it, giving also her due Reward.

Remedy for a Hawk's taking Stand in a Tree.
In the first place you must choose such places where are no Wood or Trees, or
as little as may be. If you cannot avoid it, then have two or three live
Trains, and give them to as many men, placing them conveniently for to use
them. When therefore your Hawk has stooped, and endeavors to go to stand, let
him to whom the Hawk most bends cast out his Train-Duck seeled: if the Hawk
kill her, reward her therewith. If this course will not remedy that fault in
her by twice or thrice so doing, my advice is then to part with the Buzzard.

How to help a Hawk froward and coy through pride of Grease.
There is a scurvy quality in some Hawks, proceeding from pride of Grease, or
being high kept, which is a disdainful coyness. Such a Hawk therefore must not
be rewarded although she kill; yet give her leave to plume a little; and then
let the Faulconer take a Sheeps-Heart cold, or the Leg of a Pullet, and whilst
the Hawk is busy in pluming, let either of them be conveyed into the Body of
the Fowl, that it may favor thereof; and when the Hawk has eaten the Brains,
Heart, and Tongue of the Fowl, then take out your Enclosure, and call your Hawk
with it to your Fist, and feed her therewith: after this give her some Feathers
of the Neck of the Fowl to scowr and make her cast.

To make a Hawk hold in her Head, and not mind Check.
Take a piece of a Lease, and fasten it to your Lurestring, the other end to
the Wing of a Pidgeon, which you may put in and pull out of your Hawking-bag at
your convenience: when you find your Hawk apt to go out, show your Pidgeon. I
would not have you use it often; for it draws a Hawk from her place if well
flown.

How to continue and keep a Hawk in her high-flying.
If your Hawk be a stately high-flying Hawk, you ought not to engage her in
more flights than one in a morning: for often flying brings her off from her
stately pitch. If she be well made for the River, fly her not above twice in a
morning; yet feed her up though she kill not.

When a high-flying Hawk being whistled to, gathers upwards to a great gate,
you must continue her therein, never flying her but upon broad Waters and open
Rivers; and when she is at the highest, take her down with your Lure; where
when she has plumed and broken the Fowl a little, then feed her up, and by
that means you shall maintain your Faulcon high-flying, inwards, and very fond
of the Lure.

Some will have this high-flying Faulcon seldom to kill, and not to stoop: yet
if she kill every day, although she stoop from a high Gate, yet if she be not
rebuked or hurt therewith, she will, I can assure you, become a higher flier
every day than other; but she will grow less fond of the Lure. Wherefore your
high-flying Hawks should be made inwards, it being a commendable quality in
them to make in and turn head at the second or third toss of the Lure, and when
she pours down upon it as if she had killed.

And as the teaching of a Faulcon, or any other Hawk to come readily to and
love the Lure, is an art highly commendable, because it is the effect of great
labor and industry: so it is the cause of saving many a Hawk, which otherways
would be lost irrecoverably.

Mark this by the way, that some naturally high-flying Hawks will be long
before they be made upwards, still fishing and playing the slugs; and when they
should get up to cover the Fowl, they will stoop before the Fowl be put out:
And this may proceed from two causes. In the first place, she may be too sharp
set, and in the next place, it may be she is flown untimely, either too soon or
too late.

When you see a Hawk use those evil Tatches without any visible cause, cast her
out a dead Fowl for a dead Quarry, and hood her up instantly without Reward, to
discourage her from practicing the like another time: half an hour afterward
call her to the Lure and feed her, and serve her after this manner as often as
she fisheth in that fashion.

Besides, to correct this error, the Faulconer ought to consult the natures
and dispositions of his Hawks, and should carefully observe which fly high when
in good plight, and which best when they are kept low; which when sharpest set,
and which on the contrary in a mean between both; which early at Sunrising,
which when the Sun is but two hours high; which sooner, and which later in an
evening.

For know that the natures of Hawks are different; so are the time to fly each
one: for to fly a Hawk in her proper times, and to fly her out of it, is as
disagreeable as the flight of a Gerfaulcon and a Buzzard. Therefore the
Ostrager must fly his Hawks according to their natures and dispositions,
keeping them always in good order.

Where by the by take notice, all Hawks, as well Soar-hawks as Mew'd-hawks and
Haggards, should be set out in the Evening two or three hours, some more, some
less, having respect to their nature as it is stronger or weaker; and in the
morning also according as they cast, hooding them first, and then setting them
abroad a weathering, until you get on Horseback to prosecute your Recreation.

A Flight for the Hern.
This Flight has less of Art in it than Pleasure to the beholders; and, to say
the truth, the Flight is stately and most noble.

As it is less difficult to teach a Hawk to fly at Fowl than it is to come unto
and love the Lure, the first being natural, and not the last; so there is less
industry to be used in making a Hawk fly the Hern than Waterfowl. To the first
she is instigated by a natural propensity and inclination; to the latter she is
brought with art, pains, and much diligence.

At the beginning of March Herns begin to make their Passage: if therefore you
will adapt your Faulcons for the Hern, you must not let them fly longer at the
River, and withal you must pull them down to make them light; which is done by
giving them Hearts and flesh of Lambs and Calves, also Chickens; but give them
no wild meats.

To the intent you may acquaint them one with the other, so that they may the
better fly the Hern and help one another, you must call a cast of them to the
Lure at once; but have a care they crab not together, for so they may endanger
one another in their flight.

When your Hawk is scowred and clean and sharp set, you must then get a live
Hern, upon the upper part of whose long sharp Bill you must place a joint of a
hollow Cane, which will prevent her from hurting the Hawk: that being done, tie
the Hern in a Creance; then setting her on the ground, unhood your Hawk, who
will fly the Hern as soon as she sees her. If she seize her, make in apace to
succor her, and let her plume and take blood of the Hern: then take the
Brains, the Marrow of the Bones, and the Heart, and laying it on your
Hawking-glove, give it your Faulcon. After this, rip her Breast, and let your
Hawk feed thereon till she be well gorged: this being done, hood her up upon
the Hern, permitting her to plume at her pleasure; then take her on your Fist,
and let her tire on the Foot or Pinion.

Because Herns are not very plentiful, you may preserve one for a Train three
or four times, by arming Bill, Head, and Neck, and painting it of the same
color that the Hern is of: and when the Faulcon seizes her, you must be very
nimble to make in, and deceive her by a live Pidgeon clapped under the Wing of
the Hern for the Faulcon, which must be her Reward.

The Hawk having thus several times taken her Train without discovery of the
delusion, you may then let the Hern loose in some fair Field without a Greance,
or without arming her: when she is up of a reasonable height, you may cast off
your Faulcon; who if she bind with the Hern and bring her down, then make in
apace to rescue her, thrusting the Hern's Bill into the ground, and breaking
his Wings and Legs, that the Hawk may with more ease plume and foot him. Then
reward her as before, with the Brains, Marrow of the Bones, and Heart, making
thereof an Italian Soppa.

Thus much of a Train-Hern. Now to fly the wild Hern, it is thus: If you find a
wild Hern at Siege, win in as nigh unto her as you can, and go with your Hawk
under the Wind; and having first loosed her Hood in a readiness, as soon as the
Hern leaves the Siege, off with her Hood, and let her fly. If she climb to the
Hern and bring her down, run in (as I said before) to rescue her, thrusting her
Bill into the ground, breaking her Wings and Legs, and rewarding her as
aforesaid on your Hawking-glove.

Now if your Faulcon beat not down the Hern, or do give him over, never fly
your Faulcon again at a Hern, unless with a Make-hawk well entered; for the
Coward by this means, seeing another fly at the Hern and bind with her, takes
fresh courage. And if they kill the Hern flying both together, then must you
reward them both together while the Quarry is hot, making for them a Soppa as
aforesaid. This is the only way to make them both bold and perfect Herners.

Of the HAGGARD-FAULCON, why so called; her good Shape and Properties: And what
difference there is between a Haggard and a Faulcon-gentle.
THe Haggard is by some called the Peregrin-Faulcon, because, say some, she is
brought from a Country foreign and remote; and therefore others call them
Travelers, or Passengers. But if there be no other reason for the name but
this, all other Hawks coming from exotic places might borrow that appellation.

Upon a threefold consideration, I conceive they are called Haggard or
Peregrin-faulcons.

First, because their Eyrie was never found in any Country by any man that ever
I could hear or read of.

Secondly, because these Faulcons rangle and wander more than other Faulcon
does, still seeking strange and foreign Coasts; so that wherever they come
they may be justly called Peregrins or Foreigners.

Thirdly, and lastly, she never takes up her habitation long in a place.

This Haggard is not inferior to any other Faulcon, but very tender, and
cannot endure hard weather, say some; but my experience has found it
otherwise. The reason that may be alleged is this; first, she travels far, as
a Stranger, and comes into Countries commonly in the hardest time of the year:
next, she is a hot Hawk, which may be gathered from her high flying, where the
Air is much colder than below, and therefore ought to be more hardy: lastly,
she meweth with more expedition (if she once begin to cast her Feathers) than
other Faulcons do.

They are of shape like other Faulcons; but as to mould they are of three
sorts, large, middle-siz'd, and little; some long-shaped, some short-trussed;
some larger, some less.

They have a fourfold Mail, blank, russet, brown and Turtle.

The goodness of her Shape consists in having her Head plumed dark or blank,
flat on the top with a white Wreath environing the same, a large blue bending
Beak, wide Nares, a great black full Eye, high stately Neck, large Breast,
broad Shoulders, a great Turtle-coloured Feather, long Veins and Sails, but
slender shaped, a long Train, high Thighs, and white on the Pendant Feathers, a
large wide Foot, with slender Stretchers, and Talons tending somewhat to an
azure color.

You may know her in her flight from another by the stirring of her Wings; for
she uses no thick stroke, but gets up to her Mountee leisurely, without any
great making out: besides she may be known by her extraordinary large Sails.

The differences between the Haggard and Faulcongentle are these:

First, the Haggard is larger, being longer-armed with longer Beak and Talons,
having a higher Neck, with a long and fair-seasoned Head.

Secondly, her Beam-feathers in flight are longer than the Faulcon-gentle's,
her Train somewhat larger: again, the Haggard has a flat Thigh, and the
other's is round.

Thirdly, the Haggard will lie longer on the Wing.

Fourthly, the Haggard at long flight exceeds the Faulcon-gentle; which last
fleith with more speed from the Fist than the other. For maintenance of Flight
and goodness of Wing the Haggard exceeds all other Hawks.

Fifthly, and lastly, the Haggard is more deliberate and advised in her
Stooping than the Faulcon-gentle, who is more hot and hasty in her Actions, and
missing the Fowl, is apt presently to fly on head at the Check.

Of the BARBARY-FAULCON.
THe Barbary, or, as some call her, the Tartaret-Faulcon, is a Bird seldom
found in any Country, and is called a Passenger as well as the Haggard. They
are somewhat lesser than the Tiercel-gentle, and plumed red under the Wings,
strong-armed, with long Talons and Stretchers.

The Barbary-Faulcon is venturously bold, and you may fly her with the Haggard
all May and June. They are Hawks very slack in mewing at first; but when once
they begin, they mew their Feathers very fast.

They are called Barbary-Faulcons, because they make their passage through that
Country and Tunis, where they are more frequently taken than in any other
place, namely in the Isles of the Levant, Candy, Cyprus, and Rhodes. In my
opinion, she is a Hawk of not much value, and therefore I shall leave her, to
speak of another of greater reputation.

Of the GERFAULCON.
THe Gerfaulcon is a very fair Hawk, and of great force, especially being
mewed: she is strongarmed, having long Stretchers and Singles; she is fierce
and hardy of nature, and therefore difficultly to be reclaimed. She is a lovely
Bird to behold, larger than any kind of Faulcon: her Eyes and Head are like the
Haggard's.

Her Beak is great and bending: she has large Nares, and a Mail like a
Lanner's; her Sails are long and sharp-pointed; her Train much like the
Lanner's; she has a large Foot marble-seared, and is plumed blank, brown, and
russet. She expects great civility from her Keeper, who must exercise a great
deal of patience on her.

The Gerfaulcon's Eyrie is in some parts of Prussia, and on the borders of
Russia; and some come from the Mountains of Norway, and from Germany: These may
be also called Passengers.

By reason of the fierceness and hardiness of this Bird, she is very hardly
manned and reclaimed; but being once overcome, she proves an excellent Hawk,
and will scarce refuse to fly at any thing.

Their Beaks are blue, so are the Sears of their Legs and Feet, having Pounces
and Talons very long.

These Hawks do not fly the River, but always from the Fist fly the Herns,
Shovelers, etc.

In going up to their Gate they do not hold that course or way which others do;
for they climb up upon the Train when they find any Fowl, and as soon as they
have reached her they pluck her down, if not at the first, yet at the second or
third encounter. You must feed and reward them like other Faulcons.

They are very crafty, and covet to keep their Castings long through sloth;
therefore instead of Cotton give them a Casting of Tow, and be sure to keep
them sharp set.

In the Manning and Reclaiming you must by kindness make her gentle and
familiar with you. When you have taught her to be lured loose, then learn her
to come to the Pelts of Hens, or any other Fowl: but let her not touch any
living flesh, for fear that draw her love away from your Voice and Hand.

All this time you must be close by her, about her, and upon your Knees, using
your Voice unto her, with her dinner and supper clean dressed and washed, giving
her still some bits thereof with your hand, that she may the more delight
therein. By doing thus frequently you will so win her, that should she be
guilty of Carrying, yet by this means she will be reclaimed, and forget that
error.

Let the Ostrager have especial care how he make his Gerfaulcon at first, and
indeed all other Hawks; for as they are made then, he shall ever find them
after; and if they are well made, they are twice made, and for ever made: and
therefore have a care of two much precipitation in posting them forward from
one lesson to another, before they are perfect in any thing.

If you train her with Doves, she will not carry a feather from you. But first
before you spring her any Doves, let her kill four or five at Lure close by
your foot, having a pair of short Creances at your Lure.

Here note, that the Gerfaulcon is most desired for her high-flying, and is
best at Hern and the Mountee: and that you may bring her to perfection herein,
play with your entermewed Gerfaulcon the first year, showing her all imaginable
kindness, and using all possible means to make her love you. When you have
brought her forward, give her often Castings to cleanse and purge her, also to
prevent the growth of too much glut and fatness in her inward parts, which will
endanger her life.

Of the SAKER.
THe Saker is a Passenger or Peregrin-Hawk, for her Eyrie has not been found
by any. They are found in the Isles of the Levant, Cyprus, Rhodes, and Candia,
and in several other Islands in the Sea.

She is somewhat larger than the Haggard-faulcon; her Plume is rusty and
ragged; the Sear of her foot and Beak like the Lanner; her Pounces are short,
however she has great strength, and is hardy to all kind of Fowl. She is more
disposed to the Field a great deal than to the Brook, and delights to prey on
great Fowl, as the Hern, the Goose, etc. As for the Crane, she is not so free
to fly at her as the Haggard-faulcon. The Saker is good also for lesser Fowl,
as Pheasant, Partridge, etc. and is nothing so dainty of her Diet as Hawks
long-winged.

This Hawk will make excellent sport with a Kite, who, as soon as she sees the
Saker (the Male whereof is called a Sakaret) cast off, immediately betakes her
self to, and trusts in the goodness of her Wings, and gets to her pitch as
high as possibly she may, by making many Turns and Wrenches in the Air: which
if well observed, together with the variety of contests and bickerings that are
between them, it cannot but be very pleasant and delightful to the beholder. I
have known in a clear day and little wind stirring, that both the Saker and
Kite have soared so high that the sharpest eye could not discern them, yet has
the Saker in the encounter conquered the Kite, and I have seen her come
tumbling down to the ground with a strange precipitancy.

Of all Birds the Saker has the longest Train. This Hawk will fly at Hern,
Kite, Pheasant, Partridge, Quail, and sometimes at the Hare; but her chiefest
excellency consists in her flying at the Crane. Now because we have but few of
them in England, I shall desist from speaking farther of the Saker, only that
she is made to the Lure as other Hawks are: and indeed all Faulcons are made
after the same manner, yet are not flown withal alike; for Sakers, Lanners,
Gerfaulcons, Mylions, and Merlins do not fly the River; if any do, it is very
rarely.

Of the LANNER, LANNERET, and TUNISIAN.
THe Lanner is a Hawk common in all Countries, especially in France, making her
Eyrie on high Trees in Forests, or on high Cliffs near the Seaside.

She is lesser than the Faulcon-gentle, fair-plumed when an Enter-mewer, and of
shorter Talons than any other Faulcon. Those who have the largest and
best-seasoned Heads are the best Lanners.

With the Lanner or Lanneret you may fly the River; and both are very good also
for the Land.

They are not very choice in their Food, and can better away with gross
Victuals than any other Hawk.

Mewed Lanners are hardly known from the Soarhawks, (and so likewise the Saker)
because they do not change their Plume.

You may know the Lanners by these three tokens. 1. They are blanker Hawks than
any other. 2. They have less Beaks than the rest. 3. And lastly, They are less
armed and pounced than other Faulcons.

Of all Hawks there is none so fit for a young Faulconer as the Lanner, because
she is not inclined to Surfeits, and seldom melts Grease by being over-flown.

There are a sort of Lanners which Eyrie in the Alps, having their Heads white
and flat aloft, large and black Eyes, slender Nares, short and thick Beaks, and
lesser than the Haggard or Faulcon-gentle. Some are indifferent large, some
less, and others middlesized.

Their Mail is marble or russet; their Breast-feathers white and full of russet
spots; the points and extremities of their Feathers full of white drops; their
Sails and Train long: they are short Legged, with a foot less than that of a
Faulcon, marble-seer'd; but being mewed the Seer changes to a yellow.

The Lanner never lies upon the Wing after she has flown to Mark, but after
once stooping she makes a Point, and then, like the Goshawk, waits the Fowl.

If she miss at the first downfall and kill not, she will consult her
advantage to her greatest ease.

These kind of Hawks are highly prized in France and Italy, neither is she
despiseable in England; but we look upon them as slothful and hard-metled: and
therefore if you intend to have any good of her, keep a strict hand over her;
for she is of an ungrateful disposition, and will slight your Kindnesses,
contrary to the nature of the Faulcon-gentle, who for one good usage will
return a treble courtesy, and the better she is rewarded, the better she will
fly.

They are flown at Field or Brook, and are Hawks that maintain long flights,
whereby much Fowl is killed (and more than by a better Hawk) by reason of Dogs
and Hawking-poles.

If you will fly with a Lanner, you must keep her very sharp: and because they
keep their Castings long, by reason they are hard-metled Hawks, give them
therefore hard Castings made of Tow and knots of Hemp.

In the reclaiming the Lanner and the Lanneret much pains and labor must be
taken, and the chiefest thing is to make her well acquainted with the Lure,
which must be garnished with hard washed meat, and let her receive the major
part of her Reward in bits from your hand: as for the rest of her Training,
take the same course which I have directed in the manning and ordering of the
Haggard-faulcon. But above all take pains to stay her, and by your utmost Art
restrain her from dragging or carrying any thing from you, to which ill quality
she is more inclined than any other Hawk whatever.

To conclude this Chapter, I come next to the Tunisian-Faulcon, which is not
much different in nature from the Lanner, yet somewhat less, but in Foot and
Plume much alike. She has a large round Head, and is more creese than the
Lanner, and more heavy and sluggish in her flight.

She is called a Tunisian-faulcon, from Tunis the Metropolis of Barbary, the
Country where she usually makes her Eyrie.

They are excellent Hawks for the River, lying long upon the Wing, and will fly
the Field also very well.

They naturally delight to seize upon the Hare, and will strike boldly at her.
Much more might be said of her, which I here omit, she being a Hawk not very
common in England.

Having cursorily discourst in as good a method as I could of the seven sorts
of Faulcons, with their Manning, Reclaiming, Luring, Training, Staying, etc. I
shall proceed to give you an account of some other Hawks, which I propounded
and promised in the beginning of this Treatise: take them thus in order.

Of the MERLIN.
THe Merlin in Plume is much like the Haggard-Faulcon, also in the Sear of the
Foot, Beak, and Talons, and is much alike in Conditions.

A Merlin well manned, lured, and carefully looked after, will prove an
excellent Hawk. Their flight is swifter than any other Hawk, and naturally they
fly at Partridge, Thrush, and Lark.

It is a Bird very busy and unruly, and therefore the Faulconer ought to take
special heed and care of them, lest unnaturally they eat off their own Feet and
Talons, which several of them have been known to do, and die thereby. For which
cause, Merlins ought not to be mewed or intermew'd, because in the Mew they
often spoil themselves.

She is accounted a Hawk of the Fist, and not of the Lure; but to my knowledge
she may be brought to love the Lure very well.

She is very venturous and hardy, which may appear by her flying at Birds as
big or bigger than her self, with such eagerness, as that she will pursue them
even into a Town or Village.

If you will fly with a Merlin at a Partridge, choose the Formal, which is the
Female. The Jack is not worth the Training.

When you have made her to the Lure, and that she will patiently endure the
Hood, then make her a Train with a Partridge: if she foot and kill it, reward
her well, suffering her to take her pleasure thereon. After this, fly her at
the wild Partridge; if she take or mark it at first or second flight, being
retrieved by the Spaniels, feed her upon it with a reasonable Gorge, chearing
her with your Voice in such manner that she may know it another time. If she
prove not hardy at first Train, try her with a second or third: if she prove
not then, she will prove nothing worth.

If you fly the Merlin at Lark or Linnet, let it be with a Cast of Merlins at
once, because they love to fly in company: besides, it is a greater delight to
the Spectators to see them fly together; you shall observe the one climb to the
Mountee above the Lark, and the other to lie low for her best advantage.

When your Merlin is thoroughly manned and made gentle, (which you must bring to
pass according to the method propounded for other Hawks) I say, when she is
reclaimed, you may then carry her into the fields; where having found a Lark or
Linnet, get as near as you can into the Wind to the Bird; and as soon as the
Bird rises from the ground, unhood your Cast of Merlins and cast them off, and
when they have beaten down the Lark, let them feed a little thereon.

There is a sort of Larks which I would not advise the Faulconer to fly at, and
they are called Cut-larks, which do not mount as the long-spur'd field-Lark,
but fly straight forward, to the endangering the loss of your Hawk without any
pastime or pleasure.

Of the Mewing of Merlins, Faulcons, Gerfaulcons, and Mylions at Stock or at
Large: and which is the best way of Mewing.
It is the opinion of some, (but how commendable, I will leave the Reader to
judge) that Merlins cannot be mewed, or if they be, that they are very rarely
good afterward. Experience tells me the contrary: for if they be hardy, and
have flown well in their Soarage, they have proved much better after mewing
than before.

The time of mewing for Faulcons should be about the latter end of April; at
which time set down your Faulcons, diligently observing whether they be louzy
or not: if they are, pepper them, and that will infallibly kill the Lice. You
must also scour them, before you cast them into the Mew.

Mewings are of two sorts; the one loose and at large, the other at the Stock
or Stone.

Mewing at large is thus in short: If your Room be large, by divisions you may
mew four Faulcons at once, each partition consisting of about twelve foot
square, and as much in height, with two Windows two foot broad, the one opening
to the North, for the benefit of cold Air; the other to the East, for the
beneficial warmth of the Sun. At your East-window let there be a Board two foot
broad, even with the bottom of the Window, with a Lath or Ledge round; in the
middle set a green Turff, laying good store of Gravel and Stones about it, that
your Hawk may take them at her pleasure.

If your Faulcon be a great Bater, let your Chamber be on the ground, which
must be covered four fingers thick with gross Sand, and thereon set a Stone
somewhat taper, of about a Cubit in height, on which they love to sit, by
reason of its coolness.

Make her two Perches, at each Window one, to recreate her self as she
pleases, either with Heat or Cold.

Every week or fortnight set her a Basin of Water to bathe in; and when she
has bathed therein, take it away the night following.

Your Mew must have a Portal to convey in the Hack, a thing whereon the meat is
served. I need not prescribe the manner how to make it, since it is a thing so
generally known already.

You ought to keep one set-hour in feeding; for so will she mew sooner and
better: when she has fed and gorged her self, then remove the Stick from the
Hack on which the meat was fastened, to keep her from dragging it into the Mew.

In the opinion of most, it is better Mewing at the Stock or Stone, which must
be performed thus: Make choice of a Ground-room remote from noise or concourse
of people, and therein set a Table of what length you think is most convenient
for the number of your Faulcons, and of about six foot in breadth, with thin
Boards along the sides and ends, about four fingers high from the superficies
of the Table, which must stand on Tressels about three foot high from the
ground. Let this Table be covered indifferently thick with great Sand mixed with
small Pebbles, in the midst whereof place a pyramidal Freestone about a yard
in height, unto which tie your Faulcon, Gerfaulcon, Merlin or Mylion: then take
a small Cord of the bigness of a Bow-string, and put it through a Ring or
Swivel, and bind it about the Stone in such sort that the Swivel may go round
the Stone without let or hindrance, and thereunto tie the Lease of your Hawk.

Here note, that if you mew more than one Hawk in one Room, you must set your
Stones at that distance, that when they bate they may not crab one another.

The reason of placing this Stone is, because the Faulcon delights to sit
thereon for its coolness sake, and the little gravelly stones the Hawk
frequently swallows to cool her within. The Sand is necessary to preserve their
Feathers when they bate, and their Mewets are the more easily cleansed. The
little Gord with the Swivel tied about the Stone, is to keep the Hawk from
tangling when she bateth, because the Ring will still follow her.

All day let your Hawk stand hooded, only when you take her on your Fist to
feed: at night unhood her; and lest any accident should happen in the night,
prejudicial to the Hawk, the Faulconer ought to lie in the Mew.

Of the HOBBY.
THe Hobby is a Hawk of the Lure, and not of the Fist, and is a high flier, and
is in every respect like the Saker, but that she is a much lesser Bird.

The Hobby has a blue Beak, but the Seer thereof and Legs are yellow: the
Crinets or little Feathers under her Eye are very black; the top of her head is
betwixt black and yellow, and she has two white seams on her Neck; the Plumes
under the Gorge and about the Brows, are reddish, without spot or drop; the
Breast-feathers are brown for the most part, yet powdered with white spots; her
Back, Train, and Wings are black aloft, having no great scales upon the Legs,
unless it be a few beginning behind the three Stretchers and Pounces, which are
very large in respect of her short Legs; her Brail-feathers are engouted
betwixt red and black; the Pendant-feathers (which are those behind the Thigh)
are of a rusty smoaky complexion. The daring Hobby may be well called so, for
she is nimble and light of Wing, and dares encounter Kites, Bazzards, or Crows,
and will give souse for souse, blow for blow, till sometimes they seize and
come tumbling down to the ground both together.

They are chiefly for the Lark, which poor little creature so dreads the sight
of a Hobby soaring in the Air over her, that she will rather choose to commit
her self to the mercy of Man or Dogs, or to be trampled on by Horses, than
venture her self into that Element where she sees her mortal Enemy soaring.

The Hobby makes excellent sport with Nets and Spaniels, which is performed
after this manner. The Dogs range the field to spring the Fowl, and the Hobbies
soar over them alost in the Air: the silly Birds, fearing a Conspiracy between
the Hawks and Dogs to their utter destruction, dare not commit themselves to
their Wings, but think it safer to lie close to the ground, and so are taken in
the Nets. This sport is called Daring.

Of the GOSHAWK.
THere are several sorts of Goshawks, and they are different in goodness,
force, and hardiness, according to the diversity of their choice in Cawking: at
which time when Hawks begin to fall to liking, all Birds of Prey do assemble
themselves with the Goshawk, and flock together.

The Female is the best: and although there be some Goshawks which come from
Sclavonia, Sardinia, Lombardy, Russia, Puglia, Germany, Armenia, Persia,
Greece, and Africa; yet there are none better than those which are bred in the
North parts of Ireland, as in the Province of Ulster, but more especially in
the County of Tyrone.

Take these Rules as to the goodness of her proportion or shape.

She ought to have a small Head, her Face long and straight, a large Throat,
great Eyes, deep set, the Apple of the Eye black, Nares, Ears, Back, and Feet
large and blank; a black long Beak, long Neck, big Breast, hard flesh, long
Thighs, fleshy, the bone of the Leg and Knee short, long large Pounces and
Talons. From the Stern or Train to the Breast forward she ought to grow round:
the Feathers of the Thighs toward the Train should be large, and the
Train-feathers short, soft, and somewhat tending to an Iron Mail. The
Brayl-feathers ought to be like those of the Breast, and the Covert-feathers of
the Train should be spotted and full of black rundles; but the extremity of
every Train-feather should be black streaked.

The sign of force in a Goshawk is this: Tie diverse of them in several places
of one Chamber or Mew, and that Hawk that does slise and mewt highest and
farthest off from her, is without question the strongest Hawk; for the high and
far mewting argues a strong Back.

I might tell you the ill shape of a Goshawk; but since I have declared the
good, the bad may be collected from thence: Contraria contrariis dignoscunter.
However take this general rule, That Goshawk that has pendant Plumes over her
Eyes, the whites whereof are waterish and blank, that is red-mail'd or bright
tawny, has the most assured tokens of a Hawk that is ill conditioned.

The Goshawk preyeth on the Pheasant, Mallard, Wild-goose, Hare, and Coney;
nay, she will venture to seize on a Kid or Goat; which declares the
inestimable courage and valor of this Hawk.

She ought to be kept with great care, because she is very choice and dainty,
and looks to have a nice hand kept over her.

How to make the Soar or Haggard Goshawk.
First trim them with Jesses, Bewets, and Bells, as soon as they come to your
hands; keep them seeled some time, hooding and unhooding them often, teaching
them to feed on the Fist three or four days, or till they have left their
Rammageness and become gentle: having so done, unseel them by Candlelight at
night, causing them to tire or plume upon a Wing or Leg of a Pullet; and be
sure to deal gently and mildly with them until you have won and thoroughly
manned them: then you may go into some pleasant field, and first give them a
bit or two hooded on your Fist, and the like unhooded, cast them down fair and
softly on some Perch, and make them come from it to your Fist, calling to them
with a Faulconer's usual terms; and when they come, feed them, calling all the
while in the same manner to make them acquainted with your voice. The next day
you may call them with a Creance at a farther distance, feeding them as before.

When you have thus called your Goshawk abroad three or four days, and that you
find her grow cunning, then take her on your Fist, and mount on Horseback, and
ride with her an hour or two, unhooding and hooding her sometimes, giving her a
bit or two in sight of your Spaniels, that she may not be afraid of them: this
being done, set her on a Tree with a short Greance tied to her Loins, and going
half a score yards from her on Horseback, call her to your Fist according to
art; if she come, reward her with two or three bits, and cast her up again to
the Tree: then throw out a dead Pullet (to which she was used before) about a
dozen yards from her; if she fly to it and seize it, let her feed three or four
bits upon it; ride the mean while about her on Horseback, and rate back your
Spaniels, because they shall not rebuke her at first, and make her ever after
afraid of them: then alight, and gently take her on your Fist, feed her, hood
her, and let her plume or tire.

Here note, that the Goshawk is a greater Poulterer, and therefore it would be
more requisite to throw out a dead Partridge, or one made artificially with its
Wing, Tail and Plumage; which will cause her to know Partridge better, and
Poultry less.

How to make a Goshawk fly to the Partridge.
Having manned your Goshawk, go into the field with her, carrying with you a
Train-Partridge, and unhooding your Hawk, bear her as gently as you can; and
you will do well to let her plume or tire, for that will make her the more
eager.

If the Partridge spring, let her fly: if she mark one, two, three, or more on
the ground, then go to her and make her take Perch on some Tree thereby: then
if you can retrive the Partridge with your Spaniels, as soon as they spring it
you must cry, Howit, howit, and retrive it the second time, crying when it
springs as aforesaid: if your Hawk kill it, feed her upon it.

If it so happen your Spaniels should take it (as it is very frequent for hot
Spaniels to light upon the Partridge, being either flown out of breath, or
overcharged with fear) then alight from your Horse, and taking it speedily from
the Dogs, cast it out to your Hawk crying, Ware Hawk, ware, and let her feed
thereon at her pleasure.

After this you must not fly her in two days: for having fed on bloody meat,
she will not so soon be in good case to fly again; for such meat is not so
easily endewed by a Hawk as the Leg of a Chicken or the like, Using her thus
three or four times, she will be well in blood, and become an excellent Flier
at this pleasant Field flight.

Here note, that you must do at first with her as with other Hawks, that is,
feel and watch her, and win her to feed, to the Hood, to the Fist, etc. and
then enter her to young Partridges till November, at which time both Trees and
Fields become bare and empty: then you may enter her to the old Rewen, setting
her short and eager; if she kill, feed her up with the Partridge three or four
times, and this will bring her to perfection.

If your Hawk be a good Partridger, let her not fly at the Powt or Pheasant,
for they fly not so long a Flight as the Partridge; and therefore the Goshawk,
being more greedy of Prey than any other Hawk, (yet desirous of ease, would
always covet short Flights, not caring to hold out: not but that there are some
good both for long and short flights, but they are rarely sound.

Besides, you must have a great care in keeping them in good order, with
Flying, Bathing, Weathering, Tiring, and Pluming.

How to help a Goshawk that turns Tail to Tail, and gives over her Game.
It is usual for a Goshawk to fly at a Partridge, yet neither kill it, nor fly
it to mark, but to turn Tail to Tail; that is having flown it a Bow-shot or
more, she gives over her Game, and takes a Tree: then must you call in your
Spaniels to the Retrieve that way your Hawk flew the Partridge; let the
Faulconer draw himself that way also, and carrying with him a quick Partridge,
let him cast it out to her, which will make her believe it is the same she flew
at. When you cast it out, cry, Ware Hawk, ware; make her seize it, and feed her
upon it: and this will encourage her to fly out her flight another time. If the
next time you fly her (which must be the third day) she serve you so again,
then must you do as aforesaid with alive Partridge carried about you for that
purpose: if she serve you so the third time, I would advise you to rid your
hands of her as soon as you can.

How to make a Goshawk fly quickly.
The Goshawk (especially Soars and Niasses) are very loving to and fond of man,
and therefore should be flown with a little more Rammage, else frequently,
after two or three strokes with their Wings, they will give over the flight,
and return to the Keeper: wherefore you must fly with them as soon as you can.
And yet there is an evil which attends this direction, and that is, by flying
over-soon you will pull down your Hawk and make her poor, from whence proceeds
fearfulness and cowardice. To remedy which, you must give your Hawk some
respite, and set her up again before you fly her. There are some Goshawks (but
very few) which will not fly when they are in good plight: then must you bate
their flesh, and pinch them with scouring, washed meat, and the like. But the
best way of flying such an one is when she is lusty and high: and to add to
her vivacity and courage, let her be set abroad in the morning an hour or two,
when the weather is not very cold; for being so weathered, when she has flown
a Partridge to the Mark, she will not away until it be retrieved by the
Spaniels.

How to fly a Goshawk to the River.
A Goshawk (but no Tiercel) may fly the River at Mallard, Duck, Goose, or Hern,
with other large Waterfowl: She is made for that purpose after this manner.

First, make her to the Fist, as is prescribed in her making to the Field: then
carry her into the field without Bells, and with a live Duck, which you must
give to one of the company, who must hide himself in some Ditch or Pit with the
Duck tied to a Creance: then must you draw near him with your Hawk unhooded on
your Fist, and giving him some private notice to throw out the Duck, cast off
your Hawk; and if she take it at the Source, let him reward and feed her with a
reasonable Gorge: then take her upon your Fist and hood her, permitting her to
tire and plume upon the Leg or Wing of the Duck. The third day go again with
her into the Field in like manner, or else find out some Plash or Pool where
Wild-fowl lie, taking the advantage of the rising Bank: being near the Fowl,
let some of the company raise them up, and your Hawk being unhooded, cast her
off; if she kill any of them at Source, make in to her quickly, and cross the
Fowl's Wings, so that she may foot and plume it at her pleasure, rewarding her
as before. After this, take her on your Fist, and let her tire and plume the
Leg or Wing of the Fowl aforesaid.

When your Goshawk is thoroughly nouzled, and well in blood, you may fly her
twice a day or oftener, rewarding her as before.

An excellent way to preserve a Goshawk in the time of her flying, especially
in hot weather.
Take a pint of Red-rose-Water, put it into a Bottle, bruise one stick or two
of green Liquorish and put in it likewise a little Mace, and the quantity of a
Wallnut of Sugar Candy, and draw her meat through it twice or thrice a week, as
you shall find occasion: It prevents the Phantass, and several Diseases they
are subject to: besides, it gives a huge Breath, and gently scoureth her.

How to fly the Wild-goose or Crane with the Goshawk.
Having manned your Goshawk, brought her to the Fist, and trained her with a
Goose in the Field, then seek out where Wild-geese, Cranes, or other large
Wildfowl lie: having found them afar off, alight and carry your Hawk unhooded
behind your Horse, stalking toward them until you have got pretty nigh them,
holding down your Hawk covert under the Horse's Neck or Body, yet so that she
may see the Fowl: then you must raise them, and casting off your Hawk, if she
kill, reward her. And thus she may kill four or five in a day.

In like manner, you may make her to the Crane, and may stalk to Fowl which lie
in Ponds or Pits as aforesaid.

Here note, that if you can fly at great, slight the lesser Flights, which will
make your Hawk the bolder.

How to mew a Goshawk, and draw her out of the Mew, and make her Flying.
Having flown with a Goshawk, Tiercel, Soar, or Haggard till March, give her
some good Quarry in her Foot, and having seen her clean from Lice, cut off the
Buttons of her Jesses, and throw her into the Mew; which Room should be on the
ground, and situated toward the North, if possible.

Let the Pearches therein be lined with Canvas or Cotton; for otherwise by
hurting her Foot she may get the Gout or Pynn.

Let the Mew have also a Window toward the East, and another Northward. There
must be also a Basin of Water in the Mew for bathing, which must be shifted
every three days. Feed your Hawk with Pigeons, or else with the hot Flesh of
Weather-Mutton.

About the beginning of October, if you find your Goshawk fair mewed and hard
penned, then give her Chickens, Lambs-hearts, or Calves-hearts, for about
twenty days together, to scour her, and make her slise out the slimy substance
and glitt out of her Panel, and enseam her.

Having done thus, some Evening draw her out of the Mew, and new furnish her
with Jesses, Bells, Bewets, and all other things needful for her: then keep her
seel'd two or three days, till she will endure the Hood patiently; for mewed
Hawks are as impatient of the Hood as those newly taken.

When you have won her to endure the Hood, then in an Evening by Candlelight
you may unseel her, and the next day show her the Fist and Glove, making her to
tire and plume morning and evening, giving her sometimes in the morning (when
her Gorge is empty) a little Sugar Candy, which will help her in an excellent
manner to endew.

When you find your Goshawk feed eagerly, and that you think in your judgment
she is enseamed, and that you may boldly fly with her, then go with her into
the Field; she will then bate, (if empty) and fly of her own accord: if she
kill, feed and reward her; but if she fly to the mark with a Partridge, then
must you retrive it, and serve her as before declared.

Some general Observations for an Ostrager or Falconer in Keeping and
Reclaiming a GOSHAWK.
It frequently happens that a Goshawk or Tiercel, where good in their Soarage,
become worse after they are mewed: and the reason may be, because she was not
cherished nor encouraged, to make her take delight in her Soarage.

For in a manner the major part of a Faulconer's skill consists in coying and
kind usage of his Hawk, so cherishing her that she may take delight in her
Flight.

At the first entering of his Hawk he ought always to have a Train-Partridge in
his Bag, to serve her with when need requires, to purchase her love: and let
him take such observations which may keep his Hawk always in good order. As
first, he must know naturally all Goshawks are full of moist humors,
especially in the Head, and therefore let him ply them with Tiring and Pluming
morning and evening; for that will open them in the Head, and make them cast
water thereat. Let the Goshawk's tiring be a Rum of Beef, a Pinion or the Leg
of a Chicken, given by the fire, or in the warm Sun: this not only opens her
Head, but keeps her from slothfulness in good exercise.

Give her every night Casting of Feathers or Cotton, and in the morning mark
whether it be wrought round or not, whether sweet or not, whether moist or dry,
and of what color the water is that drops out of the Casting: by these means
he shall know what condition his Hawk is in.

He also ought to regard her Mewts, to see whether they be clean or not, and
give remedies accordingly. He ought also to consider the season; for in cold
weather he must set his Hawk in some warm place where fire is made; he must
line the Perch with Canvas or Cotton, and must set it so far from the Wall
that the Hawk hurt not her Feathers when she bateth. If the weather be
temperate, he may then set her in the Sunshine for an hour or two in the
morning.

Let no Hens or Poultry come near the place where your Hawk does Perch; and in
the Spring offer her water every week, or else she will soar away from you when
she flies, and you may go look her.

If your Hawk bathe her self spontaneously in cold weather after her flight, go
presently to the next house and weather her with her Back to the fire, and not
her Gorge, for that will make her sick: and dry your Hawk if you have carried
her in the Rain.

A good Faulconer will always keep his Hawk high and lusty, yet so that she may
be always in a condition to fly best.

Also he must keep his Hawk clean, and her Feathers whole: and if a Feather be
broken or bruised, he must presently imp it; and to that end he must have his
Imping-needles, his Semond, with other Instruments always in readiness.

The first year it is most requisite to fly your Goshawk to the Field, and not
to the Covert; for so they will learn to hold out, and not turn tail in the
midst of their slight: and when they are mewed Hawks, you may make them do what
you will: and it is better to let her be a little rammage than to be overmanned.

Her feeding is best on hot meats: and if you would instruct her to kill great
Fowl, make her Trains thereof; and if you would have her continue those
Flights, never fly her at less, for that will take her off from them and spoil
her. If you will make her to fly with a Dog to assist her, then feed your Hawk
with great Fowl, and your Dogs with flesh tied under their Wings. If you train
your Hawk with them, rewarding her upon the Train, and your Dog with her, this
will make them acquainted together.

Thus continue doing till your Dog thoroughly knows his duty: and be sure to
keep your Dog tied up; for if you let him go loose, it will spoil the best Dog
that is: and never give him a reward, but when he makes in at such Fowls to
rescue the Hawk.

Call your Goshawk to no other thing than your Fist, and oftentimes spurt good
wine on your Goshawks Sears: And note, that in all her Distempers sweet things
are best to be administered in her Medicines.

Of the SPARROW-HAWK.
THe last Hawk which we shall treat of, is the Sparrow-hawk; of which there are
several kinds, and of different Plumes.

For the kinds, there is the Sclavonian, Calabrian, Corsican, German,
Vicentian, and Veronian, Alpisan, Sabbean, and Bergamascan, in the black Vale
near the Confines of Valtolina. It is needless to give you a particular account
of them.

Their Plumes are different: some are small plumed and blank Hawks, others of a
larger Feather, some plumed like the Quail, some brown or Canvas-mail'd, and
others have just thirteen Feathers in their Train, etc.

To be short, this Character I mav justly give the Sparrow-hawk in general,
that she is in her kind, and for that Game her strength will give her leave to
kill, a very good Hawk. Besides, he that knows how to man, reclaim, and fly
with a Sparrow-hawk, may easily know how to keep and deal with all other Hawks.

And herein lies an excellency in the Sparrow-hawk, she serves both for Winter
and Summer with great pleasure, and will fly at all kind of Game more than the
Faulcon. If the Winter- Sparrow-hawk prove good, she will kill the Pie, the
Chough, the Jay, Wood-cock, Thrush, Blackbird, Felfare, with diverse other
Birds of the like nature.

How to make a Sparrow-hawk, whether Eyess, Brancher, Soar, Mewed, or Haggard.
Sparrow-hawks are to be considered as all other kinds of Hawks are, according
to their age and disposition.

The several kinds of Sparrow-hawks may be comprehended under these five heads;
the Eyesses or Nyesses, Branchers, Soars, Mewed, and Haggards.

Eyesses, are mewed in the Wood, and are taken in the Eyrie.

Branchers, are those which have forsaken the Eyrie, and are fed near it by the
old ones on Boughs and Branches.

Soar-hawks, are so called, because, having forsaken the Eyrie, and beginning
to prey for themselves, they soar up alost for pleasure.

Mewed Hawks, are such which have once or more shifted the Feather.

Lastly, Haggards, are they which prey for themselves, and do also mew in the
Wood or at large.

This division of kinds is not peculiar to the Sparrow-Hawk, but common to
all: give me leave to run them over in order as I have set them down.

For the Eyress or Nyess, (which is of greatest difficulty to bring to any
perfection) you must first feed her in some cool Room which has two Windows,
the one to the North, and the other to the East, which must be open, and barred
over with Laths, not so wide for a Hawk to get out, or Vermin to come in: strew
the Chamber with fresh Leaves, and do in every respect to this Room as I have
ordered in a former Chapter for the Mewing the Faulcon.

You must feed your Eyess with Sparrows, young Pigeons, and Sheeps-hearts.
Whilst she is very young and little you should cut her meat, or shred it into
small pellets, and feed her twice or thrice a day, according as you find her
endew it or put it over.

When she is full summed and flies about, then give her whole small Birds, and
sometimes feed her on your Fist, suffering her to strain and kill the Birds in
your hand; and sometimes put live Birds into the Chamber where she is, that she
may learn to know to foot and to kill them; and let her feed upon them in your
presence: by this course you will not only neul her, but take her off from
that scurvy quality of hiding her Prey when she has seized it, a natural
property belonging to all Eyesses. Likewise every morning go into the Room,
call her to your Fist, whistle and use such terms as you would have her
hereafter acquainted with. When she has put forth all her Feathers and is full
summed, then take her out of the Chamber, and furnish her with Bells, Bewets,
Jesses, and Lines.

It will be altogether requisite to seel her at first, that she may the better
endure the Hood and handling: and let it be a Rufter-hood that is large and
easy, which you must pull off and put on frequently, stroaking her often on
the head, till she will stand gently.

In the Evening by Gandle-light unseel her, giving her somewhat to tire upon,
handling and stroaking her Feathers gently, hooding and unhooding her as often
as you think fit.

Before I proceed any farther, I shall inform you how to Seela Hawk after the
best manner. Take a Needle threaded with untwisted Thread, and casting your
Hawk take her by the Beak, and put the Needle through her Eyelid, not right
against the sight of the Eye, but somewhat nearer the Beak, that she may have
liberty to see backward; and have especial care that you hurt not the Web: then
put your Needle through the other Eyelid, drawing the ends of the Thread
together, tie them over the Beak, not with a straight knot, but cut off the
Threads near to the end of the knot, and so twist them together, that the
Eyelids may be raised so upwards that the Hawk may not see at all, but as the
Thread shall slacken, she shall be able to see backwards only, which is the
cause that the Thread is put nearer the Beak.

When your Eyess is well won to the Hood, and to the Fist, let her kill small
birds thereon; then call her two or three days or longer, till she will come
far off; then take a live Pidgeon tied by the Foot with a Creance, and stir it
till your Hawk will bate at it and seize it, but not far off that you may
quickly help her at the first, lest the Pidgeon struggling with her she prove
too strong, and so discourage your young Hawk: then let her plume and foot her,
and feed her thereupon, whistling the while, that she may know it another time:
then hood her, and let her plume and tire a little.

You may use her to Trains of Chicken and Quail: and when she will seize
readily by often Training, ride out with her in the morning into the Fields,
where calling your Sparrow-hawk to your Fist, and giving her a bit or two, go
with your Spaniels to seek some Beavy of young Quails, advancing your Fist
aloft, that your Hawk may see them when they spring, flying her at advantage:
if she kill reward her, etc. if she miss, serve her with the Train of a Quail.

Let your Dogs hunt on your right hand when they range, but especially when
they quest and call, to the end you may the better cast off your Hawk. When
your Hawk is thoroughly entered and well nouzled, you may then hold your hand
low, for she will now bate at the Whur: but whatsoever you do, have a quick eye
and a good regard to the Spaniels, not coveting to be too near them, but a
little above them, that you may let your Hawk fly coasting at the advantage
when the Game springs.

Of the Brancher, Sodr, Mewed, and Haggard Sparrow-hawk.
Having spoken of the first kind of Sparrow-haws, viz. the Eyess, the other
four in the Title of this Chapter must consequently be discoursed of.

I shall give you but few instructions, for in effect the same Precepts that
serve for the Eyess will serve also for the Brancher, Soar, Mewed, and Haggard
Hawks; only this, these four last require not so much pains to be taken to
make them know their Game as the Eyess, because they have been accustomed to
prey for themselves.

Above all things, the Faulconer must take them off from their ill custom of
carrying, and that may be done by serving them with great Trains, whereby they
will learn to abide on the Quarry.

Be very mindful of coying them as much as you can, for they will remember a
kindness or injury better than any other Hawk.

If the Hawk be newly taken, and will not feed, then rub her Feet with warm
flesh, whistling to her, and sometimes putting the flesh unto her Beak: if she
will not yet feed, rub her Feet with a live Bird; if at the crying of the Bird
the Hawk seizes it with her Feet, it is a sign she will feed; then tear off
the Skin and Feathers of the Bird's Breast, and put the Bird to her Beak, and
she will eat.

When she will feed upon your whistle and chirp, then hood her with a
Rufter-hood, and feed her betimes in the morning; and when she has endewed,
give her a Beaching in the daytime, and every time you hood her, give her a
bit or two; at evening give her the Brains of a Hen for her supper: and in
every thing else order these Hawks aforesaid, as you do the Faulcon and the
rest.

How to mew Sparrow-hawks.
Some use to put their Sparrow-hawk into the Mew as soon as they leave flying
her, cutting off both her Bewets, Lines, and knots of her Jesses, and so leave
them in the Mew till they are clean mewed.

If you will have your Sparrow-hawk to fly at Quail, Partridge, or
Pheasant-powt, then you must draw her in the beginning of April, and bear her
on the Fist till she be clean and thoroughly enseamed.

Others keep their Sparrow-hawks on the Perch until March, and then throw them
into the Mew, pepering them for Lice, if they have any. Her Mew should be a
Chamber alost from the ground, eight or nine foot long, and about six foot
broad: her Windows and Pearches must be like the Goshawks.

Her Mew being thus provided, in May go in to her in an Evening by
Candlelight, and taking her up softly, pull out all her Train-feathers one
after another: this shall make her mew the faster, especially if you feed her
with hot meat and Birds, observing a certain hour to feed her in.

Once in fourteen days set water before her in the Mew: if you perceive she
has any Feathers or Down which stand staring upon her Back, sitting as if she
would rouse, then set her water sooner. If you put water by her continually, it
delays her Mewing; and to keep it always from her, causes her to mew her
Feathers uncleanly: but water once in a fortnight is the best Medium for her
Mewing between those two extremes.

Thus having given you a summary account of most Hawks commonly in use in
England, and in most parts of Europe, showing their Shapes, Complexions,
Natures, manner of Manning, Reclaiming, Ordering, Luring, Flying, Mewing, etc.
I shall next give you an account of the several Diseases and Maladies they are
subject to, with their proper Cures and Remedies: but before I shall enter
thereon, give me leave to inform the Ostrager or Faulconer of his necessary
duties.

The Duty of a Faulconer; with necessary Rules and Observations for him to
follow.
A Faulconer ought to consult and consider the quality and mettle of his Hawks,
and to know which of them he shall fly with early, and with which late.

He must be fond of his Hawk, patient, and cleanly in keeping her from Lice,
Mites, and the like Vermin. He must rather keep his Hawks high and full of
flesh, than poor and low, which makes them more subject to infirmities than
when they are in very good plight.

Every night after flying, he must give his Hawk Casting, sometimes Plumage,
sometimes Pellets of Cotton, and sometimes Physic, as he shall find her
diseased by her Casting or Mewt.

Every night he must make the place very clean under her Perch, that he may
know by her Casting whether the Hawk stands in need of Scourings upwards or
downwards.

Let him remember every Evening to weather his Hawk, excepting such days
wherein she has bathed; after which, in the Evening she should be put into a
warm Room on a Perch with a Candle burning by her, where she must sit
unhooded, if she be not rammage, to the intent she prune and pick her self, and
rejoice by enoiling her self after bathing: and in the morning he ought to
weather her, and let her cast, if the has not done it already, keeping her
still hooded till he carry her to the field.

In feeding his Hawk he must have a care of feeding her with two sorts of meat
at one time; and what he gives her must be very sweet.

If he have an occasion to go abroad, let him have a care that he perch not
his Hawk too high from the ground, for fear of bating and hanging by the Heels,
whereby she may spoil herself.

He ought to carry to the Field with him Mummy in powder, with other Medicines;
for frequently the Hawk meets with many accidents, as bruises at encounters,
etc. neither must he forget to carry with him any of his necessary
Hawking-implements.

Lastly, he must be able to make his Lures, Hoods of all sorts, Jesses, Bewets,
and other needful Furniture for his Hawk: neither must he be without his
Coping-Irons to cope his Hawk's Beak, if it be overgrown, and to cope her
Pounces and Talons, as need shall require: neither must he be without his
Cauterizing-Irons.

Let these Instructions suffice, I being willing to leave the rest to the care
and observation of the ingenious Faulconer.

Of Diseases and dangerous Accidents incident to HAWKS, and their several Cures.
IT is necessary for a skilful Faulconer not only to know how to Man, Reclaim,
Keep, Fly, Imp, and Mew his Hawks, with other things pertinent to that purpose;
but also to know their Diseases, with the proper Cures of them, and other
Accidents frequently befalling Hawks, both in their Fights and otherways.

Before we shall characterize their Maladies and prescribe Rules for their
Cures, it will not be irrequisite to tell you that Hawks, as well as men,
(which seems somewhat strange) have four Complexions, the true indicators of
their natures: and as in man his natural Complexion and Constitution is known
by his Skin, so is the Temperament and natural Disposition of a Hawk by her
Coat and Plume. This opinion has not been only averred by the Ancients, but
confirmed by the modern experience of the Skilful in the noble Art of Hawking.
Take it in this manner.

Faulcons that are black are Melancholic, and are to be physicked with hot and
moist Medicines, because their Complexion is cold and dry; for which purpose
Aloes, Pepper, Cocks-flesh, Pigeons, Sparrows, Goatsflesh, and the like, are
very good.

Faulcons blank are Phlegmatic, and must have Physic hot and dry, because
Phlegm is cold and moist; to which purpose Cinnamon, Cloves, Cardamomum,
Goats-flesh, Choughs, etc. are very good.

Faulcons Russet are Sanguine and Chelerick indifferently mixed, and their
Physic must be cold, moderately moist and dry, as Myrtles, Cassia-fistula,
Tamarinds, Vinegar, I ambs-flesh, and Pullets.

Thus much for the Complexions: Now for the Diseases and their Cures.

Of Castings, and Mewtings, either good or bad according to their several
Complexions and Smells.
Castings are of two sorts, Plumage, or Cotton: the latter is most commonly
given in Pellets, which must be about the bigness of an Hazie-nut, made of fine
soft white Cotton: after she has supped you must convey this into her Gorge.

In the morning diligently observe how she has rolled and cast it, whereby you
shall know whether she be in a bad or good condition: for example, if she cast
it round, white, not stinking, nor very moist or waterish, you may conclude her
sound; but if she roll it not well, but cast it long, with properties contrary
to the former, then she is unfound and full of Diseases.

Besides, if her Casting be either black green, yellowish, slimy, or stinking,
it denotes your Hawk to be diseased. The former Casting is remedied by hot
meats; the latter by feeding her well, and washing her meats in cool water, as
of Endive, etc. and give her one or two Castings of Cotton, incorporating
therewith Incense and Mummy. But if she continue notwithstanding in this
condition, give her an upward Scowring made thus: Take Aloes pulverized one
scruple, powder of Clove four grains, powder of Cubebs three grains;
incorporate these, and wrap them in Cotton, and give it your Hawk empty, having
no meat in her Panel.

Casting of Plumage is to be observed as the former Casting: that is, if in the
morning you find them round and not stinking, it is a good sign; but if long,
slimy, with indigested flesh sticking to the same, and having an ill scent, it
is very bad. Here note, that by how much the more sweet or stinking the Casting
is, by so much is the Hawk in a better or worse condition.

Mewts must be observed as well as Castings, in this manner: If the Mewt be
white, not very thick nor clear, having no black spot in it, or but very
little, it is a sign of the healthy constitution of the Hawk; but if it be
white and very thick in the middle, though it does not import sickness, yet it
shows her to be too gross and over-full of Grease; which you must remedy by
giving her moist meats, as the Heart of a Calf or Lamb, etc. and for two
mornings after give her some Sugar Candy, or else the Gut of a Chicken well
washed and filled with Oyl-Olive: either of these will scour her, and make her
to slise freely.

It is a very bad and mortal sign, to see your Hawk's Mewt full of variety of
colors: therefore you must speedily prevent ensuing mischiefs by giving her
Mummy purified and beaten to powder, wrapping it in Cotton.

If the Mewt be more yellow then white, then does she abound with Choler
proceeding from great Flights in hot weather, also from much Bating. This is
remedied by washing her meat in Bugloss, Endive, Borage, and suchlike cold
Waters, wringing the said meat after you have so washed it.

The black Mewt is a most deadly sign, and if it continue four days she will
peck over the Perch and die. If she mewt so but once, there is no great
danger, for it proceeds either from the Blood or Guts of the Fowl in tiring, or
else-from being gorged with filthy meats: in this case give her good warm meat
and Cotton-casting, with the powder of Gloves, Nutmeg, and Ginger, or Mummy
alone.

If the Mewt be green, it is a bad sign, and denotes her troubled with an
infected and corrupt Liver, or with some Apostume, unless she be a Rammage-
Hawk, and then that sign holds not good. Her cure is, by feeding her with meat
powdered with Mummy; if she will not take it with her Food, then give it her in
a Scowring or Casting: but if this ill-colour'd Mewting continue still, then
give her a Scowring of Agarick, and after that another of Incense pulverized to
comfort her.

The dark sanguine Mewt with a black in it is the most deadly sign of all, and
differs but little, if any thing, from the former black Mewt. A Hawk mewting
after this manner is irrecoverable, and therefore it is needless to prescribe a
Cure.

Lastly, the gray Mewt like sour Milk, is a mortal token, yet curable, as shall
be shown hereafter.

Thus you see how requisite it is for a Faulconer to observe diligently every
morning his Hawk's Castings and Mewtings, that knowing thereby their Maladies,
he may timely find out their Remedies. Let us now proceed to their particular
Diseases.

Of the Cataract.
The Cataract in the Eyes of a Hawk, is a malady not easily removed, and
sometimes incurable, when it is too thick and of a long continuance.

It proceeds from gross Humors in the Head, which frequently do not only
dim, but extinguish the sight: and sometimes the Hood is the cause of this
mischief.

The cure must be effected by Scowring her two or three days with Aloes or
Agarick: then take the powder of washed Aloes finely beaten one scruple, and two
scruples of Sugar Candy; mingle these together, and with a Quill blow it into
your Hawk's Eye afflicted as aforesaid three or four times a day. This is the
gentlest and most Sovereign Medicine of any yet I have tried. But if this will
not do, you must use stronger Medicines, as the juice of Celandine-roots,
bathing their eyes often with warm Rose Water wherein has been boiled the
seeds of Fenugreek.

Of the Pantas or Asthma.
The Pantas is a dangerous Distemper, and few Hawks escape which are afflicted
therewith. It happens when the Lungs are as it were so baked by excessive heat,
that the Hawk cannot draw her breath, and when drawn, cannot well emit it
again. You may judge of the beginning of this Distemper by the Hawk's laboring
much in the Panel, moving her Train often up and down at each motion of her
Panel; and she cannot many times mewt or slise; or if she do, she drops it
fast by her. It is known likewise by your Hawk's frequent opening her Clap and
Beak.

The best Remedy is, to scour your Hawk with good Oyl-Olive well washed in
several Waters till it become clear and white, which you must do after this
manner: Take an earthen Pot with a small hole in the bottom thereof, which you
must stop with your Finger; then pour therein your Oil with a quantity of
Water, and coil these together with a Spoon till the Water grow darkish; after
which remove your Finger, and the Water will run out, but the Oil remain behind
floating on the top; thus do seven or eight times, till you have thoroughly
purified the Oil: Then take a Sheep's Gut above an Inch long for a Faulcon and
Goshawk, but of less length for lesser Hawks, and fill it with this Oil, and
fasten it with Thread at both ends. Your Hawk having first cast, convey this
Gut into her Throat, holding her on the Fist till she make a Mewt; an hour
after she has done mewting feed her with a Calf's Heart or a Pullet's Leg,
giving her every third or fourth day a Cotton casting with Cubebs and Cloves. I
shall only add one Receipt more for the Pantas or Asthma, and that is the Oil
of sweet Almonds poured into a washed Chicken's Gut, and given the Hawk; which
is of great efficacy in the cure of this Disease.

Of Worms.
There are a sort of Worms an Inch long, which frequently afflict Hawks,
proceeding from gross and viscous Humors in the Bowels, occasioned through
want of natural heat and ill digestion.

You may know when she is troubled with them by her casting her Gorge, her
stinking Breath, her trembling and writhing her Train, her croaking in the
night, her offering with her Beak at her Breast or Panel, and by her Mewt
being small and unclean.

You may cure her of them with a Scowring of washed Aloes, Hepatick,
Mustard Seed, and Agarick, of each an equal quantity; or the powder of
Hartshorn dried; or lastly, a Scowring of white Dittander, Aloes, Hepatick
washed four or five times, Cubebs, and a little Saffron wrapped in some flesh, to
cause her to take it the better.

Of the Filanders.
There are several sorts of Filanders, but I shall speak but of one sticking to
the Reins. They are Worms as small as a Thread, and about an Inch long, and lie
wrapped up in a thin Skin or Net near the Reins of a Hawk, apart from either Gut
or Gorge.

You shall know when your Hawk is troubled with them, by her poverty, by
ruffling her Train, by straining the Fist or Perch with her Pounces, and
lastly, by croaking in the night when the Filanders prick her. You must remedy
this Malady betimes, before these Worms have enlarged themselves from their
proper station, roving elsewhere to your Hawk's ruin and destruction.

You must not kill them as other Worms, for fear of Impostumes from their
corruption, being incapable to pass away with the Hawk's Mewt; but only
stupifie them, that they may be offensive but seldom; and that is done thus:
Take a head of Garlic, taking away the outmost rind; then with a Bodkin
heated in the fire, make holes in some Cloves, then steep them in Oil three
days, and after this give her one of the Cloves down her Throat, and for forty
days after she will not be troubled with the Filanders. Wherefore a Faulconer
will show himself prudent, if, seeing his Hawk low and poor, he give her once a
month a Clove of this Garlic for prevention of the Filanders.

Another approved Medicine for Filanders or Worms in Hawks.
Take half a dozen Cloves of Garlic, boil them in Milk until they are very
tender, then take them out and dry the Milk out of them; then put them into a
spoonful of the best Oil of Olives you can get, and when she has cast, in the
morning give these to your Hawk, feed her not in two hours after, and be sure
it be warm meat, and not much, and keep her warm that day for fear of taking
cold; give her the Oil with the Garlic: they must steep all night.

Of Hawks Lice.
These Lice do most infest the Head, the Ply of a Hawk's Wings, and her Train.
In the winter you may kill them thus: Take two drams of Pepper beaten to
powder, and mingle it with warm Water, and with this Lotion wash the places
infested with these Lice or Mites: then set your Hawk on a Perch with her Back
and Train against the Sun; then hold in your hand a small Stick about a handful
long, with a piece of soft Wax at the end of it, and with that (whilst the Hawk
is weathering her self) take away those Vermin crawling upon the Feathers. You
may do well to add to the Pepper and Water some Stavesacre.

In the Summertime you may kill the Lice with Auripigmentum beaten to powder,
and strowed on the places where they lie.

A safe and easy way to kill Lice in Hawks.
Mail your Hawk in a piece of Cotton, if not in some Woollen-Cloath, and put
between the Head and her Hood a little Wool or Cotton: then take a Pipe of
Tobacco, and, putting the little end in at the Tream, blow the Smoke, and what
Lice escape killing, will creep into the Cloth. This is a certain way.

How to keep and maintain all manner of Hawks in health, good plight, and
liking.
In the first place, never give them a great Gorge, especially of gross meats,
as Beef, Pork, and such as are hard to be endewed and put over.

Secondly, never feed them with the flesh of any Beast that has lately gone to
Rut; for that will insensibly destroy them.

Thirdly, if you are constrained to give your Hawk gross food, let it be well
soaked first in clean Water, and afterward sufficiently wrung; in Summer with
cold Water, in Winter with lukewarm Water.

Ever observe to reward your Hawks with some good live meat, or else they will
be brought too low: however, the serving them with washed meats is the way to
keep them in health.

I shall conclude how to keep Hawks in perfect health with this most excellent
Receipt. Take Germander, Pelamountain, Basil, Grummel-seed, and Broom-flowers,
of each half an ounce; Hyssop, Sassifras, Polypodium, and Horse-mints, of each
a quarter of an ounce, and the like of Nutmegs; Cubebs, Borage, Mummy, Mugwort,
Sage, and the four kinds of Mirobolans, of each half an ounce; of Aloes
Succotrine the fifth part of an ounce, and of Saffron one whole ounce. All
these you must pulverize, and every eighth or twelfth day give your Hawks the
quantity of a Bean thereof with their meat. If they will not take it so, put it
into a Hens Gut tied at both ends, and let him stand empty an hour after.

Of the Formica.
This is a Distemper which commonly seizes on the Horn of Hawks Beaks, which
will eat the Beak away: and this is occasioned by a Worm, as most men are of
opinion.

You may perceive it by this; the Beak will grow rugged, and it will begin to
separate from the Head.

To remedy this Malady, you must take the Gall of a Bull, and break it into a
Dish, and add thereto the powder of Aloes-Succatrine: mingle these well
together, and anoint the Clap or Beak of your Hawk therewith, and the very
place where the Formica grows, twice a day; but touch not her Eyes or Nares:
continue thus doing till your Hawk be perfectly cured, and bathe her with
Orpiment and Pepper to keep her from other Vermin.

Of the Frownce.
The Frownce proceeds from moist and cold Humors which descend from the
Hawk's Head to the Palate and root of the Tongue, by means whereof they lose
their appetite, and cannot close their Clap. This by some is called the
Eagles-bane; for she seldom dies of age, but of the over-growing of her Beak.

You may know if your Hawk be troubled with this Distemper, by opening her
Beak, and seeing whether her Tongue be swollen or no: if it be, she has it.

There are several ways to cure this Distemper, but the best that ever yet I
could find for it, is, only to take the powder of Alume reduced to a Salve
with strong wine-vinegar, and wash the Hawk's Mouth therewith.

To cure the dry Frownce.
Take a Quill and cut it in the shape of a Pen, and at the other end tie a fine
little Rag; with one end scrape off the white Skin which you will see in the
Mouth or Throat of your Hawk until it bleedeth: then with the other end wash it
with the juice of Lemon or White-wine-Vinegar very clean; then take a little
burnt Alume, and some of a Shoe-soal burnt upon Wood-coals and beaten to
powder; mix them, and lay them on the place or places; but let your Hawk have
no meat above, nor be ready to be fed: by this I have cured many.

Of the Pip.
The Pip frequently troubles Hawks, as it does Chickens, and proceeds from
cold and moistness of the Head, or from feeding on gross meat not well washed in
warm Water in the Winter, and cold Water in the Summer.

The Symptoms of this Distemper are the Hawk's frequent Sniting, and making a
noise twice or thrice in her Sniting.

For the Cure hereof, you must cast your Hawk gently, and look upon the tip of
her Tongue, and if you find the Pip there, you must scour her with a Pill made
of Agarick and Hiera picra given two or three days together with her Casting at
night; this will cleanse her Head, and the sooner if she be made to tire
against the Sun in the Morning: Then bind a little Cotton to the end of a
Stick, and dipping it in good Rose Water wash her Tongue therewith: after this
anoint it three or four days with Oil of sweet Almonds and Oyl-olive well
washed as aforesaid. Having so done, you will find the Pip all white and soft:
then take an Awl, and with the point thereof lift up the Pip softly, and remove
it, as Women pip there Chickens, but remove it not till it be thoroughly ripe;
and wet her Tongue and Palate twice or thrice a day with the aforesaid Oil,
till she be thoroughly cured.

How to remedy that Hawk which Endeweth not, nor Puts over as she should do.
This happens either by being foul within, or by a Surfeit; or else when she
was low and poor her Keeper over-gorged her, by being too hasty to set her up,
and she being weak was not able to put over and endew, and surfeited thereupon.

The Cure whereof is this: You must feed her with light meats, and a little at
once, as with young Rats and and Mice, Chickens or Mutton dipped in Goats-milk or
otherwise; or give her a quarter of a Gorge of the yolk of an Egg.

If you feed her with the flesh of any living Fowl, first steep it well in the
blood of the same Fowl so shall your Hawk mount her flesh apace; if you also
scour her with Pills made of Lard, Marrow of Beef, Sugar and Saffron mixed
together, and given her three mornings together, giving her also a reasonable
Gorge two hours after.

How to make a Hawk feed eagerly that has lost her Appetite, without bringing
her low.
A Hawk may lose her Appetite by taking too great Gorges in the Evening, which
she cannot well endew; or by being foul in the Panel; or sometimes by Colds.

To remedy which, take Aloes Succotrina, boiled Sugar, and Beef marrow, of each
alike, only less of the Aloes; incorporate these, and make them into Balls or
Pills as big as Beans, and give of them to your Hawk, and hold her in the Sun
till she has cast up the filth and slime within her; then feed her not till
noon, at which time give her good meat; and three days after for the same
Disease it is good tiring on Stockdoves, small Birds, Rats or Mice.

How to raise a Hawk that is low and poor.
The Poverty of a Hawk happens several ways: either by the ignorance of the
Faulconer of some latent lurking Distemper; or by her soaring away, and so
being lost four or five days, in which time, finding little or no Prey, she
becomes poor and lean.

To set her up you must feed her, a little at once, and often, with good meat
and of light digestion, as small Birds, Rats, Mice, etc. Or thus: take two
spoonfuls of Honey, four of fresh Butter, and boil them together in a new
earthen pot of Water; then take Pork well washed, and steep it in that Water,
giving your Hawk a reasonable Gorge thereof twice a day, warming the said Water
when you intend to feed your Hawk; and get some Snails that breed in running
Waters, and give them her in the morning, and they will not only scour away
the gross slimy humors which are within, but also nourish her exceedingly.

How to remedy a Hawk that is slothful, and is averse to flying.
A Hawk frequently has no mind to fly, either by reason of her ill keeping,
that is, when she is kept by those who know not how to give her her Rights, as
bouzing, bathing, etc. or because the Hawk is too high and full of grease, or
too poor and low: by the first she becomes proud and coy, and by the latter so
weak that she wants strength and spirit to perform it.

For the curing of which Distemper, she ought to be thoroughly viewed by some
skilful Faulconer, by whom such Remedies should be administered to her as are
needful for her: but above all, there is nothing like giving her in a morning
three or four Pills of Celandine well washed.

Of Swollen Feet in a Hawk.
Hawks have Swelling in their Feet upon several accounts: sometimes by chafing
their Feet in flying their Prey, striking it, and taking cold thereupon;
sometimes for want of rolling or lining the Perch with some soft warm cloth;
or else through gross humors and foulness within, which through exercise drop
down into their Feet, and so cause them to swell: lastly, this swelling happens
by pricks when they fly fiercely into Bushes after Game.

For a Remedy, you must scour your Hawk three mornings together with the pills
of Lard, Marrow, Sugar and Saffron, and set her in the Sun: two days after this
feed her with good meat: then take Bole-Armoniack, and half the quantity of
Sanguis Draconis; and having made them into powder, temper them well together
with the White of an Egg and Rose Water, and anoint her Feet twice a day three
or four days together, setting her on some Cloth to keep her Feet warm.

How to scour Hawks before you cast them into the Mew.
When Mewing-time is come, you must scour and cleanse your Hawks; for in luring
and flying-time by foul feeding they engender Filanders and other Distempers,
whereof they die for want of timely care and cure.

When you set down your Hawk use the same as you find Page 246, which will not
only kill the Worm, but scour a Hawk also.

The best way is, (when you mean to cast a Hawk into the Mew) first to scour
her well according to former directions, to cope her, and set her up well in
flesh, to discharge her as near as you can of all Diseases, also to free her
from Mites and Lice, to set her Water, sometimes to feed her with young Rats,
Mice, Dogs-flesh, Pigeons, Rabbets, and now and then with some liquid thing and
meats laxative.

Take notice of this special Observation: A Haggard is not to be cast in loose
to the Mew, but is to be mewed on the Fist; for otherwise she will become too
coy and strange: and if she fall to bating and beating her self for heat, then
must you hood her up, or bespout her with cold water, which is the readiest way
to make her leave Bating.

You must continue her on the Fist till she begin to shed her Feathers; then
set her down, and tie her to a Stone or Perch, as you do the rest; and after
she has mewed and comes to fly, then let her stand on a Block or Billet cased
or rolled. In the same manner mew Goshawks, Tierces, and Sparrow-hawks; only
they will not be born on the Fist, but be at liberty in the Mew, and very
cleanly served.

Fifteen or twenty days before you draw your Hawk out of the Mew, you must
begin to abate her of her diet, the sooner and better to enseam her. And forget
not to feed her with washed meat, which will prevent many dangers that may
follow.

Many more Diseases there are incident, and Accidents happening to Hawks, of
which with their Cures there are large Discourses written in Italian, French,
and English, and therefore I thought fit to insert in this place no other
Maladies than what most usually occur: If you desire to be further satisfied, I
shall refer you to those larger and (it may be) less useful Volumes.

An Abstract Of such STATUTE-LAWS As concern HAWKING.
STat. 11 H. 7. cap. 17. None shall take out of the Nest any Eggs of Faulcon,
Goshawk, Lanner, or Swan, in pain of a year and a days imprisonment, and to
incur a Fine at the King's pleasure, to be divided betwixt the King and the
owner of the Ground where the Eggs shall be so taken.

II. None shall bare any Hawk of English breed called an Eyess, Goshawk, Cassel
Lanner, Lanneret, or Faulcon, in pain to forfeit the same to the King.

III. He that brings an Eyess from beyond the Sea, shall have a Certificate
under the Customers Seal where he lands, or if out of Scotland, then under the
Seal of the Lord-Warden or his Lieutenant, testifying that she is a foreign
Hawk, upon the like pain of forfeiting the Hawk.

IV. None shall take or fear away any of the Hawks abovesaid from their Coverts
where they use to breed, in pain of 10 l. to be recovered before Justices of
Peace, and divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutor.

Stat. 34 Edw. 3. cap. 22. A Hawk taken up shall be delivered to the Sheriff,
who after Proclamation made in the Market Towns of the County (if challenged)
shall deliver her to the right owner.

II. If the Hawk were taken up by a mean man, and be not challenged within Four
Months, the Sheriff shall detain her, satisfying the party for taking her; but
if by a man of Estate, who may conventently keep an Hawk, the Sheriff shall
restore her to him again, he answering for the charge of keeping her.

III. If any do take away or conceal a Hawk, he shall answer the value thereof
to the owner, and suffer two years imprisonment; and in case he be not able to
answer the value, he shall remain in Prison a longer time.

Stat. 37 Edw. 3. cap. 19. He that steals and carries away an Hawk, not
observing the Drdinance of 34 Edw. 3. 22. shall be deemed a Felon.

FINIS.
THE GENTLEMAN'S Recreation: Containing DIRECT RULES For the Famous Game of
FOWLING: With Instructions for the taking of all manner of LAND and WATERFOWL.
Whether by FOWLING-PIECE, NET, ENGINE, or otherways. With a short Account of
Singing-Birds. To which is added An Abstract of all Statute or Penal-Laws
relating to that curious Art.

The Third Part.

London: Printed by J. C. and F. C. for N. C.



OF FOWLING: OR, The complete Art and Secrets of Fowling, either by Water or by
Land, according to ancient and modern Experience.
What Fowling is; with the nature and diversity of all manner of Fowl.

FOWLING is used two manner of ways: either by Enchantment, or Enticement; by
winning or wooing the Fowl unto you by Pipe, Whistle, or Call; or else by
Engine, which unawares surprizeth them.

Fowl are of diverse sorts, which alter in their nature as their Feathers; but
by reason of their multiplicity, I shall for brevity-sake distinguish them
only into two kinds, Land and Waterfowl.

The Waterfowl are so called from the natural delight they still take in and
about the Water, gathering from thence all their food and nutriment.

Here note, that Waterfowl are in their own nature the subtilest and wisest of
Birds, and most careful of their own safety: Hence they have been formerly
compared to an orderly and well-governed Camp, having Scouts on land afax off,
Courts of Guards, Sentinels, and all-sorts of other watchful Officers
surrounding the body, to give an alarm on any approach of seeming danger.

For in your observation you may take notice, that there will be ever some
straggling Fowl, which lie aloof from the greater number, which still call
first. Now it is the nature of Waterfowl to fly in great Flocks, having always
a regard to the general safety; so that if you see a single Fowl, or a couple
fly together, you may imagine they have been somewhere affrighted from the rest
by some sudden amazement or apprehension of danger: but so naturally are they
inclined to society, that they seldom leave wing till they meet together again.
And this is occasioned not only by the near approach of men, but also by the
beating of Haggards on the Rivers, as also by the appearance of the very bold
Buzzard and Ring-tail.

Of Waterfowl there are two sorts; such as live of the water, and such as live
on the water: the one taking their sustenance from the water without swimming
thereon, but wading and diving for it with their long Legs: The other are
Web-footed and swim, as the Swan, Goose, Mallard, etc.

Of the Haunts of Fowl.
THe thing of greatest moment for the Fowler to understand, is the Haunts of
Fowl. In order thereunto you are to understand, that all sorts of greater Fowl,
viz. those who divide the foot, have their residence by the edge of Rivers that
are shallow, Brooks, and Plashes of water: and these appear not in Flocks, but
you shall see here one single, there a couple, and the like; which makes them
difficult to be taken by Engine or Device; but they are the best flights for
Hawks that can be imagined.

Likewise these Fowl delight in low and boggy places; and the more sedgie,
marish and rotten such grounds are, the fitter they are for the haunting of
these Fowl.

They love also the dry parts of drowned Fens, which are overgrown with tall
and long Rushes, Reeds, and Sedges.

Lastly, they delight in half-drowned Moors, or the hollow vales of Downs,
Heaths, or Plains, where there is shelter either of Hedges, Hills, Tufts of
Bushes or Trees, where they may lurk obscurely.

Now the lesser Fowl, which are Web-footed, haunt continually drowned Fens,
where they may have continually plenty of Water, and may swim undisturbed by
man or beast: Their haunt is likewise in the main Streams of Rivers, where the
Current is swiftest and least subject to freez; and the broader and deeper such
Rivers are, the greater delight these Fowl take therein, the Wild-goose and
Barnacle excepted, who abide no Waters above their sounding; for when they
cannot reach the Ouze, they instantly remove thence, seeking out more shallow
places. These two last named are infinitely delighted with green Winter-corn,
and therefore you shall see them evermore where such Grain is sown, especially
if the ends of the Lands have much water about them.

Likewise these smaller Fowl do very much frequent small Brooks, Rivers, Ponds,
drowned Meadows, Pastures, Moors, Plashes, Meres, Loughs and Lakes, especially
if well stored with Islands unfrequented, and well furnished with Shrubs,
Bushes, Reeds, etc. and then they will breed there, and frequent such places
both Summer and Winter.

The readiest way of taking great Fowl with NETS.
THe first thing you are to consider, is the making of your Nets, which must be
of the best Packthread, with great and large Meshes, at least two Inches from
point to point: for the larger the Meshes are, (so that the Fowl cannot creep
through them) the better it is; for they more certainly entangle them.

Let not your Nets be above two fathom deep, and six in length, which is the
greatest proportion that a man is able to overthrow. Verge your Net on each
side with very strong Cord, and extend it at each end upon long Poles made for
that purpose.

Having thus your Nets in readiness, let the Fowler observe the haunts of Fowl,
that is to say, their Morning and Evening feedings, coming at least two hours
before those seasons; then spreading his Net smooth and flat upon the ground,
staking the two lower ends firm thereon, let the upper ends stand extended upon
the long Cord, the farther end thereof being staked fast down to the Earth two
or three fathom from the Net; and let the stake which staketh down the Cord
stand in a direct and even line with the lower Verge of the Net, the distance
still observed: then the other end of the Cord, which must be at least ten or
twelve fathom long, the Fowler shall hold in his hand at the uttermost distance
aforesaid, where he shall make some artificial shelter either of Grass, Sods,
Earth, or such like matter, whereby he may lie out of the sight of the Fowl.

Observe to let the Net lie so ready for the Game, that upon the least pull it
may rise from the Earth and fly over.

Strew over all your Net, as it lies upon the ground, some Grass, that you may
hide it from the Fowl. It will not be amiss (but altogether requisite) to stake
down near your Net a live Hern, or some other Fowl formerly taken, for a Stale.
When you observe a competent number of Fowl come within the verge of your Net,
then draw your Cord suddenly, and so cast the Net over them: Continue thus
doing till the Sun be near an hour high, and no longer; for then their feeding
is over for that time; and so do at Evening from about Sunset till Twilight.
By this means you may not only take great quantities of larger Wild-fowl, but
also Plover, which takes his food as much from Land as Water.

How to take small Waterfowl with Nets.
LEt your Nets be made of the smallest and strongest packthread, and the Meshes
nothing near so big as those for the greater Fowl, about two foot and a half or
three foot deep; line these Nets on both sides with false Nets, every Mesh
being about a foot and a half square each way, that as the Fowl strikes either
through them or against them, so the smaller Net may pass through the great
Meshes, and so streighten and entangle the Fowl.

These Nets you must pitch for the Evening-flight of Fowl before Sunset,
staking them down on each side of the River about half a foot within the water,
the lower side of the Net being so plumb'd that it may sink so far and no
farther: Let the upper side of the Net be placed slantwise, shoaling against
the water, yet not touching the water by near two foot; and let the strings
which support this upper side of the Net be fastened to small yielding Sticks
pricked in the Bank, which as the Fowl strikes may give liberty to the Net to
run and entangle them. Thus place several of these Nets over diverse parts of
the River, about twelvescore one from another, or as the River or Brook shall
give leave; and be confident, if any Fowl come on the River that night, you
shall have your share.

And that you may the sooner obtain your desire, take your Gun and go to all
the Fens and Plashes that are a good distance from your Nets, and fire it three
or four times; which will so affright the Fowl, that they will instantly post
to the Rivers; then plant your Nets upon these Fens and Plashes.

In the Morning go first to the River and see what Fowl are there surprised;
and having taken them up with your Nets, if you espy any Fowl on the River,
discharge your Gun, which will make them fly to the Fens and Plashes, and then
go and see what you have taken: Thus you shall be sure to be furnished with
some, though there be never so few abroad.

How to take all manner of small Birds with Bird-Lime.
IN cold weather, that is to say, in Frost or Snow, all sorts of small Birds do
congregate in Flocks, as Larks, Chaffinches, Lennets, Gold-finches,
Yellowhammers, Buntings, Sparrows, etc. all these but the Lark do perch on
Trees or Bushes as well as feed on the ground: If you perceive they resort
about your House or Fields adjacent, then use your Bird-lime that is well
prepared, and not over old; order it after this manner: Take an Earthen dish
and put the Bird-lime into it, and add thereunto some fresh Lard, or
Capons-grease, putting an ounce of either to a quarter of a pound of Bird-lime:
then setting it over the fire, let it melt gently together; but let it not boil
by any means, for if you do, you will take away the strength of the Bird-lime,
and so spoil it. Having thus prepared it, get a quantity of Wheat-ears, as many
as you think you shall conveniently use, and cut the Straw about a foot long
besides the Ears; then from the bottom of the Ears to the middle of the Straw
lime it about six inches: the Lime must be warm when you lime the straw, that
so it may run thin upon the straw, and therefore the less discernable, and
consequently not suspected by the Birds.

Having thus got your Lim'd-straws in this manner ready, go into the field
adjacent to your house, and carry a bag of Chaff and thresht Ears, and scatter
these together twenty yards wide, (it is best in a Snow) then take the
Lim'd-ears and stick them up and down with the Ears leaning, or at the end
touching the ground; then retire from the place, and traverse the grounds all
round about; the Birds hereupon being disturbed in their other haunts fly
hither, and pecking at the ears of Corn, finding that they stick unto them,
they straightways mount up from the Earth, and in their flight the Bird-limb'd
straws lap under their Wings, and falling are not able to disengage themselves
from the Straw, and so are certainly taken.

By the way take this caution; do not go and take up five or six you see
entangled, for that may hinder you it may be from taking three or four dozen at
one time. If they be Larks that fall where your Bird-lim'd Straws do lie, go
not a near them till they spontaneously rise of themselves, and flying in great
Flocks; I can assure you I have caught five dozen at one lift.

You may lay some nearer home to take Finches, Sparrows, Yellowhammers, etc.
who resort near to Houses, and frequent Barn-doors, where you may easily take
them after the same manner as aforesaid. The taking of Sparrows is a very great
benefit to the Husbandman, for they are his and the Farmers principal Enemies,
of all small Birds; insomuch as I dare assure them, that every dozen of
Sparrows taken by them in the Winter, shall save them a quarter of Wheat before
Harvest be ended. In the taking of them, you may stick the top of your House if
thatcht; and though you never have the Birds, yet the destruction of them will
be a great advantage. Before a Barn-door if you lay your Twigs, or
Lim'd-straws, you may there take them with abundance of other small Birds. The
Sparrow is excellent food, and a great restorer of decayed Nature. You may also
take them at roost in the Eaves of Thatchthouses, by coming in the night with a
Clap-net, and rubbing the Net against the hole where they are flying out, you
clap the Net together, and forsake them: the darkest night with a Lanthorn and
Candle is the chiefest time to take them.

Having performed your Morning Birding-recreation, go bait the same place where
you were before, and bait it with fresh Chaff and Ears of Corn, and let them
rest till next Morning; then take some fresh Wheat-ears again, and stick them
as aforesaid: and when you bait in the Afternoon, take away all your Lim'd
Ears, that so the Birds may feed boldly, and not be frighted or disturbed
against next Morning.

How to take Great Fowl with LIME-TWIGS.
YOu must supply your self with good store of Rods, which are long, small, and
straight-grown Twigs, being light and apt to play to and fro.

Lime the upper part of these Twigs, holding the Bird-lime before the fire, so
that it may melt, for the better besmearing them.

Having first well acquainted your self where these Fowl do frequent Morning
and Evening, you must then observe before Sunset for the Evening-flight, and
before day for the Morning, that you plant your Limetwigs where these Fowl
haunt, pinning down for a Stale one of the same Fowl alive (which you have
formerly taken for that purpose) which you intend to catch with your Bird-lime.
Round about the Stale (giving the Fowl liberty to flutter to and fro) prick
your Twigs in rows a foot distant one from the other, till you have covered all
the place so haunted, that there shall be no room left, but that they must
certainly fall foul with the Lime-twigs.

Prick the Rods sloaping with their heads bending into the Wind about a foot or
somewhat more above ground: If you please (and I think it the best way) you may
cross-prick your Rods, that is, one point into the wind, and another against
the wind; by which means you may take the Fowl which way soever they come.

Place also a Stale some distance from your Limetwigs, and fasten small strings
to it, which upon the sight of any Fowl you must pull, then will your Stale
flutter, which will allure them down.

If you see any taken, do not run instantly and take them up if you see any
Fowl in the air; for by their fluttering others will be induced to swoop in
among them. It will not be amiss to have a well-taught Spaniel with you for the
retaking of such Fowl (as it is common) which will flutter away with the
Limetwigs about them.

If you intend to use these Twigs for smaller Wildfowl, and such as frequent
the water only, then must you fit them in length according to the depth of the
River; and your Lime must be very strong Water-lime, such as no wet or frost
can injure. Prick these Rods in the water, as you did the others on the Land,
as much of the Rod as is limed being above water; and here and there among your
Rods you must stake down a live Stale, as a Mallard, a Widgeon or Teal: and
thus you may do in any shallow Plash or Fen.

You need not wait continually on your Rods, but come thrice a day, and see
what is taken, viz. early in the Morning, at high Noon, and late in the
Evening; but come not unattended with your Water-spaniel: for if you perceive
any of your Rods missing, you may conclude some Fowl are fastened to them which
are crept into some Hole, Bush, or Sedge by the River side, and then will your
Dog be very necessary for the discovery.

Do not beat one Haunt too much, but when you find their numbers fail, remove
and find out another, and in three weeks time your first will be as good as
ever.

Of the great and lesser SPRINGES.
HAving noted the Morning and Evening feeding of divided-footed-Fowl, observing
the Furrows and Water-Tracts where they usually stalk and paddle to find Worms,
Float-Grass-roots, and the like; you must mark where many Furrows meet in one,
and break out as it were into one narrow passage, which so descending,
afterward divides it self into other parts and branches; then mark how every
Furrow breaks and comes into this Center or little Pit, which is most
paddled with the Fowl, or which is easiest for Fowl to wade in: This being
done, take small and short Sticks, and prick them cross-wise athwart over all
the other passages, one Stick within half an Inch of the other, making as it
were a kind of Fence to guard every way but one which you would have the Fowl
to pass: if they stand but somewhat more than a handful above the Water, such
is the nature of the Fowl that they will not press over them, but stray about
till that they find the open way.

Having thus hemmed in all ways but one, take a stiff Stick cut flat on the one
side, and prick both ends down into the Water, and make the upper part of the
flat side of the stick to touch the water, and no more: then make a Bow of
small Hazel or Willow made in the fashion of a Pear, broad and round at one
end, and narrow at the other; at least a foot long, and five or six Inches
broad, and at the narrow end make a small nick: then take a good stiff-grown
plant of Hazel, clean without knot, three or four Inches about at the bottom,
and an Inch at the top, and having made the bottom-end sharp, at the top you
must fasten a very strong Loop of about an hundred Horse-hairs plaited very
fast together with strong Packthread, and made so smooth that it will run and
slip at pleasure: Let the Loop be of the just quantity of the hoop, made
Pear-wise as aforesaid: then hard by this Loop you must fasten a little broad
thin Tricker within an Inch and half of the end of the Plant, which must be
made equally sharp at both ends: thrust the bigger sharp end of the Plant into
the ground close by the edge of the water, the smaller-end with the Hoop and
the 'Tricker must be brought down to the first Bridge, and then the Hoop made
Pear-wise being laid on the Bridge, one end of the Tricker must be set upon the
nick of the Hoop, and the other end against a nick made on the small end of the
Plant, which by the violence and bend of the Plant shall make them stick and
hold together until the Hoop be moved. This done, lay the Swickle on the Hoop
in such fashion as the Hoop is proportioned; then from each side of the Hoop
prick little Sticks, making an impaled path to the Hoop; and as you go farther
and farther from the Hoop or Spring, so make the way wider and wider, that the
Fowl may enter a good way before it shall perceive the Fence. By this means the
Fowl will be enticed to wade up to the Spring, which shall be no sooner
touched, but that part of the Bird so touching will be instantly ensnared: And
thus according to the strength of the Plant you shall take any Fowl of what
bigness soever.

The Spring for lesser Fowl, as Woodcock, Snipe, Plover, etc. is made after
the fashion aforesaid, only differing in strength according unto the bigness of
the Birds you intend to catch.

The main plant or Sweeper you may make of Willow, Osier, or any stick that
will bend and return to its proper straightness.

This device is for the Winter only, when much wet is on the ground, and not
when the Furrows are dry. Now if the waters be frozen, you must make plashes;
and the harder the Frost, the greater resort will there be of these smaller
Fowl.

Of the FOWLING-PIECE and the STALKING-HORSE.
THat is ever esteemed the best Fowling-piece which has the longest Barrel,
being five foot and a half or six foot long, with an indifferent bore, under
Harquebuss.

Provide the best sort of Powder as near as you can, and let it not be old, for
keeping weakens it much, especially if it grow damp; therefore when you have
occasion to use it, dry it well in a Fire-shovel, and sift it through a fine
Searcher to take away that dust which hinders the more forcible effects, and
fouleth your piece.

Let your Shot be well sized, and of a moderate bigness; for if it be too
great, then it scatters too much: if too small, it has not weight nor strength
sufficient to do execution on a large Fowl.

Shot being not to be had at all times, and in all places, suitable to your
occasions and desires, I shall therefore here set down the true process of
making all sorts and sizes under Mould-shot.

Take what quantity of Lead you please, and melt it down in an Iron Vessel, and
as it melts keep it stirring with an Iron-Ladle, and clear it of all impurities
whatsoever that may arise at the top by skimming them off. Then when the Lead
begins to be of a greenish color, strew on it Auripigmentum finely powdered,
as much as will lie on a Shilling to 12 pound of Lead. Then stir them together,
and the Auripigmentum will flame.

Your I adle ought to have a Notch on one side of the Brim for the more easy
pouring out of the Lead, and the Ladle ought to remain in the melted Lead, that
the heat may be agreeable to it, to prevent all inconveniences which may
happen through excess of heat or cold. Then try your Lead by droping it into
water. If the drops prove round, then the temper of the heat is right; but if
the Shot have Tails, then there is want both of heat and Auripigmentum.

Then take a Copper-plate about the size of a Trencher-plate, with an
hollowness in the midst about three inches compass, with about forty holes
bored according to the size of the Shot you intend to cast. The hollow bottom
should be thin, but the thicker the brim the better, because it will longer
retain the heat. Place it on an Iron frame over a Bucket of water, about four
Inches from it, and spread burning Coals on the plate to keep the Lead melted
upon it.

Then take up some Lead and pour it gently on the Coals on the plate, and it
will force its way through the holes into the water, and form it self into
Shot. Thus do till all your Lead be run through the holes of the plate:
observing to keep your Coals alive, that the Lead may not cool, and so stop up
the holes. Whilst you are casting your Shot, another person may catch some of
the Shot with another Ladle, placed four or five inches (underneath the bottom
of the plate) in the water, and by that means you may discern if there are any
defects in your process, and rectify them.

The chief business is to keep your Lead in a just degree of heat, that it be
not so cold as to fill up the holes, nor so hot as to make the Shot crack. To
remedy the coolness of your Lead and plate, you must blow your Coals; to remedy
the beat, you must refrain working till it be cool enough, observing, that the
cooler your Lead, the larger your Shot; the hotter, the smaller.

When you have cast your Shot, take them out of the water and dry them over the
fire with a gentle heat, and be sure to keep them continually stirred that they
melt not. When they are dry you are to separate the great Shot from the small,
by the help of Sieves made on purpose, according to their several sizes. If you
would have very large Shot, you may with a stick force the Lead to trickle out
of your Ladle into the water without the plate.

If it stop on the plate, and yet the plate be not too cool, give but the plate
a little knock, and it will run again. Take care that none of your Instruments
be greasy. When you have separated your Shot, if any prove too large for your
purpose, or any ways imperfect, it is only your pains lost, and it will serve
again at your next operation.

In shooting, observe always to shoot with the wind, if possible, and not
against it; and rather side-ways, or behind the Fowl, than full in their faces.

Next, observe to choose the most convenient shelter you can find, as either
Hedge, Bank, Tree, or any thing else which may abscond you from the view of the
Fowl.

Be sure to have your Dog at your heels under good command, not daring to stir
till you bid him, having first discharged your Piece: for some ill-taught Dogs
will upon the snap of the Cock presently rush out, and spoil all the sport.

Now if you have not shelter enough, by reason of the nakedness of the Banks
and want of Trees, you must creep upon your hands and knees under the Banks,
and lying even flat upon your Belly, put the nose of your Piece over the Bank,
and so take your level; for a Fowl is so fearful of man, that though an Hawk
were soaring over her head, yet at the sight of a man she would betake her self
to her wing, and run the risque of that danger.

But sometime it so happens that the Fowl are so shie, there is no getting a
shoot at them without a Stalking-horse, which must be some old Jade trained up
for that purpose, who will gently, and as you will have him, walk up and down
in the water which way you please flodding and eating on the Grass that grows
therein.

You must shelter your self and Gun behind his foreshoulder, bending your body
down low by his side, and keeping his body still full between you and the Fowl:
being within shot, take your level from before the forepart of the Horse,
shooting as it were between the horses Neck and the water; which is much better
than shooting under his Belly, being more secure, and less perceiveable.

Now to supply the want of a Stalking-horse, which will take up a great deal of
time to instruct and make fit for this exercise, you may make one of any pieces
of old Canyas, which you must shape into the form of an Horse, with the head
bending downwards as if he grazed. You may stuff it with any light matter; and
do not forget to paint it of the color of an horse, of which the brown is the
best; and in the midst let it be fixed to a Staff with a sharp Iron at the end,
to stick into the ground as you shall see occasion, standing fast whilst you
take your level.

It must be made so portable, that you may bear it with ease in one hand,
moving it so as it may seem to graze as you go. Let the stature of your
artificial Stalking-horse be neither too low nor too high; for the one will not
abscond your body, and the other will be apt to frighten the Fowl.

Instead of this Stalking-horse, you may fashion out of Canvas painted an Ox or
Cow: and this change is necessary, when you have so beaten the Fowl with your
Stalking-horse, that they begin to find your deceit, and will no longer endure
it, (as it frequently falls out.) Then you may stalk with an Ox or Cow, till
the Stalking-horse be forgotten, and by this means make your sport lasting and
continual.

Some there are that stalk with Stags or Red-Deer formed out of painted Canvas,
with the natural Horns of Stags fixed thereon, and the color so lively painted,
that the Fowl cannot discern the fallacy; and these are very useful in low
Fenny grounds, where any such Deer do usually feed; and are more familiar with
the Fowl, and so feed nearer them than Ox, Horse, or Cow: by which means you
shall come within a far nearer distance.

There are other dead Engines to stalk withal, as an artificial Tree, Shrub, or
Bush, which may be made of small Wands, and with painted Canvas made into the
shape of a Willow, Poplar, or such Trees as grow by Rivers and Water-sides; for
these are the best.

If you stalk with a Shrub or Bush, let them not be so tall as your Tree, but
much thicker; which you may make either of one entire Bush, or of diverse Bushes
interwoven one with another, either with small Withy-wands, Cord, or
Pack-thread, that may not be discerned: and let not your Bush exceed the height
of a man, but be thicker than four or five, with a Spike at the bottom to stick
into the ground whilst you take your level.

How to take all manner of Land fowl by day or night.
SInce the dissolution and spoil of Paradise, no man has either seen, or can
give the names of all Land-fowl whatever, there being such great variety, every
Country producing some particular sorts which are unknown to other Nations.

To avoid prolixity, I shall rank them under two heads.

The first are such who are either fit for Food or Pleasure, either for eating
or singing: for eating, Pigeons of all sorts. Rook, Pheasant, Partridge,
Quails, Rail, Felfares, etc. and for eating or singing, the Blackbird,
Throstle, Nightingale, Linnet, Lark, and Bullfinch.

Secondly, such as are for Pleasure only, and they are all manner of birds of
Prey, as Castrels, Ring-tails, Buzzards, etc.

The general way of taking these Land-fowl of several sorts together, is either
by day or by night. If by day, it is done with the great Net, commonly called
the Crow-net, and not at all differs in length, depth, bigness of Mesh, manner
of laying, etc. from the Plovernet; only it will not be amiss if the Cords be
longer.

This Net you may lay before Barn-doors, or where Corn has been winnowed, also
in Stubble-fields, so concealing the Net that the Fowl may not discern the
Snare. When you perceive a quantity within the Net scraping for food, and you
lie concealed afar off, with your Cord in your hand suddenly pull the Net over
upon them.

You may do well to take notice of their Morning and Evening Haunts, to worm
and feed upon the Greenswarth; and here lay your Net, and it will prove as
effectual as in other places, so that you observe to abscond your self in some
Covert so as not to be descried: in the next place, pull not too hastily, but
wait for a good number of Fowl within the Net, and then pull freely and
quickly; for the least deliberation after the Net is raised, is the ruin of
your design.

Thus much for Day-fowling with the Net: now if you will prosecute your sport
by Night, you must do it according to the nature and manner of the Country, or
situation or fashion of the ground, whether Woody, Mountainous, or Champain.

In plain and Champain Countries you must use the Low-bell, from the end of
October until the end of March; and this method you must follow.

The day being shut in, the air mild without Moonshine, take a Low-bell, (which
must have a deep and hollow sound, for if it be shrill it is stark naught) and
with it a Net whose Mesh is twenty yards deep, and so broad, that it may cover
five or six Lands or more, according to the company you have to carry it. With
these Instruments go into any stubble Corn-field, but Wheat is the best. He
that carries the Bell must go foremost, toling the Bell as he goes very
mournfully, letting it but now and then knock on both sides: after him must
follow the Net, born up at each corner and on each side by several persons;
then another must carry some Iron or stony Vessel which may contain burning,
but not blazing Coals, and at these you must light bundles of straw: or you may
carry Links with you. And having pitched your Nets where you think the Game
lies, beat the ground and make a noise, and as the Fowl rise they will be
entangled in the Net. Thus you may take good store of Partridge, Rails, Larks,
Quails, etc.

Having so done, extinguish your Lights, and proceed laying your Net in some
other place as beforementioned.

Here note, that the sound of the Low-bell makes the Birds lie close, so as
they dare not stir whilst you are pitching the Net, for the sound thereof is
dreadful to them; but the sight of the Fire much more terrible, which makes
them instantly to fly up, and so they become entangled in the Net.

Furthermore, if you intend to have the full fruition of your sport, you must
be very silent, and nothing must be heard but the sound of the Low-bell till
the Net is placed and the Lights blazing; but as soon as they are extinguished
a general silence must be again.

The Trammel is much like this Net for the Lowbell, and may be necessarily used
on the same grounds; only it ought to be longer, though not much broader.

When you come to a place fit for your purpose where Birds lodge on the Earth,
you shall then spread your Trammel on the ground; and let the farthest end
thereof, being plumb'd with Lead, lie loose on the ground; but let the foremost
ends be born up by two men, and so trail the Net along, keeping the foremost
ends a yard or more distance from the ground.

On each side of the Net carry Wisps of Straw lighted, or Links, and let some
beat the ground with long Poles; and as the Birds rise under the Nets, take
them. And thus you may continue doing as long as you please, to your great
profit and pleasure.

Of BAT-FOWLING.
BAT-FOWLING is the taking of all manner of Birds, great and small, by night,
which roost in Bushes, Shrubs, Hawthorn-trees, etc.

The manner is: you must be very silent till your Lights are blazing, and you
may either carry Nets or none: if none, you must then have long Poles with
great bushy tops fixed to them; and having from a Cresset or vessel to carry
fire in, lighted your Straw, or other blazing combustible matter, then must you
beat those Bushes where you think Birds are at roost; which done, if there be
any in those Bushes or Trees, you will instantly see them fly about the Flames:
for it is their nature, through their amazedness at the strangeness of the
Light, and extreme darkness round about it, not to depart from it, but they
will even scorch their Wings in the same, so that those who have the bushy
Poles may beat them down as they please, and take them up. Thus you may
continue your sport as long as it is very dark, and no longer.

Of the DAY-NET, and how to take Birds therewith.
THe Day-Net is generally used for the taking of Larks, Buntings, Merlins,
Hobbies, or any Birds which play in the Air, and will stoop either to Stale,
Prey, Gig, Glass, or the like.

The season for these Nets is from August to November: the time you must plant
these Nets must be before Sunrising. Where note, the milder the Air, the
brighter the Sun, and the pleasanter the Morning is, the better will your sport
be, and of longer continuance.

Let the place you elect for this purpose be plain and Champain, either on
Barley-stubbles, green Lays, or level and flat Meadows; and these places must
be remote from any Villages, but near adjacent to Cornfields.

The fashion of a Day-net is this: you must make them of fine Packthread, the
Mesh small, and not above half an Inch square each way; let the length be about
three fashom, the breadth one fathom and no more: the shape is like the
Crow-net, and it must be verg'd about in the same manner with a strong small
Cord, add the two ends extended upon two small long Poles suitable to the
breadth of the Net, with four stakes, Tail-strings, and Drawing-lines, as
aforementioned: only whereas that was but one single Net, here must be two of
one length, breadth and fashion. These Nets must be laid opposite to each
other, yet so close and even together, that when they are drawn and pulled
over, the sides and edges may meet and touch one the other.

These Nets being staked down with strong Stakes very stiffly on their Lines,
so as with any nimble twitch you may cast them to and fro at your pleasure; you
shall then to the upper ends of the foremost staves fasten your Hand lines or
drawing Cords, which must be at the least a dozen, a fathom long; and so extend
them of such a reasonable streightness, as with little strength they may raise
up the Nets and cast them over.

When your Nets are laid, some twenty or thirty paces, beyond them place your
Stales, Decoys, or playing Wantons, upon some pearching Boughs, which will not
only entice Birds of their own Feather to stoop, but but also Hawks and Birds
of Prey to swoop into your Nets.

Remember to keep the first half dozen you take alive for Stales, and to that
end have a Cage or Linnen-bag to put them in: The rest squeez in the
hinder-part of the head, and so kill them. And thus do every day.

Of taking small Birds which use Hedges and Bushes with Lime-twigs.
THe great Lime-bush is best for this use, which you must make after this
manner: Cut down the main Arm or chief Bough of any bushy Tree, whose branches
or Twigs are long, thick, smooth and straight, without either pricks or knots;
of which the Willow or Birch-tree are the best: when you have picked it and
trimmed it from all superfluity, making the Twigs neat and clean; take then of
the best Bird-lime, well mixed and wrought together with Goose-greace or
Capon's-greace, which being warmed, lime every Twig therewith within four
fingers of the bottom. The body, from whence the branches have their rise, must
be untouched with Lime.

Be sure you do not dawb you Twigs with too much Lime, for that will give
distaste to the Birds; yet let none want its proportion, or have any part left
bare which ought to be touched: for, as too much will deter them from coming, so
too little will not hold them when they are there.

Having so done, place your Bush on some Quick-set or dead Hedge near unto
Towns-ends, back-yards, old houses, or the like; for these are the resort of
small Birds in the Springtime: in the Summer and Harvest in Groves, Bushes,
White-thorn-trees, Quick-set-hedges near Cornfieldsd, Fruit Trees, Flax and
Hemp-lands; and in the winter about Houses, Hovels, Barns, Stacks, or those
places where stand ricks of Corn, or scattered Chaff, etc.

As near as you can to any of these haunts plant your Lime-bush, and plant your
self also at a convenient distance undiscovered, imitating with your mouth the
several Notes of Birds, which you must learn by frequent practice, walking the
Fields for that very purpose often, observing the variety of several birds
sounds, especially such as they call one another by. I have known some so
expert herein, that they could imitate the Notes of twenty several sorts of
Birds at least, by which they have caught ten Birds to another one that was
ignorant therein.

But if you cannot attain to it by your industry, you must then buy a
Bird-call, of which there are several sorts, and easy to be framed, some of
Wood, some of Horn, some of Cane, and the like.

Having first learned how to use this Call, you shall sit and call the Birds
unto you; and as any of them light on your Bush, step not to them till you see
them sufficiently entangled: Neither is it requisite to run for every single
Bird, but let them alone till more come, for their fluttering is as good as a
Stale to entice more.

This Exercise you may use from Sunrising till ten a clock in the Morning, and
from one till almost Sunset.

You may take these small Birds with Lime-twigs only, without the Bush. When I
was a boy, I have taken two or three hundred small Twigs about the bigness of
Rushes, and about three Inches long, and have gone with them into a field where
were Hempcocks; upon the tops of half a score, lying all round together, I have
stuck my Twigs, and then have gone and beat that field, or the next to it,
where I saw any Birds; and commonly in such fields there are infinite numbers
of Linnets and Green-birds which are great lovers of Hemp Seed. I say, they fly
in such vast flocks, I have caught at one fall of them upon the Cocks eight
dozen at a time.

But to return, there is a pretty way of taking Birds with Lime-twigs, by
placing near them a Stale or two made of living Night-baits, placing them
aloft, that they may be visible to the Birds thereabouts; which will no sooner
be perceived, but every Bird will come and gaze, wondering at the strangeness
of the sight: then they having no other convenient lighting-place but where the
Lime-twigs are, you may take what number you list of them.

But the Owl is a far better Stale than the Bat, being bigger, and more easily
to be perceived; besides, he is never seen abroad, but he is followed and
persecuted by all the birds near adjacent.

If you have not a living Bat or Owl, their skins will serve as well being
stuffed, and will last you twenty years. There are some have used an Owl cut in
Wood, and naturally painted, with wonderful success.

It is strange to me that this Bird above all others should be so persecuted by
all Birds whatsoever, especially by the Goose; and therefore some arch Cracks
in Lincolnshire and other places where are great quantities of Geese,
observing their tempers, have made great advantage of them; for by only
throwing a live Owl among a flock of Geese, they got as many Quills as they
knew what to do with; for the Geese endeavoring to beat the Owl with their
wings, never left till they did beat the Quills out of their wings, and
commonly the best, which are Seconds.

How to make the best sort of Bird-lime, and how to use it.
TAke at Midsummer the bark of Holly, and pill it from the Tree, so much as
will fill a reasonable big Vessel; then put to it running Water, and set it
over the fire, and boil it till the gray and white bark rise from the green,
which will take up sixteen hours in the boiling: then take it from the fire,
and separate the barks after the water is very well drained away: then take all
the green bark, and lay it on the ground in a close place and moist floor, and
cover it over with all manner of green Weeds, as Hemlock, Docks, Thistles, and
the like; thus let it lie ten or twelve days, in which time it will rot, and
turn to a filthy slimy matter. Then take it and put it into a Mortar, and there
beat it till it become universally thick and tough, without the discerning of
any part of the bark or other substance; then take it out of the Mortar, and
carry it to a running Stream, and there wash it exceedingly, not leaving any
more or foulness within it; then put it up in a very close Earthen pot, and let
it stand and purge for diverse days together, scumming it as often as any
foulness arises for four or five days: when you perceive no more Scum, you
shall then take it out of that Pot, and put it into another clean Earthen
Vessel, cover it close, and keep it for your use.

When you are about to use your Lime, take what quantity you think fit and put
it into a Pipkin, adding thereto a third part of Goose-greace or Capons-greace
finely clarified, and set them over a gentle fire, and there let them melt
together, and stir them continually till they are well incorporated: then take
it from the fire, and stir it till it be cold.

When your Lime is cold, take your Rods and warm them a little over the fire;
then take your Lime and wind it about the tops of your Rods, then draw your
Rods a sunder one from the other, and close them again, continually plying and
working them together, till by smearing one upon another, you have equally
bestowed on each Rod a sufficient proportion of Lime.

If you lime any Strings, do it when the Lime is very hot and at the thinnest,
besmearing the Strings on all sides, by folding them together and unfolding
them again.

If you lime Straws, it must be done likewise when the Lime is very hot, doing
a great quantity together, as many as you can well grasp in your hand, tossing
and working them before the fire till they are all besmeared, every Straw
having his due proportion of Lime: having so done, put them up in cases of
Leather till you have occasion to use them.

Now to prevent the freezing of your Lime either as it is on Twigs, Bushes, or
Straws, you must add a quarter as much of the Oil called Petroleum as of your
Capons-grease, mix them well together, and then work it on your Rods, etc. and
so it will ever keep supple, tough, and gentle, and will not be prejudiced
should it freeze never so hard.

The best and most Experienced way of making Water. Bird-lime.
BUy what quantity you think fit of the strongest Bird-lime you can procure,
and wash it as long in a clear Spring Water till you find it very pliable, and
the hardness thereof removed; then beat out the water extraordinary well, till
you cannot perceive a drop to appear, then dry it well; after this, put it into
a Pot made of Earth, and mingle therewith Capons-grease unsalted, so much as
will make it run; then add thereto two spoonfuls of strong Vinegar, a spoonful
of the best Sallet-Oyl, and a small quantity of Venice-Turpentine: This is the
allowance of these Ingredients, which must be added to every pound of strong
Bird-lime, as aforesaid. Having thus mingled them, boil them all gently
together over a small fire, stirring it continually; then take it from the fire
and let it cool: When at any time you have occasion to use it, warm it, and
then anoint your Twigs or Straws, or any other small things, and no Water will
take away the strength thereof. This sort of Bird-lime is the best, especially
for Snipes and Felfares.

In what manner a man may take Snipes with this Bird-lime:
TAke what number you shall think most expedient for your purpose, of
Birch-twigs, and lime fifty or sixty of them very well together. After this, go
and seek out those places where Snipes do usually frequent, which you may know
by their Dung.

In very hard frosty or snowy Weather, where the Water lies open, they will lie
very thick: Having observed the place where they most feed, set two hundred of
your Twigs, more or less, as you please, at a yard distance one from the other,
and let them stand sloaping some one way and some another; then retire a
convenient distance from the place, and you shall find there shall not one
Snipe in ten miss your Twigs, by reason they spread their Wings, and fetch a
round close to the ground before they light. When you see any taken, stir not
at first, for he will feed with the Twigs under his Wings; and as others come
over the place, he will be a means to entice them down to him. When you see the
Coast clear, and but few that are not taken, you may then take up your Birds
fastening one or two of them, that the other flying over, may light at the same
place. If there be any other open place near to that where your Twigs are
planted, you must beat them up: The reason why they delight to haunt open
places, and where Springs do gently run, is because they cannot feed, by reason
of their Bills, in places that are hard and stony; and about these Plashes, in
snowy Weather, they very much resort.

The manner of taking Felfares by Water-Bird-lime.
ABout Michaelmas, or when the cold Weather begins to come in, take your Gun
and kill some Felfares; then take a couple of them, or one may serve, and
fasten them to the top of a Tree, in such manner that they may seem to be
alive: Having so done, prepare two or three hundred Twigs, take a great
Birchen-bough, and therein place your Twigs, having first cut off all the small
Twigs; then set a Felfare upon the top of the bough, making of him fast, and
let this bough be planted where the Felfares do resort in a Morning to feed;
for they keep a constant place to feed in, till there is no more food left. By
this means others flying but near, will quickly epsy the topbird, and fall in
whole flocks to him. I have seen at one fall three dozen taken.

How to take Pigeons with Lime-twigs.
PIgeons are great devourers and destroyers of Corn; wherefore when you find
any ground much frequented by them, get a couple of Pigeons, either dead or
alive; if dead, put them in such a stiff posture as if they were living and
feeding; then at Sunrising take a quantity of Twigs, as many as you think fit,
let them be small, (but I judge Wheaten-straws are better for this purpose) and
lay them up and down where your Pigeons are placed, and you shall find such
sport at every fall that is made, that you may quickly be rid of them without
offending the Statute: If there come good flights, you may easily take four or
five dozen of them in a morning.

How to take Mag-pies, Crows, and Gleads with Lime-twigs.
WHen you have found any Carrion on which Crows, Pies, Kites, etc. are preying
upon, over night set your Lime-twigs every where about the Carrion; but let
them be small, and not set too thick; if otherwise, being subtle Birds, they
will suspect some danger or mischief designed against them. When you perceive
one to be fast, advance not to him presently; for most commonly when they are
surely caught, they are not sensible thereof.

You may take them another way, and that is by joining to a Packthread several
Nooses of Hair up and down the Packthread, and peg it down about a yard from
the Carrion: for many times when they have gotten a piece of Flesh, they will
be apt to run away to feed by themselves; and if your Nooses be thick, it is
two to one but some of the Nooses catch him by the Legs.

How to take Rooks when they pull up the Corn by the Roots.
TAke some thick Brown-paper, and divide a sheet into eight parts, and make
them up like Sugarloaves; then lime the inside of the Paper a very little; (let
them be limed three or four days before you set them) then put some Corn in
them, and lay threescore or more of them up and down the ground; lay them as
near as you can under some clod of Earth, and early in the Morning before they
come to feed; and then stand at a distance, and you will see most excellent
sport; for as soon as Rooks, Crows, or Pigeons come to peck out any of the
Corn, it will hang upon his head, and he will immediately fly bolt upright so
high, that he shall soar almost out of sight; and when he is spent, come
tumbling down as if he had been shot in the Air. You may take them at
Ploughing-time when the Rooks and Crows follow the Plough; but then you must
put in Worms and Maggots of the largest size.

How to take Birds with BAITS, either Land or Waterfowl.
IF you have a desire to take House-doves, Stock-doves, Rooks, Coughs, or any
other-like Birds, then take Wheat, Barley, Fetches, Tares, or other Grain, and
boil them very well with good store of Nux vomica in ordinary running water:
when they are almost boiled, dry and ready to burst, take them off the fire,
and set them by till they be thoroughly cold. Having so done, scatter this Grain
in the Haunts of those Birds you have a mind to take; and as soon as they have
tasted hereof, they will fall down into a dead swound, and shall not be able to
recover themselves in a good while.

And as you take these great Land-fowl with this drunken device, so you may
take the middle and smaller sort of Birds, if you observe to boil with what
food they delight in, a quantity of this Nux vomica.

Some, instead of Nux vomica, use the Lees of Wine, the sharper and quicker
they are, the better, boiling their Grains in these Lees, also Seeds or any
other food, and strewing them in the Haunts of those Birds you would surprise.
These do as effectually as Nux vomica; and it is the cleanlier and neater way,
there being not that poisonous quality in them.

You may choose whether you will boil your Grain or Seed in the aforesaid Lees;
for they will be every whit as effectual if only steeped a considerable while
therein, giving them leave to drink in the Lees till they are ready to burst
before you use them.

Others, having neither Nux vomica, nor Wine-lees, take the Juice of Hemlock,
and steep their Grains therein, adding thereto some Henbane-seed or Poppy-seed,
causing them to be infused therein four or five days; then draining the Grain
or Seed from the Liquor, strew them as aforesaid. The Birds having tasted
hereof, are immediately taken with a dizziness, which will continue some hours,
so that they cannot fly; but they will recover again, if you kill them not. If
you intend them for food, let them be first recovered.

Thus much for the Land; now let us speak of the Waterfowl.

The ready way by Bait to take such Fowl as receive part of their food by land,
and part by water, as Wildgeese, Barnacle, Grey-plover, Mallard, Curlew,
Shoveler, Bitter, Bustard, with many more; I say, the best way my experience
has found out is, to take Bellengeleaves, Roots and all, and having cleansed
them very well, put them into a Vessel of clear running Water, and there let
them lie in steep twenty four hours; then never shift them from the Water, but
boil them together till the Water be almost consumed: then take it off, and set
it a cooling. Then take a quantity hereof, and go to the Haunts of any of the
aforesaid Fowl, and there spread of this Bait in sundry and diverse places; and
those that shall taste hereof will be taken with the like drunken dizziness as
the former. To make this Confection the more effectual, it will be requisite to
add a quantity of Brimstone thereunto in its boiling.

How to recover Fowl thus entranced.
If you would restore any of these entranced Fowl to their former health, take
a little quantity of Sallet-oyl, according to the strength and bigness of the
Fowl, and drop it down the Throat of the Fowl; then chafe the head with a
little strong White-wine-Vinegar, and the Fowl will presently recover, and be
as well as ever.

And thus much for taking Fowl of all sorts by Baits.

A most excellent and approved way how to take the HERN.
A Hern is as great a devourer of Fish as any is; nay some dare affirm, ten
times as much as an Otter, and shall do more mischief in one week than an Otter
shall do in three months: for I have been told by one that has seen a Hern
that has been shot at a Pond, to have had seventeen Carps at once in his
Belly, which he will digest in six or seven hours, and then betake himself to
fishing again. I have been informed by another, that he saw a Carp taken out of
a Hern's Belly which was nine Inches and an half long.

Several Gentlemen that have kept Herns tame, have put Fish in a Tub, and tried
the Hern how many small Roaches and Dace he would eat in a day, and they have
found him to eat about fifty in a day, one day with another.

One Hern that haunts a Pond, in a Twelvemonths time, shall destroy a thousand
Store- Carps; and when Gentlemen sue their Ponds, they think their Neighbors
have robbed them, not in the least considering an Hern is able to devour them
in half a years time, if he put in half as many more.

Now since this ravenous Fowl is so destructive to Ponds and Fish of the River,
it will be very necessary to find out a way to destroy that, that destroys so
many; which may be done in this manner.

Having found out his haunt, get three or four small Roaches or Dace; and have
a strong Hook with Wyre to it, draw the Wyre just within the skin of the said
Fish, beginning without side of the Gills, running of it to the Tail, and then
the Fish will live five or six days. Now if the Fish be dead, the Hern will not
meddle with him. Let not your Hook be too rank; then having a strong Line with
Silk and Wyre, about two yards and a half long, (if you twist not Wyre with
your Silk, the sharpness of his Bill will bite it in two immediately) and tie a
round Stone about a pound-weight to the Line, and lay three or four Hooks, and
in two or three nights you shall not fail to have him if he comes to your Pond.
Lay not your Hooks in the water so deep that the Hern cannot wade unto them.
Color your Line of a dark green, for an Hern is a subtle Bird. There are
several other Fowl devourers of Fish, as Kings-fisher, More-hens, Balcoots,
Cormorant, etc. but none like the Hern for Ponds and small Rivers.

How to take PHEASANTS several ways.
THe taking of Pheasants is to be performed three several ways, by Nets, by
Lime-bush, or else by other particular Engines, which shall be discoursed of
hereafter.

The taking of Pheasants with Nets, is done either generally, or particularly:
generally, when the whole Eye of Pheasants is taken, that is the old Cock and
old Hen with all their Powts, as they run together in the obscure Woods; or
particularly, when you take none but the old Pheasants, or the young, being of
an age fit to couple or pair.

For the greater facility of taking Pheasants, you must first understand their
Haunts, which are never in open Fields, but in thick young Copses well grown,
and not in old high Woods.

Having thus found out their Coverts, which must be solitary and untraced by
Men or Cattle, the next thing will be how to find out the Eye or Brood of
Pheasants.

The first way, is by going into these young Copses, and carefully viewing the
same, searching every where; and by that means at last finding where they run
together, as Chickens after a Hen. Or, secondly, you must rise early in a
Morning, or come late in the Evening; and observe how and when the old Cock and
Hen call their young ones to them, and how the young ones answer back unto them
again; and so from that sound direct your Path as near as you can to the place
where they are, lying there down so close you may not be discerned; by which
means you will know where they meet, and how accordingly you may pitch your
Nets.

But the most certain way of finding them out, is to have a natural
Pheasant-call, which you must learn how to use, understanding all their Notes,
and how to apply them: For they have several Notes, and all different; one to
cluck them together when the Hen would brood them, another to chide them when
they straggle too far, a third to call them to meat when she has found it, a
fourth to make them look out for food themselves, and a fifth to call them
about her to sport withal. You must use your Call in the morning early, at
which time they straggle abroad to find Provender; or else in the Evening just
about Sunsetting, which is their time likewise for feeding.

Now although these are the best times to use your Call, yet you may call them
at any other time of the day, only altering your Note. Just at, or before
Sunrising, your Note must be to call them to feed, and so at Sunset: but in
the Forenoon and Afternoon your Notes must be to cluck them together to brood,
or to chide them for straggling, or to give them notice of some approaching
danger.

Knowing your Notes, and how to apply them, with the places where Pheasants
haunt, which you shall know by the strength of the under-growth, obscureness,
darkness, and solitariness of the place, you must then lodge your self as close
as possible, and then call at first very softly, lest the Pheasants being
lodged very near you, should be affrighted at a loud Note; but if nothing
reply, raise your Note higher and higher, till you extend it to the utmost
compass: and if there be a Pheasant within hearing, she will answer in a Note
as loud as your own, provided it be not untunable, for that will spoil all.

As soon as you hear this answer, if it be from afar, and from one single Fowl,
creep nearer and nearer unto it, still calling, but not so loud; and as you
approach nearer to it, so will the Pheasant to you; and as you alter your Note,
so will she: and in all points you must endeavor to imitate her, and in fine
you will get sight of her, either on the Ground or Perch: Then cease your
calling, and spread your Net between the Pheasant and your self, in the most
convenient place you can find, with all secrecy and silence, making one end of
the Net fast to the ground, and holding the other end by a long Line in your
hand; by which, when any thing straineth it, you may pull the Net close
together: which done, call again, and as soon as you perceive the Pheasant come
underneath your Net, then rise up and show your self, that by giving the
Pheasant an affright, he may offer to mount, and so be entangled within the Net.

Now if it so fall out that you hear many answers, and from diverse corners of
the Wood, then stir not at all, but keep your place; and as you hear them by
their sounds to come nearer and nearer unto you, so shall you in the mean time
prepare your Nets ready, and spread them conveniently about you, one pair of
Nets on the one side, and another on the other side; then lie close, and apply
your self to the Call till such time as you have allured them under your Nets;
then stand up and show your self, which will affright them and make them mount,
whereby they will be entangled.

The fashion of Pheasant-Nets.
You must make these Nets of double-twined brown Thread dyed blue or green; let
the Mesh be reasonably large and square, almost an inch between Knot and Knot;
let the length of it be about three fathom, and the breadth about seven foot,
and verge it on each side, with strong small Cord, and let the ends be also so,
that it may lie compass-wise and hollow.

Some make these Nets of a much larger size; but then they are too cumbersome,
and hardly to be ruled with one hand: but the others are readier to pitch, and
better to take, also more nimble for any purpose you shall employ them to.

Of Driving of Pheasant-powts.
The driving and taking young Pheasants in Nets is done after this manner.
Having either by your eye or Call found out an Eye of Pheasants, you must then
(taking the wind with you, for they will naturally run down the wind) place
your Nets cross the little Pads and ways which you see they have made, (for
they will make little Paths like Sheep-tracks) and as near as you can, come to
some special Haunts of theirs, which you shall know by the bareness of the
ground, Mutings, and loose Feathers which you shall find there: and these Nets
must be placed hollow, loose, and circularwise, the nether part thereof being
fastened to the ground, and the upper side lying hollow, loose, and bending, so
that when any thing rusheth into it, it may fall and entangle it: which done,
you must go before where you found the Haunt, and there with your Call (if you
find the Eye is scattered and separated one from the other) you must call them
together.

Then take your Instrument called a Driver, which is made of strong white Wands
or Osiers set fast in a handle, and in two or three places twisted about and
bound with other Wands, bearing the shape of those things Cloath-dressers
usually dress their Cloth withal: I say, with this Driver you must make a
gentle noise, raking upon the Boughs and Bushes round about you; which as soon
as Powts do hear, they will instantly run from it a little way, and then stand
and listen, keeping all close together: then give another rake, at which they
will run again as before: And by thus raking, you will drive them like so many
Sheep before you which way or whither you please, and consequently at last into
your Nets.

In using your Driver there are two things to be observed. The first is
Secrecy, in concealing your self from the sight of the Pheasants; for if they
chance to see you, they will instantly hide themselves in Holes and bottoms of
Bushes, and will not stir from thence by any means whatever, as long as any day
endures.

The other thing to be observed, is Time and Leisure in the work; for there is
nothing obstructs this Pastime more than too much haste: for they are very
fearful Creatures, and are soon startled; and when once alarmed, their fears
will not suffer them to argue or dispute with the affrighting object; but the
very first apprehension is sufficient to make them all fly at an instant,
without staying to behold what they are so much afraid of.

Of taking Pheasants with a Lime-bush.
Having observed their Haunts as aforesaid, take a Bush, or single Rods, and
trim them with the best and strongest Lime that can be got: let your Rods be
twelve inches; your Lime-bush must not contain above eight Twigs, being the
Top-branch of some Willow-tree, with an indifferent long Handle, made sharp
either to stick into the ground, or into Shrubs and Bushes. You may plant your
Bush near the branch of some little Tree which the Pheasant usually pearcheth
on.

When you have placed your Bush or Rods, take out your Call, but remove not
from your place, lying close without discovery. If your Call be good, and you
have skill to use it, you will quickly have all the Pheasants within hearing
about you; and if one happen to be entangled, she will go near to entangle all
the rest, either by her extraordinary fluttering, or their own amazement and
confusion. And as they are taken by the Rods on the ground, so you will
surprise them with your Bushes; for being scared from below, they will mount to
the Perch or Bushes, to see what becomes of their fellows, and be there taken
themselves.

Here note, that it is very requisite to count all your Rods, and when you have
gathered up your Pheasants, see what Rods you have missing, and then conclude
from the miss of them, that some Pheasants are run with them into the Bushes;
and therefore it will be necessary to have a Spaniel which will fetch and
carry, and one that will not break nor bruise either Flesh or Feather.

The Seasons for the use of Nets or Lime.
The Lime is only for the Winter-season, beginning from November, when the
Trees have shed their Leaves, (and then Lime-bushes and Branches of Trees are
alike naked and of the same complexion) and ending at May, at which time the
Trees begin to be furnished with Leaves.

The true use of the Nets is from the beginning of May till the latter end of
October.

So that there is no time of the year but their Breeding-time, which may not be
exercised in this pleasure; whence what profit may arise, I shall leave to the
judgment of those who keep good houses, and such as have good Stomachs.

How to take PARTRIDGES several ways, either by Net, Engine, Driving, or
Setting.
PArtridges are naturally cowardly, fearful, simple, and foolish, and therefore
most easily to be deceived or beguiled with any Train, Bait, Engine, or other
Device whatever, whether by Enticement, Call, or Stale.

It will he necessary in the first place to consider their Haunts, which are
not (like the Pheasants) certain, but various; any covert will serve their
turn, and sometimes none at all.

The places they most delight in are the Cornfieldsd, especially whilst the
Corn grows; for under that covert they shelter, engender, and breed. Neither
are these places unfrequented by them when the Corn is cut down, by reason of
the Grain they find therein, especially in Wheat-stubble; and the height
thereof they delight in, being to them as a covert or a shelter. Now when the
Wheat-stubble is much trodden by Men or Beasts, then they betake themselves to
the Barley-stubble, provided it be fresh and untrodden; and they will in the
Furrows amongst the Clots, Brambles, and long Grass, hide both themselves and
Covies, which are sometimes twenty in number, sometimes five and twenty: nay, I
have heard of thirty in a Covie.

Now after the Winter-season is come, and that these Stubble-fields are
plough'd up, or over-soiled with Cattle, then do these Partridges resort into
the up-land Meadows, and do lodge in the dead Grass or Fog under Hedges,
amongst Mole-hills, or under the Roots of Trees: Sometimes they resort to
Copses and Underwoods, especially if any Cornfieldsd are near adjacent, or
where grows Broom, Brakes, Fern, or any Covert whatsoever.

In the Harvest-time, when every Field is full of men and Cattle, then you
shall find them in the daytime in the Fallow-fields which are next adjoining
to the Cornfieldsd, where they lie lurking till the Evening, and then they feed
among the Shocks or Sheaves of Corn; and so they do likewise early in the
Morning.

When you know their Haunts according to the situation of the Country and
season of the year, your next care must be to find them out in their Haunts;
which is done several ways. Some do it by the Eye only; and this Art can never
be taught, but learned by frequent Experience, distinguishing thereby the
color of the Partridge from that of the Earth, and how and in what manner they
lodge and couch together: for which purpose you may come near enough to them,
for they are a very lazy Bird, and so unwilling to take the Wing, that you may
even set your foot upon them before they will stir, provided you do not stand
and gaze on them, but be in continual motion; otherwise they will spring up and
be gone.

There is another way to discover them, and that is by going to their Haunts
very early in the Morning, or at the close of the Evening, which is called the
Jucking-time, and there listening for the calling of the Cock- Partridge, which
will be very loud and earnest; and after some few calls the Hen will answer,
and by this means they meet together; which you shall know by their rejoicing
and chattering one with another: upon the hearing of which, take your range
about them, drawing nearer and nearer to the place you heard them juck in; then
cast your eye toward the Furrows of the Lands, and there you will soon find
where the Covie lies, and so take them as your fancy shall lead you.

The best, safest, and easiest way for finding of Partridges is by the Call,
having first learned the true and natural Notes of the Partridge, knowing how
to tune every Note in its proper Key, applying them to their due times and
seasons.

Being perfect herein, either Mornings or Evenings (all other times being
improper) go to their Haunts, and having conveyed your self into some secret
place where you may see and not be seen, listen a while if you can hear the
Partridges call; if you do, answer them again in the same Note, and as they
change or double their Notes, so must you in like manner: thus continue doing
till they draw nearer and nearer unto you. Having them in your view, lay your
self on your back, and lie as if you were dead without motion, by which means
you may count their whole number.

Having attained to the knowledge of discovering them where they lie, the next
thing will be a ready way how to catch them.

Of taking Partridges with Nets.
The Nets wherewith you ensnare Partridges must be every way like your
Pheasant-nets, both for length and breadth; only the Mesh must be smaller,
being made of the same Thread, and dyed of the same color.

Having found out the Covie, draw forth your Nets, and taking a large
circumference, walk a good round pace with a careless eye, rather from than
toward the Partridges, till you have trimmed your Nets, and made them ready
for the purpose: which done, you must draw in your circumference less and less,
till you come within the length of your Net: then pricking down a a Stick about
three foot in length, fasten one end of the Line of your Net, and make it fast
in the Earth as you walk about; (for you must make no stop nor stay;) then,
letting the Net slip out of your hands, spread it open as you go, and so carry
and lay it all over the Partridges.

But if they should lie straggling, so that you cannot cover them all with one
Net, then you must draw forth another, and do with that as you did with the
former; doing so with a third, if occasion require: having so done, rush in
upon them, who affrighted, will fly up, and so be entangled in the Nets.

How to take Partridges with Bird-lime.
Take of the fairest and largest wheat-straws you can get, and cut them off
between Knot and Knot, and lime them with the strongest Lime. Then go to the
Haunts of Partridges, and call: if you are answered, then prick at some
distance from you your limed Straws in many cross rows and ranks cross the
Lands and Furrows, taking in two or three Lands at least: then lie close and
call again, not ceasing till you have drawn them toward you, so that they be
intercepted by the way by your limed Straws, which they shall no sooner touch,
but they will be ensnared; and by reason they all run together like a brood of
Chickens, they will so besmear and daub one another, that very few of them will
escape.

This way of taking Partridges is only to be used in Stubble-fields from
August till Christmas. But if you will take them in Woods, Pastures, or
Meadows, then you must lime Rods, as was before expressed for the Pheasant, and
stick them in the ground after the same manner.

How to drive Partridges.
The Driving of Partridges is more delightful than any other way of taking
them: The manner of it is thus.

Make an Engine in the form and fashion of a Horse, cut out of Canvas, and
stuff it with Straw, or such light matter: with this artificial Horse and your
Nets you must go to the Haunts of Partridges, and having found out the Covie,
and pitched your Nets below, you must go above, and taking the advantage of the
Wind, you must drive downward: Let your Nets be pitched slope-wise and hovering.
Then, having your Face covered with something that is green, or of a dark blue,
you must, putting the Engine before you, stalk toward the Partridges with a
slow pace, raising them on their Feet, but not their Wings, and then will they
run naturally before you.

If they chance to run a by-way, or contrary to your purpose, then cross them
with your Engine, and by so facing them, they will run into that track you
would have them: Thus by a gentle slow pace you may make them run and go which
way you will, and at last drive them into your Net, and so dispose of them at
your pleasure.

How to take Partridges with a Setting-dog.
There is no Art of taking Partridges so excellent and pleasant as by the help
of a Setting-dog: wherefore, before we proceed to the Sport, we shall give you
an account what this Setting-dog is.

You are to understand then, that a Setting-dog is a certain lusty
Land-spaniel, taught by nature to hunt the Partridge more than any chase
whatever, running the fields over with such alacrity and nimbleness, as if
there was no limit to his fury and desire, and yet by art under such excellent
command, that in the very height of his career by a Hem or sound of his
Master's voice he shall stand, gaze about him, look in his Masters face, and
observe his directions, whether to proceed, stand still, or retire: nay, when
he is even just upon his Prey, that he may even take it up in his mouth, yet
his obedience is so framed by Art, that presently he shall either stand still,
or fall down flat on his belly, without daring either to make any noise or
motion till his Master come to him, and then he will proceed in all things to
follow his directions.

Having a Dog thus qualified by Art and Nature, take him with you where
Partridges do haunt, there cast off your Dog, and by some word of encouragement
which he is acquainted with, engage him to range, but never too far from you;
and see that he beat his ground justly and even, without casting about, or
flying now here now there, which the mettle of some will do, if not corrected
and reproved. And therefore when you perceive this fault, you must presently
call him in with a Hem, and so check him that he dare not do the like again for
that day; so will he range afterward with more tem perance, ever and anon
looking in his Master's face, as if he would gather from thence whether he did
well or ill.

If in your Dog's ranging you perceive him to stop on the sudden, or stand
still, you must then make in to him, (for without doubt he has set the
Partridge) and as soon as you come to him, command him to go nearer: but if he
goes not, but either lies still or stands shaking of his Tail, as who would
say, Here they are under my nose, and withal now and then looks back; then
cease from urging him further, and take your circumference, walking fast with a
careless eye, looking straight before the nose of the Dog, and thereby see how
the Covy lie, whether close or straggling.

Then commanding the Dog to lie still, draw forth your Net, and prick one end
to the ground, and spread your Net all open, and so cover as many of the
Partridges as you can; which done, make in with a noise, and spring up the
Partridges; which shall no sooner rise, but they will be entangled in the Net.
And if you shall let go the old Cock and Hen, it will not only be an act like
a Gentleman, but a means to increase your Pastime.

How to take RAILS, QUAILS, MOREPOOTS, etc.
FRom what is contained in the foregoing Chapters, you may collect a method how
to take other Fowl, as Rails, Quails, Morepoots, etc. all which are very good
flights for Hawks.

Their haunts are much alike with those of the Partridge; only the Quail loves
most the Wheat-fields, the Morepoot most the Heath and Forest-grounds, and the
Rails love the long high Grass where they may lie obscure.

The way of finding them is like that of the Partridge, by the Eye, the Ear,
and Haunt: but the chief way of all to find them out is the Call or Pipe, to
which they listen with such earnestness, that you can no sooner imitate their
Notes, but they will answer them, and will pursue the Call with such
greediness, that they will play and skip about you, nay run over you,
especially the Quail.

The notes of the Male and Female differ very much, and therefore you must have
them both at your command; and when you hear the Male call, you must answer in
the Females note; and when the Female calls, you must answer in the Males note:
and thus you will not fall to have them both come to you, who will gaze and
listen till the Net is cast over them.

The way of taking these Birds is the same with that of the Partridge, and they
may be taken with Nets or Lime, either Bush or Rod, or Engine, which you must
stalk with; or by the Setting-dog, which I shall treat of in the next Chapter.

How to elect and train a SETTING-DOG from a Whelp till he come to perfection.
THe Dog which you elect for Setting must have a perfect and good scent, and be
naturally addicted to the hunting of Feathers. And this Dog may be either
Land-spaniel, Water-spaniel, or Mungrel of them both; either the Shallow-flewed
Hound, Tumbler, Lurcher, or small bastard Mastiff. But there is none better
than the Land-spaniel, being of a good and nimble size, rather small than
gross, and of a courageous mettle; which though you cannot discern being young,
yet you may very well know from a right breed, which have been known to be
strong, lusty and nimble Rangers, of active Feet, wanton Tails, and busy
Nostrils; whose Tail was without weariness, their Search without
changeableness, and whom no delight did transport beyond fear or obedience.

When you have made choice of your Dog, begin to instruct him about four months
old, or six months at the uttermost.

The first thing that you shall teach your Dog, is to make him loving and
familiar with you, knowing, you from any other person, and following you
wherever you go. To effect this the better, let him receive his food as near
as you can from no other hand but your own; and when you correct him to keep
him in awe, do it rather with words than blows.

When you have have so instructed your Dog that he will follow none but your
self, and can distinguish your frown from your smile, and smooth words from
rough, you must then teach him to couch and lie down close to the ground;
first, by laying him often on the ground, and crying, Lie close. When he has
done any thing to your mind and pleasure, you must then reward him with a piece
of Bread: if otherwise, chastise him with words, but few blows.

After this, you must teach him to come creeping unto you with his Belly and
Head close upon the ground, as far or as little a way as you shall think fit:
and this you may do by saying, Come nearer, come nearer, or the like; and at
first, till he understand your meaning, by showing him a piece of Bread or some
other food to entice him to you. And this observe in his creeping to you, if he
offer to raise his Body or Head, you must not only thrust the rising-part
down, but threaten him with your angry voice; which if he seem to slight, then
add a sharp jerk or two with a Whipcord-lash.

You must often renew his Lessons till he be very perfect, still encouraging
him when he does well.

If you walk abroad with him, and he take a fancy to range, even when he is
most busy speak to him, and in the height of his pastime make him fall upon
his Belly and lie close, and after that make him come creeping to you.

After this teach him to lead in a String or Line, and to follow you close at
your heels without trouble or straining of his Collar.

By that time he has learned these things aforesaid, I conceive the Dog may be
a twelvemonth old; at which time the season of the year being fit, take him
into the field and permit him to range, but still in obedience to your command.
But if through wantonness he chance to babble or open without cause, you must
then correct him sharply, either with a Whipcord-lash, or biting him hard at
the Roots of his Ears.

Having brought him to a good temper and just obedience, then, as soon as you
see him come upon the Haunt of any Partridge, (which you shall know by his
greater eagerness in hunting, as also by a kind of whimpering and whining in
his voice, being very desirous to open, but not daring) you shall speak to him,
bidding him take heed, or the like: but if notwithstanding he either rush in
and spring the Partridge, or opens, and so the Partridge escapes, you must
then correct him severely, and cast him off again, and let him hunt in some
haunt where you know a Covy lies, and see whether he has mended his fault: And
if you catch any with your Nets, give him the Heads, Necks, and Pinions for his
future encouragement.

Many more observations there are, which are too numerous here to recite;
wherefore I shall desist, and give you an account of a Water-dog, and so finish
this present Discourse.

How to train a WATER-DOG, and the use thereof.
I Shall begin with the best proportion of a Water-dog, and first of his
color. Although some do attribute much to the color, yet experience lets us
know they are uncertain observations.

To proceed then, your Dog may be any color and yet excellent; but choose him
of Hair long and curled, not loose and shagged: his Head must be round and
curled, his Ears broad and hanging, his Eye full, lively and quick, his Nose
very short, his Lip Hound-like, his Chaps with a full set of strong Teeth, his
Neck thick and short, his Breast sharp, his Shoulders broad, his Forelegs
straight, his Chine square, his Buttocks round, his Belly gaunt, his Thighs
brawny, etc.

For the training this Dog, you cannot begin too soon with him; and therefore
as soon as he can lap, you must teach him to couch and lie down, not daring to
stir from that posture without leave. Observe in his first teaching to let him
eat nothing till he deserve it; and let him have no more Teachers, Feeders,
Cherishers, or Correctors but one; and do not alter that word you first use in
his information, for the Dog takes notice of the sound, not the language.

When you have acquainted him with the word suitable to his Lesson, you must
then teach him to know the word of Reprehension, which at first should not be
used without a Jerk. You must also use words of cherishing, to give him
encouragement when he does well: and in all these words you must be constant,
and let them be attended with spitting in his mouth, or cherishing of the hand.
There is also a word of Advice, instructing him when he does amiss.

Having made him understand these several words, you must next teach him to
lead in a string or Collar orderly, not running too forward, nor hanging
backward. After this you must teach him to come close at your heels without
leading; for he must not range by any means, unless it be to beat Fowl from
their Covert, or to fetch the wounded.

In the next place you must teach him to fetch and carry any thing you throw
out of your hands. And first try him with the Glove, shaking it over his Head,
and making him snap at it; and sometimes let him hold it in his mouth, and
strive to pull it from him; and at last throw it a little way, and let him
worry it on the ground: and so by degrees make him bring it you wherever you
throw it. From the Glove you may teach him to fetch Cudgels, Bags, Nets, etc.

If you use him to carry dead Fowl, it will not be amiss; for by that means he
will not tear or bruise what Fowl you shoot.

Having perfected this Lesson, drop something behind you which the Dog does not
see; and being gone a little way from it, send him back to seek it, by saying,
Back, I have lost. If he seem amazed, point with your Finger, urging him to
seek out, and leave him not till he has done it. Then drop something at a
greater distance, and make him find out that too, till you have brought him to
go back a mile.

Now may you train him up for your Gun, making him stalk after you step by
step, or else couch and lie close till you have shot.

Many more necessary Rules there are, which for brevity sake I must omit.

The last use of the Water-dog is in moulting-time, when Wild-fowl cast their
Feathers and are unable to fly, which is between Summer and Autumn: at this
time bring your Dog to their Coverts, and hunt them out into the stream, and
there with your Nets surprise them, driving them into them; for at this time
sheep will not drive more easily. And though some may object, that this sickly
time is unseasonable; yet if they consider what excellent food these Fowl will
prove when crammed, the taking of them may be very excusable. I have eaten of
them after they have been fed a while with Livers of Beast, Whey, Curds,
Barley, Paste, scalded Bran, and suchlike; they have proved exceeding fat, and
have tasted not so fishy as they do by their natural feeding, but exceeding
sweet, and deserve to be preferred before any Fowl whatever.

How to take, preserve, and keep all sorts of Singing-birds that are commonly
known in England. Giving also an account of their Nature, Breeding, Feeding,
Diseases of the same, with their Remedies.
IN the preceding Discourse I have given you a Summary account of the several
ways and artifices which are used to take either Land-fowl, or Fowl properly
belonging to the Water. Upon second thoughts I look upon this Third part of the
Gentleman's Recreation, called a Treatise of Fowling imperfect, if I add not now
what I omitted before; a small Essay as to the Taking, Preserving, and Keeping
all sorts of Singing-birds commonly known in these his Majesty's three
Kingdoms. They are thus called.

The Nightingal. The Blackbird. The Wood-lark. The Linnet. The Chaff-finch.
The Rob. Red-breast. The Starling. The Tit-lark. The Bull-finch. The
Canary-bird. The Throstle. The Skie-lark. The Gold-finch. The Green-finch. The
Wren. The Red-start. The Hedgesparrow.


Lastly, their Diseases and Cures.

Of the NIGHTINGAL.
ACcording to the judgment of most men, the Nightingale carries the Bell from
all other Singing-birds, opening her charming Mouth not only sweetly, but with
much variety of pleasant Notes: It is but a small Bird, yet has a loud voice;
which made the Poet call her -- -- - Vox, and praeterea nihil. They are so well
known, a description of them would be needless; and are not only esteemed of
here, but in Italy and other parts.

They appear to us at the latter end of March, or beginning of April, and very
few know where they inhabit all the Winter; some think they sleep all that
season.

She makes her Nest commonly about two foot above ground, either in thick
Quick-set-hedges, or in Beds of Nettles where old Quick-set has been thrown
together. She hatcheth her young ones about the beginning of May, and naturally
delights to frequent cool places, where small Brooks are garnished with
pleasant Groves, and Quick-set-hedges are not far distant.

That Nightingale which in my opinion is the best to keep, is he that is the
earliest Bird of the Spring; for he will sing the better, having more time to
hear the Old one sing than those that are hatched later.

The young Nightingales must be taken out of their Nests when they are
indifferently well fledged in a mediocrity: for if well feathered, they will
become sullen; and if too little, they are so tender the cold will kill them.

For their meat give them lean Beef, Sheeps-heart, or Bullocks-heart, taking
away first the fat Skin that covers it, and take away the Sinews; after this,
soak the like quantity of white Bread in water, and squeeze out some of the
water; then mince it small; then feed them with a Stick, taking upon the point
thereof the quantity of a Gray Pea, and give every one of them three or four
such gobbets in an hour, as long as they shall endure to be in the Nest: when
they are able to fly out of the Nest, then put them into a Cage with several
Pearches for them to sit upon, and line them with some green Bays, for they are
very subject to the Cramp at first; and at the bottom of the Cage put in some
Moss or Hey, as well for other Birds as the Nightingale: it is safe to line
their Cages against Winter, or keep them in some warm place. When they are
first Caged, continue for a while to put some of their Meat by them mingled
with Ants, which will induce them to feed themselves.

In the Summer you must feed them every day with fresh Meat, otherwise it will
quickly grow stale or stink. When they begin to moult, give them half Egg hard
boiled, and half Sheeps-heart mingled with Saffron and Water. Here note,
Duck-eggs will kill them: you may give them sometimes red Worms, Caterpillars,
and Hog-lice; Meal-worms make them familiar, suffering them to take them out of
your hand.

The way of taking Old and Young is thus: For the Young, observe where the Cock
sings; and if he sings long, the Hen is not far from that place, who oftentimes
betrays her Offspring by being too careful; for when you come near her Nest,
she will Sweet and Cur: if notwithstanding this, you cannot find her Nest,
stick a Meal-worm or two upon a Thorn, and then lying down or standing, observe
which way it is carried by the Old one, and drawing near, you will hear the
young ones when she feeds them. When you have found out the Nest, touch not the
young; for if you do, they will not tarry in the Nest.

The way to take Branchers, by others called Pushers, (because when thoroughly
fleg'd the Old ones push them out of the Nest) I say, you must take them after
this manner: When you have found where they are, which you shall know by their
Curring and Sweeting; (for if you call true, they will answer you immediately:)
having your Tackle all ready, scrape, in the Ditch or Bank-side, the Earth
about three quarters of a yard square, that it may look fresh; then take a
Bird-trap, or Net-trap, which you must make after this fashion.

How to make a Net-trap for Nightingales.
Take a Net made of green Silk or Thread, about the compass of a yard, made
after the fashion of a Shove-net for Fishes; then get some large Wyre, and
bending it round, join both ends, which you must put into a short Stick about
an Inch and an half long; then you must have a piece of Iron with two Cheeks
and a hole on each side, through which you must put some fine Whip-cord three
or four times double, that so it may hold the piece of Wood the better unto
which the ends of the Wyre are put, and with a Button on each side the Iron,
twist the Whip-cord, that so the Net may play the quicker: you must fasten the
Net to the Wyre as you do a Shove-net to the Hoop; then get a Board of the
compass of your Wyre, and join your two cheeks of Iron at the handle of your
Board; then make a hole in the middle of your Board; and put a piece of Stick
of about two Inches long, and a Hole at the Top of your Stick, which you must
have a Peg to put in with two Wyres, an Inch and half long, to stick your
Meal-worm upon; then tie a String in the middle of the top of your Net, drawing
the Net up, having an eye at the end of the handle to put your Thread through,
pull it till it stands upright, then pull it through the hole of the Stick that
stands in the middle of your Board, and put your Peg in the hole, and that will
hold the String that the Net cannot fall down: you must put two Worms upon the
Wyres, before you put it into the hole, and set it as gently as you can, that
it may fall with the first touch of the Nightingale: When you have your Net and
Worm ready, having first scraped the place, then put some Ants in your
Trap-cage, and upon your Board put some Worms upon Thorns, and set them at the
bottom of your Trap-cage, little holes being made for the same purpose to stick
in the ends of your Thorns: Then plant your Trap near to the place where you
heard them call, either in the Ditch, or by the Bank-side, or corner of a
Hedge, and then walk away; you may set what number of Trap-cages you think
convenient. Do what is here proposed, and you need not doubt the having of your
desires satisfied.

Having taken your Nightingales, (the times is in July or August) tie the ends
of their Wings with some brown Thread, that so they may be disenabled to hurt
themselves by beating their tender bodies against the top and Wyres of the Cage.

Let the Cage be covered above half with green Bays, and for four or five days
let him be very little disturbed by company; but withal forget not to feed them
half a dozen times every day with Sheeps-heart and Egg shred very fine, and
mingle red Ants therewith, and a few red Earthworms would not do amiss.

Here note, that no Nightingale at first taking will eat any other food than
what is living, as Worms, Ants, Flies, or Caterpillars; which through
sullenness if he will not eat, then take him out, and upon the point of a Stick
(first opening his Bill) give him four or five gobbets one after another; then
turn him into the Cage, strowing the bottom thereof with Egg and minced
Sheeps-heart mingled with some Pismires. These Nightingales that are taken at
this time of the year, will not sing till the middle of October, and then they
will hold in song till the middle of June: But the Nightingales that are taken
from the first of April to the twentieth, are the best Birds for Song in the
whole Universe; and these are taken with Trap-cages or Trap-nets, as the
Branchers aforesaid, in June, July; and August. Here observe, that Nestlings
nor Branchers (except they have an old Bird to sing over them) have not the
true Song for the first twelve months. When you have so tamed them that they
begin to Cur and Sweet with cheerfulness, and record softly to themselves, it
is a certain sign that they eat, and then you need not trouble your self with
feeding them; but if they sing before they feed, they commonly prove most
excellent Birds: Those Birds that are long a feeding, and make no Curring nor
Sweeting, are not worth the keeping. If you have a Bird that will flutter and
bolt up his head in the night against the top of the Cage, keep him not, for he
is not only good for nothing, but his bad example will teach the best of your
Birds to do the like.

Now to the intent you may not keep Hens instead of Cocks, and so not only be
at useless charge, but be frustrated of your expectation, you shall distinguish
their Sexes by these observations. The Cock in the judgment of some is both
longer and bigger: others say the Cock has a greater Eye, a longer Bill, and a
Tail more reddish: others pretend to know them by the Pinion of the Wing, and
Feathers on the Head. These Rules I look not upon as infallible, having found
them contrary to truth by my own experience: Now to undeceive you, take these
true Experimental Observations. First, take notice that if any of your
Nestlings (before they can feed themselves) do Record a little to themselves,
and in their Recording you perceive their Throats to wag, you need not doubt
that they are Cocks; but when they come to feed themselves, the Hen will Record
as well as the Cock; therefore mark them when young, for it is very difficult
to distinguish afterward.

Branchers, whether Cocks or Hens (when taken and do feed themselves) will
Record; but the Cock does it much longer, louder, and oftener.

The best sort of Nightingales frequent Highways, Orchards, and sing close by
houses: these when taken will feed soonest, being more acquainted with the
company of people; and after their feeding will grow familiar, and sing
speedily. Observe, not to untye too soon the Wings of your Nightingale; for if
he be not very familiar and tame when he is untyed, he will be apt to beat
himself against the Cage, and so spoil himself.

Now as to their Diseases and Cures, observe this, that at the latter end of
August they grow very fat, either abroad or in a Cage: when it begins to abate
when they do not sing, it is a dangerous sign; wherefore to remedy this, keep
them very warm, giving them Saffron in their meat or water: when you perceive
the growth of their fat, purge them thrice a Week for a Month, either with a
Worm which is found in Pigeon-houses, or with a speckled Spider, which you may
find plentifully about Vines, Currants, or Goose-berrybushes in August, and at
no time else. If they are melancholy, put into their Drinking-pot some
Liquorish with a little white Sugar Candy, giving them to feed on Sheeps-heart
shred small, some Meal-worms, and Eggs mingled with Pismires. It is strange
that some of these Birds when fat will fast three weeks, which I have known;
but it is better when they eat.

Nightingales kept in a Cage two or three years, are subject to the Gout: for
their Cure, take fresh Butter and anoint their Feet four or five days, and they
will be well again. Here note, that for want of keeping them clean, their Feet
are clogged, and then their Claws will rot off, and are subject to Gout and
Cramp, and will take no delight in themselves; to prevent these mischiefs, put
dry Sand into the bottom of their Cages.

They are likewise troubled with Aposthumes and breaking out about their Eyes
and Neb; for which, use Gapons-grease. And thus much of the Diseases of the
Nightingale.

Of the CANARY-BIRD.
THough many of these Birds are lately brought from Germany, and therefore are
called by the name of that Country, yet undoubtedly their Original proceeded
from the Canary-Islands. They are in color much like our Green-birds, but
differ much in their Song and Nature; and in this they differ from all Birds:
For as others are subject to be fat, the Cocks of these never are, by reason of
the greatness of their mettle, and their lavish singing; either of these will
not suffer him to keep hardly flesh upon his back.

The best of them are shaped long, standing straight and boldly.

Before you buy either these German or Canary-birds, hear them sing, and then
you will know how to please your Ear or fancy, either with Sweet-song,
Lavish-note, or Long-song, which is best, having most variety of Notes. Some
like those that whisk and chew like unto a Tit-lark; others are for those that
begin like a Skie-lark, and so continue their Song with a long, yet sweet Note;
a third sort are for those that begin their Song with the Skie-lark, and then
run upon the Notes of the Nightingale, which is very pleasant if he does it
well: The last is for a loud Note and lavish, regarding no more in it than a
noise.

If you would know whether your Canary-bird be in health before you purchase
him, take him out of the Store-cage, and put him into a clean Cage alone; where
if he stand boldly without crouching, without shrinking Feathers, and his Eyes
looking brisk and cheerfully; these are good signs of a healthy Bird: But now
observe, if he bolts his Tail like a Nightingale after he has dunged, if shows
he is not well; though he seem lively for the present, there is some Distemper
near attending: likewise if he either dung very thin and watery, or of a slimy
white, and no blackness in it; these are dangerous signs of death approaching.

These Birds are subject to many Diseases, as Imposthumes which afflict their
head, and are of a yellow color, causing a great heaviness, and withal a
falling from the Perch, and death ensuing, if this Malady be not speedily
cured. The most approved Cure is to make an Ointment of fresh Butter and
Capons-grease melted together, and anoint therewith the Bird's Imposthume three
or four days together: if it become soft, open it gently and let out the
matter; then anoint the place with some of the same Ointment, and this will
immediately cure him: during the Cure, give him Figs, and Liquorish, and white
Sugar Candy in his Water.

Canary-birds above three years old are called Runts; at two years old they are
called Eriffs; and those of the first year are called Branchers; when they are
new flown and cannot feed themselves, they are called Pushers; and those that
are brought up by hand, Nestlings. Now since there are but few Canary-birds
which breed in England, it being so great a trouble to look after them, I shall
here insert nothing concerning the ordering when they intend or begin to build;
what things are necessary for them when they begin to breed; how to order them
when they have young ones; or how to breed the young ones when taken out of the
Nest: Those who intend to be informed of every thing hereunto belonging, may
easily be instructed by applying themselves to several Germans in and about the
City, who make it their business to breed Canary-birds after the best ( German)
fashion.

Of the BLACKBIRD.
AS some do esteem the Nightingale to be the best Singing-bird in the World, so
in my opinion the Blackbird is the worst; yet they are as frequently kept as
their betters, and are in great estimation amongst the Vulgar; for no other
reason that I know, than for the loudness and coarseness of his Song, as they
are Borish in their Speech, and have little but rusticity in their Conditions.
To be short, he is better to be eaten than kept, and is much sweeter to the
Palate when dead, than to the Ear when living.

She builds her Nest upon old Stumps of Trees by Ditch-sides, or in thick
Hedges. As they begin betimes, that is, in the beginning of March, (when many
times the Woods are full of Snow) so they breed often, that is, three or four
times a year, according as they lose their Nest.

The young Black-birds are brought up almost with any meat whatsoever; but
above all, they love Groundworms, Sheeps-heart, hard Eggs, and white Bread and
Milk mixed together.

This Bird sings somewhat more than three months in the year; his Note, as I
said, is harsh, therefore to add a value to him, let him be taught to whistle;
yet put Song and Whistle together, in my judgment it is fitter for a large Inn
than a Lady's Chamber.

Of the THROSTLE.
OF Throstles there be five kinds; the Mistle-throstle, the Northern-throstle
or Felfare, the Wind-throstle, the Wood-song-throstle, and the Heath-throstle.

The first is the largest of all the five, and the most beautiful; it feeds for
the most part on the Berries of Mistletoe: and since that they are so good
against the Falling Sickness and Convulsions, these Throstles, when dried and
pulverized and drank in the water of Mistletoe, or Black-cherry-water, are much
more effectual against those two Distempers. He sings but little, and therefore
though the young ones are easy to be brought up, being hardy, yet he is not
worth the keeping; for his Notes are rambling and confused, yet not lavish
neither.

The second is the Felfare, who comes into England before Michaelmas, and goes
away about the beginning of March. In hard weather they feed on Hips and Haws;
but when it is indifferently warm, there being neither Frost nor Snow on the
ground, they feed on young Grass and Worms.

They breed upon certain Rocks near the Scottish Shore three or four times a
year, and are there in very great numbers: They are not so fit for the Cage as
the Spit, having a most lamentable untuned chattering tone: in Frost and Snow
they are very fat, and then are most delicate food; but being killed in open
weather, they are so bitter, that they are not worth the eating.

Thirdly, the Wind-throstle, (or Whindle) which travels with the Felfare out of
the North, is a smaller Bird, with a dark red under his Wing. He breeds in
Woods and Shaws as Song-throstles use to do, and has an indifferent Song,
exceeding the two former; but yet they are fitter for the Pot or Spit than for
a Cage of Avery.

The fourth is the Wood-song-thrustle, and sings most incomparably, both
lavishly, and with variety of Notes: To add to his estimation, he sings at
least nine of the twelve months in the year.

They build about the same time, place, and manner as the Blackbird does: her
policy in the building of her Nest is much to be admired, since the composure
cannot be mended by the art of Man: Besides the curious building, she leaves a
little hole in the bottom of her Nest, as I conceive to let out the Water, if a
violent shower should come, that so her Eggs or young ones may not be drowned.

They go very soon to Nest if the Weather favor them, and breed three times a
year, that is, in March or April, May and June; but the first Birds usually
prove the best.

Take them in the Nest when they are fourteen days old, and keep them warm and
clean, not suffering them to sit on their Dung, but so contrive it, that they
dung over the Nest. Feed them with raw Meat and some Bread chopped together
with bruised Hemp Seed, wetting your Bread before you mingle it with the meat.

Being thoroughly fledged, put them into a Cage where they may have room enough,
with two or three Pearches, and some Moss at the bottom of the Cage, to keep
them clean; for otherwise they will be troubled with the Cramp, and for want of
delighting in themselves the singing will be spoiled.

Bread and Hemp Seed is as good food for them as can be given: and be mindful
of furnishing them at least twice a week with fresh water, that they may bathe
and prune themselves therein, otherwise they will not thrive.

The fifth and last is the Heath-throstle, which is the least we have in
England, having a dark breast. Some are of opinion that this bird exceeds the
Song-throstle, having better Notes, and neater Plume.

The Hen builds by the Heath-side in a Furz-bush, or stump of an old Haw-thorn,
and makes not Shaws and Woods her haunt as other Throstles do. She begins not
to breed till the middle of April, and breeds but twice in a year; and if kept
clean and well fed, will sing three parts in four of the whole year. Their
manner of breeding is in like-sort as the former.

To know the Cock from the Hen, according to old Country-judgment, is to choose
the top-bird of the Nest, which commonly is most fledged. Others think that to
be the Cock which has the largest Eye, and most speckles on his breast. Others
choose the Cock by the pinion of his Wing, if it has a very dark black that
goes across it; but above all, choose him thus: If his Gullet be white with
black streaks on each side, his spots on his Breast large and black, having his
head of a light shining brown, with black streaks under each Eye and upon the
pinion of the Wing; these are the best marks that ever I observed.

Of the ROBIN-RED-BREAST.
IT is the opinion of some, that this little King of Birds for sweetness of
Note comes not much short of the Nightingale. It is a very tender Bird, and
therefore must have its Cage lined. They breed very early in the Spring, and
commonly thrice a year.

When the young are about ten days old, take them from the old ones, and keep
them in a little Bowerbasket: if they tarry long in the Nest, they will be
sullen, and therefore more difficultly brought up: you must feed them as you
feed the Nightingale in all respects: finding them grow strong, put them into a
Cage, put Moss in the bottom thereof, and let them stand warm.

The way of taking a Robin-red-breast is so easy and common, that every Boy
knows how to take him in a Pit-fall; but with a Trap-cage and a Meal-worm you
may take half a score in a day: Hearing them sing, keep those birds which most
delight you. If you take any without hearing them sing, thus you shall know
whether he be Cock or Hen; if a Cock, his breast will be of a darker red, and
his red will go farther up upon the head than the Hens.

Of the WREN.
THis Bird in my opinion is a pretty sweet dapper Songster, being of a nature
cheerful; as he is pleasant to the Ear, so he is to the Eye; and when he sings
cocks up his Tail, and throws out his Notes with so much alacrity and pleasure,
that I know not any bird of its bigness more delights the sense of Hearing.

This Bird builds twice a year, about the latter end of April, in shrubs where
Ivy grows thick, and sometimes in old Hovels and Barns. They lay a numerous
quantity of Eggs; and I can assure you I have seen a Nest containing two and
twenty: herein are two things greatly to be wondered at; first, that so small a
bird should cover such a great quantity of Eggs; secondly, when they have
hatched, to feed them all, and not to miss one bird, and in the dark also.

Their second time of breeding is in the middle of June: of either breed, what
you intend to keep must be taken out of the Nest at thirteen or fourteen days
old. Let their food be Sheeps-heart and Egg minced very small, or Calves or
Heifers-heart; but be sure to clear them of the Fat and Sinews, which must be a
general rule to be observed for all Meat-birds. Feed them in the Nest every day
very often, but a little at a time; let the instrument you feed them with be a
Stick; and when you observe them to pick it off of their own accord, then eage
them, and putting meat to them in a little Pan, and about the sides of the
Cage, to entice them to eat; however, have a care to feed them too, lest they
neglect themselves and die. When they can feed themselves very well, give them
once in three days a Spider or two. You may teach them to whistle tunes if you
so desire it; for they are easily taught, being a bird that is very docible.
Here note, if they be fed with Paste, they will live longer than if they fed
upon Hearts. The brownest and largest of the young Wrens are the Cocks.

Of the WOOD-LARK.
SOme prefer the Wood-lark before the Nightingale; but it is of this bird as
all others, some are more excellent in length and sweetness of Song.

This bird breeds the soonest of any we have, by reason of his extraordinary
mettlesomeness: and therefore if they are not taken in the beginning of
February at least, they grow so rank that they will prove good for nothing.

The places this bird most delights in are gravelly grounds, and Hills lying
toward the Orient, and in Oat-stubs. Their building is in your Laiers grounds,
where the Grass is rank and russet, making their Nests of Bennet-grass, or dead
Grass of the field under some large Tuffet, to shelter them from the injury of
the weather.

This Bird has very excellent pleasant Notes, with great variety, insomuch
that I have observed some have had almost thirty several Notes; which if they
sing lavish, is a most ravishing melody or harmony, if the Nightingale join in
consort.

These Birds are never bred from the Nests as ever I could hear: I have several
times attempted it, but to no purpose; for notwithstanding my greatest care,
they died in a Week, either of the Cramp or Scowring.

The times of the year to take them are June, July, August; and then they are
called young Branchers, having not yet moulted. They are taken likewise at the
latter end of September; but having then moulted, the young and old are not
distinguishable.

Lastly, they are taken from the beginning of January to the latter end of
February, at which time they are all coupled and returned to their
Breedingplaces.

The way to take them in June, July, and August, is with an Hobby, after this
manner: get out in a dewy Morning, and go to the sides of some Hills which lie
to the rising of the Sun, where they most usually frequent; and having sprung
them, observe where they fall; then surround them twice or thrice with your
Hobby on your Fist, causing him to hover when you draw near, by which means
they will lie still till you clap a Net over them, which you carry on the point
of a Stick.

If three or four go together, take a Net like one made for Partridges: when
you go with a Setting-dog only, the Mesh must be smaller, that is, a
Lark-mesh; and then your Hobby to the Lark is like a Setting-dog to Partridges,
and with your Net at one draught you may take the whole flock.

The Wood-lark that is taken in June, July, and August will sing presently, but
will not last long, by reason of their moulting. That which is taken in January
and February will sing in five or six days, or sooner; and these are the best,
being taken in full stomach, and are more perfect in their Song than those
taken at other seasons.

If in the Cage you find him grow poor at the beginning of the Spring, give him
every two or three days a Turff of Three-leav'd-grass, (as is used to the
Skie-lark) and boil him a Sheeps-heart and mince it small, mingling it among
his Bread, Egg, and Hemp Seed, which will cause him to thrive extraordinarily.

If he be troubled with Lice, (a Distemper he is commonly afflicted withal)
take him out of the Cage, and smoke him with Tobacco; give him fresh gravel,
and set him in a hot place where the Sun shines, and this will cure him if he
have strength to bask in the Sand.

If you would have him sing lavish, feed him with Sheeps-heart, Egg, Bread and
Hemp Seed mixed together, and put into his water a little Liquorish, white
Sugar Candy, and Saffron: Let this be done once a week.

Upon the first taking of your Wood-lark thus must you do; you must put into
your Cage two Pans, one for minced meat, and another for Oat-meal and whole
Hemp Seed. Then having boiled an Egg hard, take the crumbs of white Bread; the
like quantity of Hemp Seed pounded in a Mortar, and mingle your Bread and it
with your Egg minced very small, and give it him. Let there be at the bottom of
the Cage fine red Gravel, and let it be shifted every week at farthest; for he
delights to bask in the Sand, which will not be convenient if foul'd with his
Dung. Let the perch of the Cage be lined with green Bays, or which is better,
make a perch of a Mat: and lest they should not find the Pan so soon as they
should do, to prevent famine, strew upon the Sand some Oat-meal and Hemp Seed.

How to know the Cock is thus: first, the largeness and length of his Call:
Secondly, his tall walking: Thirdly, at Evenings the doubling of his Note,
which Artists call Cuddling; but if you hear him sing strong, you cannot be
deceived.

Here note, that if a Bird sings not that is taken in February and January
within one month after, you may conclude him not worth the keeping, or else is
an Hen infallibly.

The Wood-lark as it is naturally endewed with incomparable notes, so it is a
tender Bird, and difficult to be kept; but if rightly ordered, and well looked
to, will be a most delightful Songster to its Master growing better and better
every year even to the very last.

These Birds are very subject to the Cramp, Giddiness in the Head, and to
Louziness. The best remedy to prevent the Cramp, is to shift the Cage often
with fresh Gravel, otherwise the Dung will clog to their feet which causes the
Cramp. The giddiness of the Head proceeds from feeding upon much Hemp Seed:
perceiving this distemper, give him some Gentles, (the common Bait for
Fishermen) Hog-lice, Emmets and their Eggs, with Liquorish, all put into
water, we serve in their stead, and will cure immediately. Louziness (which
causes leanness in this bird) is cured as said before by smoking Tobacco.

Of the SKIE-LARK: The several ways to take them; and when taken, how to order
them.
THere is a great difference between one Skie-lark and another; for one may not
be worth two pence, when another shall be worth two pounds.

This Bird is very hardy, and will live upon any food in a manner, so that he
have but once a weeks Turff of Three-leav'd-grass. As the Wood-lark has young
ones in March, the Skie-lark has rarely any till the middle of May. They
commonly build in Corr or thick high grass Meadows, and seldom have more than
four: take them at a fortnight old, and at fir^^ give them minced sheeps-heart
with a chopped hard Egg mingled: when they can feed alone, give them Bread
Hemp Seed, and Oat-meal; let the Bread be mingled with Egg, and the Hemp Seed
bruised: Let them have Sand in the bottom of their Cage; Pearches therein are
to no purpose.

As the Wood-lark is taken with Net and Hobby, so may the Skie-lark be taken
also. They are taken likewise in dark nights with a Trammel; this Net is about
six and thirty yards long, and six yards over, run through with six ribs of
Pack-thread; which ribs at the ends are put upon two Poles sixteen foot long,
made taper at each end, and so is carried between two men half a yard from the
ground; every six steps touching the ground, to cause the Birds to fly up,
otherwise you may carry the Net over them without disturbing them: hearing them
fly against the Net, clap it down, and they are safe under it. This is a very
murdering Net, taking all sorts of birds that it comes near, as Partridges,
Quails, Woodcocks, Snipes, Felfares, and what not, almost in every dark night.

The next way of taking them is with a pair of Day-nets and a Glass, which is
incomparable pastime in a Frosty Morning. These Nets are commonly seven Foot
deep, and Fifteen long, knit with your French Mesh, and very fine Thread. These
Nets take all sorts of small Birds that come within their Compass, as
Bunting-larks, and Linnets in abundance.

These Larks are also taken by a Low-bell, with a great light carried in a Tub
both by one man, and the Net by another; this Bell and Light so amazeth them,
that they lie as dead, and stir not till the Net overcast them. By this Bell
are all sorts of Fowls and Birds taken, as Partridge and Pheasant; and if the
Bell be loowd, or very deep, Duck, Mallard, Woodcock, and Snipe may be taken.

The last way of taking Larks is in a great Snow, by taking an hundred or two
hundred yards of Pack-thread, fastening at every six inches a Noose made with
Horse-hair; two hairs are sufficient. Now since I have already described this
way of taking Larks, I shall desist, and only inform you that those Larks you
intend to preserve for singing, must be taken in October or November: Choose the
straightest, largest, and loftiest Bird, and he that has most white on his
Tail, for these are the marks of the Cock. Observe in this Bird, as in all
others, that you give no salt Meat, nor Bread seasoned with salt.

Of the LINNET.
THeir Nests are usually in Thorn-bushes and Furt-bushes; and some of the
hotter sort of them will breed four times a year. The young ones may be taken
at four days old, if you intend to teach them to whistle, or learn the Song of
other Birds: for being so young, they know not the tune of the old Bird. Being
so young, keep them very warm, and feed them often, and a little at a time:
there must be bruised soaked Rape-seeds, with the like quantity of white bread,
of which there must be fresh made every day to prevent sowring, which will make
them scowr to death: let not their Meat be too dry, for fear of being
Ventburnt. If you intend they shall whistle, do you whistle to them in the time
of Feeding, being more apt to learn before they can crack hard seeds. Whatever
Bird you intend your Linnet shall learn his Notes of, hang him under it, and he
will perfectly imitate him: nay, so docible this Bird is, as I have been
credibly informed, that some of them have been taught to speak. To know the
Cock from the Hen, must not always be discovered by their Breasts; but the Cock
is best known by the brownness of his Back and the white in his Wing; that is
to say, take your young Linnet when the Wing-feathers are grown, and stretch
out his Wing, holding his body fast with the other hand; and then observe the
white upon the fourth, fifth, and sixth Feather; if it cast a glistering white,
and the white goes close to the Quil, this is a sure sign of a Cock.

Many are the Diseases of this Bird, as the Ptisick, known by his panting,
staring Feathers, lean Breast, and spilling his Seeds up and down the Cage; and
this Disease happens for want of Water, or for want of green Meat in the
Spring: He is troubled also with Streins or Convulsions of the Breast:
Sometimes he is afflicted with hoarsness in his voice, being overstrein'd in
singing: he is sometimes melancholy, at other times afflicted with scowring, of
which there are three sorts; the first is thin, and with a black or white
substance in the middle, not very dangerous; the second is between a black and
white, clammy and sticking, this is bad; but the third and last is most mortal,
which is the white clammy scowring: The several Cures I shall not here set down
for brevity sake, but refer you to the care of the Bird-merchant.

Of the GOLD-FINCH, or CHRISTMAS-FOOL, so called in Norfolk.
THey are taken in great plenty about Michaelmas, and will soon become tame.
The beauty of this Birds severally-colour'd Feathers is not much taken notice
of, because they are so common among us; but they have been so noted and valued
beyond Sea, that they have been transported in great quantities for great
rarities.

They breed commonly in Apple Trees and Plumtrees thrice a year. You must take
the young ones with the Nest at ten days old, and feed them after this manner:
Take some of the best Hemp Seed, pound it, sift it, and mix it with the like
quantity of white bread, with some flower of Canary-seeds; and taking up the
quantity of a white Pea upon a small Stick, feed them therewith three or four
bits at a time, making fresh every day: You must keep these Birds very warm
till they can feed themselves, for their nature is very tender.

For the purgation of this Bird, as well as all others which feed on Hemp Seed,
take the seeds of Mellons, Succory, and Mercury, which is a principal Herb for
the Linnet; but the best for the Gold-finch are Lettice and Plantain; and
nothing can be more wholesome for him than Wall or Loom-earth, and some fine
Sand, and a lump or two of Sugar put always into his Cage.

Of the TIT-LARK.
THis Bird is very short in his Song, and no variety in it; yet some fancy him
for his Whisking, Turring, and Chewing: He commonly appears at that time of the
year that the Nightingale does, which is the beginning of April, and leaves us
at the beginning of September: They are fed when taken as the Nightingale; you
must cram him at first, for he will not feed himself, by reason he always feeds
on live meat in the field, for which cause he is unacquainted with the meat we
offer him: when he comes to feed of himself, he will eat what the Wood-lark
eats, or almost any other meat.

This Bird breeds about the latter end of April, or beginning of May, and
builds her Nest on the ground by some Pond-side or Ditch-side, and feeds her
young with Caterpillars or Flies. They are easily brought up being hardy, and
are not subject to Colds or Cramps as other Birds are, but live long if
preserved with care. If you breed up this Bird young and cleanly, you may
please your self with his Song; all that I can say of it is, Short and sweet.

Of the CHAF-FINCH.
THere is no scarcity of this Bird, and in my mind fitter for the Spit than a
Cage, having but one short plain Song, yet for that he is admired by some, and
kept very charily.

They build their Nests in Hedges and Trees of all sorts, and have young ones
twice or thrice a year; they are seldom bred up from the Nest, because they are
not apt to take another Birds Song, nor to whistle. The Essex-finch is best
both for length of Song, and variety, concluding it with several Notes very
prettily. He is very little subject to any Disease, only he is inclinable to
be very lousie, if he be not sprinkled with a little Wine twice or thrice a
month.

Of the STARLING.
THis Bird is generally kept by all sorts of people above any other bird for
whistling; but their greatest fault is, they have them too fledged out of the
Nest, and that makes them retain commonly so much of their own harsh Notes:
therefore those who do intend to have them excellent, and avoid their own
squeaking Notes, must take them from the old ones at the end of three or four
days; and thus you must do to all birds you would learn to whistle, or speak,
or learn another birds Song by hanging under him.

Of the RED-START.
THis Bird is a Forerunner of the Nightingale, and is of a very sullen dogged
temper in a cage; but abroad is very cheerful, and has a very pleasant kind of
whistling Song.

The Cock is fair and beautifully colored, and is delightful to the eye. They
breed thrice a year; the latter end of April, in May, and toward the latter
end of June.

They build usually in holes of hollow Trees, or under house-eaves: She is the
shiest bird I know of her building; for when she is about her Nest, if she
perceive any look on, she forsakes it; and if you touch an Egg she never comes
more to the Nest, and if she have young ones and you do the like, she will
either starve them, or break their Necks over the Nest. Now though the old ones
are thus dogged, yet if you bring up their young, their nature will alter, and
become very tame.

You must take them out of the Nest about ten days old; if they stay longer,
they will learn somewhat of the old one's sullen temper. You must feed them
with Sheeps-heart and Eggs chopped and mixed together, about the quantity of
three white Peace, upon the end of a Stick, when they open their mouths: when
they will thus feed, put them into a Cage with meat about it, and a Pan of meat
therein; and though he feed himself, yet it will be very sparingly for four or
five days, wherefore you must now and then feed him your self. Keep him warm in
the Winter, and he will sing as well in the night as the day.

Of the BULL-FINCH.
THe Bull-finch has no Song of his own, nor whistle neither, but is very apt
to learn any thing almost, if taught by the mouth.

Of the GREEN-FINCH.
THis Bird is not worth a keeping for his Song, but for his color, and being a
hardy heavy bird to ring the Bells.

They breed very sillily by the High-way-side, and early before the Hedges have
leaves upon them; which causes every one to see their Nests at first, so that
seldom their first Nests come to any thing. They breed three times a year, and
the young ones are very hardy birds to be brought up. You may feed them with
white Bread and Rape bruised and soaked together: He is apter to take the
Whistle than another Bird's Song. All that can be said of him, he is a very
dull Bird, and will never kill himself either by singing or whistling.

Of the HEDGE-SPARROW.
THis is not so despicable a bird as some would have it; for if you will mind
its Song, you will find very delightful Notes, and sings early in the Spring
with great variety. Old or young become tame very quickly, and will sing in a
short time after they are taken; so that you take them at the latter end of
January or beginning of February: they will feed almost on any thing you give
them.

They commonly build in a White-thorn or private Hedge, laying Eggs much
different from other Birds, being of a very fine blue color. This Bird is very
tractable, and will take any bird's Song almost, if taken young out of the
Nest. I shall only speak a few Experiments of others, and deliver some
Observations of my own concerning the length of Birds lives, and which are most
proper for whistling, and so shall end this Treatise.

First, As to the length of Birds Lives: Among Nightingales some live but one
year, some three, some five, some eight, and some twelve; singing better and
better for the first seven or eight years, and after that decline by little and
little: They must have careful keepers that can preserve their lives to the
fifth year; experience informs us, where one lives to that age, an hundred die.

The Wood-lark seldom lives in a Cage above six years, and hardly five.

The Robin-red-breast rarely lives above seven years; for he is a tender Bird,
and much subject to the Falling Sickness, Cramp, and Oppression of the Stomach.

The Skie-lark as he is a hardy Bird, so he is long lived also. All sorts of
Seed-birds live longer than any soft-beak'd Birds, especially the Canary and
Linnet. I have known a Canary-bird live and sing within a year of twenty; in
like manner the Linnet.

So much as to the Lives of Singing Birds; let us now consider which are most
fit for Whistling.

In the first place I look upon the Starling to be the best; and never heard
better than at the Greyhound in St. Mary Ax, taught and sold by the ingenious
Master of that House. But since I have spoken of the Starling and Bull-finch
already, I shall insist no farther.

The Blackbird has a kind of rude Whistle; and if young taken out of the
Nest, is very apt to learn.

The Robin-red-breast is a most incomparable Bird for the Whistle, and to Speak
also. A Robin is a hot-mettled Bird, and therefore he must not be in the
hearing of another; wherefore if you breed two, let them be separated into two
several Rooms, that they may not hear, and so consequently spoil each other.

The Canary-bird will learn to Whistle any thing almost, if taken young out of
the Nest, otherwise not; for being a very hot-mettled Bird, he will run upon
his own Song do what you can.

The Linnet will learn any Tune almost, if not too long, and too full of
variety. Learn him one Tune first, then another, keeping him dark and still,
out of the noise of other Birds.

Take this for a general Rule for all Birds, That the younger they be, the
better they will prove, and answer your expectation for all your trouble and
pains in bringing up and keeping them.

An Abstract Of such STATUTE-LAWS As concern FOWLING.
Stat. 11 Hen. 7. cap. 17. NOne shall take Pheasants or Partridges with Engines
in another's ground without License, in pain of 10 l. to be divided betwixt the
Owner of the Ground and Prosecutor.

Stat. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 11. None shall destroy or take away the Eggs of any
Wild-Fowl, in pain to forfeit for every Egg of a Crane or Bustard so taken or
destroyed 20 d. Of a Bittern, Hern, or Shoveland 8 d. And of a Mallard, Zeal,
or other Wild-Fowl 1 d. to be divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutor.

Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 10. None shall Kill or take any Pheasants or Partridges
with any Net or Engine, in the nightime, in pain to forfeit for every
Pheasant 20 s. And for every Partridge 10 s. which if the Offender pay not
within ten days, he shall suffer one months Imprisonment without Bail, and
enter into Bond (for two years) with good Sureties before some Justices of
Peace, not to offend in the like kind.

II. None shall Hawk or Hunt with his Spaniels in standing Grain, or before it
is Stocked (except in his own Ground, or with the Owner's consent) in pain to
forfeit 40 s. to the Owner of the said Ground, to be recovered as aforesaid.

This Act shall not restrain Fowlers who unwillingly take Pheasants or
Partridges, and forthwith let them go at large.

Stat. 1 Jacob. cap. 27. Every person convicted by his own Confession, or by
two Witnesses upon Oath, before two or more Justices of Peace, to have Killed
or Taken any Pheasant, Partridge, Pigeon, or other Game; or to have taken or
destroyed the Eggs of Pheasants, Partridges, or Swans, shall by the said
Justices be committed to Prison without Bail, unless he immediately pay to the
use of the Poor where the Offense was committed, or he apprehended, 20 s. for
every Fowl or Egg so killed, taken or destroyed; and after one Months
Commitment, shall before two or more Justices of Peace be bound with two
sufficient Sureties in 20 l. apiece, with condition never to offend in the like
kind again.

II. Every person convicted as abovesaid, to keep a Greyhound, Dog, or Net to
kill or take Deer, Hare, Pheasant, or Partridge (unless he have Inheritance of
10 l. per Annum, a Lease for life of 30 l. per Annum, or be worth 200 l. in
Goods, or otherwise be the Son of a Baron or Knight, or Heir apparent of an
Esquire) shall suffer Imprisonment as aforesaid, unless he pay 40 s. to the use
abovesaid.

III. None shall sell, or buy to sell again any Pheasant or Partridge, (except
by them reared up or brought from beyond Sea) in pain to forfeit for every
Pheasant 20 s. and every Partridge 10 s. to be divided betwixt the Prosecutor
and the Poor of the parish where such Offense is committed.

Stat. 7 Jacob. cap. 11.Every person convicted by his own Confession, or by two
Witnesses upon Oath, before two or more Justices of Peace, to have Hawked, or
destroyed any Pheasant or Partridge, betwixt the first of July and the last of
August, shall suffer one Months Imprisonment without Bail, unless he pay to
the use of the Poor where the Offense was committed, or be apprehended 40 s.
for every time so hawking, and 20 s. for every Pheasant or Partridge so taken
or destroyed: But this offense shall be prosecuted within six months after it
shall be committed.

II. It shall be lawful for the Lord of a Manor, or any having free Warren,
Inheritance of 40 l. per Annum, Freehold of 80 l. per Annum, or Goods worth
400 l. or their Servants (Licensed by them) to take Pheasants or Partridges
within their own Grounds or precinct, so they do it in the daytime, and only
betwixt Michaelmass and Christmas.

III. If any person of a mean condition shall be convicted by his own
Confession, or by one Witness upon Oath before two or, more Justices of the
Peace, to have killed or Taken any Pheasant or Partridge with Dogs, Nets, or
Engines, he shall by the said Justices be Committed to Prison without Bail,
unless he pay to the use of the Poor where the Offense was committed 20 s. for
every Pheasant or Partridge so killed or taken: And also become bound before
one or more Justice of Peace in a Recognizance of 20 l. never to offend in the
like kind agaiu.

IV. Every Constable or Headborough (upon Warrant under the hand of two
Justices of Peace) has power to search the Houses of persons suspected to have
any Setting-Dogs or Nets for the the taking of Pheasants, or Partridges; and
the Dogs or Nets there found to kill and cut in pieces at pleasure, as things
forfeited unto the said Officers.

V. He that shall be punished by virtue of this Act, shall not be punished
again by virtue of any other Law for the same Offense.

Barbel
Tench
Roach
Dace
Gudgion
Perch
Loach
Eele
Grayling
Salmon
Trout
Carp
Bream
Pike


THE GENTLEMAN'S Recreation: Containing DIRECT RULES FOR THAT Noble and
Delightful ART OF ANGLING: Whereunto is annexed An Abstract of all such Statute
for penal Laws relating to that Curious Art.

The Fourth Part.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for N. C.

OF FISHING. The Introduction.
ANGLING is an excellent Art, which as it pleads great Antiquity, so the
knowledge thereof is with much difficulty to be obtained: and indeed it bears
some similitude to Poetry in this, that as it is said, Poeta nascitur, non fit,
so ought the Piscator or Fisherman to have a natural inclination unto the Art
of Angling, or his knowledge therein will be always dull and imperfect; not but
that it may be much heightened by practice and experience.

Now he that intends to be his Crafts-master in this harmless Pastime or
Recreation, must not only diligently search and enquire into the mysteries and
depths of this Art, but must also be furnished, as aforesaid, with a natural
propensity thereunto, attended with observation and Patience: And having gotten
by observationand practice a competent knowledge, or having conquered the
difficulties of Angling, it will then not only prove pleasant, but profitable,
and be like Virtue, a Reward to it self.

Now that I may farther commend this ingenious profession, be pleased to take
notice of the Antiquity thereof; some saying it is as ancient as Deucalion's
Flood. Some attribute it to the invention of one Belus, the first Author of
virtuous Recreations. Others say that Seth left the knowledge of Angling to his
posterity engraven on brazen Pillars with the first Rudiments of the
Mathematics, and other useful Arts; by which means they were preserved from
perishing in the universal Deluge

Diverse are the opinions of men concerning the Antiquity of this Art: let it
suffice, that certainly it is older than Christ's Incarnation; for both Job and
the Prophet Amos make mention of Fish-hooks, and consequently there must be
Anglers then in those days

The next thing that offers it self in the commendation of this Art, is the
benefit of Contemplation, which is acquired hereby; which is a thing (according
to the opinion of some learned Cloistered men) to be preferred before Action,
because say they) it makes us mortals the nearer to come to the Creator by way
of imitation; for he is all Contemplation of his own infinite Power Goodness,
etc.

But waving this, I cannot let slip the expression of an ingenious Forreiner,
who said, That Rivers and the Inhabitants of the watery Element were made for
wise men to contemplate, and fools to pass by without consideration. Modesty
will not permit me to rank my self in the number of the first; and I shall
endeavor to clear my self from the scandal of the last, by giving you a short
account of Rivers and their watery Inhabitants.

I shall first discourse of Rivers: one whereof I have read of, situate in
Epirus, which has a strange double and contrar property; the one is, that it
will extinguish any Torch that is lighted: and the other is, to light a Torch
never lighted before.

The River Silarus in a few hours will (as report says) convert a Rod into
Stone. And I my self know a Lough in Ireland, that in some years will convert
Wood into Stone, of which are made the best Hones. Cambden makes mention of a
Well near Kerby in Cumberland, that ebbs and flows several times every day.

The same Author makes mention of the River Mole in Surrey, which, running
several miles under ground, being opposed by Hills, at last breaks out again so
far off, that the Inhabitants thereabout boast (as the Spaniards of the River
Ama) that they feed several Flocks of Sheep on a green Bridge. There is such
another green Bridge in Wales, the River running a great way under ground, and
there di^emboguing it self into the Sea. Some thereabout report, that they have
put a living Goose into the Hole where the Water falls, and she has swum out
at the other end; but with no Feathers on her back.

Mr. Thomas May in his History of The Reign of King Henry the Second, relates
two strange things from Gricaldus Cambrensis, of certain Wells in Ireland. His
Words are these:

A Well there is in Munster to be seen,
Within whose Waters whosoever has been
Once drenched, his Hair straight takes an hoary dye.
Another Fountain of quite contrary
Effect to that in Ulster Springs; for there
Those that have washed once, how old soever,
Shall never after have an hoary Hair.
Another thing, though against Nature, yet for the strangeness of it I cannot
choose but relate, and that is of a certain River near Harwood in Bedfordshire,
which in the year of our Lord 1399, (a little before the Civil Wars between the
Houses of York and Lancaster burst forth) of a sudden stood still, and divided
it felf asunder, so that men might pass three miles together on foot down the
midst of the Channel, leaving the Waters like a Wall behind them. Speed in his
Descript. Bedford.

I shall conclude with two of the strangest Rivers that ever were heard of. The
first is a River called Eleusina, which is so merrily disposed, (if you will
believe a man of no less Authority than Aristotle) that it will dance to a
Fiddle, bubling at the noise of Music, and will grow very muddy; but as soon
as the Music cease, it cease its motion, returning to its former calmness
and clearness. The other is as wonderful, and (if you will believe Josephus
that learned Jew) it is a River in Judaea, which runs very swisth all the six
days of the Week, but rests on the Seventh, which is the Jewish Sabbath.

And now a word or two concerning Fish: Plinsaith, That Nature's great and
wonderful powers more demonstrated in the Sea than on the Land: and this may
appear by those numerous and various Creatures which inhabit in and about that
Element; which will appear more at large, if you will read their History
written either by Rondeletius, Gesner, Johnstonus, or Aldrovandus. The number
and the various shapes o^ these Fishes are not more strange, than their
different Natures, Inclinations and Actions. Give me leave to speak a little
hereof.

There is a Fish called the Cuttle-fish, which w^^ cast a long Gut out of her
Throat, with which she a^gles: For lying obscurely in the Mud, she perm^^ small
Fish to nibble at it, and by that means draws them near her by little and
little, till coming within her reach, she leaps upon them and devours them:
hence she is called the Sea-Angler.

The Hermit is a Fish that when she grows old will seek out a dead Fish's
shell, fit for her purpose, and there dwell secluded from all company, studying
nothing more than how to defend her self against the injuries of Wind and
Weather.

The Sargus is a Fish so lascivious, (as Du-Bartas expresses it rarely well)
that when he cannot find change of Mates enough in the Sea, he will get ashore
and Cuckold a Goat.

Goes courting She-Goats on the grassy Shore,
Horning their Husbands that had Horns before.
Whereas it is reported that the Mullet is so chaste, that when she is deprived
of her Mate, she will follow him to the shore and dye.

The Torpedo, or Cramp-fish, is a Fish of so baneful and poisonous a nature,
that all other Fish that come within her reach are immediately stupefied and
without motion, so that they easily become her prey; nay, she will so suddenly
convey her Poison up the Rod and Line of the Angler, when she feels her self
entangled, that his Hands and Arms immediately losing their strength, become
nummed and senseless.

The Scolopendra has as rare and strange a way of defending her self from the
Anglers subtilty, as any Fish whatever, if we may credit the relation of
Du-Bartas, whose words are these:

But if the Scolopendra have sucked in
The sowre-sweet morsel with the barbed pin,
She has as rare a Trick to rid her from it;
For instantly she all her Guts will vomit;
And having cleared them from the danger, then
She fair and softly sups them in again,
So that not one of them within her Womb
Changes his Office or his wonted room.
The Remora is a Fish of so strange and secret a property (and for that reason
is often used for a Metaphor) that as the same Du-Bartas says,

Let all the Winds in one Wind gather them,
And (seconded with Neptune's strongest stream)
Let all at once blow all their stiffest gales,
Aftern a Galley under all her sails;
Let her be helped with an hundred Oars;
Each lively handled by five lusty Rowers;
The Remora fixing her feeble Horn
Into the Tempest-beaten Vessels Stern,
Stays her Stone-still.
In the year of our Lord 1180, near Orford in Suffolk, there was a Fish taken
in the perfect shape of a Man; he was kept by Bartholomew de Glanvile in the
Castle of Orford above half a year; but at length, not being carefully looked
to, he stole to the Sea, and was never seen after. He never spoke, but would
eat any Meat that was given him, especially raw Fish, when he had squeezed out
the juice: He was often had to Church, but never showed any sign of Adoration.

Let what is already spoken of Fish suffice, since it will not only be
impertinent to enlarge farther, but impossible here to give an account of the
natures of all Fish: I shall therefore refer you to such Authors who have made
it their business to write large Volumes.

Before I put an end to this Introduction, permit me to insert something in the
praise of Fishermen and Fishing.

A short Encomium, or somewhat in Praise of Fishermen and Fishing.
IT is very remarkable, that amongst the Twelve Holy Apostles there were four
of them Fishermen, whom our Savior elected and inspired to preach the Gospel.
And the reason that some give for this choice is, that he knew and found the
hearts of such men naturally more fitted for Contemplation and quietness,
having Spirits mild, sweet, and peaceable.

Besides, our Savior seems to have a more than common respect for their
Ocupation, for two reasons. First, He never reproved these for their
profession, as he did others, viz. the Scribes and Money Changers. Next, He
dignified these poor Fishermen with the priority of Nomination in the
Catalogue of his Twelve Apostles. Nay, that which is more observable is this,
that our Savior took only three of these Fishermen with him when he ascended
the Mount to bear him company at his Transfiguration.

Now as to the lawfulness of Fishing, I think none can speak against it, since
our Savior himself commanded St. Peter to fish to pay Caesar his Tribute.

And as the Ancients have highly applauded and approved of this ingenious
Exercise, several of the Hero's of old, in the height of their glory, having
exercised themselves herein: so several of our eminent late Divines have done
the like; as Dr. Whitaker, learned Perkins, Dr. Nowel Dean of St. Paul's London,
and the incomparable Sir Henry Wotton Provost of Eaton College, who was a
great lover of Angling, and would frequently say thereof, that it was after his
Study a Rest to his mind, a chearer to his Spirits, a diverter of sadness, a
Calmer of unquiet thoughts, a Moderator of Passions, a procurer of
Contentedness; and that it begot habits of Peace and Patience in those that
profess and practice it. And thus I conclude the praise of Angling, though much
more might be spoke thereof.

How to Improve Fish Ponds, and the Fish therein contained.
BEfore I shall lay down such Observations and Instructions, which with much
pains and cost I have collected, to render a Fisherman complete in that
delightful Exercise of taking Fish: I shall give an account of Ponds, and how
they may in the best manner be improved.

Imprimis. Consider the situation of your Pond, and the nature of those
Currents which run into it. In the next place, observe whether it be a Breeder,
or not; if it be a Breeder, Experience will instruct you never to expect any
large Carps from such Ponds, for the greatness of the number of the Spawn will
over stock the Pond; therefore for large Carps a Store-pond is ever accounted
best.

Now to make a Breeding-pond become a Store-pond, when you cannot make a
Store-pond become a Breeding-pond, thus you must do. When you sue your Pond,
consider what quantity of Carps it will maintain; then put in all Milters, or
all Spawners, by which means in a little time you will have Carps that are both
large and fat beyond your expectation. By putting in but one Sex of them, there
is an impossibility of increasing of them; but of the Roach it will
notwithstanding multiply abundantly: Therefore it is needful, and altogether
necessary for such who keep Breeding-ponds, to sue them once in three years,
for fear of the increase of Roaches, though none were ever put in, which may
seem very strange, if the truth thereof could not be made manifest; as thus:
there are several Ponds frequented by Wild-ducks, which usually come at nights
to feed with the Tame ones there abiding: Now those Wild-ducks bring these
Roaches with them, for their feeding amongst weeds in Rivers.

Besides the Spawn of Roaches will hang about their Feet and Feathers, which is
washed off by the water of those Ponds they are accustomed to haunt; by which
means in a few years they become so numerous though you your self did not put
one into the Breeding pond; for which cause you sind your Carps so lean, and
almost hunger starved.

By the way, give me leave to insert this true story. A Gentleman not far from
the City of London, had a large pond of about four Acres of ground; a Gentleman
standing by at the suing thereof, and seeing not only a great quantity of Fish,
but the best grown that ever he saw, he advised him to put in two or three
hundred of stores of Carp, about three or four years growth, out of a pond that
was over stocked, and to put Sixty of those he had taken out; which accordingly
he saw done, fancying to see stately Carps at the next suing.

After the expiration of four years, this Gentleman was advised to sue his
Pond, to see what Monsters four years addition to their growth would produce;
for those sixty Carps were from Eye to Fork from fifteen Inches to eighteen
Inches when he put them in: now having sued his Pond, he found almost the whole
number of his Carps; but they were in such a lean condition, that he did not
know them; for they were Monsters in Nature their heads being bigger than their
whole bodies, and almost as heavy and this happened it seems by his own foll,
by putting in but twenty Roaches; and when the Pond was sued there were bushels
of small Roaches, and these Roaches eat up all the sweet feed from the Carps;
for Roaches are like sheep to great Cattle, which eat up and devour all the
sweet feed, and what affords the greatest nutriment. This Gentleman was very
much frustrated of his expectation; and the Fish-monger which came from London
to buy a pennyworth as soon as he perceived the Monsters, he mounted his
Horse, and rid as if the Devil drove him, not so much as bidding the Gentleman
farewell. Here is to be noted, that Ponds which will not breed one Carp; Roaches
in one year will multiply by thousands; therefore you must be careful every
year to view your Pond, and observe if any such fry appears, lest when you come
to sue your Pond, you be deceived in your expectation.

How to make Carps grow to an extraordinary bigness in a Pond.
PErceiving about the month of April that your pond begins to grow low in
Water, then with an Iron-Rake, rake all the sides of your pond where the water
is fallen away; then sow some Hay-seeds, and rake it well; by this means at the
later end of Summer there will be a great growth of Grass; which when winter
comes, and the pond being raised by Rain to the Top, will overflow all that
Grass; and then the Carps having water to carry them to the feed, will fill
themselves, and in a short time become as fat as Hogs that are kept up for that
purpose: Do this every Summer till you sue your Pond, and you will find no
River- Carp to surpass them either in fatness or sweetness.

General Observations to be understood by all such who desire to attain to the
complete and perfect Art of Angling.
BY no means fish in light and dazzling Apparel but let your Clothing be of a
dark dusky color.

Wheresoever you use to angle (for the Angler has his peculiar haunt) cast in
once in four or five days Corn boiled soft; if for Carp and Tench, oftener: also
you may cast in Garbage, Livers of Beasts, Worms chopped in pieces, or Grains
steeped in Blood and dried. This will attract the Fish unto the place: and to
keep them together as you fish, throw in half a handful of Grains of ground
Malt. This must be done in still water; but in a Stream you must cast your
Grains above your Hook, and not about it; sor as they float from your Hook, so
will they draw the Fish after them.

If you will bait a Stream, get some Tin-boxes made full of holes no bigger
than just fit for a Worm to creep through; then fill these Boxes with them, and
having fastened a Plummet to sink them, cast them into the Stream with a string
fastened thereto, that you may draw them forth when you please, by the smalness
of the holes asoresaid, the Worms can crawl out but very leasurely, and as they
crawl the Fish will resort about them.

If you would bait for Salmon, Trout, Umber and the like, in a Stream, then
take some blood, and therewith incorporate fine Clay, Barley, and Malt ground
adding thereto some Water; make all in a Paste with Gum of lvy; then form it
into Cakes, and cast them into the stream. Some will knead or stick Worms
therein fast by the head. If you find your bait take no effect in the
attracting of the Fish, you may then conclude some Pike or Perch lurketh
thereabout to seize his Prey, for fear of which the Fish dare not venture
thereabout: you must therefore remove these obstructions of your sport, by
taking your Trowl; and let your Bait be either Brandlings or Lob-worms; or you
may use Gentles, or Minows, which they will greedily snap at.

Keep your Rod neither to dry nor to moist, lest the one make it brittle, and
the other rotten. If it be very soultry dry Weather, wet your Rod a little
before you Angle: and having struck a good Fish, keep your Rod bent, and that
will hinder him from running to the end of the Line, by which means he will
either break his hold or the Hook.

If you would know what Bait the Fish loves best at the time of your fishing,
having taken one, slit his Gill, and take out his Stomach, and open it without
bruising, and there you will find what he last fed on and had a fancy to; by
which means you may bait your Hook accordingly.

When you fish, shelter your self under some Bush or Tree, or stand so far from
the brink of the River that you can only discern your Float: for Fish are
timorous, and are affrighted at the least sight or motion. The best way of
Angling with the Fly is down the River, and not up, as you will find by
experience.

You never need make above half a dozen trials in one place, either with Fly or
Ground-bait, when you angle for Trout; for by that time he will either offer to
take, or refuse the Bait, and not stir at all.

If you will have Fish bite eagerly and freely, and without suspicion, you must
present them with such Baits as naturally they are inclined to, annd in such
manner ar they are accustomed to receive them.

If you use Pastes for Baits, you must add Flax or Wool, mix a little Butter
therewith and that will preserve the Paste srom washing off your Hook.

The Eyes of such Fishes as you kill, are most excellent Baits on the Hook for
almost any sort of Fish.

Lastly, make not this or any other Recreation your daily practice, lest your
immoderate Exercise therein bring a Plague upon you rather than a pleasure.

Astrological Elections for Angling in general.
IF as the Wise man says, (and I think there is none that dare question his
Authority) that There is a proper time and season for every action under the
Sun, I hope it will not be offensive nor impertinent to show what time and
seasons the intelligent Angler ought to make choice of, that may answer his
expectation. For my own part, I have so often experimented the truth of these
Rules, that by my good will I would never: Angle but at an elected time: the
ingenious will not despise them, and for others they were not intended: And
they are these;

If you would Neptune's scaly Subjects get,
Nights horned Queen in the Midheaven set:
Thence let her on the Paphian Goddess shine
I th'West, and greet her with a friendly Trine.
Be sure you always fortify the East;
And let the Maiden-Star possess the West:
However let some Aquatick Sign ascend,...
And let all power his happy Lord attend.
Then see the setting Constellation be
Afflicted by some hateful Enemy,
At least his Lord, the sixth with strength defend;
Let active power his Radiant Lord attend.
Then may you boldly venture to the Flood,
And take from thence what Fishes you see good.
What provision is to be made for Angling-Tools.
THE time of providing Stocks is in the Winter-Solstice, when the Trees have
shed their Leaves, and the Sap is in the Roots: For after January it ascends
again into the Trunk and Branches, at which time it is improper to gather
Stocks or Tops.

Let your Stocks be taper-grown, and your Tops the best Rush-ground-shoots you
can get, not knotty, but proportionable and slender; otherwise they will
neither cast nor strike well, and by reason of their unpliableness your Line
will be much endangered.

Having gathered your Stocks and Tops all in one season, and as straight as you
can, bathe them, saving the Tops, over a gentle fire, and use them not till
fully seasoned, till about a year and four months: they are better if kept two
years.

Now to preserve these Stocks or Tops from rotting, or worm-eating, rub them
over thrice a year with Sallet or Linseed-oyl; sweet Butter will serve, if
never salted; and with any of these you must chafe well your Rods: if bored,
pour in either of the Oils, and let them bathe therein twenty sour hours, then
pour it out again; and this will preserve your I ops and Stocks from injury

How to join the Stock or Top together, or how to make all sorts of Rods for
Fly, Ground, or otherwise, with what lengths are best for several sorts of
Fishing, I need not here relate; since without putting your self to the
trouble, you may purchase them of such as sell them at no dear rates.

How to make a Line after the best manner.
LET your Hair be round, and twist it even, for that strengthens the Line; and
let your Hair, as near as you can, be of an equal bigness: then lay them in
Water for a quarter of an hour, bv which means you will find which of the Hairs
do shrink; than twist them over again.

Some intermingle Silk in the twisting, but I cannot approve of it; but a Line
of all Silk is not amiss; also a Line made of the smallest Lute-string is very
good, but that it will soon rot by the Water.

The best color for Lines is the sorrel, white, and gray; the two last for
clear waters, and the gray for muddy Rivers: neither is the pale wacry green to
be contemned, which color you may make after this manner.

Take a pint of strong Ale, half a pound of Soot, a small quantity of the juice
of Walnut-leaves, with the like quantity of Alum; put these into a Pipkin, and
boil them together about half an hour: Having so done, take it off the fire,
and when it is cold put in your Hair. Or thus:

Take a pottle of Alum-water, somewhat more than a handful of Marigold-flowers,
boil them till a yellow scum arise; then take half a pound of green Copperas,
with as much Verdegreece, and beat them together to a fine powder: put these
with the Hair into the Alum-Water, and let it lie ten hours or more; then take
the Hair out, and let it dry.

In the making your Line leave a Bought at both ends, the one to put it to and
take it srom the Rod, the other to hang your lowest link upon to which your
Hook is fastened; and so you may change your Hook as often as you please.

Of the Hook, Flote, and other things worth the Observation.
YOur Hook ought to be long in the shank, somewhat round in its circumference,
the point standing even and straight; and let the bending be in the shank.

Use strong, but small Silk, in the setting on of your Hook, laying the Hair on
the inside of your Hook: for if it be on the outside, the Silk will fret and
cut it a sunder.

As for the Flotes, there are diverse way of making them: Some use your
Muscovy-Duck-quills, which are the best for still Waters; but for strong
streams take good sound Cork without flaws or holes, and bore it through with a
hot Iron; then put into it a Quill of a fit proportion; then pare your Cork
into a Pyramidal form of what bigness you think fit; after this grind it smooth.

To plum your Ground, you must carry with you a Musquet-bullet with a hole made
through it, or any other sort of Plummet, tying this to a strong twist, hang it
on your Hook, and so you will find the depth of the Water.

And that you may not incommode your Tackle, it will be very requisite to make
several partitions in pieces of Parchment sowed together, by which each Utensil
may have a place by it self.

In any wise forget not to carry a little Whetstone with you to sharpen your
Hooks if you find them blunt and dull.

I need not advise you how to carry your BOB and PALMER, or put you in mind of
having several Boxes of diverse sizes for your Hooks, Corks, Silk, Thread, Lead,
Flies, etc. or admonish you not to forget your Linen and Woollen Bags for all
sorts os Baits; but let me forwarn you not to have a PAUNDER that is heavy, for
it can never be light enough: those which are made of Osiers I think are the
best.

Lastly, forget not carry with you a small Pole with a Loop at the end thereof,
to which you may fasten a small Net to land great Fish withal.

There is another way much better, and that is by the Landing-hook, which has
a Screw at the end of it to screw it into the Socket of a Pole: to which Socket
may be fitted also two other Hooks, the one to pull out Wood, and the other
sharp to our away Weeds.

Of Flies Natural and Artificial, and how to use them.
NAtural Flies are innumerable, there being as many kinds as there are
different sorts of Fruits: to avoid prolixity, I shall only name some of them,
viz. the Dun-fly, the Stone or May-fly, the Red Fly, the Moor-fly, the
Tawny-fly, the Shel-fly, the Cloudy or Blackish-fly, the Flag-fly, the
Vine-fly; also Caterpillars, Canker-flies, and Bear-flies, with Thousands more
which frequent Meadows and Rivers, for the contemplation of all, but
particularly the recreation of Anglers.

These come in sooner or later, according to the season of the year, that is,
sooner, or later according to the forwardness or backwardness of the Spring;
for Flies being bred of Putrefaction, commence their being according as the
Heat does further their seminal virtue unto animation

I cannot prescribe you Rules to know when each Fly comes in, and is most
grateful to every sort of Fish; and therefore I shall leave the knowledge
hereof to your own observation.

Moreover, there are several sorts of Flies according to the several natures of
diverse Soils and Rivers, or diversity of Plants; yet some there are common to
all, although but few.

All Flies are very good in their seasons for such Fish as rise at the Fly; but
some more peculiarly good, as being better beloved by some sort of fish.

Fish generally rise at these Flies most eagerly when most sorts of Flies
resort to the Waterside, hanging in a manner in clusters on Trees and Bushes,
delighting themselves to skip thence and play upon the water; and then do the
fish show their craft in catching them.

To the intent you may the better know what kind of Fly the Fish then most
covet, observe thus to do; coming in the Morning to the Riverside, beat the
Bushes with your Rod, and take up what variety you may of all sorts of Flies,
and try them all; by which means you will quickly know which are in greatest
estimation among them. Not but that they will change their Fly sometimes, but
then it is when they have glutted themselves there with for five or six days
together, which is commonly upon the going out of that Fly: for Fish never
covet that Fly more than when there is greatest plenty, contemning them at
their first coming in.

There are two ways to fish with these natural Flies; either on the surface of
the water, or a little underneath it. Now when you angle for Chevin, Roach, or
Dace with the natural Fly, move it not swiftly when you see the Fish make at
it, but rather let it glide spontaneously toward it with the Stream: If it be
in a still and slow water, draw the Fly slowly sideways by him, that will make
him eager in pursuit of it; whereas if you should move it swiftly, they will
not follow it, being a lazy fish and slow of motion. These fish delight to show
themselves in a Sun-shiny-day almost on the very surface of the Water, by which
means you may pick and choose.

The Artificial Fly is seldom used but in blustering weather, when by the
Winds the Waters are so troubled, that the Natural Fly cannot be seen, nor rest
upon them.

There are (according to the opinion of Mr. Walton, a very ingenious man, and
an excellent Angler) twelve sorts of Artificial Flies to angle with on the top
of the Water, of which these are the principal.

The first is (to use his own words) the Dun-fly, in March, made of dun Wool,
and the Feathers of a Partridge's Wing.

The second is a Dun-fly too, and made of black Wool, and the Feathers of a
black Drake; the Body made of the first, and the Wings of the latter.

The third is the Stone-fly, in April; the Body is made of black Wool made
yellow under the Wings and Tail.

The fourth is the Ruddy-fly, in the beginning of May; the Body being made of
red Wool, and bound about with black Silk, with the Feathers of a red Capon,
which hang dangling on his sides next his Tail.

The fifth is the Yellow or Greenish Fly, in June; the Body is made of black
Wool, with a yellow List on either side, and the Wings taken off the Wings of a
Buzzard, bound with black braked Hemp.

The sixth is the Moorish-fly; the Body made of duskish Wool, and the Wings
made of the blackish Mail of the Drake.

The seventh is the Tawny-fly, good until the middle of June; the Body made of
tawny Wool, the Wings made contrary one against another, of the whitish Mail of
the white Drake.

The eighth is the Wasp-fly, in July; the Body made of black Wool lapt about
with yellow Silk, the Wings made of Drake-feathers.

The ninth is the Shel-fly, good in the middle of July; the Body made of
greenish Wool lapt about wirh the Herle of a Peacock's Tail, and the Wings made
of Buzzards Wings.

The tenth and last is the Drake-fly, good in August; the Body made of black
Wool lapt about with black Silk, his Wings of the Mail of the black Drake with
a black head.

And then having named two more, he concludes wittily, Thus have you a Jury of
Flies, likely to betray and condemn all the Trouts in the River.

This in my opinion seems a tedious and difficult way. I should rather think it
better to find the Fly proper for every season, and that which the Fish at that
time most eagerly covet, and make one as like it as possibly you may, in
color, shape, and proportion; and for your better imitation lay the natural
Fly before you.

There are several ways of making these artificial Flies, which I shall forbear
here to relate, thinking it more proper to leave it to the ingenuity of every
particular person, which will be very much helped by seeing and observing the
Artist's method in their composition.

The best Observations I can collect for artificial Fly-fishing, are these:

First, Observe to fish in a River somewhat disturbed by Rain, or in a cloudy
day, when the Waters are moved by a gentle breez: the South Wind is best, the
West indifferent, but the East is stark naught. But as to this I give not much
credit; for let the Sky be cloudy, and the Season not too cold, I Will bid
defiance to any Wind that blows not too hard. If it blow high, yet not so high
but that you may conveniently guide your Tackle, they will rise in plain Deeps,
where you shall kill the best Fish: but if the Wind be small, then is the best
angling in swift Screams; and be sure to keep your Fly in continual motion.

Secondly, Keep as far from the Waterside as you can, whether you fish with a
Fly or Worm; and fish down the Stream, having the Sun on your back, not
suffering your Line to touch the Water but your Fly only. Here note, that the
light Fly makes most sport in a dark night, and the darkest or least Fly in a
clear dry.

Thirdly, In clear Rivers ever Angle with a small Fly with slender Wings; but
in such as are muddied by Rain, use a Fly that is larger bodied than ordinary.

Fourthly, When the water begins to clear after Rain, and becomes brownish,
then use a Red or Orange Fly; if the day be clear, a light-coloured Fly, and a
dark Fly for dark Waters; if the Water be of a wheyish complexion, then use a
black or brown Fly. I will not say these Directions or Rules are without
exceptions.

Fifthly, Let your Line for Fly-fishing be twice as long as your Rod, unless
the River be cumbred with Wood.

Sixthly, For every sort of Fly, have several of the same differing in color,
to suit with the different complexions of several waters and weathers.

Seventhly, You must have a nimble eye, and an active hand to strike presently
with the rising of the fish, or else he will be apt to spew out the Hook,
finding his mistake.

Eighthly, Let your Fly fall first into the Water; for if your Line fall first,
it scares the fish, and therefore you must draw again and cast.

Ninthly, When you angle in slow Rivers or still places with your Artificial
Fly, cast it over cross the River, and let it sink a little in the water, and
draw it gently back again, so as you raise no Circles, nor break the Water; and
let the Fly float gently with the Current, and hereby you will find excellent
sport.

Lastly, Take notice that your Salmon-flies must be made with their Wings
standing one behind the other, whether two or four, He delights in the finest
gawdiest colors you can choose, in the Wings chiefly, which must be long, and
so must the Tail.

Of Ground Angling.
IF you fish under the Water for a Trout, it must be without a Float, only
with a Plumb of Lead, or a Bullet, which is better, because it will fowl on the
ground. And this way of fishing is very good in cold weather, when the Fish
swim very low: you must place this Bullet about nine Inches from the baited
Hook; your Top must be very gentle, that the Fish may more easily run away with
the Bait, and not be scared with the stifness of the Rod. You must not strike
as soon as you feel the Fish bite, but slack your Line a little, that he may
the better swallow the Bait and Hook. When you strike do it gently, for the
least matter does it.

Let your Tackle be fine and slender, for that is better than your big and
strong Lines, which serve only to fright the Fish.

You will find it a better way of Angling to do it without Float or Lead, only
making use of a Garden-worm, drawing it up and down the Stream; by which you
will take more Trouts than any other way, especially if it be in a clear day.
The Morning and Evening are the chiefest seasons for the Ground-Line for Trout:
but if the day prove Cloudy, or the Water muddy, you may Angle at Ground all
the day.

Of Night-Angling.
GReat Fish (especially Trouts) are like Bucks, wary and circumspect in their
self-preservation, and know the seasons most fit for them to feed without
danger; and that is the Night, as they suppose, thinking then they may most
securely range abroad.

In your Night-angling take two great Gardenworms of an equal length, and place
them on your Hook; then cast them a good distance, and draw them to you again
upon the superficies of the Water, not suffering them to sink; to which end you
must not use a Plummet. You may easily hear the Fish rise, and therefore give
him some time to swallow your Bait, then strike him gently. If he will not take
it at the top, sink your Bait by adding some Lead, and order your self as at
Day-angling on the Ground.

I have frequently experienced it, that the best Trouts bite in the Night,
rising most commonly in the still Deeps, but unusually in the Streams.

Instead of these Garden-worms you may use a black Snail, or a piece of Velvet
in its likeness: this is a most excellent Night-bait for a Trout, and nothing
like the black Snail for a Chub in the Morning early.

You may bait your Hook with a Minnow for a Trout thus: put your Hook through
the point of his lower Chap, and draw it through; then put your Hook in at his
Mouth, and bring the point to his Tail; then draw your Line straight, and it
will bring him into a round compass: But be sure you so order his Mouth that
the Water get not in.

What times are seasonable, and what unseasonable to Angle in.
CAlm and clear weather is very good to angle in; but cool cloudy weather in
Summer is best; but it must not be so boisterously windy as that you cannot
guide your Tackle. The cooler the weather is in hottest Months, the better it
is: and if a sudden violent shour has disturbed and muddied the River, then is
your time to angle in the Stream at the ground with a red Worm.

Likewise a little before the Fish spawn is a very good time for Angling; for
then their Bellies being full, they come into sandy Fords, and there rub their
Bellies to loosen them, at which time they will bite very freely.

If you intend to fish for Carp and Tench, you must commence your sport early
in the Morning, fishing from Sunrising till eight of the Clock, and from four
in the Afternoon till Night; and in hot Months till it be very late.

In the heat of Summer Carps will show themselves on the very Rim of the water;
at which time, if you fish with a Lob-worm as you do with a Fly natural, you
will have excellent sport, especially if it be among Reeds.

In March, April, September, and all the Winter, (in which season Fish swim
deep very near the Ground) I say, in those Months it is best fishing in a clear
serene warm day, for then they bite fastest: But all the Summertime Mornings,
Evenings, and cool cloudy weather are the best times for Angling.

Here note, that by experience you will find that Fish rise best at the Fly
after a shour of Rain that have only beaten the Gnats and Flies into the River
without muddying them. The proper Months and times of the day for the Fly, are
March, April, May, and the beginning of June; in which Months let your times be
in the Morning about nine, and between three and four in the Afternoon. A warm
Evening is very seasonable, if the Gnats play much.

After a clear Moon shiny-night, if the day succeeding prove cloudy, it is a
very good time for Angling; for, having abstained from food all the night, (for
they will not stir for fear in bright nights) the next day they become hungry
and eager, and the gloominess of the day makes them bite boldly.

At the opening of Sluices or Mill-dams go along with the course of the water,
and you will find Trouts and other fish will then come out to seek for what
food the water brings down with it.

Having shown you what seasons are most proper and profitable to Angle in, I
will demonstrate to you such as are not.

And First, In the extremity of Heat, when the Earth is parched with Drought,
there is little sport to be obtained, especially in muddy or clear shallow
Rivers.

Secondly, In the Winter or Springtime, when there happens any hoary Frost,
then will not the fish bite kindly all that day, unless it be in the Evening,
and if that prove serene and pleasant: but it is not convenient to fish at any
time when the Wind blows so high that you cannot manage your Tools to
advantage.

Thirdly, Sheep-shearing time is an an Enemy to the Angler, for then the Fish
glut themselves with what is washed off the Sheep, and will scarcely bite till
that season be over. Likewise sharp East and North nipping-winds do very much
prejudice the Anglers Recreation: neither is it good to fish immediately after
Spawning-time; for at that time their appetite is much abated.

It is a very strange thing to consider the natural instinct in Fish in
foreknowing the approach of a shower of Rain; for I have tried, that upon the
rise of a Gloud that threatened a sudden Shower, they would not bite; from which
observation I have often saved my self from being wet to the Skin.

Lastly, If the preceding night prove dark and cloudy, the succeeding day will
prove ineffectual for fishing, unless for small fish; for at such times the
great ones prey abroad for the lesser, who, by instinct knowing the danger,
hide themselves till the Morning; and having fasted all night become then very
hungry, whilst the great ones having gorged themselves lie absconded all the
day long.

The next thing we shall insist on, is the way of taking several sorts of fish
(as they are here alphabetically set down) with several proper Baits according
to the best of experiences.

Of the BARBEL.
THE Barbel is so called by reason of the Barb which is under his Nose or
Chaps. He is a leather-mouth'd-fish, that is, such a one as will not break his
hold when hook d; but will frequently break, if big, both Rod and Line.

They swim together in great Shoals, and are at worst in April, though not very
good at any time.

The places where he loves most to resort, are where Weeds grow, or in a
gravelly rising ground, wherein he will dig and root like a Hog with his Nose:
not but that he frequents the strongest swifts of water sometimes, as deep
Bridges or Wears, where he will so settle himself among the Piles and hollow
places, or amongst Moss or Weeds, that let the Water be never so swift, he will
remain immovable. This is his custom in the Summertime; after which times he
retires into deep waters and there helps the Female to dig a hole in the Sand
for her to hide her Spawn from being devoured by other Fish.

This Fish is of a delicate Cast and handsome shape, with small Scales placed
after a most curious manner; and as his shape is curious so is his palate, for
he will not eat any thing but what is clean; and therefore if you intend to
make any sport with him your Bait must be very well scowred. The best for him
is a Lobworm, at which he will bite boldly, if you bait your ground the night
before with big worms cut in pieces. For him you can never bait the Ground too
much, nor can you fish for him too early or too late.

Gentles also are a very good Bait for him, if green; and so is Cheese made
tough by keeping it in a wet Linen Bag a day or two: This Cheese steeped in
clarified Honey, and the Ground where you intend to fish baited therewith, will
give you an opportunity to catch store enough of Barbels, if there be any
thereabout. You may do well to bait your Hook with Cheese that is sost, and
Sheeps-tallow wrought into a Paste: but there is no bait like the well-scowred
Lob-worm, or Cheese steeped in Honey an hour or two.

When you fish for this Barbel, let your Rod and Line be both loug and strong;
on your Line let there be a running Plummet, that is a Bullet with a hole throw
the middle, let a knot or little bit of Lead be placed a Foot or more above
your Hook, to keep your Bullet from falling down on it: so your Worm lay at the
bottom where they always bite, and when he takes your bait the Plummet will lie
and not check the fish, and you may know by the bending of the top of your Rod
when he bites, and likewise feel him with your hand make a strong snatch, then
strike and you rarely fail, if you play him well and tire him; for as he is
very subtle, so is he extraordinary strong and dogged to be dealt withal, and
will so struggle, that if you manage him not dexterously, he will break your
Line.

His best time of biting is about nine of the Clock, and the chiefest time of
fishing for him is at the latter end of May, June, July, and the beginning of
August.

Of the BREAM.
THere are two sorts of Breams, the one a fresh and the other a salt
water-Fish, yet neither differ much in shape, nature, or taste.

I shall only speak of the fresh water Bream, which at full growth is a large
and stately Fish, and breeds either in Ponds or Rivers; but chiefly delights in
the former, which if he likes, he will not only grow exceeding fat, but will
fill the Pond with his issue, even to the starving of the other Fish.

As for his shape, it is very broad, and thick scaled very excellently, with a
forked Tail; his Eyes are large, but he has a very little sucking Mouth,
disproportionate to his Body.

The flesh of this Fish is accounted more pleasant than wholesome by some: but
as for my part, I am of the judgment of the French, who have a great
estimation for it; and if you will but taste his Belly or Head, you will say it
is most excellent food.

The Bream spawneth in June, or the beginning of July, and is easily taken; for
after one or two gentle turns he will fall upon his side, and so you may draw
him to Land with ease. The best time of Angling for him, is from St. James-tide
till Bartholomew-tide; for having had all the Summers food, they are exceeding
fat.

The Bream is a great lover of red Worms, especially such as are to be found at
the root of a great Dock, and lie wrapped up in a round clue; also he loves
Paste, Flag-worms, Wasps, green Flies, Butter-flies, and a Grass-hopper with
his Legs cut off.

The way of taking Breams is thus: First bait the ground (where you know they
resort) with a convenient quantity of sweet-ground Barley-malt, boiled but a
little while, and strained when it is cold: go with it to the place about nine
a Clock at night, then take your Malt, and squeezing it between your Hands,
throw it into the River, and it will sink: If the stream run hard, cast in your
squeezed Balls a little above the place you intend to angle in. Having thus
baited your ground, in the Morning bait your Hook with the greatest red Worm
you can get; you may find them in Gardens or Chalky Commons after a shower of
Rain; of which you must store your self beforehand, keeping them a Month at
least in dry Moss, changing the Moss every three days. Having baited your hook
so that the worm may crawl to and fro, for the better enticing of the Fish to
bite without suspicion, observe where your fish play most and stay longest,
which commonly is in the broadest, deepest and stillest part of the River
generally in deep and still back Waters: then plumb your ground, and fish
within half an Inch of it; for although you shall see some Breams play on the
top of the Water, yet these are but the Sentinels for them beneath.

You may have three or four Rods out at a time stuck in the Bank-side, and let
them be long, the Floats Swan or Goose-quills, which must be sunk with Lead,
the tops bearing above water about half an Inch. Let your Rods be cast in one
above the other about a yard and a half distant, and then withdraw your self
from the Bank so far that you can perceive nothing but the top of the Float;
and when you perceive it sink, then creep to the Waterside, and give it as
much Line as you can: if it be a Carp or bream, they will run to the other
side; then strike gently, and hold your Rod at a bent a little while, but do
not pull, for then you spoil all; but you must first tire them before you can
land them, being very shie. Of the two, the Carp is the worst, being more brisk
and strong.

Here take notice by the way, if Pike or Perch be thereabout, it will be but a
folly to think of killing Carp or Bream; and therefore you must remove those
obstacles, by fishing them out first. And to the intent you may know whether
there be those Fish of Prey thereabout, take a small Bleak or Gudgeon, and bait
it, setting it alive among your Rods, two foot deep from your Float, with a
little red Worm at the point of your Hook: if a Pike be there, he will
certainly snap at it.

Of the BLEAK.
THE Bleak is an eager fish, and is caught with all sorts of Worms bred on
Trees or Plants, also with Flies, Paste, Sheeps-bloud, etc You may angle for
them with half a score Hooks at once, if you can fasten them all on. Also in an
Evening the Bleak will take the natural or artificial Fly.

If it be a warm clear day, there is no Bait so good for the Bleak as a small
Fly at the top of the water, which they will take at any time of the day, but
especially in the evening: there is no fish that yields better sport for a
young Angler than this, for they are so eager that they will leap out of the
water at the Bait.

If the day be cold and cloudy, Gentles or Cadice are best about two foot under
water.

This same Bleak by some is called a Fresh-watersprat, or River-swallow, by
reason of his continual motion.

Some would have him called Bleak from the whitish color, and that is only
under his Belly, for his Back is of a pleasant Seagreen.

There is another way of taking Bleaks, by whipping them in a Boat or on a
Bank-side in swift Water in a Summers evening, with a Hazel-top about five or
six foot long, and a Line twice the length of the Rod; but the best way is with
a Drabble that is tie eight or ten small Hooks along a Line two Inches above
one another the biggest Hook the lowermost, by which you may sometimes take a
better Fish, and bait them with Gentles, Flies, or small red Worms, by which
means you may take half a dozen or more at one time.

Of the BULL-HEAD, or MILLER'S-THUMB.
THE Bull-head is a Fish which has a broad Head and wide Mouth, with two broad
Fins near his Eyes, and two Fins under his Belly: instead of his Teeth his
rough Lips assist him in nibbing at the bait. He has Fins also on his Back,
and one below the Vent; and his Tail is round, his Body being all over covered
with whitish, blackish, and brownish spots.

They begin to spawn about April, and are full of Spawn all the Summer-season.
The Bull-head's common habitation is in Holes, or among Stones in clear Water
in Summer; but in the Winter he takes up his quarters with the Eel in the Mud:
So does the Loach and Minnow; or we cannot guess otherwise where their
Winter-abode should be.

He is easily taken in the Summer, for he is lazy and simple. You may see him
in hot weather lie Sunning himself on a flat Stone or gravelly Ground, at which
time you may put your Hook (which must be baited with a small Worm) very near
the Mouth, at which he seldom refuses to bite, so that the veriest bungling
Angler may take him.

He is an excellent fish for taste, but of so ill a shape, that many women care
not for dressing him, he so much resembles a Toad.

Of the CHEVIN.
THE Chevin spawneth in March, and is a very strong (yet unactive) fish,
yielding in a very little time after he is struck. The larger he is, the
quieter he is taken.

As for his food, he loves all sorts of Worms and Flies, also Cheese, Grain,
black Worms, slitting their Bellies that the white may appear: he loves to
have his Bait large, and variety of Baits at one Hook. He delights very much in
the Pith that grows in the bone of an Ox-back, os which you must be careful in
taking off the tough outward Skin, without breaking the tender inward Skin

Early in the Morning angle for your Chevin with Snails; but choose some other
Bait for him in the heat of the day, for then he will not bite at them. In the
Afternoon fish for him at Ground or Fly. There is no Fly he loves better than
a great Moth with a great head, whose Body is yellow, with whitish Wings; which
is to be found commonly in Gardens about the Evening. He will not stick
sometimes to snap at a Lamprey.

Of the CHAR.
I Could never read nor hear that the Char was taken any where but in a Mere in
Lancashire, called Winander-mere, the largest, according to report, that is in
the Kingdom of England, being ten miles in length, and as smooth as a
Bowling-green at the bottom.

This Char is spotted like a Trout, and its dimension seldom exceeds seventeen
Inches or a foot and half. This Fish is delicate food, having scarce a Bone but
what is on the Back. Now since the place is so remote from London where these
Chars are taken, I shall for bear to trouble our City-Angler with Rules and
Directions how to angle for him, and pass to such Fish as are frequently found
in every River here near adjacent.

Of the CHUB.
THis Fish has several appellations; for he is called a Chub, a Chavender by
the French, by some a Villian, by others a Cheven. As for my part, call him
what you please, I like him not for these reasons: first, he is full of small
forked Bones dispersed every where throughout his Body; next, he eats very
waterish; and lastly, this Fish is unfirm, and (in my opinion) in a manner
tasteless.

Of all fish he is the best to enter a young Angler, for he is very easily
taken: however give me leave to prescribe you some more Rules than what I have
already shown in the Angling for the Cheven, which is the same with the Chub or
Chavender

You must find out some hole, where you shall have twenty or more of them
together in a hot day floating almost on the very surface of the water: let
your Rod be long and strong, and your Line not above a yard or two long, very
strong, and an indifferent large Hook; then bait your Hook with a Grasshopper,
bob your Grasshopper up and down one the top of the water, and if there be any
Chub near he will rise; but so abscond your self that you may not be seen, for
he is a very fearful fish, and therefore the least shadow will make him sink to
the bottom of the water, yet he will rise again suddenly; this is called
Bobing.

Having baited your Hook drop it gently some two foot before that Chub you have
elected by your eye to be the best and fairest, and he will instantly bite
greedily thereat, and be held so fast by reason of his Leather-mouth, that he
can seldom break his hold: and therefore you may do well to give him play
enough, and so tire him; otherwise you may endanger your Line.

If you cannot find a Grasshopper, then bait your Hook with any kind of Fly or
Worm, as I said before, as Dors, Beetles, Bobs, Cod or Case-worms.

When you fish for the Chub with a Fly, Grasshopper, or Beetle, it must be at
the top of the water; if with other baits, underneath.

In March and April angle for your Chub with Worms; in May, June, and July,
with Flies, Snails, or Cherries. Where note he will rarely refuse a Grasshopper
on the top of a swift Stream, nor at the bottom the young Humble-bee. In
August, September, etc. make use of a Paste made of Parmisan, or Holland cheese
pounded with Saffron in a Mortar, adding thereunto a little Butter. Others make
a Paste of Cheese and Turpentine for the Winter-season, at which time the Chub
is in his prime; for then his forked Bones are either lost, or converted into a
Gristle; and he is excellent meat baked.

In hot weather angle for him in the middle of the water, or near the top
thereof; but in cold weather fish for him near the bottom.

To finish all other discourse of this Chub, Cheven, or Chavender, I shall only
say that his Spawn is excellent; and if he be large, the Head, when the Throat
is well washed, is the best part of the Fish.

Of the CARP.
IT is confessed by all, that the Carp is the Queen of all Fresh-water-fish,
being not only a good, but subtle fish and living longest of all fish
(excepting the Ecl) out of his proper Element. Those that die soonest are
Herrings, for salt water; and for fresh water, Trouts.

Carps are observed to breed several Months in one year; and for this reason
you shall hardly ever take either Male or Female without Melt or Spawn. They
breed ever more naturally in Ponds than in running water: in the latter very
seldom or never; and where they breed, they breed innumerably.

He that intends to Angle for a Carp, must arm himself with a world of
Patience, by reason of the extraordinary subtlety and policy of that Fish: They
always choose to lie in the deepest places either of Ponds or Rivers where is
but a small running Stream. Next, you are to observe that the Carp will seldom
bite in cold weather; and in hot weather you cannot be too early or too late at
your sport: and if he bite, you need not fear his hold, for he is one of those
leather-mouth'd-fish, who have their Teeth in their Throat.

When you angle for the Carp, your Rod and Line must be strong; and because he
is so very wary, it is good to entice him by baiting the Ground with course
Paste: In March he seldom resuseth the red Worm, the Cadice in June, nor the
Grasshopper in July, August, and September.

The Carp takes delight in Worms or sweet Pastes, of which there are great
variety: the best are made up of Honey and Sugar, and ought to be thrown into
your Water some hours before you intend to angle; or if you throw in your Paste
made into small Pellets two or three days before, it will not be the worse,
especially if you throw in also Chickens-guts, Garbage, or Blood incorporated
with Bran or Cow Dung.

You may make your Paste in this manner: Take a convenient quantity of
Bean-flour, or any other Flour, and mingle it with the flesh of a Cat cut
small; make up this Composition with Honey, and then beat them all together in
a Mortar so long, till they are so tough as to hang upon a Hook without washing
off. For the better effecting thereof, mingle therewith some whitish Wool; and
if you would keep it all the year, add thereunto some Virgins-wax and clarified
Honey.

If you fish with Gentles, anoint them with Honey and put them on your hook
with a piece of Scarlet dipped in the like. This is the most approved way to
deceive and captivate the subtle Carp. Honey and crumbs of White-bread mixed
together is a very good Paste for a Carp.

An approved way how to take Carp in a muddy Pond. Vide Chap. Of the Tench.

Of the DACE and DARE.
THE Dace, Dare and Roach, are much of a kind, both in manner of feeding,
cunning, goodness and commonly in size

The Dace or Dare will bite at any Fly, but especially at the Stone-cadice fly
or May fly, the latter end of April and the beginning or most part of May is a
most excellent bait, floating on the top of the water; which you may gather
great quantities of from the Reeds and Sedge by the water side, or from
Hawthorne bushes which grow near the bank of a shallow Gravel-stream, on which
they very much delight to hang: also at Ant-flies, of which the blackish is the
best, which are found in Mole-hills about the Months of June, July, August and
September. The way of preserving them for your use is, to put them alive into a
Glass-bottle, having first laid therein some of the moist Earth from whence you
gatherd them, with some of the Roots of the Grass of the said Hillock: having
laid your Ant-flies in gently without premdicing their Wings, lay a clod of
Earth over it: thus you may keep them a Month, if you bruise them not. If you
would keep them longer, put them into a large Rundlet, having first washed the
inside with water and Honey: having thus kept them three Months, they are an
incomparable Bait in any Stream and clear Water, either for Dace, Dare or
Roach, and are good also for a Chavender, fishing within a handful from the
bottom.

The best time for making use of the Ant-flie, is when they swarm, and that is
generally about the latter end of July, and beginning of August: they will cover
a Tree or Bush with their multitude, and then if you make use of them, you may
load your self with Roach or Dace in a small time.

In a warm day he rarely refuses a fly at the top of the water: but remember
that when you fish under water for him, it is best to be within an handful or
something more of the ground.

If you would fish for Dace or Dare in winter, then about Alhallontide, where
ever you see Heath or Sandy grounds ploughing up, follow the Plough, and you
will find a white worm with a red head, as big as the top of a man's little
finger. You may know where most of them are, by the number of Crows and Rooks
which sit on the plowed land. The worm is very soft and is by some termed a
Grub, which is nothing but the Spawn of a Beetle. Gather what quantity you
think fit, and put them into a Vessel with some of the Earth from whence they
were taken, and you may keep them all the Winter.

Lastly the young brood of Wasps and Bees having their heads dipped in Blood, are
an excellent bait for Dace or Dare.

Of the EEL.
I Shall not trouble you with variety of discourses concerning the being of an
Eel, whether they breed by some Generation, or Corruption as Worms or by
certain Glutinous dew drops, which falling in May and June on the Banks of some
Ponds or Rivers; are by the heat of the Sun turned into Eels: and these are by
some called Yelvers, of which I have seen Cakes made, and have eaten thereof
when fried, with much satisfaction. I say waving away all Discourses of this
nature, I shall only tell you that some have differented Eels into four sorts
chiefly: namely, the Silver-Eel, a Greenish Eel, (which is called a Creg;) a
blackish Eel, with a broad flat head; and lastly an Eel with reddish Fins.

I shall only speak of the first, which is the Silver Eel. This Eel is
generally believed to have its being from Generation, but not by spawning, but
the young coming from the Female alive, and no bigger than a small Needle.

This Eel may be caught with several sorts of Baits but principally with
powdered Beef. A Garden-worm or Lob, or a Minnow, or Hen's-gut, or Garbage of
Fish, is a very good bait: but some prefer a Pride, which others call a
Lamprey, beyond any yet named.

As Eels abscond themselves in Winter, taking up their constant residence in
the Mud, without stirring out for six Months; so in the Summer they take no
delight to be abroad in the day, and therefore the most proper time to take
them is in the night, with any of those Baits aforesaid, fastening your Line to
the Bank-side with your Laying-hooks in the water. Or you may throw in a Line
with good store of Hooks baited, and plumb'd with a Float to discover where the
Line lies, that in the Morning you may take it up with your Drag-hook.

There is another way of taking Eels, and that is by Sniggling. This Sniggling
is nothing else but taking in the daytime a strong Line and Hook baited with a
Lob or Garden-worm, and marking such Holes and places where the Eels use to
abscond themselves in the daytime near Wears, Mills, or Floodgates, and
gently by the help of a Stick putting your bait into such holes where you
imagine Eels are: and if there be any, you shall be sure to have a bite; but
then have a care you pull not too hard, lest you spoil all. Here note, that the
Top of your Stick must be cleft, wherein you must put a strong Hook, but of a
narrow compass; which Stick must guide the Bait into the Hole where the Eel is,
by which means, if your Tackling hold, you may get as large Eels as any are in
the River, Mill-pond, or Flood-gate, etc. And as this way of fishing is called
Sniggling, so it is called Broggling for Eels.

Bobbing fot Eels is done after another manner: that is, Take very large Lobs,
scowr them well, and with a Needle run some strong-twisted Silk through them
from end to end; take so many as that you may wrap them about a board a dozen
times at least, then tie them fast with the two ends of the Silk, that they may
hang in so many Hanks; then fasten all to a strong Cord, and about a handful
and a half above the Worms fasten a Plumb of three quarters of a pound in
weight, and fasten your Cord to a strong Pole: having so done, fish in muddy
Water, and you will feel the Eels tug lustily at them. When you think they have
swallowed them as far as they can, gently draw up your Line, till you have
brought your Eels to the top of the water, and then bring them ashore as fast
as you can. The Gentleman (and an experienced Angler) from whom I received this
Instruction, told me, he has taken six or seven large Eels at a time this very
way.

There is another way also for taking of Eels (though it be somewhat laborious,
and for that reason is best to be made use of in cold weather) and that is by
an Instrument called an Eel-spear: it is made for the most part with three
Forks or Teeth, jagged on the sides; but those are better that have four. This
you are to strike into the Mud at the bottom of the River; and if you chance to
light where they lie, you need not fear taking them if your Instrument be good.

If you would take verv large Eels indeed, bait your Night-hooks with small
Roaches, und let the Hooks lie in the Mouth of the Fish.

Of the FLOUNDER.
I shall not go about to tell you the nature of a Flounder, or give you his
description, since he is a Fish so well known to every one.

In April, May, June and July, you may fish for the Flounder all day long,
either in a swift Stream or in the still Deep, but best in the Stream. Your
most proper Baits are all sorts of red Worms, Wasps and Gentles.

Of the GRAILING.
WHen you angle for the Grailing, you must head your Hook upon the Shank with a
very slender narrow plate of Lead, and let it be slenderest at the bent of the
Hook, that the Bait which must be a large Grashoper, may with more facility
come over it: At the point let there be a Cad bait, and keep the bait in
continual Motion; and forget not to pull off the Grashopper's Wings which are
uppermost.

In the Months of March and April, there is an excellent Bait for the Grailing,
which is called a Tagtail: This worm is of a pale Flesh-colors, with a yellow
Tag on his Tail, somewhat less then half an Inch long; which is to be found in
Marled Grounds and Meadows in fair weather, but not to be seen in cold weather,
or after a shower of Rain.

Of the GUDGEON.
THe Gudgeon, though small, is a fish of so pleasant a taste, that in my
opinion it is very little inferior to the Smelt. I need not describe him, he
is so well known.

He spawns three or four times in the Summer season. His feeding is much like
the Barbel's, in sharp Streams and on Gravel, slighting all manner of Flies. He
is easily taken with a small red Worm, fishing near the ground.

This Fish is Leather-mouthed, and will not easily be lost off the Hook when
struck. You may fish for him with Float, your Hook being on the ground; or by
hand with a running line on the ground, without either Cork or Float.

Wasps, Gentles, and Cad-baits are good baits for the Gudgeon, but the small
Red worm the best; you may fish for them with two or three hooks at once and
find very pleasant sport where they rise any thing large. When you Angle for
them, stir up the Sand or Gravel with a long Pole, which will make them gather
to that place, and bite faster and with more eagerness.

Of the GUINIAD.
I Cannot say much of this Fish, only that it is excellent food; and therefore
I shall conclude my discourse of the Guiniad with a very strange observation;
and that is, This Fish is not found any where but in a large Water called
Pemble-Mere: but that which is most remarkable is this, That the River which
runs by Chester has its Head or. Fountain in Merionith shire and in its course
runs through this Pemble-Mere, which abounds as much with Guiniads, as the
River Dee does with Salmon, of each both affording great plenty; and yet it was
never known that any Salmon was ever caught in the Mere, nor ever any Guiniads
taken in the River.

When Dee that in his course fain in her lap would lie,
Commixtion with her store, his stream she does deny,
By his complexion proved, as he through her does glide,
Her Wealth again from his she likewise does divide:
Those white fish that in her do wondrously abound,
Are never seen in him; nor are his Salmons found
At any time in her; but as she him disdains,
So he again from her as wilfully abstains.
Draytons Polyolb. Song 9. Of the LOACH.
THe Loach, though a small yet a dainty fish: his breeding and feeding is in
little and clear swift Brooks or Rivulets; here and in sharp Streams Gravel is
his usual food. He is small and slender, seldom exceeding three Inches in
length: he is bearded like a Barbel, having two Fins at his sides, four at his
Belly, and only one at his Tail and is freckled with many black or brown spots.

This Loach is commonly full of Spawn, which is, with the flesh, a very
grateful food to weak Stomachs affording great Nourishment. He is to be taken
with a very small Worm near the ground, for he delights to be near the Gravel,
and therefore is seldom seen on the top of the water.

Of the MINNOW.
THe Minnow is a fish without Scales, and one of the least of the watery
Inhabitants; but for excellency of meat he may (in my opinion) be compared to
any fish of greatest value and largest size; and little things should not be
despised. The Spawners are usually full of Spawn all the Summer long, for they
breed often, as it is but necessary, being both Prey and Baits to other fish.
They come into the Rivers generally about March and April, and there continue
till the cold weather drive them into their Winter quarters again.

Of color this fish is greenish, or wavy sky-colored; his Belly is very
white, but his Back is blackish. This Fish will bite sharply at a small Worm;
and if you will trouble your self to catch enough of them you may make an
excellent Tansie of them, cutting off their Heads and Tails, and frying them in
Eggs, saucing them with Butter, Sugar and Verjuice.

Anglers use to find him oftener then they would: Deep places he seldom
frequents. It is a Fish no way curious of his feeding, for any Bait pleases
him if he can but swallow it, he will strain hard for what he cannot gorge. The
chiefest food he loves is a small red Worm, Wasps, or Cad-baits.

Of the POPE, or RUFF.
THis Fish with a double name is small, and seldom grows bigger than Gudgeon;
in shape he is not unlike a Perch, but esteemed better food, being of taste as
pleasant and delightful as any fish whatever.

The Ruff frequents the deepest running places in a Gravel River, the exact
bottom of which being found by plumbing, and your Hooks being baited with small
red or brandling Worms, (for I would have you fish with two or three) you will
have incomparable sport as long as you desire.

The Ruff makes excellent sport with an unexperienced Angler, for he is a
greedy biter; and they are in great Shoals together where the Water is deep,
smooth, and calm. If you would catch a good round quantity, bait your ground
with Earth, and angle for them with a small red Worm.

Of the PIKE.
THE Pike is a very long-lived creature, and if we may credit Sir Francis
Bacon, or Gesner that famous Brutologist, he outlives all other Fish; which is
pity, he being as absolute a Tyrant of the Freshwaters, as the Salmon is, the
King thereof.

The larger the Pike, the courser the food, the smaller being ever best;
contrary to the nature of Eels, which improve their goodness by their bulk and
age.

He is a melancholic Fish, because he never swims in Shoals, but rests himself
alone; and he is as bold as any fish whatever, if we may believe Report, which
informs us a Pike has been known to fight with an Otter for a Carp he had
taken, and was carrying out of the Water. Another bit a Mule by the Lip as he
was drinking, and stuck thereunto so fast, that by that means the Owner of the
Mule took him. Another bit a Maid by the Foot as she was washing. He will
frequently devour his own kind unnaturally; from whence I suppose he may obtain
the name of a Freshwater-wolf.

As the Pike is in nature like the Hawk, a Bird of Prey, so he is like her in
generation, neither of them breeding but once a year: and when the Pike spawns
it is between February and March. The best Pikes are found in Rivers, the worst
in Meres or Ponds.

His common Food is either Pickerel weed, Frogs, or what fish he can procure.
This Pickerel-weed some say, both feeds and breeds them.

There are two ways of fishing for the Pike; first by the Ledger, secondly by
the Walking-bait.

The Ledger-bait is fixed in one certain place, whilst the Angler may be
absent; and this must be a living Bait, either Fish or Frog. Of Fish the best
are a Dace, Roach, or Perch: for Frogs, the yellowest are the best. How to
keep them alive on your Hook, your own ingenuity will inform you.

When you intend to use the Ledger-bait, if it be a Fish, stick your Hook
through his upper Lip; and then fastening it to a strong Line at least twelve or
fourteen yards in length, tie the other end of the Line either to some Stake in
the ground, or to some bough of a Tree near the Pike's usual haunt or where you
think it is like he may come. Then wind your Line on a sorked stick, (big
enough to keep the bait from drawing it under water) all except about half yard
or somewhat more; and your stick having a small celft at the end, fasten your
Line therein; but so, that when the Pike comes, he may easily draw it forth,
and have Line enough to go to his hold and pouch.

If your Bait be a Frog, put the Arming-wyre in at his Mouth, and out at his
Gills; and then with a fine Needle and Silk sow the upper part of his Leg with
one stitch only to your Arming-wyre, or tie his Leg above the upper joint to
the Wyre; but as gently as you can, lest you hurt him.

I have seen excellent sport with living baits tied about the Bodies of two or
three couple of Ducks, driven over a place where store of Pikes have
frequented. I have observed the Pike to strike so violently at the living Bait,
that being hung he has drawn the Duck clear under water. The like may be done
with such baits tied to bladders, suffering them to float down the River,
whilst you mind your sport walking on its Banks.

The next way of Angling for a Pike is with a Trowl with a Winch to wind it up
withal. As this Fish is very strong, so must your Tackle; and your Rod must not
be very slender at top, where must be placed a Ring for your Line to run
through. Your Line must be Silk two yards and a quarter next the Hook, which
mast be double, and strongly armed with a Wyre about seven Inches: the rest of
your Line may be strong Shoemakers-thread. Upon the shank of the Hook fasten
some smooth Lead; and having placed your Hook in the Mouth of a Minnow, Dace,
or Roach; with your Lead sink your Bait with his head downward. Having so done,
cast your Bait up and down: if you feel him at the hook, give him length enough
to run away with the Bait and pouch it; which when you think he has done,
strike him with a smart jerk, and so continue your sport with him as long as
you shall think fit. Take likewise this next Direction from a friend that
speaks not much different.

When you intend to Trowl, you may make choice either of Roach, Dace, Bleak, or
Gudgeon to bait withal, (but for my own part I always prefer the Guogeon) which
you must do thus: put your Arming-wyre in at the Mouth, and thrusting it along
by the Back bring it out again at the Tail, and there faslen it with a Thread
Having your Reel in your hand, and your Line fastened to your hook through a
Ring at the top of your Rod, cast your bait into some likely place, and move it
up and down in the water as you walk gently by the Riverside: when you have a
bite (which you may easily feel, for he will give a good tug) be sure to give
him Line enough. You may let him lie almost a quarter of an hour before you
strike; and then have a care you do it not too fiercely, lest you endanger your
Tackle, and lose the Fish to boot.

If you fish at Snap, you must give him leave to run a little, then strike,
striking the contrary way to which he runs. For this way of Angling, a
Spring hook is best; and your Tackle must be much stronger than that for the
Trowl, because you must strike with greater force.

Here note, that a large Bait more invites the Pike to bite, but the lesser
takes him more infallibly, either at Snap or Trowl.

If you fish with a dead bait for a Pike, this is a most excellent bait: Take a
Minnow, Frog that is yellow, Dace, or Roach, and having dissolved Gum of Ivy in
Oil of Spike, anoint your both therewith, and cast it where Pikes frequent.
Having lain a little while at bottom, draw it to the top, and so up the Stream,
and you will quickly perceive a Pike follow it with much eagerness.

A Pike will bite at all baits, excepting the Fly, and bites best about three
in the afternoon in clear water with a gentle gale, from the middle of Summer
to the latter end of Autumm; he then bites best in still places or a gentle
Stream: but in Winter he bites all the day long. In the latter end, and
beginning of the Spring, he bites most eagerly early in the morning, and late
in the evening

Of the PERCH.
THE Perch is a fish that is hook-backt, somewhat bowed like a Hog, and armed
with stiff Gristles, and his sides with dry thick Scales. He is a bold biter,
which appears by his daring to adventure on one of his own kind with more
courage than the Pike by much.

Some say there are two sorts of Pearches, the one salt water, and the other
fresh: the first has but one Fin on his Back, the latter two, which is more
than most Fishes have.

He spawns but once a year, and that is in February or March, and seldom grows
longer than two foot. His best time of biting is when the Spring is far spent,
at which time you may take at one standing all that are in one hole, be they
never so many.

His Baits are a Minnow, or little Frog; but a Worm called a Brandling is best,
if well scoured. When he bites give him time enough, and that can hardly be too
much.

The Perch biteth well all the day long in cool cloudy weather; but chiefly
from eight in the Morning till ten, and from three till almost six.

You may angle for him with Lob-worms well scoured, Bobs, Oak-worms, Gentles,
Colewort-worms, Minnows, Dors, Wasps, and Cad-baits.

He will not bite at all the seasons of the year, especially in Winter, for
then he is very abstemious; yet if it be warm he will bite then in the midst of
the day; for in Winter all fish bite best about the heat of the day.

If you rove for a Perch with a Minnow, (which of all baits yields the most
delightful recreation to the Angler) it must be alive, sticking your Hook
through his upper Lip or back Fin, and letting him swim about mid-water, or
somewhat lower; for which purpose you must have an indifferent large Cork with
a Quill on your Line.

I always make use of a good strong Silk-Line, and a good Hook armed with Wyre,
so that if a Pike do come I may be provided for him, and have by this means
taken several. I use also to carry a Tin-pot of about two quarts or three
pints, in which to keep my Minnows or Gudgeons alive: the Lid of the Pot is
full of little holes, so that I can give them fresh Water without opening it;
which ought to be about every quarter of an hour, lest they die.

If you take a small Casting-net with you, you may at a cast or two take baits
enough to serve you all day without farther trouble.

When you fish with a Frog, you must fasten the Hook through the skin of his
Leg toward the upper part thereof.

The Perch is none of the Leather-mouth'd sort of fishes; and therefore when
he bites give him time enough to pouch his bait, lest when you think all sure,
his hold break out, and you lose your fish and your patience too.

The best place to fish for Pearches is in the turning of the Water, or Edwing
in a good Gravel Scour, where you will not fail of them, and Ruffs before
spoke of.

He that will take a Perch must first take notice that this fish feeds well,
and bites freely. Let the Angler overnight bait his ground with Lob-worms
chopped in pieces; and in the morning let him come to the place, where he must
first plumb his ground, then gage his Line and bait his hook with a red knotted
worm, or a Minnow, which is better in my opinion: the hook must be put in at
the back of the Minnow betwixt the fish and the skin, that the Minnow may swim
up and down alive, being buoyed up with a Cork or Quill, that the Minnow may
have liberty to swim a foot off the ground. Let these directions be carefully
observed and followed, and the Angler need not fear the frustration of his
expectations.

Of the RUD.
THE Rud has a forked Tail, and is small of size: some say he is bred of the
Roach and Bream, and is found in Ponds; in some they are in a manner
innumerable.

There is little less difference between the Rud and Roach, than there is
between the Herring and Pilchard, their shape being much alike, only differing
in bulk or bigness. Since the Rud is but a Bastard- Roach, I shall speak no
more on him, but discourse of the genuine Roach only.

Of the ROACH.
THE Roach is not looked on as any delicate Fish at all; if there be any thing
prizable, it is his Spawn.

The Roach is a very silly fish, being every whit as simple as the Carp is
crafty. They are more to be esteemed which are found in Rivers than in Ponds,
although those that breed in the latter are of a much larger size; yet the
Thames below Bridge abounds with very large fat Roach, such as I may
confidently affirm exceed in magnitude all others either in Ponds or Rivers.

The Roach is a Leather-mouth'd-fish, having his Teeth (as I said before) in
his Throat, as all Leather-mouth'd Fish have.

In April the Cads or Worms are proper Baits to angle for Roaches; in Summer
fish for them with small white Snails or Flies: but note, they must be under
water, for he will not bite at the top. Or, take a May-fly, and with a Plumb
sink it where you imagine Roaches lie, whether in deep water, or near the Posts
and Piles either or Bridge or Wear having so done, do not hastily, but gently
pull your Fly up, and you will see the Roach (if any there) pu sue and take it
near the rim of the water lest by flight it should escape.

In Autumn you may fish for them with Paste only made of the crumbs of sine
White-bread, molded with a little water and the labor of your hands into a
tough Paste, colored not very deep with Red-Lead, with which you may mix a
little sine Cotton or Lint, and a little Butter; these last will make it hold
on and not wash off your Hook. With which you must fish with much
circumspection, or you lose your bait. In like manner in Winter you may angle
for Roach with Paste; but Gentles are then the better bait.

Take these next Observations experimentally tried by some of us, viz. There is
another excellent bait either so: Winter or Summer, and that is this: Take an
handful of well dried Malt, and put it into a Dish of Water, and then having
grubbed and washed it betwixt our hands till it be clean and free from Husks,
put that water from it, and having put it into a little fresh water, set it
over a gentle Fire, and let it boil till it be pretty fest; then pour the Water
from it, and with a sharp Knife, turning the sprout-end of the Corn upward,
take off the back-part of the Husk with the point of your Knife, leaving a kind
of inward Husk on the Corn, or else you spoil all: then cut off a little of the
sprout-end, that the white may appear, and also a very little of the other end
for the Hook to enter. When you make use of this bait, cast now and then a
little of it into the water; and then, if your Hook be small and good, you will
find it an excellent bait either for Roach or Dace.

Another good bait is the young brood of Wasps or Bees, if you dip their Heads
in Blood. So is the thick blood of a Sheep being half dried on a Trencher, and
then cut into such small pieces as will best fit your Hook: a little Salt will
keep it from turning black, and make it the better.

Or you may take a handful or two of the largest and best Wheat you can get,
boil it in a little Milk till it be soft, then fry it gently with Honey and a
little beaten Saffron dissolved in Milk.

The Roach spawns about the middle of May; and the general baits by which he is
caught are these: small white Snails, Bobs, Cad-baits, Sheeps blood, all sorts
of Worms, Gnats, Wasps, Paste, and Cherries.

The way of fishing for Roach at London Bridge is after this manner: In the
Months of June, and July, there is great resort of those Fish to that place,
where those that make a trade of it take a strong Cord, at the end whereof is
fastened a three-pound weight; a foot above the Lead they fasten a Packthread of
twelve foot long to the Cord, and unto the Packthread at convenient distances
they add a dozen strong Links of Hair with Roach-Hooks at them, baited with a
white Snail of Perriwinkle; then holding the Cord in their Hands, the biting of
the Fish draws the Packthread, and the Packthread the Cord, which admonishes
them them what to do: whereby sometimes they draw up half a dozen, sometimes
less, but commonly two or three at one draught.

Of the STICKLEBAG.
THis fish is small, prickly, and without Scales and not worth the
consideration, but that he is an excellent bait for Trouts, especially if his
Tail on the Hook be turned round, at which a Trout will bite more eagerly than
at Penk, Roach, or Minnow. The Loach is every whit as good a bait as the
Sticklebag, provided you place either aright on the Hook. To the intent you may
do it, take this observation: the nimble turning of the Penk, Minnow, Loach, or
Sticklebag, is the perfection of that sort of fishing. That you may attain
thereunto, note, that you must put your Hook into the Mouth of any the
aforesaid Baits, and out at his Tail tying him fast with white thread a little
above it, in such manner that he may turn: after this sow up his mouth, and
your design is accomplished. This way of baiting is very tempting for large
Trouts, and seldom fails the Angler's expectation. This fish in some places is
called a Banstickle.

Of the SALMON.
THE Salmons evermore breed in Rivers that are not brackish, yet discharge
themselves into the Sea, and spawn commonly in August, which become Samlets in
the Spring following. The Melter and Spawner having both performed their
natural duty, they then betake themselves to the Sea. I have known that when
they have been obstructed in their passage, they have grown so impatient, that,
clapping their Tails to their Mouths, with a sudden spring they have leapt
clear over Wear, or any other obstacle which stood in their way: Some having
leapt short, have been taken by that means. If they are so obstructed that they
cannot find their way to the Sea, they become sick, lean, and pine away, and
die in two years. If they spawn in the mean time, from thence proceeds a small
Salmon called a Skegger, which will never grow great. It is the Sea that makes
them grow big; but it is the fresh Rivers that makes them grow fat; and so much
the farther they are from the Sea up in the River, the fatter they grow, and
the better their food.

From a Samlet (which is but little bigger than a Minnow) he grows to be a
Salmon in as short time as a Goslin will grow to be a Goose.

A Salmon biteth best at three of the clock in the Afternoon, in the Months of
May, June, July, and August, if the water be clear, and some little breeze of
Wind stirring, especially if the Wind blows against the Stream, and near the
Sea.

Where note, that he has not his constant residence, like a Trout, but removes
often, coveting to be as near the Springhead as he may, swimming generally in
the deepest and broadest parts of the River near the ground; and he is caught
like a Trout, with Worm, Fly, or Minnow. The Garden-worm is an Excellent bait
for the Salmon, if it be well scoured, and kept in Moss about twenty days,
after which time those Worms will be very clear, tough and lively.

There is a way of fishing for Salmon with a Ring of Wyre on the top of the
Rod, through which the Line may run to what length is thought convenient,
having a Wheel also near the hand.

I have been told that there is no bait more attractive of and eagerly pursued
by the Salmon and most other fish, than Lob-worms scented with the Oil of
Ivy-berries, or the Oil of Polypodie of the Oak mixed with Turpentine; nay, Assa
Foetida they say is incomparably good.

The Artificial Fly is a good bait for a Salmon; but you must then use a Trowl
as for the Pike, he being a strong fish. As the Salmon is a large fish, to must
your Flies be larger than for any other, with Wings and Tails very long.

You shall observe, when you strike him, that he will plunge and bounce, but
does not usually endeavor to run to the length of the Line, as the Trout will
do; and therefore there is less danger of breaking your Line.

If you will angle for Salmon at ground, then take three or four Garden-worms
well scoured, and put them on your Hook at once, and fish with them in the same
manner as you do for Trouts.

Be sure to give the Salmon (as well as all other fish) time to go gorge the
Bait, and be not overhasty, unless your bait be so tender it will not endure
nibbling at. Much more may be said of Salmon-fishing, which I shall pass by,
leaving the rest to your own practice and observation.

Of the TENCH.
I Shall now discover an approved way how to take Tench and Carp in a muddy
Pond: but know, I do not make public this following Secret, to teach Knaves
how to rob Gentlemen's Ponds, but that the proper Owners may be able upon cases
of necessity to supply themselves with Fish, without being put to so much
trouble and charge as to sue their Ponds. But to the purpose. In the first
place you must provide your self with a very good large Casting-net, well
leaded; let not the Meshes from the Crown to a full yard and a half be too
small; for then if the Pond be any thing of a depth, the fish will strike away
before the Net comes to the ground: the whole Net ought to have a large Mesh,
well leaded, and deep Tucked.

The second thing to be done is, to make the place clean from Stakes and
Bushes, and try with the Net before you intend for the sport: if your Net
happen to hang, then all your pains will prove ineffectual; therefore you must
be sure before you cast in your Net that you clear and cleanse the place very
well twice or thrice with a Rake. Then take a quarter of a peck of Wheat,
baking it well in an Oven, putting in near three quarts of Water; when it is
well baked, take five pints of Blood, and incorporate the Wheat and Blood
together, adding thereto as much Bran as is sufficient to make a Paste thereof:
and that it may the better hold together, put some (lay to it; after this,
knead it well together with a quart of Lob worms chopped in pieces, and worked
into Paste as aforesaid: then roll it into balls as big as a Goose-egg, and
throw it into the Pond within the circumference of your Casting-net; and
between whiles throw in some Grains; and when you think the fish have found out
the Baiting-place, then come in the close of the Evening (having baited very
early in the Morning) and cast your Net over the baited-place: then take a long
pole with a large Fork made for the purpose, and stir all about the Net; for
the Carps and Tench are struck up beyond their Eyes in Mud, and stand exactly
upon their Heads: let the Net lie near an half hour, still stirring with your
Pole, if the place be not too deep: when you have covered the Fish, you may go
into the Pond, and take them out with your hands; but if the water be deep,
when you find the Carps begin to stir, (for they cannot stand long on their
heads in the Mud) then lift up the Crown of your Net bolt upright with a long
Staff, that so the fish may play into the Tuck of the Net.

Here note, that should you draw up your Net suddenly after you have cast it
in, it is an hundred pound to a penny whether you should take one Carp or
Tench; but letting the Net lie, the Mud will choke them if they remove not out
of it.

Now here I cannot omit a very pleasant story in my opinion: A Gentleman having
special Carps in his pond, but not knowing how to take one of them, unless it
were by chance with Hook and Line; I desired him that we might taste of his
Carps, and modestly told him, a brace of them would serve our turns: He
answered, I might freely have them, if I knew how to catch them. Hereupon I
prepared some ingredients, and having baited a convenient place very early in
the Morning, at the dusk of the Evening we came with a Casting-net, and at the
first throw covered a great quantity of fish, as hereafter will appear; but not
one seemed to stir a jot under the Net, being all struck into the Mud. Hereupon
the Gentleman fell a laughing heartily, saying, Sir, If I had no other
provision to trust to but what fish you shall catch this night, I believe I
shall go supperless to Bed. Hearing him say so, I desired that he would have a
little patience, for the fish were asleep, and I was as yet loath to disturb
them; but half an hour hence, if he would stay so long, I should make bold to
awake them with a witness: So the Gentleman having smoaked a pipe of Tobacco a
Carp began to play in the Net; and after this in a very little time a great
many more began to dance and skip: whereupon I lifted up the Crown, that they
might play in the Tuck; and when I thought they were all got out of the Mud I
began to draw, and at one draught drew up in the Net Seventy odd Carps, great
and small, to the admiration and great satisfaction of the Owner and the rest
of the company, having in all their lifetime not seen the like before.

The Tench has but small Scales, (and they smooth) yet very large Fins, with a
red Circle about his Eyes, and a little Barb hanging at each corner of his
Mouth.

The Slime of a Tench is very medicinal to wounded Fishes; and therefore he is
commonly called the Fishes Physician.

The Pike is so sensible of his virtue, that he will not injure the Tench,
though he will seize on any other fish of his size that comes in his way: And
when the Pike is sick or hurt, he applies himself to the Tench, and finds cure
by rubbing himself against him.

The Tench has a greater love for Ponds than clear Rivers, and delights
himself amongst Weeds, and loves to feed in very foul Water; and yet his food
is nourishing and pleasant.

The time of Angling for him is early and late, both morning and evening, in
the months of June, July and August, or all night in the still parts of the
River.

He is a great lover of large red Worms, and will bite most eagerly at them, if
you first dip them in Tar. The Tench loves also all sorts of Paste made up with
strong-sented Oils, or with Tar, or a Paste made of brown Bread and Honey. He
will bite also at a Cad-worm, a Lob worm, a Flag-worm, green Gentle, Cad-bait,
Marsh-worm, or soft boiled Bread-grain.

Of the TORCOTH.
THe Torcoth is a fish having a red Belly, but of what estimation I know not;
for that, let the Welshmen speak, who best know him: for as I have heard he is
only to be found in the Pool Lin-peris in Carnarvanshire. I only name him that
you may know there is such a fish.

Of the TROUT.
IT is observed that the Trout comes in and goes out of season with the Stag
and Buck, and Spawns about October or November: which is the more to be wondered
at, because most other fish Spawn in warm weather, when the Sun by his heat
has adapted the Earth and Water making them fit for generation.

All the Winter, the Trout is Sick, Lean and unwholesome, and you shall
frequently then find him Louzy. These Trout-lice are a small Worm with a big
Head sticking close to his sides, and sucking moisture from him that gave them
being: and he is not freed from them till the Spring or the beginning of Summer,
at which time his strength increases; and then he deserteth the still deep
waters, and betakes himself to gravelly ground, against which he never leaves
rubing till he has cleansed himself of his Louziness; and then he delights to
be in the sharp Streams and such as are swift, where he will lie in wait for
Minnows and May-flies; at the latter end of which month he is in his prime,
being better and fatter in that Month, especially at the latter end thereof,
than in any other throughout the whole year.

There are several sorts of Trouts highly prizable; as the Fordidge-Trout, the
Amerly-Trout, the Bull-Trout in Northumberland, with many more which I shall
forbear to mention, but only tell you what is generally observed; and that is,
that the red and yellow Trouts are the best, and as'to the Sex, the Female is
the best, having a less head and a deeper body then the Male. By their Hog-back
you shall know that they are in season, with the like note for all other fish.

The Trout is usually caught with a Worm, Minnow or Fly natural or artificial.
There are several sorts of Worms which are baits for the Angler; the
Earth-worm, the Dug-worm, the Maggot or Gentle; but for the Trout, the Lob-worm
and Brandling are the best, or Squirril-tail, having a red head, streakt down
the back, and a broad Tail. The Brandling is found commonly in an old
Dunghill, Cow Dung, Hogs-dung, or Tanners-bark. Here note, that whatever Worms
you fish withal are the better for keeping; which must be in an Earthen pot
with Moss, which you must change often in Summer, that is, once in three or
four days, and in twice as long time in Winter.

When you fish for a Trout by hand on the ground, take a Lob-worm and clap your
Hook into him a little above the middle, and out again a little below the same;
then draw your Worm above the arming of your Hook, making your first entrance
at the Tail end, that the point of the Hook may come out at the Head-end.

When you fish with a Minnow, take the whitest and middle-sized, for those are
the best, and place him so on your Hook, that he may turn round when he is
drawn against the Stream.

The best Instructions (for putting the Minnow on the Hook) which I can lay
down are these: Put your Hook in at his Mouth and out at his Gill, drawing it
through about three Inches; then put the Hook again into his Mouth, and let the
point and beard come out at his Tail; then the Hook and his Tail you must tie
about with a fine white Thread, and let the body of the Minnow be almost
straight on the Hook: then try against the Stream whether it will turn; where
note, it cannot turn too fast. If you want a Minnow, a small Loach or
Sticklebag will serve the turn: if none of these can be gotten, you may in
their season have an Artificial one made of Cloth by one that is living, which
I have found to be every whit as good a Bait as what are natural.

If you fish with a Natural or Artificial Fly, then follow such directions as I
have already prescribed in a foregoing Chapter, which particularly discourses
of Flies Natural and Artificial.

Of the UMBER.
IT is the opinion some, that the Umber and Grailing differ only in Names, and
are of a Trout-kind, but seldom grow to the bigness of a Trout, I having never
seen nor heard any exceed the length of eighteen Inches.

He frequents such Rivers as the Trouts do, and is taken with the same Baits,
especially the Fly; and; being a simple Fish, is more bold than the Trout is.

In the Winter he absconds himself, but after April he appears abroad, and is
very gamesome and pleasant. He is very tender-mouth'd, and therefore quickly
lost after he is struck. For what more may be said, I refer you to the Chapter
of the Grailing.

THus have I given you an Alphabetical and summary account of the Nature of
Fish, and the several ways to take them, according to ancient and modern
experience: I shall only give you more a short discovery of their Haunts; and
so I shall conclude this Treatise.

Next to the Art of taking Fish, the knowledge of their Haunts and proper
places to find them in according to their kinds is rightly to be considered:
for not knowing what Rivers or what parts of them are fittest for your Baits,
or what Baits best suit with each River and the fish therein contained, you
only angle at adventure, and, instead of reaping satisfaction, you only lose
your pains and your labor.

Wherefore in the first place you are to understand, that fishes change places
with the season. Some in the Summer keep always near the top or rim of the
Water; others are continually at the bottom. For the first, you may angle with
a Float or Fly; the latter are to be found at the Arches of Bridges,
Mill-ponds, Wears, Floodgates, etc. In Winter all fish in general fly into
deep Waters.

The Barbel, Roach, Dace, and Ruff delight in sandy gravelly ground. The
deepest part of the River and the Shadows of Trees are equally grateful.

The Bream, Pike, and Chub choose a Clay and Ouzie ground. The Bream delights
most in the midst of a River whose Stream is not too rapid, but gently gliding:
the Pike is for still Waters full of Fry; and that he may the better and
securer seize his Prey, he frequently absconds himself amongst Water-docks,
under Bushes or Bull-rushes.

Carp, Tench, and Eel frequent still Waters, and what are foul and muddy. Eels
lie lurking under Roots or Stones: The Carp is for the deepest place of the
Water; and where there are green Weeds the Carp and Tench delight most of all.

Perch delight in gentle Streams not too deep, yet they must not be shallow;
and a hollow Bank is their chiefest refuge.

Gudgeons love sandy ground in gentle Streams, they affect small Rivers above
the large, or small Brooks, and bite best in the Spring till they Spawn.

The Salmon delights most in Rivers which ebb and flow, are large, and have a
swift current, in such Rivers are the greatest plenty. If the Rivers are rocky
or weedy, so much the better.

Shad, Thwait, Plaice, and Flounder have the greatest love for salt or brackish
Waters which ebb and flow.

The Umber affects Marly Clay grounds, clear and swift Streams; but they must
then be far from the Sea, for they seldom come near it.

There are many more Rules to be observed, which generally hold good, but I
will not conclude them infallible, since I have found some of them (well
credited) very false; wherefore let every man's experience be his guide in the
knowledge of the nature of Rivers, and the Fish their Inhabitants. And
therefore it will be very requisite for him that would be complete in the Art
of Angling, diligently to observe whatever River or water he fisheth in,
whether it be muddy, slimy stony, gravelly, swift, or of a slow motion. And as
he must have a competent knowledge in Rivers, Ponds, or all fishable waters he
is acquainted with; so must he know the nature of each Filh, and what Baits are
most proper for every kind, or he shall never attain to the reputation of a
good experienced ANGLER.

I shall conclude this Treatise with the experimental observations of an
ingenious Gentleman, who has practiced the Art of Fishing many years, and
therefore the more fit to give Directions for the right use of the Angle.

Experimental Observations and useful Directions for the right use of the
Angle; and is a true and brief Epitome of the whole Art and Mystery of the
Fishing Recreation.
NOne certainly is so ignorant to address himself to the River for Recreation,
but he will be mindful to carry necessary Tackle with him: being completely
furnished therewith let him in the first place consult Sun, Wind, Moon, Stars,
and change of Air; for without observing Times and Seasons, his Tackle, though
never so good, will prove ineffectual.

Wherefore observe, if the Sun be obscured with Clouds, and his Face hidden
from your Eyes, then set forth your Ground-baits, and use your brightest Flies.
If the Sun shine out gloriously, then use the darkest of your Flies. Here note,

If that the Wind be in the South,
It blows the Fly in the Trout's Mouth.
If the weather be warm, it is no matter in what point of the Compass the Wind
lies, so that it blow not too high; the same observation holds good at Night
as well as Day. If the Sun shine bright, the Moon prove clear, or the Stars
glitter, there is but little sport to be expected.

Gentlemen, I write to you that have more than common experience in the Art of
Angling, and therefore I hope you will not expect that I should here inform you
how to prosecute the little recreation of the Thames, how to catch Bleak, Dace,
etc. since there is hardly any young beginner that is ignorant thereof: Whereof
omitting such trifling discourse, I shall fall upon that which is somewhat more
material, and first, how to take Eels. When the Angler stays a night or two,
let him take five or six Lines (or what number he thinks fit) each of them
about sixteen yards long, and at every two yards long make a Noose to hang on a
hook armed either to double Thread, or Silk-twist, for it is better then Wyre.
His Hooks must be baited with Millers-thumbs, Loaches, Minnows or Gudgeons: to
every Noose there must be a Line baited, and all the Lines mustly cross the
River in the deepest place, either with Stones or pegged lying in the bottom,
you must watch all night, or rise as soon as ever it is break of day (or else
you will lose diverse that were hung) and draw up the Lines, on each of which I
have known two or three Eels or Grigs.

Every one that delights in Fly-fishing ought to learn the way of making two
sorts of Artificial Flies, the Palmer ribbed with Silver or Gold, and the
Mayfly, both which are the ground of all Flies.

In the making of the Palmer-Fly he must arm his Line on the inside of the
Hook; then with a pair of Sizers let him cut so much of the brown of a Mallards
Feathers as he shall think sufficient to make the Wings; then let him lay the
outermost part of the Feather next the Hook, and the point of the Feather
toward the Shank of the Hook; let him whip it three or four times about the
Hook with the same Silk he armed the Hook; then make his Silk fast: then let
him take the Hackle of the neck of a Cock or Capon (but a Plovers Top is best)
and let him take off the one side of the Feather; and then he must take the
Hackle-silk, or Gold or Silver thread; and let him make all these fast at the
bent of the Hook, working them up to the Wings; every bout shifting his
Fingers, and making a stop, then the Gold will fall right, and let him make
fast: then work up the Hackle to the same place, and make it fast: after this
let him take the Hook betwixt his Finger and Thumb in the left hand with Needle
or Pin, and part the Wings in twain; then with the Arming-silk (having fastened
all hitherto) let him whip it about as it falls cross between the Wings, and
with his Thumb he must turn the point of the Feather toward the bent of the
Hook: then let him work it three or four times about the shank, so fasten it,
and view the proportion for other Flies.

If he make the grounds of Hogs-wool, sandy, black, or white, or Bears-wool, or
of a red Bullock two years old, he must work these grounds on a waxed Silk, and
must arm and set on the Wings as aforesaid.

The body of the May-fly must be wrought with some of these grounds, which will
be admirably well when ribbed with black Hair. The Oak-fly he must make with
Orange-Tawny and black, for the body; and the brown of the Mallards Feather for
the Wings.

The next thing to be observed, is the Floating for Scale-fish in Pond, or
River: First, take notice that the Feed brings the Fish together, as the Sheep
to the Pen; and there is no better in all Angling for Feed, than Blood and
Grains; though Paste is good yet inferior to these.

Next, let him observe to plumb his ground, Angling with fine Tackle, as single
hair for half the Line next the Hook, round and small plumbed according to his
Float. There is a small red worm with a yellow tip on his Tail, which is an
excellent bait for this sort of Fish or any other. Other special baits are
these: Brandlings, Gentles, Paste or Cadice (otherwise called Cock-bait.) They
lie in Gravelly husk under the stones in the River.

There is a way of Trowling for Pike with an Hazle rod of Twelve foot long,
with a Ring of Wyre on the top of the Rod for the Line to run through: within
two foot of the bottom of the Rod, there is a hole made to put in a Wind to
turn with a Barrel, to gather sip the Line and loose it at pleasure: This is
the best manner of Trowling.

There is another way to take more Pikes either in Mere, Pond, or River, than
any Trowler with his Rod can do, which is done after this manner.

Take a forked stick with a Line of Twelve yards long wound upon it; at the
upper end leave about a yard, either to tie a bunch of Flags, or a Bladder to
buoy up the Fish, and to carry it from the ground. The Bait must be a live
fish, either Dace, Gudgeon, Roach, or small Trout: The forked stick must have a
slit in the one side of the Fork to put in the Line, that he may set his live
fish to swim at a gage, that when a Pike takes the Bait, he may have the full
liberty of the line for his feed. He may turn these loose either in Pond or
River, in the Pond with the Wind all day long, the more the better: at night
let him set some small weight that he may stay the Buoy till the Fish takes it.

For the River he must turn all loose with the Stream; the Hooks must be
double, the Shanks must be somewhat shorter then ordinary; for the shorter the
Hook is off the Shank, without doubt it will less hurt the fish: and it must be
armed with small Wyre well softened; but certainly a hook armed with twisted
Silk is better.

If you arm your hook with Wyre, the Needle must be made with an Eye; then must
he take one of those living Baits, and with one of his Needles enter within a
Straws breadth of the Gill of the Fish, so pull the Needle betwixt the Skin and
the Fish, then pull the Needle out at the hindmost Fin, and draw the Arming
thorough the Fish, until the Hook come to lie close to the Fishes Body having
so done, let him put off in Mere or pond with the Wind; in the River with the
Stream: the more that he pulls off in Mere or Pond, he is the likelier to have
the greater Pastime.

There is a time when Pikes go a Frogging in Ditches, and in the River to Sun
them, as in May, June, and July; at these times you shall hardly miss one in
twenty; and thus must the Angler deal with them. Let him take a Line of Seven
or Eight foot, and let him arm a large Hook of the largest size that is made,
and arm it to his Line; let him lead the shank of his Hook neatly, of such a
weight that he may guide the Hook at his pleasure. He may strike the Pike that
he sees with the bare Hook where he pleases. This Line and Hook does far exceed
Snaring.

In the taking of a Carp either in Pond or River, if the Angler intends to add
Profit to his Pleasure, he must take a Peck of Ale-Grains and a good quantity
of any Blood, and mix the Grains together, with which let him bait the Ground
wherein he intends to Angle. This feed will wonderfully attract the Scale-fish,
as Carp, Tench, Roach, Dace, and Bream. In the Morning early let him prosecute
his pastime, plumbing his ground, and Angling for a Carp with a strong Line:
the bait must be either paste, or a knotted red Worm; by this means he shall
find sport enough.

In the Taking of a Trout with Ground-baits thus must the Angler do: In the
first place he must have a neat taper Rod, light before, with a tender Hazle
top. He may Angle with a single hair of five lengths, one tied to the other for
the bottom of the Line, and a Line of three hair'd links for the upper part;
and so if he have room enough he may take the largest Trout that swims in the
River. He that angles with a line made of three hair'd links at the bottom, and
more at the top, may take Trouts; but he that Angles with one Hair, shall take
five Trouts to the others one: For this Fish is very quick sighted; therefore
the Angler both day and Night must keep out of sight. He must Angle with the
point of his Rod down the Stream.

He must begin to Angle in March with the Ground-baits all day long: but if it
prove clear and bright, he must take the Morning and Evening, or else his
labor will be in vain.

He that Angles with Ground-baits, must fit his Tackle to his Rod, and begin at
the upper end of the Stream, carrying his Line with an upright hand, feeling
the Plummet running on the ground some ten Inches from the Hook, plumbing his
Line according to the swiftness of the Stream that he Angles in, for one
Plummet will not serve for all Streams.

For his Bait let him take the red knotted Worm, which is very good where
Brandlings are not to be had. The Minnow (or as some call it a Penk) is a
singular Bait for a Trout; for he will come as boldly at it as a Mastiff-dog at
a Bear. It will be advantageous to him in his angling to use a Line made of
three Silks and three Hairs twisted for the upper most part of the Line, and
two Silks and two Hairs twisted for the bottom next the Hook, with a Swivel
nigh to the middle of his Line, with an indifferent large hook. Let him bait
his hook with a Minnow, putting the hook through the lowermost part of his
mouth, so draw the Hook through; then put the hook in at the mouth again, and
let the point of the hook come out at the hindmost Fin; then let him draw his
Line, and the Minnows mouth will close, that no Water will get into his Belly.
As I said before, he must angle with the point of his Rod down the Stream,
drawing the Minnow up the Stream by little and little nigh the top of the
Water: the Trout seeing the bait will come most fiercely at it; but the Angler
must not then presently strike: this is a true way without Lead; for many times
they will come to the Lead, and forsake the Minnow.

The next direction is how to angle with a Fly for a Trout. In the first place
let the Angler fit himself with a Hazle of one piece or two set conveniently
together, light and pliable. The lower part of his Line next the Fly must be of
three or four hair'd Links; but if he can attain (as aforesaid) to angle with a
single Hair, he shall meet with more profit and pleasure.

Before he begin to angle, having the wind on his back, let him try how far he
can cast his Line, or at what length his Fly, and let him be careful that the
Fly fall first on the Water; for if any of the Line light upon the Water, he
had better to have stood still than to have thrown at all. He must always cast
down the Stream, with the Wind behind and the Sun before him; it is a great
advantage to have either Sun or Moon before him.

March is the month for him to begin to angle with the Fly; but if the Weather
prove windy or cloudy, there are several sorts of Palmers that are good at that
time: The first is a black Palmer ribbed with Silver: The second a black Palmer
with an Orange-tawny Body: Thirdly, a Palmer whose body is all black: Lastly,
there is a red Palmer ribbed with Gold, and a red Hackle mixed with Orange
Cruel. These Flies serve all the year long Morning and Evening, whether Windy
or Cloudy Weather. But if the Air prove serene, he may then imitate the
Hawthorn-fly, which is all black and very small, and the smaller the better.

In May let him take the May-fly and imitate that, which is made several ways:
Some make them with a shammy Body; it is best with black Hair: Others make them
with sandy Hogs-wool, ribbed with black Silk, and winged with a Mallards
Feather several ways, according to the humor of the Angler. Another called the
Oak-fly, is made of Orange colored Cruel, and black, with a brown Wing.
Lastly, there is another Fly, the Body whereof is made of the strain of a
Peacock's Feather, which is very good in a bright day. These several sorts of
Flies will serve the whole year, observing the times and seasons.

Here note, that the lightest Flies are for cloudy and dark Weather, the
darkest for bright and light, and the rest for indifferent seasons, for which
his own Judgment, Discretion, and Experience must guide him. Of late days the
Hogs-wool of several colors, the Wool of a red Heifer and Bears-wool are made
use of, which make good grounds, and excellent pastime.

The Natural-fly is a sure way of Angling to Augment the Anglers Recreation.
Now how to find them take notice that the May-fly is to be found playing at the
River side, especially against the Rain.

The Oak-fly is to be found on the But of an Oak, or an Ash, from the beginning
of May to the end of August: It is a browntsh Fly, and stands always with his
head toward the Root of the Tree, very easy to be found.

The Black-flly is to be found on every Hawthornbush, after the Buds are come
forth.

Now with these Flies he must use such a Rod as to angle with the ground bait:
the Line must not be so long as the Rod.

Let the Angler withdraw his Fly as he shall find it most couvenient and
advantageous in his Angling. When he comes to deep Water (whose motion is but
slow) let him make his Line about two yards long, and dop his Fly behind a
Bush, and he shall find incomparable sport.

The way to make the best Paste, is to take a convenient quantity of fresh
Butter, as much Sheeps-suet that is fresh, a sufficient quantity of the
strongest Cheese can be gotten, with the pith of an old stale white Loaf: Let
all these be beaten in a Mortar till they come to a perfect paste; and when the
Angler intends to spend some time in Angling, let him put hereof the quantity
of a green Pea upon his Hook, and let him observe what pleasant effects it will
produce.

An Angling SONG.
COme lay by all cares, and hang up all sorrow,
Let Us Angle to day, and never think of to morrow;
And by the Brook-side as we Angle a long;
We Will cheer up our selves with our sport and a Song.
Sometimes on the Grass our selves we will lay,
And see how the watery Citizens play;
Sometimes with a Fly stand under a Tree.
And choose out what Fish our Captives shall be:
Thus void of all care we are more happy then they
That sit upon Thrones and Kingdoms do sway;
For Scepters and Crowns disquiet still bring,
But the Man that is content is more blessed than a King.
An Abstract of such Penal STATUTES As Relate to FISHING.
13. EDw. 1. cap. 47. No Salmons shell be taken from the Nativity of our Lady
unto St. Martin's day. Young Salmons may not be destroyed nor taken by Nets nor
other Engines, at Mill pools from the midst of April until St. John Paptist.
The Penalties you may see in the said Statute at large.

I. Eliz. cap. 17. None shall take and kill any young Brood, Spawn, os Fry of
Eels, Salmon, Pike, or any other Fish, in any Flood-gate, Pipe at the tail of a
Mill, Wear, or in any Straights, Streams, Brooks, Rivers fresh or salt. Nor
take or kill any Salmons, or Trouts not being in season, being Ripper Salmons,
or Ripper Trouts, Shedder Salmons, or Shedder Trouts.

II. None shall take or kill any Pike or Pickeril not being in length ten
inches Fish, nor Salmon not being in length sixteen inches Fish, nor Trout
under eight inches, nor Barbel under twelve inches.

III. None shall take Fish with any manner of Trammel, etc. in any River or
other places, but only with Net or Trammel, whereof every Besh or Mask shall
be two inches and broad. Angling excepted.

IV. Nevertheless this Statute allows Smelts, Loaches, Minnows, Gudgeons,
Eeles, etc. to be taken by Net, etc. in such places, and such ways as
heretofore they have been.

V. The penalty for every offense is 20s. and the Fish so taken, as also the
Engine or Device whatsoever whereby the offense was committed.

5 Eliz. cap. 21. None may by day or night break down, cut out, or destroy any
Head or Dam of any Ponds, Pools, Motes, etc. where any Fish shall be put in or
stored withal by the owners thereof. Nor shall Take, Kill, or Steal away any of
the said Fish in the said Ponds, etc. against the will of the Owner.

22 and 23 Car. 2 cap. 25. It is not, lawful for any person to use any
Casting-net, Thief-net, Trammel, Shove-net, or other Net; nor to use any Angle,
Hair, Noose, Spear, or Trowl: Not to lay any Nets, UUears, Pots, Fish-hooks, or
other Engines; Or to take any Fish by any other means or device whatsoever, in
any River, Sew, Pond, Bote, or other UUater; Nor be aiding or assisting
thereunto, without the License or consent of the Lord or Owner of the said
Water. And in case any person be convict of any of these Offenses, by his own
confession, or by Oath of one sufficient Witness, within one month after the
Offense be committed, before any Justice of the Peace of such County, Riding,
Division, or Place, wherein such be committed; every such person in Taking,
Stealing, or Killing Fish, shall for chery such Offense give to the Party or
Parties grieved or injured such recompense for his or their Damages, and within
such time as the said Justice shall appoint, not exceeding treble Damages: And
over and above pay down presently unto the Overseers for the Poor where such
Difence is committed, such sum of Money, not exceeding 10s. as the said Justice
shall think meet. And in default of payment, as aforesaid, the same to be
levied by distress of the Difenders Goods, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal
of such Justice before whom the Difender shall be convicted, rendering the
overplus, if any be: And for want of Disteess the Difender or Difenders shall
be committed to the house of Correction, for such time as the Justice shall
think fit, not exceeding one Month, unless the party offending shall enter into
Bond with one competent Surery or Sureties to the party injured, not exceeding
ten pounds, never to offend in like manner.

II. And rvery Justice of Peace, before whom such Difender shall be convict,
may take, cut in pieces, and destroy all such Angles, Spears, Hairs, Nooses,
Trowls, Wears, Pots, Fish-hooks, Nets, or other Engines whatsoever, wherewith
such Difender as aforesaid shall be taken or apprehended.

III. Nevertheless, any person aggrieved may appeal to the Justices of the
Peace in their next quarter Sessions; who may give relief, and make such Order
therein as shall be agreeable to the Tenor of this Act: whose Order therein
shall be final, if no title of Land, Royalty, or Fishery be therein concerned.

FINIS.
THE TABLE FOR HUNTING: Being the First PART.
Page. INtroduction 1 Terms of Art 4 Some general names of Hounds and Beagels
19 Terms relating to Forests, etc. 20 Of the Hound Rache and Sluth-hound 28 Of
the Blood-hound 29 Of the Gaze-hound 33 Of the Greyhound 34 Of the Harrier and
Terrier 36 Of the Hound Levyner or Lyemer 37 Of the Tumbler ibid. Of the
Spaniel 39 Of the White Hound 40 Of Fallow-Hounds ibid. Of the Dun-hound 41 The
marks of a good Hound 42 The election of a Dog and Bitch for good Whelps 43 How
to enter young Hounds at the Heart, etc. 44 Of Coursing with Greyhounds 46 The
Laws of the Leash or Coursing 49 The Styles of Hunting different from the
English, both Antique and Foreign 52 Of Hart-Hunting 56 The Nature of a Heart 57
Of the Rut of Hearts 62 Of the time of Hearts Mewing 67 Of the Coats and Colors
of Hearts, and their diversities 66 How to know an old Heart by the Slot,
Entries, etc. 67 The names and diversities of Harts-heads according to Hunters
Terms 69 How to seek a Heart in his (...) or feeding place according to the
seasons of the year (...) In what manner the Huntsman shall go drawing in the
Springs 71 Directions for Harboring a Stag 72 How to find a Heart lost the
night before 73 How, to find a Heart in high Woods 74 How to unbarbour a Heart
and cast off the Hounds 75 What subtilties are used in hunting a Heart at force
76 How to kill a Heart at Bay. 79 Directions at the death of a Buck on Heart 80
Buck-Hunting 81 Roe-Hunting 83 Rain-Deer-Hunting 86 Heart Hunting 91 Of Parks
and Warrens 100 Of Coney catching 102 Of the Ferret 104 Of Fbx-Hunting 105 Of
Badger-Hunting 111 Of Otter-Hunting 115 Of the Squirrel 118 Of the Martern or
Wild-Cat 120 A short Account of Beasts not Hunted in England, and first of the
Wolf 123 Of Wild-goat-Hunting 126 Of Wild-boar Hunting 128 Of Bear-Hunting 135
Of the Beaver 137 Of the Elk 139 Diseases and Cures of Hounds 140 Diseases and
Cures of Spaniels 146 Penal Laws relating to Hunters and Hunting 150 Penal Laws
concerning Forests and Chaces, etc. 155
The Table for HAWKING: Being the Second PART.
THe Introduction Page 1 Terms of Art 4 Of the Haggard-Faulcon 11 How to know
the Nature and Disposition of several Hawks, and what must be observed from
thence 17 Of the Faulcon 20 Of the Manning, Luring, Flights, and Mewing of a
Faulcon, with other things belonging to an Ostrager 22 Of bathing a Faulcon
lately reclaimed; how to make her, and to hate the Check 26 How to enseam a
Faulcon with her Castings and Scowrings 28 General Instructions for an Ostrager
or Faulconer 32 How to hood a Hawk 36 How to make your Hawk know your Voice and
her own feeding 37 How to make your Hawk bold and venturous ibid. How to make a
Hawk know the Lure 38 How to make a Hawk flying ibid. A Flight for a Haggard 40
How to make a Soar- Faulcon, or Haggard kill at the very first 41 Remedy for a
Hawks taking stand in a Tree 42 How to help a Hawk froward and coy through
pride of grease ibid. How to make a Hawk hold in her head and not mind Check 43
How to continue and keep a Hawk in her high flying ibid. A flight for the Hern
45 Of the Haggard-faulcon; why so called, her good shape 'and properties, etc.
47 Of the Barbary-faulcon 50 Of the Gerfaulcon ibid. Of the Saker 53 Of the
Lanner, Lanneret, and Tunisian 54 Of the Metlin 57 Of the Mewing of Merlins,
Faulcons, etc. And which is the best way of Mewing 58 Of the Hobby 61 Of the
Goshawk 62 How to make the Soar or Haggard- Goshawk 64 How to make a Goshawk
fly to the Partridge 65 How to help a Goshawk that turns Tail to Tail, and
gives over her Game 66 How to make a Goshawk fly quickly 67 How to fly a
Goshawk to the River 68 An excellent way to preserve a Goshawk in the time of
her flying, especially in hot weather 69 How to fly the Wild-goose or Crane
with the Goshawk ibid. How to Mew a Goshawk, and draw her out of the Mew, and
make her flying 70 Some general Observations for an Ostrager or Faulconer in
keeping and reclaiming a Goshawk 71 Of the Sparrow-hawk 73 How to make a
Sparrow-hawk, whether Eyess, Brancher, Soar, Mewed, or Haggard 74 How to Mew
Sparrow-hawks 78 The duty of a Faulconer, with necessary Rules and Observations
for him to follow 80 Of Diseases and dangerous accidents incident to Hawks, and
their several Cures 81 Of Castings and Mewtings, either good or bad according
to their several complexions and smells. 82 Of the Cataract 85 Of the Pantas or
Asthma 86 Of Worms 87 Of the Filanders ibid. Another approved medicine for
Filanders or Worms in Hawks 88 Of Hawks Lice ibid. A safe and easy way to kill
Lice in Hawks 89 How to keep and maintain all manner of Hawks in health, good
plight, and liking ibid. Of the Formica 90 Of the Frownce 91 Of the Pip ibid.
How to remedy that Hawk which endeweth not, nor puts over as she should do
92 How to make a Hawk feed eagerly that bath lost appetite, without bringing
her low 93 How to raise a Hawk that is low and poor ibid. How to remedy a Hawk
that is slothful and averse to flying 94 Of swollen feet in a Hawk ibid. How to
scour Hawks before you cast them into the Mew 95 Penal Laws relating to Hawks
and Hawking 97
The Table for FOWLING: Being the Third PART.
WHat Fowling is, with the nature and diversity of all manner of Fowl Page 101
Of the haunts of Fowl 103 The readiest way to take great Fowl with Nets 104 How
to take small Waterfowl with Nets 105 How to take small Birds with Bird-lime
107 How to take great Fowl with Lime-twigs 109 Of the great and lesser Springs
111 Of the Fowling-piece and Stalking-horse 113 How to take all manner of
Land-fowl by day and night 118 Of Bat-fowling 121 Of the Day-net, and how to
take Birds therewith ibid. Of taking small Birds which use Hedges and Bushes
with Lime-twigs 123 How to make the best sort of Bird-lime, and how to use it
126 The best and most experienced way of making Water-bird-lime 127 In what
manner Snipes may be taken with Bird-lime 128
(...)
Of the Bull-finch 179 Of the Green-Finch ibid. Of the Hedge-Sparrow 180 An
Abstract of such Penal Laws as concern Fowling 183
The Table for FISHING: Being the Fourth and last PART.
THe Introduction Page 1 An Encomium, or somewhat in praise of Fisherman and
Fishing 7 Fish Ponds to improve, and the fish therein contained 8 Carps to make
them grow to an extraordinary bigness in Pond 10 General Observations to be
understood in the Art of Angling 11 Astrological Elections for Angling in
general 13 What provision is to be made for Angling-tools 14 A Line after the
best manner, how to make 15 Of the Hook, Flote, and other things worth the
observation 16 Flies Natural and Artificial, and how to use them 18 Of
Ground-angling 23 Of Night-angling 24 What times are seasonable, and what
unseasonable to angle in 25 Of the Barbel 27 Of the Bream 29 Of the Bleak 31 Of
the Bull-head or Millers-Thumb 32 Of the Chevin 33 Of the Char 34 Of the Chub,
Cheven, Chavender ibid. Of the Carp 36 Of Dace or Dare 38 Of the Eel 39 Of the
Flounder 42 Of the Gudgeon 43 Of the Guiniard ibid. Of the Loach 44 Of the
Minnow 45 Of the Pope or Ruff ibid. Of the Pike 46 Of the Perch 50 Of the Rud
52 Of the Roach ibid. Of the Stickleback 55 Of the Salmon ibid. Of the Tench 57
Of the Torcoth 61 Of the Trout ibid. Of the Umber or Grayling 63 Fishes Haunt,
etc. 64 Experimental Observations and Directions for Angling 67 An Angling Song
75 An Abstract of such Penal Laws as relate to Fishing 76
The Table for the HUNTING-HORSE, Being an Appendix to the First Part.
OF Hunting-Horses in general, their excellency, and the necessity and benefit
of the Art of Keeping Page 1 Of Breeding; the choice of a Stallion, and Mares,
with some general Remarks on Marks and Colors 8 Of the Age a Hunter should be
of, before he be put to Hunting: Of the Stable, and Groom, and of the Horses
first taking up from Grass, in order to his further dieting 24 How to order the
Hunter for the first Fortnight 34 Of the second Fortnights Diet, and of his
first Hunting, and what Chases are most proper to Train him 50 Of the Horses
third Fortnights Keeping, and first Thorough-sweating 64 Of making a
Hunting-Match, its advantages and disadvantages 70 Of the ordering the Hunter
for a Match or Plate 77 Of the means to judge of your Horses state of Body, and
of curing all Casualties that may happen after Matching 87 Of Riding a
Hunting-Match, or Heats for a Plate, and the advantages belonging to each 91
FINIS.


The Hunter. A DISCOVRSE of HORSEMANSHIP: Directing The right way to breed,
keep, and train a HORSE, for ordinary Hunting and Plates.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichsield, Printer to the University, for Nicholas Cox.
1685.

The HUNTER. CHAP. I. Of Hunting-Horses in general, their Excellency, and the
necessity and benefit of the Art of Keeping.
I Shall omit to speak in praise of Hunting in general, since I would avoid (as
much as might be) Repetitions, and that it is already done at the Beginning of
the foregoing Book, with more Address than I am Master of. But since that
Author has spoken nothing of the Hunting-Horse, which is a principal
Instrument of that Excellent Recreation, I desire leave to speak a word in his
Behalf. In Behalf, I say, of this noble Creature, to whom all that are
Followers of Hunting are obliged: since it is by his Strength and Vigor that
we gratify at ease our Eyes and Ears with all the Pleasures that Hunting
affords; and without whose Assistance, a great part of us could enjoy it a
little more than in Imagination.

But it is not to us only, that are Huntsmen, but to all Mankind, that the Hunter
is (or may be) serviceable. Has our Prince, or Country occasion for our Service
in the Field: on what Horse can we venture our Lives more securely, than on the
Hunter? His Readiness to obey the Hand and Heel, equals him to the Managed
Horse. His being used to gallop on all sorts of Grounds, as well steep places
as deep Earths, has so steeled his Couragc, that he declines no Military
service you can put him on. Are there Ambuscado's to be laid, Discoveries to be
made, speedy and long Marches to be performed; or any other Service, wherein
Strength of Body, Purity of Wind, or Swiftness, are required? The General may
in any of these cases rely on the Hunter, with as much Confidence, as on the
Horse that is dressed in the Manage.

In times of Peace he is equally Useful, not only for Pleasure, but also for
Necessity, and Profit. How diverting to the Eyes, is a Beautiful Horse after a
Pack of Dogs? and with how much ease to our Bodies, and delight to our Minds,
are we carried up to them; with so much Vigor and Pride to be discerned in his
Countenance, as if he emulated the Hounds in their Speed, and was desirous to
excel them, in his Obedience to their common Lord.

How Necessary is the Hunter beyond all other Horses, if his Masters urgent
Affairs (where either Life or Fortune are in hazard,) exact the performance of
a long Journey in a short Time. If his Master, in hopes of Advantage, has
matched him against any other Horse; how ready and willing is he, to persorm
the Utmost that Nature is capable of, or his Master can reasonably expect from
Him? and having Art joined to his natural Abilities, will not only excel all
other Horses, but accomplish things beyond his Masters Hopes, or Expectations;
for without its Assistance in Dieting and Exercise, no Horse can follow the
Hounds, or indeed undergo any other extreme Labor, without hazarding the
melting his Grease, the breaking of his Wind, or foundring him either in Feet,
or Body: all which are consequences of immoderate Labor, and Ignorance in this
Art.

That I may therefore give you some Light into its Mysteries, I shall first
direct you how to breed such Horses that may be for Training; or else instruct
you, how otherwise to procure them. Secondly, how to know by Shapes, Marks, and
other Tokens, what Horse may be most convenient for your purpose. Thirdly, how
to diet him so, that he may perform all things within his Power, without
Danger. Lastly, what manner of Exercise is most conducive to this Design: and
on these Heads I intend to enlarge in my following Discourse.

But before I enter upon my Subject proposed, I think it necessary to answer
Four Objections, that may be made against this Art of Dieting and Training
Horses, that I may remove all prejudice from the minds of those, who think they
may have Reason to oppose it; and that I may vindicate (with Truth) this Art,
and clear it from all Aspersions.

The first Objection I shall mention, is made by de Gray in his Epistle to the
Reader, ( Edit. 4th.) where under the Umbrage of his Love to Horses and in pity
of the Hardships they undergo in Hunting, he extremely inveighs against it, as
the Sourse of all their Miseries. But that I may not be taxed of Prevarication
by my Reader, and for his satisfaction I shall set down his Words, which are
these.

If the Nobility and Gentry of this our Isle of Great Britain, did truly know
how honorable, and how commendable Horsemanship were, and how much they are
esteemed and admired, who are the true Professors thereof, they would labor
more than they now do, to breed and to have good Horses; but it much troubles
me to see, how little Esteem Gentlemen have thereof. Some Horses they have,
though not for Manage, yet for Hunting: but what manner of Hunting?
Fox-hunting forsooth, or Harriers, which be as fleet as petty Greyhounds,
wherewith they do so much over-strain the strength of these poor Horses,
(forcing them over deep Fallows, tough Clays, and wet and rough Sands,) that
albeit those Horses be strong and able, yet are they so toiled out therewith,
as that when they come home at night they would pity the Heart of him that
loves an Horse to see them so bemired, blooded, spurred, lamentably spent, and
tired out; whereas if such Horses had been ridden to the Great-Saddle and
Cannon, they would infinitely have delighted all men that should have beheld
them.

To this I answer, that for my own part I am not very fond of Fox hunting; but
I can see no Reason why Persons of Honor should not gratify their Fancies
with this Recreation, since from the beginning Horses were made for the service
of Man; and doubtless for their Recreation, as well as more necessary Uses. And
I am very confident, that if Horses be trained, dieted, and ridden according to
Art, there will be left no ground for this Objection. For by good Feeding
Faintness would be prevented; and by Airing, and due Exercise, the Horses Wind
would be so improved, that no moderate Labor would hurt him; nay, though a
Horse by immoderate Riding, were reduced to such Tragical Exigencies, as De
Gray mentions, yet by the Assistance of Art Nature may be in Twenty four hours
space so relieved, that all those dangerous Symptoms shall be removed, and all
the Natural Faculties act as formerly.

Now as to the last part of his Argument, I appeal to all the greatest Masters
of Academies here, or in Foreign Parts; whether in the Manage, the Spurs are
not as much used, (not to say more,) as in Hunting; and the Duke of Newcastle
in his Method Nouvelle in 80. p. 85. says, il n'y a point d' Exercise si
violent pour les Chevaux que celuy de Manege; that is, There is no Exercise so
violent for Horses as the Manage; so that you see Hunting is not the only
violent Exercise: and Solomon de la Brove goes further in his Cavalarise
Frangoise, telling us, that Managed Horses should sometimes be used to the
Chase, since hunting assists his wind, and brings him to a civil Acquaintance
with other Horses: inferring from hence, that hunting procures to an Horse two
Benefits, viz. Speed and Strength, and reforms in him two Vices, Salvageness
and Restiveness.

Secondly, there are others, that though they may approve of keeping their
Horses clean, yet are not reconciled to hunting; but being either Admirers of
Coursing, or else keeping Horses only for the benefit of their health, and the
taking the Air; will not be persuaded, but that they can bring their Horses to
the same Perfection without hunting, as with it.

To answer the first of these, I mean Coursers; I affirm, it is impossible to
attain the end of this Art by that Means: for being obliged in search of their
Game to toil their Horses all day, over deep Fallows, in a foot-pace only, they
are likelier to bring their Horses to Weariness than Perfection.

And the same Answer may serve the Others likewise: for Riding a Horse up and
down the Field after nothing, brings a Weariness and Dislike to an Horse in his
Exercise, through his Ignorance of the Time, when his Labor shall cease;
whether, or to what End he is so labored. Whereas on the contrary, an Horse
naturally takes delight in following the Dogs, and seems pleased with their
Music, as is evident by his pricking up his Eaers, gazing on them, and
preffing to gallop toward them, when ever he hears them in full-cry, (though
at a distance.) Nay further, I have been Master of a Stonehorse, that so
entirely loved the Hounds, that when at any time (through eagerness of Sport,
and desire to save the Hare from being eaten) I have rid in amongst the Dogs,
he would so carefully avoid treading on them, that he has more than once
hazarded my Limbs (by making a false step) to save theirs. From hence I infer,
that doubtless Horses extremely delight in hunting, and consequently, that it
is a fit Exercise for them.

Thirdly, Others Object, That what soever Pleasure there may be in Hunting,
they had rather deny themselves that satisfaction than hazard the Laming their
Horses, which, (as they are told few, or no Hunters escape.

That Hunters are sometimes Lame, I do not deny: but cannot allow, that it
proceeds always from this Exercise. For it is the Indiscretion of the Riders,
in overstraining their Horses at Leaps; and by that means, sometimes clapping
them on the back-sinews, catching in their shoos, and such like, and not the
Sport, that is the cause of Lameness. But on the contrary, I will undertake to
show any man Twenty other Horses lame (which never knew what belonged to
Hunting) for One Hunter. There are several other Reasons besides Hunting to be
given for Lameness; as for Instance. Much Travel though but moderate, if care
be wanting) will produce Wind-galls, and Splints, which are the forerunners of
Lameness. Want of Exercise will straiten the Hoofs, and dry up the sinews; and
too much negligence in Travail occasions Surbating, Foundring, and Gravailing.
Horses on the Road oftentimes stumble, and now and then fall, and so become
Lame. Nav, a Slip, or an Overreach are as incident to the Pad, as to the
Hunter. And to conclude, the Horse that is Dressd, is more liable to a Strain
in the Back, and Fillets, than the Hunter; by means of his short-turns: so
that you may perceive that Lameness is Epidemical, and therefore no more to be
objected against Hunting-Horses, than the rest of that Species.

Fourthly, Some again are. Enemies to this Art of Dyeting Horses in particular:
affirming, that such exact Diet makes them tender, sickly, and takes them off
their Stomach: and that the Charges are not only great, but likewise
unnecessary.

To the First part of this Objection, I answer, that an Horse is so far from
being made tender, or losing his Appetite, by such extreme and several
Feedings, if he have proportionate Exercise, that it rather inures him to
hardship. For much Labor (if not too violent) either in Man or Beast, instead
of weakening the Ssomack, and causing Sickness, does rather advance the Appetite
and preserve his Health; and it may be observed, that it does oftener heighten
than decay the Stomach. In like manner moderate Airings purify his Wind, and
both together render him Healthy, and fit for Service.

As to the several sorts of Food, we shall prove in the sequel, that every part
of it is both nourishing, and natural to all Horses Constitutions; so that
consequently, it is not only allowable, but necessary: And to prove this, needs
no more; than to ride an ordinary Horse drawn clean, a days Hunting, or three
Heats, and a Course, against the best of those Horses, which are kept by such
Persons who think that half a Peck a Day, and fetching his water at the next
Spring is Horsemanship sufficient; and they will find by keeping and Exercise,
the Ordinary Horse will become long winded, and stick at Mark: when the other
that is Foul-fed, and fat, will soon give out, for want of Wind; or otherwise
if he be hardy will die under the Spur; whereas if the untrained Horse had been
rightly ordered he would have worsted Twenty such Horses.

Now to the Charges of Keeping, Fifty Shillings a Year disburs'd for Bread,
besides Hay, Straw, Corn and Physic, (which all Horses of Value must be
allowed) is all that will be requisite, to keep an Horse in as good State for
Ordinary Hunting, as any Horse whatsoever. Lastly by being Skilful in the Art
of Keeping, this Advantage will ensue; that no Distemper relating either to the
Head or Body can conceal themselves from his keepers knowledge, whose Skill
will inform him, how to put a stop to them, before they have made any
considerable Advances to the Horses Prejudice. And he that grudges so small an
Expense on so noble and useful a Creature as an Horse is, deserves never to
come on the back of one.

CHAP. II. Of Breeding, the Choice of a Stallion, and Mares, with some general
Remarks on Marks and Colors.
SInce Creation and Generation preceeded the Art of Riding, and that the first
thing which is of Course to be treated of, is the Choice of an Horse fit for
this exercise of Hunting, I shall speak something cursorily of the Art of
Breeding, before I treat of the Hunter ready for service. To them therefore
that have grounds convenient for Breed, I shall direct this part of my
discourse: and lay them down some few Rules that may be serviceable to them,
though I shall be as brief as possible, and refer them to Markham, de Gray,
Morgan, Almond, and Farring Completed, (which is collected from the
forementioned Authors Markham and de Gray) all which have treated of the Art of
Breeding more at large.

First therefore I wonld advise you to buy either an Arabian Horse (if you can
procure him,) a Spaniard, a Turk, or a Barb, for your Stallion, that is well
shaped, of a good Color to beautify your Race, and well marked, to agree with
most men's Opinions; though otherwise they are not so significative as Mr.
Blundevile, and his Italian Author Frederigo Grissone, would have us believe.

To begin with the Arabian; Merchants, and other Gentlemen that have traveled
those parts, report, that the right Arabians are valued at an incredible, as
well as an intolerable Rate; being prized at Five hundred, others say at one,
two, and three thousand Pounds an Horse; that the Arabs are as careful of
keeping the Genealogies of their Horses, as Princes in keeping their Pedigrees;
that they keep them with Medals; and that each Son's Portion is usually two
Suits of Arms, two Cymeters, and one of these Horses. The Arabs boast, that
they will ride fourscore miles a day, without drawing Bitt: which has been
performed by several of our English Horses. But much more was achieved by an
High way-man's Horse; who having taken a Booty, on the same day rode him from
London to York, being One hundred and Fifty Miles. Notwithstanding their great
value, and the difficulty in bringing them from Scanderoon to England by Sea;
yet by the care, and at the charge of some Breeders in the North, the Arabian
Horse is no stranger to those parts; where Persons who have the curiosity, may
(as I presume) at this Day see some of the Race, if not a true Arabian Stallion.

The Spanish Horse (according to the Duke of Newcastle) is the Noblest Horse in
the world, and the most Beautiful that can be; no Horse is so curiously shaped
all over from Head to Croup, and he is absolutely the best Stallion in the
world, whether you design your Breed for the Manage, the War, the Pad,
Hunting, or for Running Horses. But as he is excellent, so he wants not for
price, Three or Four hundred Pistols being a common Rate for a Spanish Horse.
Several have been sold for Seven hundred, Eight hundred, and a Thousand Pistols
a piece; and One particular Horse, called el Bravo, that was sent to the
Archduke Leopold, was held worth as much as a Manor of a Thousand Crowns a
year. The best Spanish Horses are bred in Andalouzia, and particularly at
Cordova, where the King has many Studds of Mares, and so have several of the
Spanish Nobility and Gentry. Now besides the great price at first, the Charges
of the Journey from Spain to England will be very considerable: for first, he
must travel from Andalouzia to Bilbo, or St Sebastien, the nearest Ports to
England, and is at least Four hundred Miles: and in that hot Country you cannot
with safety travel your Horse above twenty Miles a day, then there is the
Expense of your Groom and Farrier, besides the casualty of Lameness, Sickness,
and Death: so that though he do prove an Extraordinary good Horse, by that time
he arrives at your own home he will likewise be an Extraordinary dear one.

The Turk is little inferior to the Spanish Horse in Beauty, but somewhat
odd-shap'd, his head being somewhat like that of a Camel: He has excellent
Eyes, a thin Neck excellently risen, and somewhat large of body: his Croup is
like that of a Mule; his Legs not so underlimb'd as those of the Barb, but very
sinewy, good Pasterns, and good Hoofs: They never amble, but trot very well:
and are accounted at this present better Stallions for Gallopers than Barbs, as
when I come to speak of them) I shall show.

Some Merchants affirm, that there cannot be a more noble and divertive sight
to a Lover of Horses, than to walk into the Pastures near Constantinople, about
Soyling-time, where he may see many hundred gallant Horses tethred, and every
Horse has his Attendant or Keeper, with his little Tent (placed near him) to
lie in, that he may look to him, and take care to shift him to fresh Grass, as
occasion requires.

The Price of a Turk is commonly One hundred or One hundred and Fifty Pounds a
Horse, and when bought it is difficult to get a Pass; the Grand Segnior being so
very strict, that He seldom (but upon extraordinary oecasions) permits any of
his Horses to be exported his Dominions. But if (when obtained) you travel by
Land, without a Turk or two for your Convoy, you will be sure to have them
seized on by the way. Then, as in the former, so here, you will find the same
difficulties of a long Journey, (for you must come through Germany, which is a
long way,) and the same charges attending it, I mean your Groom and Farrier,
who must be careful that they entrust no Persons whatsoever with the care of
him, but themselves, especially in shooing of him: For it is the common practice
beyond Sea, (as well as here) where they discover a fine Horse, to hire a
Farrier to prick him, that they may buy him for a Stallion.

But some People choose to buy Horses at Smyrna in Anatolia, and from thence, as
likewise srom Constantinople, transport them to England by Sea; which, if the
Wind serve right, arrive in England in a month, though generally the Merchants
make their Voyages little less than a Quarter of a year.

The Barb is little inferior to any of the former in beauty, only he is
accounted by our Modern Breeders too slender and Lady-like to breed on: and
therefore in the North, at this instant, they prefer the Spanish Horse and Turk
before him. He is so lazy and negligent in his walk, that he will stumble on
Carpetground. His Trot is like that of a Cow, his Gallop low, and with much
ease to himself. But he is for the most part sinewy, and nervous, excellently
winded, and good for a Course, is he be not over-weighted.

The Mountain-Barbs are accounted tbe best, because they are the strongest and
largest. They belong to the Allarbes, who value them as much themselves, as
they are prized by any other Nations, and therefore they will not part with
them to any Persons except to the Prince of the Band to which they belong; who
can at any time, at his pleasure, command them for his own use. But for the
other more ordinary sort, they are to be met with pretty common, in the hands
of several of our Nobility and Gentry; or if you send into Languedoc and
Provence in France, they may be there bought for forty or fifty Pistols a
Horse. Or if you will send into Barbary, you may have one for Thirty Pounds, or
thereabouts. But here too the charges and journey will be great; for though
from Tunis to Marselles in France be no great Voyage, yet from Marselles to
Callais by Land measures the length of all Franee, and from thence they are
shipped for England.

The next thing of course to be treated of, is the choice of your Mares, and
the fittest Mare to breed out of, according to the Duke of Newcastle's opinion,
is one that has been bred of an English Mare, and a Stallion of either of these
Races; but if such a Mare be not to be got, then make choice of a right bred
English Mare by Sire and Dam, that is well fore-handed, well underlaid, and
strong put together in general; and in particular, see that she have a lean
Head, wide Nostrils, open Chaul, a big Weasand, and the Windpipe straight and
loose, and choose her about five or six year old, and be sure that the Stallion
be not too old.

Now for the Food of the Stallion, I would have you keep him as high as
possible for four or five months before the time of Covering, with old clean
Oats, and split Beans, well hull'd; to which you may add, if you please, Bread,
(such as in this Book shall be hereafter directed) and now and then, for
variety, you may give him an handful of clean Wheat, or Oats washed in strong
Ale; but as for Bay Salt, and Anniseeds, which Mr. Morgan, in his Perfection of
Horsemanship, advises should be scattered amongst his Provender, I hold them
superfluous whilst the Horse is in health, but be sure let him have plenty of
good old sweet Hay, well cleansed from Dust, and good Wheat-straw to lie on;
and let him be watered twice every day at some fair running Spring, or else a
clear standing Pond-water (where the other is not to be had) near some Meadow
or level piece of Ground, where you may gallop him after he has drunk. When
you have brought him to the water, do not suffer him to drink his Fill at the
first, but after he has taken his first draught, gallop and scope him up and
down a little to warm it, and then bring him to the water again, and let him
drink what he please, and after that gallop him as you did before, never
leaving the Water till you find he will drink no more. By this means you will
prevent raw Crudities, which the Coldness of the Water would produce to the
detriment of the Stomach, if you had permitted him to drink his fill at first;
whereas you allowing him his fill (though by degrees) at last, you keep his
Body from drying too fast. And this I take to be much better for your Horses
than (according to the forecited Morgan) to encourage his Water with Whitewine,
to qualify the cold quality thereof: for Nature it self is the best Directress
for the expulsion of her Enemies. especially in Brutes, where usually she can
command the Appetite: and therefore I esteem his own natural heat, for warming
his water, to be better than that which proceeds from any other. Now as to
Morgan's Direction of Sweating him every day early in the Morning, which he
says will not only perfect disgestion; and exhaust the moisture from his Seed,
but also strengthen and cleanse his Blood and Body from all raw and imperfect
humors; I am of opinion twill both dry up the radical Moisture too fast, and
likewise instead of heightning his Pride and Lust, (which he alleges,) weaken
him too much. Other Rules might be given as to the ordering of them after
Water, and the Hours of Feeding, with the quantity etc. but these will be
fitter to be handled in another place, and therefore no more of them here.

Now when your Stallion is in Lust, and the Time for Covering is come, which is
best to be in May, that the Foles may fall in April following, otherwise they
will have little or no Grass, if they should be put together (according to
Markham's opinion) in the middle of March tho he holds that one Fool falling in
March is worth two falling in May, because (says he) he possesses, as it
were, two Winters in a year, and is thereby so hardened, that nothing can
almost after impair him. The time I say being come to put your Stallion and
Mares together, pull off his hinder Shoes, and lead him to the place where the
Stud of Mares are, which you intend for covering, which place ought to be close
well fenced, and in it a little Hutt for a Man to lie in, and a larger Shed
with a Manger to feed your Stallion with Breud and Corn, during his Abode with
the Mares, and to shelter him in the heat of the Day and in Rainy weather, and
this Close ought to be of sufficient langeness to keep your Mares well for two
months.

Before you pull of his Bridle, let him cover a Mare or two in hand, then turn
him loose amongst them, and put all your Mares to him, as well those which are
with Foale, as those which are not, for there is no danger in it; and by that
means they will all be served in their height of Lust, and according to the
intention of Nature. When your Stallion has covered them once, he tries them
all over again, and those which will admit him he serves; and when his business
is finished, he beats the Pale, and attempts to be at Liberty; which when your
Man finds, (who is Night and Day to observe them, and to take care that no
other Mares are put to your Horse, and to give you an Account, which take the
horse, and which not, etc.) let him be taken up, and let him be well kept as
before; only you may at the first give him a good Mash or two, to help to
restore Nature, for you will find him nothing but Skin and Bones, and his Mane
and Tail will rot off. Be sure give him never above Ten or Twelve Mares in a
Season, at most; otherwise you will scarce recover him against the next Years
Covering-time.

When your Stallion is past this use, then buy another; but be sure never make
use of a Horse of your own Breed, for by so doing the Best Kind would in time
degenerate: but you cannot do better (the Duke of Newcastle says) than to let
your own Mares be covered by their Sire, for (according to his own words and
opinion) there is no Incest in Horses: and by this means they are nearer one
degree to the Purity and Head of the Fountain, from which they are derived,
since a fine Horse got them, and the same fine Horse covers them again.

Now though the Duke of Newcastle affirms this to be the true way for covering
Mares, alleging that Nature is wiser than Art in the Act of Generation, and
that by this way, of a dozen Mares he dare affirm that two shall not fail: yet
it may not correspond with the Interest of some private Gentlemen who turn
Breeders for Profit as well as Pleasure; for a good Stallion bearing such an
extraordinary rate, and they having but One, have reason to be cautions, to
avoid as much as can be all hazardous Experiments; which (with submission to
the Duke's Judgment) this in some cases may prove. For first, there have been
Horses of great spirit, that have killed themselves through excess of Lust,
being left to range at their liberty; and those that have been confined to an
Enclosure, and a select number of Mares, have yet in one Weeks space so
weakened Nature, that not above half the Mares have held. Secondly, some Mares
are of so hot a constitution of Nature, and their Lust so violent, that if they
are permitted to run long with the Horse, after they have conceived, will (if
they be high in flesh and lusty) desire the Horse again, which generally
hazards the Loss of the Embrio they go with.

To prevent therefore these Inconveniences, I shall lay you down an other
Method (as briefly as may be,) which is called covering in hand, as the former
is generally termed out of hand, and the way is this: viz. when you have
brought both your Horse and Mare to as proper condition for Breed by Art and
good feeding, then set some ordinary Ston'd-Nag by her for a day or two to woo
her, and by that means she will be so prone to Lust, that she will readily
receive your Stallion; which you should present to her either early in a
Morning, or late in an Evening, for a day or two together, and let him cover
her in hand once, or twice if you please, at each time, observing always to
give the Horse the advantage of Ground, and that you have some one ready with a
Pucket of cold water to throw on the Mare's Shape, immediately on the
dismounting of the Horse, which will make her retain the Seed received the
better, especially if you get on her back, and trot her about a quarter of an
Hours space, but in any case have a care of heating, or straining her: and it
will not be amiss, if after every such act you let them fast two Hours, and
then give each of them a warm Mash; and it is odds but this way your Mares may be
as well served as the other, and yet your Stallion will last you much longer.

I shall say no more as to the keeping the Mares during the time of their being
with Foale, nor of their foaling; only this, that if you take care to house
them all the Winter, and to keep them well, their Colts will prove the better.
When they are foaled, let them run with their Dams till Martin-mass, then wean
them, and keep them in a convenient House, with a low Rack and Manger on
purpose; litter them well, and feed them with good Hay, and Oats and Wheat-bran
mixed, which will make them drink, and belly well. The first year you may put
them all together, but afterward they must be separated, the Stone-Colts from
the Fillies; and if you have choice of Houses, you may put Yearings together,
Two years old together, and so Three years old together, for their better
satisfaction and agreement; as little Children best agree together.

In a warm fair Day you may grant them liberty to run and scope in some
enclosed Court or Backside, but be sure to take care to put them up again
carefully, that they be not hurt. When Summer is come, and there is plenty of
Grass, put them out in some dry Ground, that has convenient watring, and so
let them run till Martinmass again: then house them as before, and order them
in all points as older Horses, till they are full Five years old, then take
them up for good and all, and let your Groom back them if he have skill, or
else some skilful Rider. You may if you please just break your Fillies at Two
years and half old, and let them be covered at Three; and by that means they
will be so tame and gentle, as not to injure themselves or their Foals. But in
case of sickness, or any accidental calamity, as Lameness, etc. you must then
commit them to the Farrier's Care.

The reason why I propose the Housing of them every Winter, with dry Feeding
and Lodging, is, that they may be the liker their Sire in Beauty and Shape. For
the primary Cause of the sineness of Shape and Beauty in Horses is Heat, and
dry Feeding. And this is proved from the several Races we have already
mentioned, viz. the Spanish Horse, Barb, and Turkish Horse, all which Countries
are under an Hot Climate, and by consequence afford little Grass: Therefore in
our more moderate and cold Countries we are to assist Nature by Art, and to
supply the want of Heat by warm Housing, and dry Feeding. This is easily made
evident by Example. For take two Colts begot by the same Sire, on Mares of
equal Beauty, and house the one every Winter, and feed him as directed, and
expose the Other, till they are Four years old, and fit to be backed; and you
shall find the former like his Sire in all respects, and the other fitter for
the Cart than Hunting, as being a dull, heavy, flabby, scarce animated Clod;
and all this proceeds from the Humidity of the Air and Earth. From hence you
may infer, that it is not only Generation, but, as I may term it, Education,
that makes a complete Horse; and such yours will be, if you order them
according to the former Directions; for you may with ease break the Colt that
is by such good management made gentle, and half-back'd to your hand.

But I have dwelt longer on this Subject than I intended, my business being
chiefly to inform the Groom (not the Master) what belonged to his Office; and
therefore I will wander no further from my purpose, but leave it to the Rider
to follow his own Method in rendering Colts fit for his Masters Service: whilst
I give some few Directions to those Gentlemen who will not bestow either
trouble or charges on Breeding, or have the Will but not the Convenience to do
it, how to elect an Horse fit for this Exercise.

The way for a Gentleman to furnish himfelf with an Horse, that may be worth
training for Hunting, is either to enquire out some noted Breeder (of which
there are many in the North,) or else to go to some famous Fair, as Malton and
Rippon Fairs in Yorkshire, the former held on the 23. day of September yearly,
and the latter on May day: Or to Richmonds in the same Shire, (which, as I am
informed, does now of late years exceed both the forementioned, being situate
in the middle of the most celebrated part of the breeding Country;) its Fairs
are held in Easter week, and at Rood tide. Northampton has several Fairs in the
year likewise, as on the 23. day of April, the 8th. of September, 17th. of
November, with several others. There are several other Fairs, as Lenton-Fair in
Notinghamshire, Pankridg-Fair in Staffordshire, etc. which for brevities sake I
omit. At any of these places he may make choice of a Horse, which as near as
can be ought to have these following Shapes: viz.

His Head ought to be lean, large, and long; his Chaul thin, and open; his Ears
small, and pricked, or if they be somewhat long, provided they stand upright
like those of a Fox, it is usually a sign of Mettle and Toughness His Forehead
long and broad, not flat, and as we term it Mare-fac'd, but rising in the midst
like that of a Hare, the Feather being placed above the Top of his Eye, the
contrary being thought by some to betoken blindness. His Eyes full, large, and
bright; his Nostrils wide, and red within, for an open Nostril betokens a good
Wind; his Mouth large, deep in the Wykes, and hairy; His Thropple, Weasand, or
Windpipe, big, loose, and straight when he is rein'd in by the Bridle; for if,
when he bridles, it bends in like a Bow, (which is called Cock-throppled) it
very much hinders the free passage of his Wind His Head must be so set on to
his Neck, that there must be a space felt between his Neck and his Chaul; for
to be Bull-neck'd is uncomely to sight, and prejudicial to the Horses wind, as
aforesaid. His Crest should be firm, thin, and well risen; his Neck long, and
straight, yet not loose, and pliant, which the Northern-men term Withy-cragg'd;
his Breast strong, and broad; his Chest deep, his Chine short, his Body large,
and close shut up to the ^ucklebone; his Ribbs round like a Barrel, his Belly
being hid within them. His Fillets large, his Buttocks rather oval than broad
being well let down to the Cascoins. His Cambrels upright, and not bending,
which is called by some sickle-hough'd, though some hold it a sign of Toughness
and Speed. His Legs clean, flat, and straight, His Joints short, well knit, and
upright, especially betwixt the Pasthorns and the Hoof, having but little Hair
on his Fetlocks. His Hoofs black, strong, and hollow, and rather long and
narrow, than big and flat. And lastly, his Main and Tail should be long, and
thin rather than thick, which is counted by some a mark of Dullness.

As to his Color and Marks, I rather incline to believe them grateful to the
Eye, than any infallible Indexes of Goodness; for as the Goodness or Badness of
a Man does not consist in his Complexion, but in his inward Virtues, so neither
do Color or Marks certainly demonstrate the Goodness or Badness of an Horse,
because his Qualifications proceed from his inward Disposition.But yet I wholly
dissent from the opinion of Mr. Morgan, p. 31; who holds, That Color and Marks
are no more assurance of a good Horse; than the having a Feather in a Man's Hat
does prove him a good Man or a bad; inferring that inherent Colors are of no
greater Eminency or Value, than those external ones are which may be taken or
laid aside at a man's own will and pleasure.

Now I say, that although Marks and Color do not absolutely give testimony unto
us of a Horses goodness, yet they as well as his shape do intimate to us in
some part his Disposition and Qualities. For Nature, not being defective,
frames every part of the same matter whereof the whole is formed, and therefore
the Foetus being formed of the copulative Seed of its Sire and Dam, does from
them derive as well the accidental as the more essential Qualities of its
temperament and composition. And for this Reason Hair it self may osten times
receive the variation of its Color from the different temperature of the
Subject out of which it is produced. And to confirm this, I dare pass my word,
that wherever you shall meet with an Horse that has no White about him,
especially in his Forehead, though he be otherwise of the best reputed
Colors, as Bay, Black, Sorrel etc. That Horse I dare affirm to be of a dogged
and sullen disposition; especially if he have a small pink Eye, and a narrow
Face, with a Nose bending like a Hawks Bill.

But yet I am not positive, that Horses even of the most celebrated Colors,
and Marks answerable, do always prove the best; because I have seen those
Horses worsted by Others, whose Marks and Color have been esteemed the worst;
as bright Sorrel, and Mouseblack with bald Faces, and all the Legs white above
the knee. But I rather attribute the Cause thereof to the Ignorance of the
Rider, that had the training of those best marked Horses, than to any defect in
Nature; for Nature is no Counterfeit, as Art often is, to make a thing show to
the Eye, contrary to what it is in reality. And therefore as I would not have
men put too great Confidence in Marks and Colors; so I would not have them
esteemed of so lightly, as the former comparison of Mr. Morgans would make
them; for it is a constant and inseparable quality for Horses to produce Hair,
which is given them by Nature as a Tegument and Defense against the Cold: and
if it be shaved off, galled, or any ways else removed or taken away, yet it
will grow again; but a Feather may be put to, or taken from a Man's Hat at his
pleasure.

Therefore since Color seems to set forth the Beauty of an Horse, you may
for Ornament sake and to please your Eye, make choice of an Horse that is
either a Brown-Bay, Dapple-Bay, Black, Sad-Chessnut with Flaxen Main and Tail,
so that they have either a White Star, Blaze, or Snip, with a White Foot;
Dapple-Grey, or White Lyard with Black Muzzle, Eye, and Ear. Any of these are
reputed by most men to give a Grace to shape; tho in themselves they are no
perfect signs of Goodness.

But for his internal Endowments, they are more material, and therefore take
care that he by Nature be of a Gentle Disposition, to his Keeper tractable and
docile free from those ill Qualities of Biting, Striking, Restiffness, Lying
down in the Water, Starting, Running away with his Rider, Plunging, Leaping,
etc. Not but that most, if not all these ill habits may be rectified by Art;
For Experience has shown us, that Horses which have not been of such a perfect
Natural Composition, as might be desired, have yet been tempered by Art, and
have not only been reclaimed from their vicious Habits, but have been likewise
brought to great performance in Heats, as well as Hunting, as I could Instance
in several if it were necessary.

And therefore since Art was invented to perfect Nature; if (notwithstanding
your care) you have met with a Horse subject to any of these ill Qualities
aforesaid, you must search into the causes of it, which Art will help you to
discover and remove: and then the Cause being taken away, the Effect will
cease. So that probably, contrary to most peoples Opinions a Vicious Horse, by
good management and Government may be brought to excel an Horse that has a
better Reputation and Fame in the judgment of the generality of Horsemen.

CHAP. III. Of the Age a Hunter should be of before he be put to Hunting; of
the Stable, and Groom, and of the Horse's first taking up from Grass, in order
to his further Dieting.
HAving gotten a Horse answerable either to the former Descriptions, or your
own Satisfaction at least, I am to suppose that by a skilful Rider he is
already grounded in the Fundamentals of this Art, by being taught such
Obedience, as that he will readily answer to the Horseman's Helps and
Corrections both of the Bridle, the Hand, the Voice, the calf of the Leg, and
the Spur; that he can tell how to take his way forward, and has gained a true
temper of Mouth, and a right placing of his Head, and that he has learned to
stop and turn readily; for without these things are perfectly taught, and as it
were laid for a Foundation, he can never proceed effectually.

I had thoughts of enlarging upon this particular Subject, but I find my
Discourse is like to swell beyond its bounds, so that I am forced to omit it,
and therefore I shall refer you to the Directions and Prudence of your Rider,
and only tell you that it is convenient, your Horse should be Five years old, and
well way'd before you begin to Hunt him. For though it be a general Custom
amongst noted Horsemen to train their Horses up to Hunting at Four years old,
and some sooner, yet at that Age his Joints not being full knit, nor he come to
his best strength and courage, he is disabled from performing any matter of
speed and toughness: and indeed being put to sore Labor and Toil so young, he
runs a very great hazard of strains, and the putting out of Splents, Spavins,
Curbs and Windgalls, besides the daunting of his Spirit, and abating his
natural Courage, insomuch that he will become melancholy, stiff, and
rheumatick, and have all the distempers of old Age, when it might be expected
he should be in his Prime.

Your Horse then being full Five, you may if you please put him to grass from
the middle of May till Bartholmew-tide, or at least from the middle of Summer
till that time; for then the Season being so violently hot, it will not be
convenient to work him: where whilst he is sporting himself at liberty in his
Pasture, we will if you please take care to provide a good Stable for his
Reception at his taking up, and a good Groom to look after him; both which are
more essentially necessary to the Hunter than to other Horses, which require
not that exact care in keeping.

First then as to the Stable, I could wish every Gentleman would be careful to
situate it in a good Air, and upon hard dry and firm ground, that in the
Winter the Horse may go and come clean in and out: and if possible let it be
seated on an Ascent, that the Urine, Foul Water, or any Wet, may be conveyed
away by Trenches, or Sinks cut out for that purpose. Be sure to suffer no
Hen-houses, Hog-styes, or Houses of Easment, or any other filthy Smells to be
near it; for Hen-dung, or Feathers swallowed, oftentimes prove mortal, and the
ill Air of a Jakes as often is the cause of Blindness: likewise the very smell
of Swine will frequently breed the Farcy, and no Animal whatsoever more
delights in cleanliness, or is more offended at unwholesome savours than the
Horse.

Let vour Stable be built of Brick, rather than Stone, since the latter is
subject to sweating in wet weather: which Dampness and Moisture is the Original
of Rheums, and Catarrhs. Let your Wall be of a good convenient thickness, as
about Eighteen or Twenty Inches thick, both for safety and warmth in Winter,
and to keep the Sun from annoying him in Summer, which would hinder Concoction.
You may (if you please) make Windows both on the East and North sides, that you
may have the benefit of the Air during Summer, from the North, and of the
Morning Sun during Winter from the East. And I would advise you to Glaze your
Windows, and make them with Sashes, to let in Air at pleasure, and to keep out
Poultry, for the reasons before recited; and likewise to make close Wooden
shutters, that during the middle time of the Day the Stable may be dark, which
will cause him to take his Rest as well in the Day as the Night. Let your
Floor, (I mean that part on which he is always to stand, or lie down on, be
made of Oaken Planks, and not pitched, for it is easier and warmer for the Horse
to ly on Boards than Stones. be sure to lay them level; for if they are laid
higher before than behind (as they generally are in Inns and Horse-coursers
Stables, that their Horses may appear to more advantage in Stature,) his
hinder-leggs will swell, and he can never lie at ease, because his Hinder parts
will be still slipping down. Lay your Planks cross-way, and not at length; and
underneath them sink a good Trench, which receiving the Urine through holes bored
on purpose in the Planks, may convey it into some common receptacle. Let the
ground behind him be raised even with the Planks, that he may continually stand
on a Level. Let the Floor behind him be pitched with small Pebble: and be sure
let that part of your Stable where the Rack stands be well Wainscoted. I would
have two Rings placed at each side of his Stall, for his Halter to run through;
which must have a light wooden Logger at the bottom of it, to poise it
perpendicularly; but not so heavy as to tire the Horse, or to hinder him from
eating. Instead of a fixed Manger, I would have you have a Locker, or Drawer,
made in the Wainscote partition, for him to eat his Corn out of, which you may
take in and out to cleanse at pleasure. And whereas some may object the
narrowness of the Room, you may remedy that at your pleasure, by allowing it to
be the larger: tho considering the small Quantity of Provender, you are to put
in at a time, (as you see hereafter) you need not make it very large. I would
not advise you to make any Rack, but instead thereof (according to the Italian
fashion) to give your Horse his Hay on the ground, upon the Litter; or else you
may (if you please) nail some Boards in the form of a Trough, in which you may
put his Hay, and the Boards will prevent him from trampling and spoiling it.

Some possibly may object, that this way of Feeding him, may spoil his Crest,
and that the blowing upon his Hay will soon make it nauseous to his Palate. For
the spoiling his Crest, it rather strengthens it, and makes it firm, whereas,
on the contrary, to lift up his Head high to the Rack will make him
withycragged: but the way forementioned, he will feed as he lies, which will be
for his ease and satisfaction. As to the quantity of his Hay, you are to give
it him in such small Proportions, (tho the oftener) that it may be eaten before
his Freath can in the least have tainted it. But the chief Reason why I advise
you to this way is this, because the receiving his Hay down upon the Ground,
will help to cleanse his Head from any Rheum or Dose, which he may have gotten
by negligence and over-exercise and induce him by sneezing to throw out all
manner of watery humors that may annoy his Head. If your Stable will allow, you
may build several Partitions of Boards, and at the Head toward the Manger let
them be advanced to that height that one Horse may not molest or smell to
another; and so divide the Whole into as many equal Stands or Staulls as it
will admit of; allowing to each, Room enough to turn about in, and lie down at
pleasure. You may make one of your Staulls close, which may serve for your
Groom to lie in, in case of a Match, Sickness, etc. and where he may burn
Candle without the Horse's discerning of it. Behind the Horses I would have a
Range of Presses made with Peggs in them to hang up Saddles, Bridles,
Housing-cloaths, etc. as likewise Shelves to place your Curry-combs, Brushes,
Dusting-cloaths, Ointments, Waters, or any other Necessaries upon.

Now that you may not cumber your Stable with Oat-Binns, I think it necessary
to tell you, that the best way is to make use of the Invention of Mr. Farmer of
Tusmore in Oxfordshire. Which is done (according as it is described by the
Ingenuous Dr. Plot, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire) by letting the Oats
down from a Loft above, out of a Vessel like the Hopper of a Mill, whence they
fall into a square Pipe let into the wall, of about four Inches Diagonal, which
comes down into a Cupboard also set into the wall, but with its end so near the
bottom that there shall never be above a Gallon, or other desirable Quantity
in the Cupboard at a time, which being taken away and given to the Horses,
another Gallon presently succeeds; so that in the lower part of the Stable,
where the Horses stand, there is not one Inch of room taken up for the whole
provision of Oats; which Contrivance has also this further Convenience, that
by this Motion the Oats are kept constantly sweet, (the taking away one Gallon
moving the whole Mass above,) which laid up any otherwise in great quantities,
grow frequently musty.

Now I would have you have two made, the one for the Oats, the other for your
split Beans, and both let into your Range of Presses; the Partitions may easily
be made over head, to separate your Oats from your Beans. Or if you like not
this way, you may convert it into an Hay-loft, or Chambers for your Grooms,
which you fancy; but whatever you make choice of, let the Floor overhead be
seil'd, that no Dust from above fall upon your Horses. But if you have the
convenience of a Rick-yard, so that you keep your Hay abroad, it is the opinion
of some knowing Horsemen, that to tuck it out of the Rick by little and little,
as you have occasion to use it, makes it spend much better than it would
otherwise do out of the Hay-Tallet.

As to the rest of its Perquisites, a Dung. yard, a Pump, or a Conduit, are
necessary; and if you can have that convenience, some Pond or running River
near hand. But be sure, never let the Front of your Stable be without Litter,
that by frequent practice your Horse may learn to empty his Bladder when he is
come from Airing, which will be both healthful for your Horse, and profitable
for your Land.

Having thus laid down a Model for a Stable, my next business is to tell the
Groom his Duty; I mean not those which generally appertain to all Servants,
such as are Obedience, Fidelity, Patience, Diligence etc. but those more
essentially belonging to this Office. First then he must love his Horse in the
next degree to his Master, and to endeavor by fair Usage to acquire a
reciprocal Love from him again, and an exact Obedience, which if he know how to
pay it to his Master, he will the better be able to teach it his Horse; and
both the one and the other are to be obtained by fair means, rather than by
Passion and Outrage. For those who are so irrational themselves, as not to be
able to command their own Passions, are not fit to undertake the reclaiming of
an Horse, (who by nature is an irrational Creature) from his.

He must then put in practice that Patience, which I would have him Master of,
at all times, and by that and fair means he shall attain his End: For nothing
is more tractable than an Horse, if you make use of Kindness to win him. Next,
Neatness is requisite in a Groom, to keep his Stable clean swept and in order;
his Saddles, Housing-cloaths, Stirrops, Leathers, and Girths, clean, and above
all his Horse clean dressed and rubbed. Diligence in the last place is
requisite both in a daily practice of his Duty, and in observing any the
smallest Alteration whether casual or accidental, either in his Countenance, as
Symptoms of Sickness, or in his Limbs and Gate, as Lameness, or in his
Appetite, as forsaking his Meat, and immediately upon any such Discovery to
seek out for Remedy. This is the substance of the Groom's Duty in general, and
which I shall treat of more at large as Occasion shall offer it self.

In the mean time since Bartholomew-tide is now come, and the pride and
strength of the Grass nipp'd by the severe Frosts, and cold Dews which
accompany this Season, so that the Nourishment thereof turns into raw
Crudities, and the Coldness of the Night (which is an Enemy to the Horse)
abates as much Flesh and Lust as he gets in the Day, we will now take him up
from Grass whilst his Coat lies smooth and sleek.

Having brought him home, let your Groom so that Night set him up in some
secure and spacious House, where he may evacuate his Body, and so be brought to
warmer keeping by Degrees; the next day stable him. But tho it be held as a
general Rule amongst the generality of Grooms, not to cloth or; dress their
Horses, till Two or Three days after their stabling, I can find no Reason but
Custom to persuade one to it; But it being little conducive either to the
advantage or prejudice of the Horse, I shall leave it to their own Fancies: But
as to the giving of Wheat-straw, to take up his Belly, (a custom used by Grooms
generally at the Horse's first Housing,) I am utterly averse from it. For the
Nature of a Horse being hot and dry, if he should feed on Straw, which is so
likewise, it would straighten his Guts, and cause an Inflammation of the Liver,
and by that means distemper the Blood; and besides it would make his Body so
costive, that it would cause a Retention of Nature, and make him dung with
great pain and difficulty; whereas full Feeding would expel the Excrements,
according to the true Intention and Inclination of Nature. Therefore let
moderate Airing, warm Clothing, good old Hay, and old Corn, supply the place
of Wheat-straw.

To begin then methodically, that your Groom may not be to seek in any part of
his Duty, I shall acquaint him, that his first business is, after he has
brought his Horse into the Stable, in the morning to water him, and then to rub
over his Body with a hard Wisp a little moistened, and then with a woollen
cloth, then to cleanse his Sheath with his wet hand from all the Dust it had
contracted during his Running, and to wash his Yard either with White Wind, or
Water. Then he may trim him according to the manner that other Horses are
trimmed, except the inside of his Ears, which (though some still continue that
fashion) ought not to be meddled with, for fear of making him catch cold.

When this is done, let him have him to the Farrier, and there get a Set of
Shoos answerable to the shape of his Foot, and not to pare his Foot that it may
fit his Shoo, as too many Farriers do, not only in Brabant and Flanders, but
here likewise. Be sure let his Feet be well opened betwixt the Quarters and the
Thrush, to prevent Hoof-binding; and let them be opened straight, and not
side-ways, for by that means in two or three Shooings, his Heels (which are the
strength of his Feet) will be cut quite away. Pare his Foot as hollow as you
can, and then the Shoo will not press upon it. The Shoo must come near to the
Heel, yet not be set so close as to bruise it; nor yet so open as to catch in
his Shoos, if at any time he happen to overreach, and so hazard the pulling
them off, the breaking of his Hoof, or the bruising of his Heel. The Webbs of
the Shoos must be neither too broad, nor too narrow, but of a middle size,
about the breadth of an inch, with slop'd Spunges; and even with his Foot; for
though it would be for the advantage of the Traveling Horse's Heel, to have
the Shoo sit a little wider than the Hoof, on both sides, that the Shoo might
bear his Weight, and not his Foot touch the ground; yet the Hunter being often
forced to gallop on rotten spungy Earth, to have them larger would hazard
Laming, and pulling off his Shoos, as has been shown before.

There is an Old Proverb, Before behind, and Behind before; that is, in the
Fore-feet the Veins lie behind, and in the Hinder-feet they lie before.
Therefore let the Farrier take care that he prick him not, but leave a space at
the Heel of the Fore-feet, and a space between the Nails at the Toe. When your
Shoo is set on according to this Direction, you will find a great deal of his
Hoof left to be cut off at his Toe. When that is cut off, and his Feet smoothed
with a File, you will find him to stand so firm, and his Feet will be so
strong, that he will tread as boldly on Stones as on Carpet-ground.

By that time he is shod, I presume 'twill be time to water him, therefore rake
him to the River, and let him, after he has drank, stand some time in the
Water, which will close up the holes (according to the opinion of some
Horsemen) which the driving of the Nails made. Then have him gently home, and
having tied him up to the Rack, rub him all over Body and Legs with dry Straw;
then stop his Feet with Cow Dung, sift him a Quarter of a Peck of clean old
Oats, and give them to him; then litter him, and leave him a sufficient
Quantity of old Hay to serve him all Night, and so leave him till the next
Morning.

CHAP. IV. How to order the Hunter for the first Fortnight.
I presume by this your Horse will have evacuated all his Grass, and his Shoes
will be so well settled to his Feet, that he may be fit to be rid abroad to Air
without danger of surbating. Therefore it is now necessary that I begin in a
more particular manner to direct our unexperienced Groom how he ought to
proceed to order his Horse according to Art.

First then you are to visit your Horse early in the Morning, to wit, by Five a
Clock if in Summer, or Six, if in Winter, and having put up his Litter under
his Stall, and made clean your Stable, you shall then feel his Ribs, his Chaule
and his Flank, for those are the chief signs by which you must learn to judge
of the good, or evil state of your Horses body, as I shall now show you.

Lay your Hands on the lower part of his shortribs, near the Flank, and if you
feel his Fat to be exceeding soft and tender, and to yield as it were under
your hand, than you may be confident it is unsound, and that the least violent
Labor, or Travail will dissolve it: which being dissolved, e're it be hardened
by good Diet, if it be not then removed by scouring, the Fat or grease
belonging to the outward parts of the Body will fall down into his Heels, and
so cause gowtiness and swelling. I need not trouble you with the outward signs
of this Distemper, they are evident to the Eye: but tho every Groom can inform
you when a Horse is said to have the grease fallen into his Heels, yet may be
he cannot instruct you in the cause why Travail disperseth it for a time, and
when the Horse is cold it returns with more violence than before. The reason
therefore is this: The Grease which by indiscreet Exercise, and negligence in
keeping is melted and fallen into his Legs, standing still in the Stable cools
and congeals, and so unites it self with other ill Humors, which flow to the
affected part, so that they stop the natural Circulation of the Blood, and
cause inflammations, and swellings as aforesaid but Travail producing warmth in
his Limbs thaws as it were the congealed Humors, and disperses them throughout
the Body in general; till Rest gives them opportunity to unite and settle
again. Now tho most Grooms are of opinion that this Distemper is not to be
prevented by care or caution, that when it has once seaz'd a horse it remains
incureable; yet they are mistaken in both, for by Art it may be prevented, and
by Art cured: although the cure is so difficult to be wrought, that a Groom cannot
be too careful to prevent it.

As for the nward Grease which is in his Stomach, Bag, and Guts, if when once'
melted it be not removed by Art, Medicine and good keeping, it putrifies, and
breeds those mortal Diseases, which inevitably destroy the Horse, tho it be
half a year or three quarters of a year after. And this is generally the source
of most Fevers, Surfeits, Consumptions, etc. and such other Distempers which
carry off infinite numbers of horses, for want of the Farriers knowledge in the
first Causes of the Distemper: which to prevent you shall follow the ensuing
Directions.

After by feeling on his Ribs you have found his Fat soft and unsound; you
shall feel his Chaule, and if you find any fleshy substance, or great round
Kirnells or Knots, you may be assured that, as his outward Fat is unsound, so
inwardly he is full of glut, and pursive, by means of gross and tough Humors
cleaving to the hollow places of the Lungs stopping so his Windpipe that his
Wind cannot find free passage, nor his Body be capable of much Labor.
Therefore the chief end and Intention of Art is by good sound Food to enseame
and harden his Fat, and by moderate Exercise, warm clothing, and gentle
Physic to cleanse away his inward Glut, that his Wind, and other parts being
freed from all grossness, his courage and activity in any labor or service may
appear to be more than redoubled.

The same Observations you must make from his Flank, which you will find
always to correspond, with the Ribs and Chaule, for till he is drawn clean it
will feel thick to your gripe, but when he is enseam'd, you will perceive
nothing but two thin skins; and by these three Observations of the Ribs, Flank,
and Chaps, you may, at any time pass an indifferent judgment of your Horses
being in a good condition or a bad.

When you have made these Remarks, you shall sift your Horse a handful or two
(and no more) of good old sound Oats, and give them to him, to preserve his
Stomach from cold Humors that might oppress it by drinking fasting, and
likewise to make him drink the better. When he has eaten them, pull off his
Collar, and rub his Head, Face, Ears, and Nape of the Neck with a clean Rubbing
Cloth made of Hemp, for it is sovereign for the Head, and dissolveth all gross
and filthy Humors. Then take a small Snaffle, and wash it in fair water, and
put it on his head, drawing the Reins through the Headstall, to prevent his
slipping it over his head, and so tie him up to the Rack, and dress him thus;

First in your Right Hand take a Curry-Comb suitable to your Horses skin, (as
if your horses coat be short and smooth, then must the Curry-Comb be blunt, but
if long and rough, then must the Teeth be long and and sharp, standing with
your Face opposite to the Horses, hold the Left cheek of the Headstall in your
Left Hand, and Curry him with a good hard hand from the Root of his Ears, all a
long his Neck to his Shoulders: then go over all his Body with a more moderate
hand, then Curry his Buttocks down to the hinder Cambrell with an hard hand
again: then change your hand, and laying your Right Arm over his Back, join
your right-side to his left, and so Curry him gently from the top of his
Withers, to the lower part of his shoulder, ever now and then fetching your
stroke over the left side of his breast, and so Curry him down to Knee, but no
further: Then Curry him all under his Belly, near his Fore-bowels, and in a
word all over very well, his Legs under the Knees and Cambrels only excepted.
And as you dressed the left-side, so must you the right likewise.

Now by the way take notice, whether your Horse keeps a riggling up and down,
biting the Rackstaves, and now and then offering to snap at you, or lifting up
his Leg to strike at you, when you are Currying him: if he do it is an apparent
sign of his displeasure by reason of the sharpness of the Comb, and therefore
you must file the Teeth thereof more blunt: but if you perceive that he plays
these, or such like Tricks through Wantonness and the Pseasure he takes in the
Friction, then you shall ever now and then correct him with your Whip gently
for his Waggishness.

This Currying is only to raise the Dust, and therefore after you have thus
curried him, you must take either a Horse-tail (nail d to an Handle) or a clean
dusting-Cloath of Cotton, and with it strike off the loose Dust raised by your
Curry-comb Then dress him all over with the French-Brush, both Head, Body, and
Legs to the very Fet-locks, observing always to cleanse the Brush from the
filth it gathers from the bottom of the Hair, by rubbing it on the curry-comb.
Then dust him the second time. Then with your Hand wet in water rub his body
all over, and as near as you can leave no loose hairs behind you; and with your
wet hands pick and cleanse his Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, Sheath, Cods, and Tuel, and
so rub him till he be as dry as at first. Then take an Hair-patch, and rub his
Body all over, but especially his Fore-bowels under his Belly, his Flank, and
between his hinder Thighs. Lastly, wipe him over with a fine white linen
Rubber.

When you have thus dressed him, take a large Saddle-cloath (made on purpose,)
that may reach down to the Spurring-place, and lap it about his Body; then clap
on his Saddle, and throw a cloth over him for fear of catching cold. Then take
two Ropes of Straw twisted extreme hard together, and with them rub and chafe
his Legs from the Knees and Cambrels downwards to the Ground, picking his
Fetlock-joynts with your hands from Dust, Filth, and Scabs. Then take another
Hair-patch kept on purpose for his Legs, (for you must have two) and with it
rub and dress his Legs also.

Now by the way let me give you this necessary Caution, be sure whilst you are
dressing your Horse let him not stand naked, his Body being exposed to the
penetration of the Air, whilst you are telling a Banbury-story to some
Comrades, that accidentally come into the Stable, as I have seen some Grooms,
that would stand lolling over their Horses, when they were unclothed, and
trifle away their time by listening to some idle Discourse; but when you have
stripped him fall to your Business roundly, without any intermission till you
have sadled him, and thrown his Cloth over him.

And the reason why I advise you to throw a Cloth over him, whilst you are
dressing his Legs is this; that although it is a general Rule amongst Grooms,
that an Horse cannot take cold whilst he is dressing, yet is that Saying to be
understood only of his Body, not of his Legs; for the rubbing of his Legs will
not prevent catching cold in his Body

When this is done, you shall with an Iron Picker pick his Feet clean, (that
the stopping of his Feet may not be a means of his taking up Stones in them,)
comb down his Main and Tail with a wet Main-comb, then spirt some Beer into his
Mouth, and so draw him out of the Stable.

Being mounted, rake or walk him to some Running River, or fresh clear Spring,
distant a Mile or two from your Stable, (which will refine his Mouth which he
may have lost, during his Summers Running, and will likewise settle his Body
upon his Rake,) and there let him drink about half his draught at first, to
prevent raw Crudities arising in his Stomach. After he has drunk bring him
calmly out of the Water, and so ride him gently for a while; for nothing is
more unbeseeming a Horseman, than to thrust his Horse into a swift Gallop, as
soon as he comes out of the Water, for these three Causes. First, it is not
only hazards the breaking of his Wind, but also assuredly endanges the
incording, or bursting of him. Secondly, it begets in him an ill habit of
running away, as soon as he has done drinking. Lastly, the foresight he has
of such violent Exercise, makes him oftentimes refuse to quench his Thirst: and
therefore (as I said) first walk him a little way, and then put him into a
gentle Gallop for 5 or 6 score, then give him wind: and after he has been
raked a pretty space, then show him the Water again, and let him drink what he
pleases, and then gallop him again; and thus do till he will drink no more, but
be sure to observe always that you gallop him not so much as either to chafe,
or sweat him.

Now by the way observe, that in his galloping after water, (after the first
weeks enseaming,) if sometimes you give him a watering Course sharply, of
twelve or twenty score, (as you find your Horse,) it will quicken his spirits,
and cause him to gallop more pleasantly, and teach him to manage his Limbs
more nimbly, and to stretch forth his Body largely.

When your Horse has done drinking, then rake him to the Top of the next Hill,
(if there be any near your Watring-place,) for there in the morning the Air is
purest, or else to some such place, as he may gain best advantage both of Sun
and Air, and there air him a foot-pace an hour, or so long as you (in your
discretion) shall think sufficient for the state of his Body, and then ride him
home.

During the time of your Horses Airing, you will easily perceive several marks
of your Horses satisfaction, and the pleasure which he takes in this Exercise.
For he will gape, yawn, and as it were shrug his Body. If he offer to stand
still, to dung, or stale, which his Airing will provoke, be sure give him
leave, as likewise to stare about, neigh, or listen after any noise.

Now Airing brings several Advantages to the Horse. First, it purifies the
Blood, (if the Air be clean and pure,) it purges the Body from many gross and
suffocating Humors, and so hardens and enseams the Horses Fat, that it is not
near so liable to be dissolved by ordinary Exercise. Secondly, it teaches him
how to let his Wind rake equally and keep time with the other Actions or
Motions of his Body. Thirdly, it sharpens the Appetite, and provokes the
Stomach, (which is of great advantage both to Hunters and Gallopers, who are
apt to loose their Stomach through excess or want of Exercise): for the
sharpness of the Air will drive the Horses natural Heat from the exterior to
the interior parts, which Heat by furthering Concoction creates an Appetite.
Lastly, it increases Lust and Courage in him, provided he not too early air'd.

But whereas Mr. Markam, in his Way to get wealth, 4o. page 44. directs, if
your Horse be very fat to air him before Sunrise, and after Sunset; and that
the Author of the Gentleman's Jockey, 8o. page 14. says, that nothing is more
wholesome than early and late Airings; I think the contrary may be made out from
Experience. For in this Art, all things that any ways hinder the strength and
vigor of Nature, are to be avoided; now, that extremity of Cold, and being out
early and late do so, is evidently seen by Horses that run abroad all Winter,
which however hardily bred, and kept with the best care and Fodder, yet cannot
by any means be advanced to so good case in Winter as an indifferent Pasture
will raise them to in Summer. And this holding true of the Nocturnal Colds,
must needs be verified in some proportionate measure of the Morning and Evening
Dews, and that piercing Cold which is observed to be more intense at the
opening and close of the Day, than any part of the Night. Besides that, the
Dews and moist Rimes do as much Injury to a Horse, as the sharpest Colds or
Frosts: since (as I have found by experience) a Horse any ways inclinable to
Catarrhs, Rheums, or any other cold Distempers, is apt to have the Humors
augmented, and the disease most senbsily increasd by these early and late
Airings.

But if he be not had forth to air till the Sun be risen, (as you must cast to
have him dressed, and ready to lead forth against that time) his spirits will
be cheered and comforted by that universal Comforter of all living Creatures;
and indeed all Horses naturally desire to enjoy the Sun's warmth, as you may
observe by those Horses which lie out all Night, who as soon as the Sun is
risen, will repair to those places where they may have the most benefit of his
Beams, and by them be in part relieved from the coldness of the foregoing
Night. And besides the benefit of the Sun, the Air will be so mild and
temperate, as it will rather invigorate than prey upon his spirits, and more
increase his Strength than impair it

Neither, tho we disallow of Early and Late airings, need we be at a loss to
bring down our Horses fat, and from being pursive, and too high in Flesh, to
reduce him to cleanness, and a more moderate state of Body: For if you do but
observe this one Rule of keeping a fat Horse so much longer out at a time both
Morning and Evening, you will undoubtedly obtain your end by such long Airing,
joined with true sound Heats, which you may expect indeed, but will never find
from those that are shorter, how early and late soever: for this Method joined
with good feeding is the best Prescription can be given in this case, and it is
from the length of your Airings only, that you must hope to bring your Horse to
a perfect Wind, and true Courage. And therefore a Horse that is high in Flesh,
is a fitter subject to work on, than One that is low, because he is better able
to endure Labor, whereas the other must of necessity be so favored in
training, to improve his Strength and Flesh, that he is in danger (without he
be under the care of a very Skilful keeper) of proving thick wind ed for want
of true Exercise in Training.

When you are returned from Airing, and are dismounted, lead your Horse on the
Straw, which (as I told you before) should always lie before the Stable door;
and there by Whistling and stirring up the Litter under his Belly will provoke
him to Stale, which a little practice will bring him to, and is advantageous
for the Horses Health, and the keeping of your Stable clean; Then lead him into
his Staul (which ought likewise to be well littered) and having tied up his
head to the empty Rack, take off his Saddle, rubb his Body and Legs all over
with the French-brush, then with the Hair-patch, and last of all with the
Woollen cloth.

Then you shall cloth him with a Linen cloth next to his Body, and over that
a Canvas cloth, and both made so fit as to cover his Breast and to come pretty
low down to his Legs, which is the Turkish way of Clothing, who are the most
curious People (sales the Duke of Newcaslle) in keeping their Horses, and
esteem them the most of any Nation. Over the forementioned put a Body-cloath of
six, or eight Straps, which is better than a Sircingle and Pad stuffed with
wisps, because this keeps his Belly in Shape, and is not so subject to hurt him.

Now these Clothes will be sufficient for him at his first Stabling, because
being inured to the cool Air he will not be so apt to take cold, the weather
likewise at that season being indifferently warm; but when sharp weather
approaches, and that you find his Hair rise about his outward parts that are
uncloathed, as Neck, Gascoins, etc. then add another Cloth, which ought to be
of Woolen, and for any Horse bred under this Climate, and kept only for
ordinary Hunting, this is clothing sufficient.

Now the design of cloathings is only by their help joined to the warmth of the
Stable, and the Litter (which must always lie under the Horse) to keep his
Body in such a moderate Natural Heat, as shall be sufficient to assist Nature,
that skilful Physician in expelling her Enemies, by dissolving those raw and
gross Humors which are subject to annoy the Horse, and which would very much
prejudice him if they were not removed; which warm clothing does in a great
measure by dispersing them into the outward parts, and expelling them by
sweating as he sleeps and lies down, which will be a means to purge his Body,
and keep it clean from glut, and redundant Humors.

But yet (as in all things the golden mean is best) there is a mean to be
observed too here: for as too few Clothes will not assist Nature sufficiently
in the expulsion of her Enemies, so too many will force her too much, and cause
weakness in your Horse by too violent sweatings. Therefore you must have a care
of following the Example of some ignorant Grooms, who because they have
acquired a false Reputation by living in some Noblemans or Gentleman's Service,
that are noted Sportsmen, think they are able to give Laws to all their
Fraternity, and therefore without any reason heap Multiplicity of Clothes on
the Horse as if they meant to bury him in Woolen. You must know, that both the
temperature of the Weather and the State of his Body are to be observed; and
that all Horses are not to be clothed alike. Your fine-Skined Horses, as the
Barb, Turk, Spanish horse etc. require more clothes then our English common
Horses, that are bred in a colder climate, and have naturally thicker skin's,
and a longer Coat. But that you may not err I have told you already how you
are to cloth your Horse, and therefore shall only add this one General Rule,
That a Rough Coat shows want of Clothes, and a Smooth Coat Clothing
sufficient: ever observing, that by his Countenance, his Dung, and other
outward Characters (which I shall by and by give you more at large) you
perceive your Horse to to be in health, and yet notwithstanding your Horses
Coat still stares, you must add more clothes till it lie; as on the other hand
if it will lie with the assist- of a single Linen Cloth it is sufficient.

But if when he has been in keeping some time, you perceive him apt to sweat in
the Night, it is a sign that he is over-fed, and wants exercise: but if he sweat
at his first coming from Grass, you must know that there is cause rather to
increase, than diminish the Clothes I have alloted at his first Housing; for
it proceeds from the foul humors which oppress Nature, and when by exercise
they are evacuated, Nature will cease working, and he will continue in a
temperate state of Body all the year after.

When he is clothed up, pick his Feet clean with an Iron Picker, and wash his
Hoofs clean with a Spung dipped in fair watet, and then dry them with Straw or a
Linen cloth, and if there be occasion and that you find your Horses, Legs
durty, you may bathe them likewise, only you must be sure to rub them dry
before you go out of your Stable, then leave him on his Snaffle for an hour, or
more, which will assist his Appetite.

When an Hour is expired, you shall come to him again, and having tucked an
handful of Hay, and dusted it, you shall let your Horse tease it out of your
hand till he has eaten it; then pull off his Bridle, and having rubbed his Head
and Neck clean, with the Hempen-cloth, as before, pull his Ears, and stop his
Nostrils to make him snore, which will help to bring away the moist Humors
which oppress his Brain, and then put on his Collar, and give him a Quarter of
Oats clean dressed, in a Sive, having first made his Locker, or Manger clean with
a Wispe of Straw, and a Cloth.

Whilst he is eating his Corn, you shall sweep out your Stable, and see that
all things are neat about him, and turning up his Clothes, you shall rub his
Fillets, Buttocks, and Gascoins over with the hairpatch, and after that with a
Woolen-cloth; then spread a clean Flannel Fillet-cloth over his Fillets and
Buttocks (which will make his Coat lie smooth) and turn down his
Housing-cloaths upon it. Then anoint his Hoofs round from the Cronet to the Toe
with this Ointment, viz.

Take Four Ounces of Venice Turpentine, Three Ounces of Bees wax, Two Ounces of
the best Rosin, One pound of Dogs-grease, Half a Pint of Train Oil, Melt all
these Ingredients (except the Turpentine) together, being melted remove them
from the Fire, and then put in the Turpentine, and keep it stirring, till all
be well incorporated, then put it in a Gally pot, and when it is cold cover it
close from dust, and reserve it for use.

After this pick his Feet with an Iron Picker, and stop them with Cow Dung; and
by this time your Horse (if he be not a very slow Feeder) will have eaten his
Oats, which if you find he does with a good Stomach, sift him another Quart,
and throw them to feed him by little and little, whilst he eats with an
Appetite; but if he fumbles with his Corn, then give him no more at that time.

And this I think a better Direction than to prescribe a set quantity of
Provender, as all Authors I have yet met with have done. For without doubt no
certain Quantity of Meat can be allotted for all sorts of Horses, any more than
for all sorts of Men; and therefore proportion the quantity to the Horses
Appetite: but be sure at all times give him his full feeding, for that will
keep his Body in better state and temper, and increase his strength and vigor.
Whereas on the contrary, to keep your Horse always sharp-set, is the ready way
to procure a Surfeit, if at any time he can come at his fill of Provender;
according to the common Proverb, Two hungry Meals make the third a Glutton.
But tho you perceive he gather Flesh too fast upon such home-feeding; yet be
sure not to stint him for it, but only increase his Labor, and that will
assist both his Strength and Wind.

When these things are done, you shall dust a pretty of Hay, and throw it down
to him on his Litter, after you have taken it up under him; and then shutting
up the Windows and Stable door, leave him till One a Clock in the Afternoon; at
which time you shall come to him, and having rubbed over his Head, Neck,
Fillets, Buttocks, and Legs, as before, with the Hair-patch and Woollen-cloath,
you shall feed him as before, and then leave him till the time of his Evening
watring, (which should be about three of the clock in Winter, and four in
Summer;) and then having put back his foul Litter, and swept away that and his
Dung, you shall dress and saddle him as before, and mounting him you shall rake
him to the water, and after drinking and galloping you shall air him along by
the River side, till you think it time to go home; then order him in all
points, as to rubbing, feeding, stopping his Feet, etc. as you did in the
morning; and having fed him at six a clock, be sure feed him again about Nine;
and having litter'd him well, and thrown him Hay enough to serve him for all
Night, you shall leave him till the next Morning. And as you have spent this
day, so you must order him in all respects for a fortnight together, and by
that time his Flesh will be so hardened, and his Wind so improved; his Mouth
will be so quickened, and his Gallop brought to so good a stroke, that he will
be fit to be put to moderate Hunting.

Now during this Fortnights keeping you are to make several Observations, as to
the Nature and Disposition of your Horse, the temper of his Body, the course of
his Digestion, etc. and order him accordingly. As first, if he be of a churlish
Disposition, you must reclaim him by Severity; if of a loving temper, you must
win him by Kindness. Secondly, you must observe whether he be a foul Feeder, or
of a nice Stomach; if he be quick at his Meat, and retain a good Stomach, then
four times of full Feeding, in a Day and a Nights space, is sufficient; but if
he be a slender Feeder, and slow at his Meat, then you must give but a little
at once, and often, as about every two hours, for fresh Meat will draw on his
Appetite; and you must always leave a little Meat in his Locker for him to eat
at his own leisure betwixt the times of his Feeding; and when at any time you
find any left, you shall sweep it away, and give him fresh, and expose that to
the Sun and Air, which will prevent mustiness and reduce it to its first
sweetness, before it was blown upon.

Now as to the manner of Feeding, you may sharpen his Stomach by change of
Meat, as giving one Meal clean Oats, another Oats and split-Beans, and (when
you have brought him to eat Bread) you may give him another meal of Bread,
always observing to give him oftenest that which he likes best; or if you
please you may give him both Corn and Bread at the same time, provided you give
him that last which he eats best, and which has the best Digestion.

It Is observed of some Horses, that they are of so hot a Constitution, that
without they may drink at every bit they cannot eat, and those Horses usually
carry no Belly; in this case therefore you must let a Pale of Water stand
continually before them, or at least offer them Water at Noon, besides what
they fetch abroad at their ordinary times.

Next you are to observe the nature of his Digestion, that is, whether he
retains his Food long, which is the sign of a bad Digestion; or whether Nature
does expel the Dung more frequently; which if he do, and that his Dung be loose
and bright it is a sign of a good habit of Body; but if he dung hard, and seldom,
then on the contrary it is a sign of a dry Body; and therefore to remedy this,
you shall once in a day give him a handful or two of Oats, well washed in good
strong Ale, for this will loosen his Body, and keep it moist, and you will sind
it also good for his Wind, notwithstand-the opinion of some to the contrary.

CHAP V. Of the Second Fortnights Diet, and of his first Hunting, and what
Chases are most proper to Train him.
BY that time you have spent this Fortnight, according to the foregoing Rules,
your Horse will be in a pretty good state of Body; for the gross Humors will be
dried in his Body, and his Flesh will begin to be hardened, which you will
perceive (as I told you at first) by his Chaul, his short Ribs, and his Flank;
for the Kernels under his Chaps will not feel so gross as at first they did,
his flesh on his short Ribs will not feel so soft and loose, nor the thin part
of his Flank so thick as at his first housing; so that now you may without
hazard adventure to hunt him moderately.

But before I proceed, I think it necessary to clear one point, which I have
heard much discussed amongst Horsemen, which is, What sort of Chase is most
proper for the training of a young Horse? some being of one Opinion, some of
another. For some would have a Horse, which is design d either for a
Buck-hunter or Fox-hunter, used from the beginning to the Chase which they are
designed for. Others think those Chases too violent for a young. Horse, and
therefore choose to train him after Harriers; and of this Opinion I must own my
self to be, since Exporience has fully shown me the Advantages of the one, and
the Inconveniences of the other. Now to prove this Assertion, let us take a
slight view of the several Chases which are commonly used by our Nobility and
Gentry, where the Horse is made a Companion and Member of the Sport, and they
are these; the Stag, Buck, Hind, Fox, Otter, and Hare.

As for the three first here mentioned, as there is not much difference in the
hunting of them, so the Inconveniences from each Chase are in a manner the same
also. For which soever you hunt, it is either in Covert, or at force. Now if Deer
be hunted in a Park, they usually choose the most woody parts of it, as a Refuge
from the pursuits of their Enemies, which is both unpleasant to the Rider, and
troublesome to the Horse, to follow the Dogs through the thick Bushes; and
besides, usually the Ground in Parks is full of Mole-banks, Trenches, etc.
which is dangerous for a young Horse to gallop on, till he has attained to some
perfection in his Stroke. But if they be turned out of the Park, and be hunted
at force, you will find, that as soon as you have unharbour'd or roused them,
they will immediately make out end ways before the Hounds five or six, nay
sometimes ten Miles, they following in full Cry so swiftly, that a Horse must
be compelled to run up and down hill without any intermission; leaping Hedge,
Ditch, and Dale, nay often crossing Rivers, to the great danger of the Rider,
as well as of the Horse. So that in my opinion it is altogether improper to put a
young Horse to such violent labor at the first, till by practice and degrees
he has been made acquainted with hard service.

Now besides the swiftness and violence of this Chase, and the danger of
cracking his Wind, and bursting his Belly; besides the straining of his Limbs
by such desperate Riding, and the creating in a young Horse a loathsomness to
his Labor, by undergoing such violent and unusual service; the seasons for
these Chases beginning about Midsummer, and ending about Holy-Rood-tide, which
is that part of the year in which the Sun's heat is excessive, and so scorches
the Earth, that a violent Chase would hazard the melting his Grease and the
weight of the Rider, by reason of the hardness of the Ground, would occasion
Foundring, Splents, and Windgalls, insomuch that in short time the Horse would
prove altogether useless.

But here I cannot but desire to be rightly understood, since tho I object
against these Chases as improper for young Horses, yet I do not mean that
Horses should be excluded this Recreation; but I would have those which are
employed herein, to be Horses of stayed years, and by long practice and
experience have been rightly trained to Hunting. Young Horses (as the Duke of
New castle says) being as subject to Diseases as young Children, and therefore
he advises any man that would buy a Horse for use in his ordinary occasions, as
for Journeys, Hawking or Hunting, never to buy a Horse until the Mark be out of
his Mouth, and if he be sound of Wind, Limb, and Sight, he will last you Eight
or Nine years with good keeping, and never fail you; and therefore (pursues he
I am always ready to buy for such purposes an old Nag, of some Huntsman, or
Falconer, that is sound, and that is the useful Nag, for he gallops on all
Grounds, leaps over Hedges and Ditches; and this will not fail you in your
Journey, nor anywhere, and is the only Nag of use for Pleasure or Journey Thus
far the Duke. And if it may be permitted to add to his Advice, I would have
them strait-bodied clean-timbred Nags, such as may be light, nimble, and of
middle stature, for those Horses are not near so subject to Lamness as those of
bulk and strength, the causes whereof have been already declared.

The next Chase proposed was that of the Fox, which although it be a Recreation
much in use, and highly applauded by the generality of the Nobility and Gentry;
yet with submission to their judgment I never could find that pleasure in it
which has been represented to me by some of its Admirers: and I am sure it is
inconvenient for the training of a young Horse, since it is swift without
respite, and of long continuance, both which, as I have already fhew'd, are
distastful to him; but the greatest Inconvenience that happens to a Horse in
this Chase is this; that when a Fox is unkennel'd, he seldom or never betakes
himself to a champion Country, but remains in the strongest Coverts, and in
the thickest Woods; so that a Horse can but seldom enjoy the pleasure of
accompanying the Hounds, without hazarding being stubb'd, or other as dangerous
Accidents. The fittest Horses sor this Chase are Horses of great strength and
ability, since this Chase begins at Christmas, which is the worst time of
Riding, and ends at our Lady Day, when the Ground is best for it.

The next Chase to be spoken of is the Ottexs, which although it may seem
delightful to some, yet I cannot by any means think it convenient for a Horse:
for he that will truly pursue this Amphibians sport, must often swim his Horse
to the equal hazard both of the Rider and the Horse.

But to conclude with the last, and the best of Chases, and that is the Hare.
It is in my opinion the most pleasant and delightful Chase of any whatsoever,
and the most beneficial for training a young Horse. It is swift, and of some
indurance, like that of the Fox, but far more pleasant to the Horse, because
Hares commonly run the Champion Country; and the scent not being so hot as the
Foxes, the Dogs are oftener at default, and by that means the Horse has many
Sobbs, whereby he recovers Wind, and regains new strength. This Chase begins at
Michaelmass, and lasts till the End of February.

Now the best Dogs, to bring your Horse to perfection of Wind and Speed, are
your fleet Northern Hounds; for they, by means of their hard-running, will draw
him up to that extraordinary speed, that he will not have time to loiter, and
by continual practice will be so inured and habituated to the violence of their
Speed, that in a short time he will be able to ride on all sorts of Ground, and
be at such command upon the hand, that he will strike at what rate you please,
and three-quarters speed will be less troublesome to him than a
Canterbury-gallop.

I have often thought this one of the Reasons why your Northern Breeders for
the generality excel those of the South; since certainly the speed of their
Hounds contributes much to the Excellence of their Horses, and makes them
endure a four mile Course without Sobbs, which some Horsemen call
Whole-Running: but of this more in another place.

The time being now come that he may be hunted, you shall order him on his days
of Rest in all points, as to his Dressing, hours of Feeding, Watring, etc. as
in the first Fortnight before directed; only since his Labor is now to be
increased, you must endeavor to increase his Strength and Courage likewise;
and this will be effected by adding to his Oats a third part of clean old Beans
spelted on a Mill, and as an overplus to allow him Bread made after this manner.

Take four Pecks of clean old Beans, and two Pecks of Wheat, and grind them
together, and sift the meal through a Meal-sieve of an indifferent fineness, and
knead it with warm water and good store of Barm, and let it lie an hour or more
to swell, for by that means the Bread will be the lighter, and have the easier
and quicker Digestion; after which being with a Brake or any other way
exceedingly well-kneaded, make it up into great Household Peck-loaves, which
will be a means to avoid Crust, and prevent its drying too soon; bake them
thoroughly, and let them stand a good while in the Oven to soke, then draw
them, and turning the bottoms upwards let them stand to cool.

When your Bread is a day old you may venture to feed your Horse with it,
having first chipt away the Crust; and sometimes giving him Bread, sometimes
Oats, and now and then Oats and spelted Beans, according as you find his
stomach; you need not fear but such Feeding will bring him into as good
condition as you need desire for Ordinary Hunting.

When your Bread is prepared, and you first Fortnight expired, you must then
pitch upon a Day for his first going abroad after the Dogs, and the Day before
you hunt you must always order him after this manner. In the morning proceed in
your usual method as before, only observe that day to give him no Beans,
because they are hard of digestion, but give most of Bread if you can draw him
on to eat it, because it is more nourishing than Oats; and after your Evening
Watering, which ought to be somewhat earlier than at other times, give him
only a little Hay out of your hand, and no more till the next day that he
returns from Hunting: and to prevent his eating his Litter, or any thing else
but what you give him, you shall instead of a Muzzle put on a Cavezone joined
to a headstall of a Bridle, being lined with double Leather for fear of hurting
him, and tying it so straight as to hinder his Eating; and this will prevent
Sickness in your Horse, which is incident to some Horses when their Muzzle is
fet on, notwithstanding the invention of the Lattice-window, now adays so much
in use; but this way your Horses Nostrils are fully at liberty, and he will
never prove sick. But as to his Corn, give him his meals, both after his
Watering, and at nine a clock, at which time be sure to litter him very well,
that he may the better take his Rest, and leave him for that Night.

The next morning come to him very early, as about four a clock, and having
dressed a Quarter of a Peck of Oats very clean, put them into his Locker, and
pour into it a Quart of good strong Ale, and after having mixed the Oats and
Ale very well give him them to eat, whilst you put back his Dung and foul
Litter, and make clean his Stable, but if he will not eat washed Oats then give
him dry; but be sure put no Beans to them. When he has done eating, Bridle him,
and tie him up to the Ring, and dress him. When he is dressed saddle him; then
throw his Cloth over him, and let him stand till the Hounds are ready to go
forth. But be sure not to draw your Saddle Girths straight till you are ready
to mount, left by that means he become sick. But generally old Horses are so
crafty, that when an ignorant Groom goes to girt them up hard, they will streth
out their Bodies to such a bigness by holding their Wind, (on purpose to gain
ease after they are girt) that twill appear difficult to girt them; but
afterward they let go their Wind, and their Bodies fa l again.

When the Hounds are unkennell'd, (which should not be till Sunrising) go into
the Field along with them, and rake your Horse up and down gently till a Hare
be started; always observing to let him smell to other Horses Dung, (if he be
desirous of it) which will provoke him to empty himself, and let him stand
still when he does so: and if you meet with any dead Fog, Rushes, or such like,
ride him upon them, and by whistling provoke him to empty his Bladder.

When the Hare is started, you are not to follow the Hounds as the other
Hunters do, but to confider, that this being the first time of your Horses
hunting, he is not so well versed in the different sorts of Grounds as to know
how to gallop smoothly, and with ease on them; and therefore you are not to put
him as yet to above half his speed, that he may learn to carry a staid body,
and to manage his Legs both upon Fallows, and Greenswarth. Neither are you to
gallop him often, nor any long time together, for fear of discouraging him, and
breeding in him a dislike to this Exercise; but observing to cross the Fields
still to your best advantage, you shall make in to the Hounds at every default,
and still keep your Horse (as much as these Rules will allow you) within the
Cry of the Dogs, that he may be used to their Cry; and you will find, that in a
very short time he will take such delight and pleasure in their Music, that he
will be desirous to follow them more eagerly.

Now if at any time the Chase be lead over any Carpet ground, or sandy
Highway, on which your Horse may lay out his body smoothly, you may there
gallop him for a quarter or half a mile, to teach him to lay out his Body, and
to gather up his Legs, to enlarge and shorten his Stroke, according to the
different Earths he gallops on, as if on Green-swarth, Meadow, Moore, Heath,
etc. then to stoop, and run more on the Shoulders; if amongst Mole-hills, or
over high ridges and furrows, then to gallop more roundly, and in less compass,
or according to the vulgar phrase two up and two down, that thereby he may
strike his Furrow clear, and avoid setting his Fore-feet in the Bottom of it,
and by that means fall over; But by this way of galloping, tho he should happen
to set his Feet in a furrow, yet carrying his body so round and resting on the
Hand in his gallop, would prevent his Falling; and to this perfection nothing
but use, and such moderate Exercise can bring him.

According to these Rules you may spend your Time in Hunting, till about Three
a Clock in the Afternoon, at which time you shall have him home in a foot pace
as you came out in the Morning, and besure that he be cool before you bring him
out of the Field; and as you are going home consider with your self, whether or
no he has sweat a little, (for you must not sweat him much the first time;)
but if not, then gallop him gently on some Skelping Earth, till he sweat at the
Roots of his Ears, a little on his Neck, and in his Flanck, but it must be done
of his own voluntary motion, without the compulsion of Whip and Spur: and then
when he is cool as aforesaid, have him home and Stable him, and besure avoid
walking him in hand to cool him, for fear he cool too fast, or washing him, for
fear of causing an obstruction of the natural course of the Humors, (which are
thought by some Horsemen to abound most in Winter) and by that means cause an
inflammation in his Legs, which is the Parent of the Scratches.

When you set him up in his Staul (which must be well litter'd against his
coming home) tie up his Head to the Ring with the Bridle, and then rub him well
with dry Straw all over both Head, Neck, Fore-bowels, Belly, Flank, Buttocks
and Legs; and afterward rub his Body over with a dry cloth till there be not a
wet hair left about him, then take off his Saddle and rub the place where the
Saddle stood dry likewise, and so cloth him with his ordinary Clothes with all
speed, for fear least he take cold; and if you think him too hot throw a spare
cloth over him, to prevent his cooling too fast, which you may abate when you
please, and so let him stand on his Snaffle Two Hours or more, stirring him
with your Whip now and then in his Staul, to to keep his Legs and Joints from
growing stiff.

When that time is expired, and you think it may be throughout cold, then come
to him, and having drawn his Bridle rubbed his Head, and picked his Feet from
Dirt and Gravel which he may have gathered abroad, put on his Collar, and sift
him a Quart, or three Pints of Oats, and mix with them a handful of clean
dusted Hempseed, and give them to him; but give him not above the quantity
prescribed, for fear of taking away his stomach, which will be very much
weakened through the heat of his body, and want of water. Then remove the
spare-cloth (if you have not done it before,) for fear of keeping him hot too
long, and when he has eaten his Corn, throw a pretty quantity of Hay clean
dusted, on his Litter, and let him rest two or three Hours, or there abouts.

Whilst you are absent from him, you shall prepare him a good Mash, made of
half a Peck of Malt well ground, and water that is boiling hot, observing to
put no more water than your Malt will sweeten, and your Horse will drink, and
then stir them together with a Rudder, or stick and then cover it over with
cloths, till the water has extracted the strength of the Malt, which will be
evident to your taste and touch, for twill be almost as sweet as Honey, and
feel ropy like Birdlime; then when it is cold, that you can scarce perceive it
to smoke, offer it to your Horse, but not before, lest the steam ascend into
his Nostrils, and thereby offend him with its scent; and when he has drunk the
water, let him if he please eat the Malt also. But if he refuse to drink, yet
you must give him no other water that night, but by placing it in one Corner at
the head of his Stall, in such manner that he may not throw it down, (which you
may effect by nailing a Spar across before the Bucket) let it stand by him all
Night, that he may drink at his pleasure.

Now you will find this Mash, or (as some call it) Horse-Caudle, very
beneficial to your Horse on several Accounts; for it will comfort his Stomach,
and keep his Body in a due temperate heat after his days Hunting; it will
cleanse and bring away all manner of Grease and gross humors, which have been
dissolved by this Days labor, and the fume of the Malt-grains, after he has
drunk the water, will disperse watery Humors, which might otherwise annoy his
head, and is allowed by all Horsemen to be very advantageous on that account.

When he has eaten his Mash, then strip him of his Clothes, and run him over
with your Curry-comb, French Brush, Hair Patch, and Woollen Cloth, and clothe
him up again, and then cleanse his Legs as well as his Body of all Dirt and
Filth which may annoy them, as you have been directed in Dressing; then remove
him into another Stall (that you may not wet his Litter) and bathe his Legs all
over from the Knees with warm Beef-broth, or, which is better, with a quart of
warm Urine, in which four Ounces of Saltpeter has been dissolved; then rub
his Legs dry as when you came in from Water, set him into his Stall, and give
him a good Home-feeding of Oats, or Bread, (which he likes best) or both, and
having shook good store of Litter under him, that he may rest the better, and
thrown him Hay enough for all night on it, shut up your Stable close, and leave
him to his Rest till morning.

The next morning come to him betwixt six and seven a clock, for that is time
enough, because the Mornings rest is as pleasant and refreshing to the Horse as
it is to a Man, for then the meat being concocted the sleep is more sweet, and
the brain is at that time more thin and pure. If he be laid disturb him not,
but stay till he rises of his own accord, (and to know this you ought to have a
private peep. hole) but if he be risen, then go to him, and the first thing you
must do is to put back his Dung from his Litter, and to observe what Color it
is of: observe whether it be greasy, and shining outwardly, and break it with
your Feet, that you may see whether it be so inwardly; for if it be greasy and
foul either within or without, (which you may know by its outward shining, and
by spots like Soap, which will appear within) or if it appear of a dark brown
color, and harder than it was, it is a sign that your former days hunting was
beneficial to him, by dissolving part of the inward glut which was within him;
and therefore the next time you hunt you must increase his labor but a little.
But if you perceive no such Symptoms, but that his Dung appears bright, and
rather soft than hard, without grease, and in a word that it holds the same
pale yellow color it did before you hunted him, then it is a sign that days
Hunting made no dissolution, but that his Body remains in the same state still,
and therefore the next days Hunting you may almost double his Labor.

When you have made these Remarks from his Dung, you shall then proceed to
order him as in his days of Rest; that is to say, you shall give him a handful
or two of Oats before Water; then dress, water, air, feed, etc. as in the first
Fortnight.

Now as to his Feeding you must remember the way I have already showed, of
changing his Food; as giving him one while Bread, another Oats, a third time
Oats and Beans, which you find he likes best; observing always, that variety
will sharpen his Appetite. But Bread being his chief Food, as being more
nourishing and strong than the others, you must feed him often'st with it.

And as in the first Fortnight I directed you to observe his Digestion, whether
it were quick or slow, so likewise must you do now that he begins to eat Bread.
If you find him quick, and that he retains his Bread but a little while, then
(as I have already directed) you shall only slightly chip your Bread; but if he
be slow, and retains it long, cut away all the Crust, and give it to some other
Horse, and feed your Hunter only with the Crum; for that being light of
Digestion soon converts to Chyle and Excrements, but the Crust being slow of
Digestion requires by reason of its hardness longer time before it be concocted.

The next day after he has rested, you shall hunt him again as you did the
first day, observing from the Remarks you have made, to hunt him more or less,
according as you find the temper and constitution of your Horse; and when you
are returned home, observe to put in Practice the same Rules which you have
just now read; and thus hunt your Horse three times a week for a fortnight
together, observing to give him his full feeding, and no other Scowrings but
Mashes, and Hempseed, which is equal in its Virtue to the former, and only
carries off superfluous Humors in the Dung.

And here before I conclude this Chapter, I cannot but take notice of the Abuse
of Scowrings, and my own Ignorance, being led away by the persuasions and my
mistaken opinion of other men's Skill, who because they could talk of giving a
Scowring, (tho Experience has since taught me, that they never knew the
Operation of them, nay nor the Disposition of the Horses which they kept) I
thought most eminent and skilful Horse-Doctors. But indeed I found to my Cost,
that my Ignorance led me into the same mistake with those men, that take
Physic by way of Prevention, and by that means render their Bodies more liable
to Diseases, their Pores being so much opened by Physic. In like manner I
found that tho I bought Horses of sound and strong Constitutions, yet by
following the false Rules and Practices of Others I quickly brought them to
weak habits of Body; and by continually using them to unnecessary Physic, to
be tender, and apt to take Cold and Surfeits on every small occasion: which
taught me to know, that as Kitchen Physic is best for a Man, (unless he
languish under some more than ordinary Distemper) so natural and true sound
Feeding is best for a Horse, it strengthening his Constitution, and keeping his
Body in good temper; for a Horse that is full-fed with good natural Diet is not
subject to costivencss; and from hence I infer, that a Horse which is sound,
and in health, and of a strong Constitution, needs little Physic more than
good wholesome meat, and his fill of it, provided you order him as he ought to be
when he is come from Hunting.

But as Horses no more than Men are free from Distempers; but by reason of
abuses and unkind Masters are rather more liable to them, (it being become a
Proverb, As many Diseases as a Horse); so when at any time they happen recourse
must be had to Physic: and as it is good in its true use, so I shall in the
subsequent part of my Discourse set down when, and what manner of Scourings are
useful, and how they are to be applied with skill, and safety; of which in its
proper place.

CHAP. VI. Of the Horses Third Fortnights Keeping, and first thorough-Sweating.
BY this time your Horse will be drawn so clean, his Flesh will be so inseam'd,
and his Wind so improved, that he will be able to ride a Chase of three or four
Miles without much blowing, or sweating; and you will find by his Chaul and
Flank, as well as his Ribs, that he is in an indifferent good state of body,
and therefore this next Fortnight you must increase his labor, by which means
you will come to a true knowledge of what he is able to do, and whether or no
he will ever be fit for Plates, or a Match.

When your Horse is set over night, and fed early in the morning, (as in the
last Fortnights Preparation for Hunting was directed) then go into the Field
with him, and when your Horse is empty, as he will be by that time you have
started your Game, you shall follow the Dogs at a good round rate, as at
half-speed, and so continue till you have killed or lost your first Hare. This
will so rack your Horses wind, and by this time he will have so emptied
himself, that he will be fit to be rid the next Chase briskly; which as soon as
begun you shall follow the Dogs at three quarters speed, as near to them as is
consistent with the discretion of a good Horseman, and a true Huntsman; but be
sure as yet not to strain him.

During this days Riding you shall observe your Horse's sweat, under his
Saddle, and Forebowels, if it appear White like Froth, or Soap-sudds, it is a
sign of inward glut and foulness, and that your days sport was fully
sufficient, and therefore you shall have him home, and order him as before you
are directed. But if your Sport has been so indifferent, as not to sweat your
Horse thoroughly, then you shall make a Train-sent of Four Miles long, or
thereabout, and laying on your Fleetest Dogs, ride it briskly, and then having
first cooled him in the Field, ride him home and use him as aforesaid.

Now that I may not leave you in ignorance what a Train-scent is, I shall
acquaint you that it has its Name, as I suppose, from the manner of it, viz.
the trailing or dragging of a dead Cat, or Fox, (and in case of Necessity a
Red-Herring) three or four Miles, (according to the Will of the Rider, or the
Directions given him) and then laying the Dogs on the scent.

But this Caveat let me give all Huntsmen, to to keep about two or three Couple
of the fleetest Hounds you can possibly procure for this purpose only. For
although I have seen skillful Sportsmen use their Harriers in this Case, for
their diversion; yet I would persuade them not to use them to it often; for it
will teach them to lie off the Line, and fling so wide, that they will never be
worth any thing.

When you unbridle your Horse, give him instead of Hempsecd and Oats, a
handsome quantity of Rye bread, (to which end I would advise you to bake a Peck
Loaf for this purpose) which being cold and moist will assist in cooling his
body after his Labor, and prevent Costiveness, to which you will find him
addicted, then give him Hay, and afterward a Mash, and then order him in all
points as formerly.

The next morning if you perceive by his Dung that his Body is distempred, and
he is hard and bound, then take some Crumms of your Rye-bread and work it with
as much sweet fresh Butter as will make it into Paste, and then making it into
Balls about the bigness of a large Wallnut, give him 5 or 6 of them in the
morning fasting; and then setting on your Saddle upon his Cloth, mount him, and
gallop him gently in some adjoining grass-Plat, or Close till he begin to sweat
under his Ears, then lead him into the Stable, and let him be well rubbed, and
throwing a spare Cloth over him, and good store of fresh Litter under him, let
him stand two hours on the Bridle, then give him a quantity of Rye-bread, then
throw him some Hay to chew upon, and after that get him another warm Mash, and
then feed him with Bread and Corn as much as he will, and be sure to allow him
what Hay he will eat. The next day water him abroad, and order him as in his
days of rest.

The day following Hunt him again, but by no means so severely as you did the
time before till the Afternoon, but then ride him after the Dogs briskly, and
if that does not make him sweat throghly make another Train-scent, and follow
the Dogs three quarters speed, that he may sweat heartily. When you have a
little cooled him, have him home, and upon his first entrance into the Stable
give him two or three Balls as big as Wallnuts, of this most excellent
Scowring; viz.

Take Butter four Ounces, Lenitive Electuary two Ounces, Gromell Broom and
Parsley seeds, of each one Ounce, Aniseeds, Liquorish and Cream of Tartar, of
each half an Ounce, Jallap an Ounce make the Seeds into Powder, and stir them
into a Paste, with the Electuary and the Butter; knead it well, and keep it
close in a Pot for use.

As soon as you have given your Horse these Balls rub him dry, then dress him
and cloth him up warm and let him stand two or three hours on the Snaffle,
then give him two or three handfulls of Rye-bread, and order him as you did
before as to Hay Provinder, Mash etc. and so leave him till the Morning.

Then come to him and first observe his Dung whether it keep the true Color,
or whether it appear dark, or black, or red and high colored; next whether it
be loose and thin, or hard and dry. If it be of the right color I mean Pale
yellow it is a sign of health, strength and cleanness; if it be dark, or black,
then it is a sign there is Grease and other ill humors stirred up which are not
yet evacuated: if it be red and high colored, then it is a token that his Blood
is Feverish and distempered through inward heat: if it be loose and thin, it is
a sign of Weakness, but if hard and dry, it shows the horse to be hot inwardly,
or else that he is a foul feeder: But if his dung carry a medium betwixt hard
and soft, and smell strong, it is a sign of Health and Vigor.

When these Observations have been taken notice of concerning his Dung, then
you shall feed, dress, water, etc. as in his former days of Rest; observing
always to give variety, and his belly full of Corn and Bread. The next have him
abroad in the Field again, but by no means put him to any labor, further than
to rake him from hill to hill after the Dogs, to keep him within sound of their
Cry; for the design of this Day's Exercise is only to keep him in breath, and
get him an Appetite. Observe as you ride, that you let him stand still to dung;
and look back on it that you may draw Inferences from the Faeces. When the Day
is well nigh spent bring him home without the least sweat, and order him as at
other times, only observe to give no Scourings, nor Rye-bread. You may if you
please water your Horse this day, both at your going into the Field and at your
coming Home, observing to gallop after it, to warm the water in his Belly. The
next is a day of Rest.

In the same manner in every respect as you have spent this Week you must spend
the next likewise, without alteration in any point; and by that time assure
your self that your Horse will be drawn clean enough for any ordinary Hunting;
so that afterward observing to hunt your Horse moderately twice or thrice a
week, according to your own pleasure, and the constitution of your Horses body,
you need not question but to have him in as good state and strength as you
would desire, without danger of his Wind, Eyesight, Feet, or Body.

Now when you have thus according to art drawn your Horse clean, you will
perceive those signs which I told you of, verified; for his Flesh on his short
Ribs and Buttocks will be as hard as a Board, his Flank will be thin, and
nothing to be felt but a double skin, and chaps so clean from Fat, Glut or
Kernels, that you may hide your Fists in them; and above all his Exercise will
give plain Demonstration of the Truth of this Art, for he will run three or
four Miles three quarters speed without sweating, or scarce blowing, I say when
this is perfected, you must avoid all scourings after hunting, (because Nature
has nothing to work on) but Rye-bread and a Mash, except your Horse be now and
then troubled with some little Poze in the Head; and then you shall bruise a
little Mustard seed in a fine linen Rag, and steep it in a quart of strong Ale
for three or four hours, and then untying the Rag mix the Mustard Seed and the
Ale with a quarter of a Peck of Oats, and give it your Horse.

Lastly, when your Horse is drawn clean, you must beware that he grows not foul
again through want of either Airing, or Hunting, or any other Negligence, lest by
that means you procure to your self and your Horse double pains and labor, and
no thanks from your Master.

CHAP. VII. Of making a Hunting-Match, its advantages and disadvantages.
SInce many Persons of Honor delight in good Horses, both for Hunters as well
as Gallopers, it may not be improper to speak a word in this place concerning
the Advantages or Disadvantages which happen in making of Hunting-Matches;
since he that proceeds cautiously and upon truegrounds in matching his Horse is
already in a great measure sure of gaining the Prize, at least if the Proverb
be true, that a Match well made is half won.

The first thing to be considered by him that designs to match his Horse, for
his own advantage and his Horses credit, is this; That he do not flatter
himself in the opinion of his Horse, by fancying that he is swifter than the
wind, when he is but a slow Galloper; and that he is whole-running, (that is,
will run four miles without a sobb at the height of his speed) when he is not
able to run a mile.

And the ground of this Error I suppose arises from a Gentleman's being
mistaken in the speed of his Hounds, who for want of Trial against other Dogs
that have been really fleet, has supposed his own to be swist, when in reality
they were but of middle speed; and because his Horse (when trained) was able to
follow them all day, and at any hour to command them upon, deep as well as
light Earths, has therefore falsely concluded him to be swift as the best; but
upon trial against a Horse that has been rightly trained after Hounds that were
truly fleet, has to his cost bought his Experience, and been convinced of his
Error.

Therefore I would persuade all Lovers of Hunters to get two or three Couple of
tried Hounds, and once or twice a week to follow after them a Train-scent; and
when he is able to top them on all sorts of Earth, and to endure Heats and
Colds stoutly, then he may the better rely on his Speed and Toughness.

That Horse which is able to ride a Hare-chase of five or six miles briskly,
and with good courage, till his body be as it were bathed in sweat; and then
upon the death of the Hare, in a nipping frosty morning can endure to stand
still, till the sweat be frozen on his back, so that the cold may pierce him as
well as the heat; and then even in that extremity of Cold to ride another
Chase, as briskly and with as much courage, as he did in the former: That Horse
which can thus endure heats and colds oftenest is of most value amongst
Sports-men. And indeed it is not every Horse that is able to endure such
extraordinary Toil; and I my self have seen very brave Horses to the Eye, that
have rid the first Chase to admiration, that when the Cold had struck to them,
and they began to grow stiff, have flagg'd the second, and given quite out the
third Heat.

Therefore to make a judgment of the goodness of your own Horse, observe him
after the death of the first Hare, if the Chase has been any thing brisk; if
when he is cold, he shrinks up his Body, and draws his Legs up together, it is an
infallible token of want of Courage; and the same you may collect from the
slackning of his Girths after the first Chase, and from the setting of his
Teeth, and the dullness of his Countenance; all which are true marks of
Faintness, and Tyring: and therefore there is no reliance on such a Horse, in
case of a Wager.

But if on the contrary, you are Master of a Horse (not only in your own
judgment, but in the opinion of knowing Horsemen) that is approved for Speed,
and Toughness, and you are desirous to match him, or otherwise to run for a
'Plate; I will to the best of my power tell you the advantages that are to be
gained in Matching.

But before I enter upon the subject proposed, I think it convenient to tell
you the way our Ancestors had of making their Matches, and our modern way of
deciding Wagers. First then the old way of Trial was by running so many
Train-scents after Hounds, as was agreed on between the parties concerned and a
Bell-Court, this being found not so uncertain and more durable than
Hare-hunting, and the advantage consisted in having the Trains led on Earth
most suitable to the nature of the Horses. Now others chose to hunt the Hare
till such an hour prefixed, and then to run the Wild-goose-Chase, which,
because it is not known to all Huntsmen, I shall explain the use and manner of
it

The Wildgoose Chase received its Name from the manner of the flight which is
made by Wildgeese, which is generally one after another: so the two Horses
after the running of Twelvescore Yards, had liberty, which Horse soever could
get the leading, to ride what ground he pleased; the hindmost Horse being bound
to follow him, within a certain distance agreed on by Articles, or else to be
whipped up by the Triers or Judges which rode by, and which ever Horse could
distance the other won the Match.

But this Chase was found by Experience so inhumane, and so destructive to good
Horses, especially when two good Horses were matched; for neither being able to
distance the other, till ready both to sink under their Riders through
Weakness, oftentimes the Match was fain to be drawn, and left undecided, tho
both the Horses were quite spoiled.

This brought them to run Trainscents, which afterward was changed to three
Heats, and a straight Course; and that the Lovers of Hunting-horses might be
encouraged to keep good Ones, Plates have been erected in many places of this
Land, purposely for Hunters, and some their Articles exclude all others,
(namely Gallopers) from Running.

But whether you design to match your Horse against any One Horse in
particular, or to put him in for a Plate, where he must run against all that
come in general; yet it is necessary that you know the nature and disposition of
your Horse, before you venture any wager on his head; that is to say, whether
he be hot and fiery, or cool and temperate in Riding; whether he be very swift,
but not hard at bottom, or slow, but yet sure, and one that will stick at mark;
on what sort of Earths he most delights to gallop on, whether to climb or run
down hills, or else to skelp on a Flat; whether to run on deep, or light
Grounds; whether on rack-ways, or Carpet-ground; whether amongst Mole-hills, or
on Meadow ground; whether he be well-winded, or thick winded, so that tho he
will answer a Spur, and mend upon Lapping, yet he must have ease by Sobs. All
these things must be known, to the end that you may draw those advantages from
them which may be offered in matching; as this for Example.

If your Horse be hot and fiery, it is odds but he is fleet withal (for
generally those Horses are so) and and delights to run upon light and hard
flats; and must be held hard by the Rider that he may have time to recover Wind
by Sobbs; or else his Fury will choke him. But whereas it is the general
opinion that nothing that is violent can be lasting; and therefore that it is
impossible that such hot mettled Horses can be tough and hard at bottom. this I
conceive may be but a popular Error; for I have sometimes seen by Art those
two Qualities reconciled, at least so far, as to make the most Fiery Horse
managable, and to endure both Whip and Spur; and then tho he should not prove
at bottom so truly tough as the craving Drudge, yet by his Riders management
his Speed shall answer it in all points and serve in its stead; But to return
to my Subject..

The best way to Match such a Horse is to agree to run Train-scents and the
fewer the better for you, before you come to the Course: Also in these
Train-scents the shorter you make your distance the better: and above all
things be sure agree to have the leading of the first Trayn, and then making
choice of such grounds as your Horse may best show his Speed, and the Flectest
Dogs you can procure, give your Hounds as much Law before you, as your Tryers
will allow, and then making a loose try to win the Match with a Wind; but if
you fail in this attempt then Bear your Horse, and save him for the Course at
last.

But if your Horse be slow, yet well Winded, and a true Spurred Nagg; then the
more Trainscents you run before you come to run the straight Course the better.
Observing here too, to gain the leading of the first Train, which in this case
you must lead it upon such deep Earths that it may not end near any light
Ground. For this is the Rule received among Horsemen that the next Train is to
begin where the last ends, and the last train is to be ended at the starting
Post of the Course. Therefore observe to end your last on deep Earths as well
as the first.

In the next place have a care of making a Match of a sudden, and in Drink,
for fear least you repent when you are Sober. Neither make a match against a
Horse, which you do not know, without first consulting some skillful or trusty
Friend, on whose Judgment and Honesty you can safely rely, and who is able to
give a good Account of your Adversaries Horse's Speed and his manner of Riding;
and if you find him any ways correspondent to your own in speed or goodness be
not too Peremptory to venture, but upon some reasonable probabilities of
Winning: for it is neither Braggs nor Fancy that will make your Horse run one jot
the better, or your Adversarys the worse: and remember this, that there is no
Horse so good, but there may be another as good; and then if you proceed on
good Grounds, and true Judgment, you may be the bolder to go on, and stand to
your Match, notwithstanding the opinion of other men may be against you.

One material Advise I had like to have forgot and that is this; be sure at no
time give advantage of Weight, for you will find the inconvenience of it at the
latter end of the Day: for tho a Horse seel it not when he is fresh, yet it
will sink him very much when he grows weak a Horse-length lost by odds of
Weight in the first Train, may prove a distance in the straight Course at last;
sor the Weight is the same every Heat tho his strength be not.

But if on the other side you gain any advantage of Weight, article that the
Horseman shall ride so much weight as you are agreed on, besides the Saddle,
for by this means the Rider (if he be not weight of him self) must carry the
dead weight somewhere about him, which will be troublesome to the Rider as well
as the Horse; and the more to the latter, since it is more remote from his Back
then if it were in the Saddle, and by consequence will more disorder his stroke
if the Rider incline to either side then if it were nearer the Center; as you
may see by a pair of Scales, where if the Pin be not placed exactly in the
midst of the Beam, the longest part (as being most distant from the Center)
will be the heaviest.

Now as to the time that you take for dyeting, that must be according to the
Nature of your Horse, and the present state of Body he is in; for tho he may be
clean enough for ordinary Hunting, yet he may be far distant from that perfect
State of Body, that is required in a Match, and to keep him in such strict Diet
all the Season, (except on such extraordinary Occasions) would be an
unnecessary Expense.

As to your Horses Disposition for Running, you must know it by use and
Observation, for in this Point Horses very much differ, for some run best when
they are high in case, others when they are in middle Condition of Flesh, and
some again when they appear to the Eye Poor, and Low in Flesh; there fore
according to your Horses Nature, and the time required to bring him into his
best State, you must order your day for the trial of your Match to be.

But if you design to put him in for some Hunting Plate; there neither the
choice of your Ground, the Weight, nor the Horses you are to run against are at
your disposal, but you must take them as you find them; only the time for
bringing your Horse into a good Condition is at your own discretion, since you
may begin as soon or as late as you please to keep him in strict Diet, the time
for all Plates being usually fixed, and annually the same.

CHAP. IX. Of the Ordering the Hunter, for a Match or a Plate.
WHen you have either Matched your Horse, or entertained thoughts of putting him
in for a Plate, you must consider that you ought to reserve a Month at the
least, to draw his Body perfectly clean, and to refine his Wind to that degree
of perfection which Art is capable of attaining to.

First then you must take an exact view of the State of his Body; both
outwardly and inwardly as whether he be low or high in Flesh, or whether he be
dull and Heavy when abroad, and this occasioned through too much hard riding,
or through some Grease that by hunting has been dissolved, but for want of a
scowring has not been removed.

If he appear sluggish and Melancholy from either of these causes; than give
him half an Ounce of Diapente in a pint of good old Malligo Sack, which will
both cleanse his Body, and revive his Spirits: and then for the first week you
shall feed him continually with Bread, Oats and Split Beans, giving him
sometimes the one and sometimes the other, according as he likes, always
leaving some in his Locker to eat at his own leisure when you are absent; and
when you return at your Hours of Feeding to take away what is left, and to give
him fresh till you have made him wanton and playfull. To which end you shall
observe that though you ride him every day morning and evening on Airing, and
every other day on Hunting, yet you are not to sweat him, or put him to any
violent Labor, the design this week being to keep him in Wind and Breath, and
to prevent pursiveness.

But you are to observe that both your Oats, Beans and Bread are to be now
ordered after another manner then you did before, for first you must dry your
Oats well in the Sun, then put them into a clean, Bag and beat them soundly
with a Flail or Cudgel, till you think they are hulled; then take them out of
the bagg and winnow them clean both from hulls and dust and so give them to
your Horse as you have occasion. Your Beans in like manner must be separated
from the hulls which are apt to breed Glut, and must either be thrown away or
given amongst chaf to some more ordinary Horse. And for your Bread whereas
before you only chipt it, now you must cut the Crust clean away, and dispose of
it as you please; for it is hard of digestion, and will be apt to heat and dry
his Body. And now that you are to put him into stricter keeping, you are to
make a finer sort of Bread then before, as thus;

Take two Pecks of Beans, and two of Wheat, and grind them together, but not
too fine, to prevent too much Bran being in the Bread; and dress one Peck of
the Meal through a fine Range, and knead it up with new Ale-Barm, and the
Whites of a dozen new laid Eggs, and so bake it in a Loaf by it self, and the
rest dress through a Boulter, and knead it only with Ale and Barm; and use it
in all other points as the former: Now the Peck-loaf is to be given your Horse
when you set him, and the other at ordinary times.

This Bread assists. Nature much in increasing the Strength, Courage and Wind
of your Horse; provided you add thereto (as I have always told you) true
Labor, as any Bread whatsoever; nay even as either of M. De-Greys sorts of
Bread, which he mentions in his Complete Horseman 4o p. 232. ed. 4o especially
his last, which he says is better Bread, and a greater Cooler; and which he
prescribes to make thus, Take Wheat Meal one Peck, Rye-meal, Beans and
Oat-meal, all ground very small, of each half a Peck, Aniseeds, and Licorish,
of each one Ounce, White Sugar Candy four Ounces all in fine Powder, the yolks
and whites of Twenty Eggs well beaten, and so much VVhite-wine as will knead it
into a Paste, make this into great Loaves, bake them well, and after they be
two or three days old, let him eat of this Bread, but chip away the Out side.

Now the Reason why I have cited this is, because I have heard several (who
would be thought knowing Horsemen) applaud this very Bread beyond any other to
be met with in any Book, tho for my part I can find nothing excellent in the
whole Composition.

For first Oat-meal tho it be strong, yet it is a dry grain, hard of digestion,
and a great dryer up of the Blood. The Wheat is of a drying quality likewise,
tho it be light; for the Aniseed and Licorish, they are not only Physical but
hot also; so that the Body becomes over heated, and thereby costive. And yet
these People will not be persuaded, but these Drugs will make him long-winded;
possibly they might assist him in Neighing, as some men say it does Songsters
in Vocal Music, wherein there is no Exercise of the Body used; but where
bodily strength is required, I am apt to believe it more prejudicial than
profitable.

But here some will object that there is Rye and Beans both which are
moistning; especially the Rye which is both cold and moist, and is the very
reason DeGrey himself gives why he put Rye into his latter Bread, because (says
he) Rye is a Loosner and a Cooler, and therefore it will make the Horse more
soluble.

I have already said, that if his Body have Feeding proportionate to his
Labor, the Horse will continue in a right state of Health. Yet since he is hot
by Nature, and Labor might increase his natural Heat, and render him costive,
therefore I have all along prescribd him Rye-bread alone as Physical. But here
let the Horse be in what condition soever, whether bound in his body or
laxative, yet Rye being a part of your Bread, your Horse must continually feed
thereon, which has this undeniable disadvantage, that if he be loose in his
body, this Bread (to use de Grey's own words) will make him more soluble.

And now whilst I am discoursing of Horsebread, I cannot but condemn another
curiosity in some Feeders, who think, by dressing their Meal to the utmost
degree of Fineness they do wonders, and that such pure Food must of necessity
bring him to the greatest perfection imaginable both of Body and Wind.

But in this point I think they are deceived, for the Meal being dressed so
very fine, nothing remains but the quintessence of it; which tho it be lightened
by Barm and Whites of Eggs, yet when it is above a day old twill begin to
harden, (as may be observed by Manchet) and especially if Oatmeal be in it, by
reason of its drying quality, whereby it will not be so easy of digestion as
it would be otherwise if it had no Bran in it; and by consequence will be more
apt to oppress his Stomach, if he be heated, before it be thoroughly digested,
and so breed raw crudities, and an inflammation of the blood, and by that means
hazard a Surfeit, than which nothing can be of worse consequence to a Horse
that is matched.

And therefore it is that I advise, that your Horsebread should only be made of
Wheat and Beans, and that it should not be dressed too fine, nor too course,
but so, as that there may be neither so much Bran left as to annoy the blood,
nor so little as to make your Bread too close and solid; but you may leave some
on purpose to scowr the Maw, and further your Horses Digestion. And thus much
by way of Digression.

Having spoken to the first condition of Horses which we proposed, viz.
melancholy, and low in flesh, we are now to speak of those which are brisk and
lively; which if your Horse be so, that when you lead him out of the Stable he
will leap and play about you, then you must not only avoid giving him the
Scowring last mentioned of Sack and Diapente, but any other whatsoever: for
there being no foul Humors, or any superfluous matter left in his body for the
Physic to work on, it will prey upon the strength of his body, and by that
means weaken it, which it must be your utmost endeavor to preserve by full
Feeding and sound Labor, which will necessarily produce a perfect Wind, which
is the Support of Strength, for when his Wind once fails, his Strength avails
nothing.

As to the manner of it, if your Horse be engaged in a Hunting-match, you shall
sweat him twice this week, but not by hunting him after the Hare, as formerly,
but by Train-scents, since the former on this Occasion may prove deceitful; for
tho the Hounds be very swift, yet the Scent being cold the Dogs will often be
at fault, and by that means the Horse will have many Sobs, so that when he
comes to run Train-scents in earnest your Horse will look for case, his Wind
being not so perfect as in Art it ought to be.

Therefore lead your Train-scents with a dead Cat over such Grounds as you are
likely to run on and best agrees with yous Horses Humor, and be sure make
choice of the Fleetest hounds you can get, and then your Horse will be kept up
to the hight of his speed.

As to the Number of Train-scents that you are to ride at a time, I hat you
must order according to your Match, or (which is better) according to your
Horse's strength, and ability for performing his Heats. For if you labor him
beyond his strength, twill take him off his speed, weaken his Limbs, and daunt
his Spirit. If you give him too little Exercise, it will give opportunity for
pursiveness and ill humors, as Glut, etc. to increase in him, and gain in him
a habit of Laziness, that when he comes to be put to labor above his usual
rate, he will grow restiff, and settle like a Jade, either of which will
redound to your discredit, and therefore it must be from your own knowledge in
the state of his Body, and not from any general Directions in writing, that you
must steer your Course.

Only this Direction may be given you, that if you are to run Eight
Train-scents and the straight Course, more or less, you are to put him to such
severe labor not above twice in your whole Months keeping; and and if it be in
the first Fortnight, twill be the better, for then he will have a complete
Fortnight to recover his strength again; and for his labor in his last
Fortnight, let it be proportionate to his strength and wind, as sometimes half
his Task, and then three parts of it. Only observe that the last Trial you make
in the first Fortnight be a Train-scent more than your Match, for by that means
you will find what he is able to do. And for the proportion of his Exercise,
twice a week (as I have already said) is sufficient to keep him in breath, and
yet will not diminish or injure his Vigor.

But if your Hunting-match be to run sewer Trainscents, then you may put him to
his whole Task the oftener, according as you find him in condition; only observe
that you are not to strain him for Ten days at least before he ride his Match,
that he may be led into the Field in perfect strength and vigor.

If you intend him for a Plate, let him take his Heats according to this
Direction, only let it be on the Place, that he may be acquainted with the
Ground; and as for the Hounds you may omit them, as not being tied to their
speed, but that of your Adversaries Horse's. But as to your Number of Heats,
let them be according to what the Articles exact; only observe that as to the
sharpness of them, they must be regulated according to the temper of his
strength, and the purity of his Wind. And when you heat him provide some Horses
upon the Course to run at him, which will quicken his spirits, and encourage
him, when he finds he can command them at his pleasure. And here too the same
Rule must be observed, not to give your Horse a Bloody heat for Ten days or a
Fortnight before the Plate be to be run for: And let his last heat which you
give him before the day of Trial be in all his Clothes, and just skelp it
over; which will make him run the next time much more vigorously, when he shall
be stripped naked, and feel the cold Air pierce him.

But now that I am speaking of sweating, it may be expected that I should lay
down some Rules how to order a Horse that is in keeping for a Match in Frosty
weather, or in case he be an old strained Horse, so that you dare not heat him
in hard weather, for fear of Lameing him a fresh.

In these cases some Horsemen have practiced sweating their Horse in the House,
by laying on him multiplicity of Clothes, being first made hot at the Fire;
which is the most unnatural way of sweating a Horse that can be, since it is
provoked by heat arising from the outward parts, and is too violent, the
extremity of the heat joined to the weight of the Clothes, not only weakening,
but almost smothering him.

The next way in use, is to give him his Heat ahroad, as I just now mentioned
in his Clothes, but this too is not so natural and kindly, as without his
Clothes, since here too the heat is augmented from without, and consequently
abates his strength the more, and yet does not altogether so well improve his
Wind.

Therefore if either you have a Horse that has been strained, or otherwise the
weather be unseasonable, find out some dead Jog, or sandy way, though of but
half a Miles length, and there breath your horse till he sweat as you would
have him. I remember to have heard of a Gentleman having matched his horse for
a very considerable sum; and the weather proving hard, took this course to
keep his horse in breath; he caused Straw, and foul Litter to be spread all
along round an adjoining Close, and every morning his Servnats shook it up and
turned it, to keep it hollow and soft, and then the Horse was had forth to
gallop on it after his Water, and by this means kept his Horse in tolerable
Wind.

Now during this Month both on his Resting-daies, and after his sweats on
Heating-daies, you are to observe the same Rules which you were taught in the
first week of your Third Fortnights Keeping; only you are to omit all
scourings, but Rye-bread and Mashes; since your Horse being in so perfect a
state of Body has no need of any. Only if you think there may be any occasion,
and that your Horse prove Thirsty, about Eight or Nine a Clock at Night you may
give him this Tulip to, cool him and quench his Thirst.

Take Barly-water Two Quarts: of Syrrup of Violets 3 Ounces, of Syrrup of
Lemmons 2 Ounces, mix them together, and give them to your Horse to drink; if
he refuse, fasten it from falling as you did the Mash, and so let it stand by
him all Night.

During the last Fortnight, you must not only dry your Oats, and hull them by
beating, but likewise take half a Strike of Oats and wash them in the Whites of
a dozen or twenty Eggs, and stirring them therein let them soke all Night; then
the next Morning take them and spread them abroad in the Sun, till they be as
dry as at first, and so give them to your Horse, and when they are spent
prepare more in the same manner. This Food is light of Digestion, and very
sovereign for his Wind.

^is Beans must be ordered as before, only give them not so frequently, if he
will eat his Oats without them; and for his Bread this Fortnight let it be
three parts Wheat to one of Beans, and let it be ordered as before directed.
And likewise if you find him inclined to costiveness forget not to relieve
Nature by giving him Oats washed in two or three Whites of Eggs and Ale beat
together; for that, as I have told you already, will cool his Body, and keep it
moist.

During the last Week omit giving him a Mash, only give the Barly-water as
before; but as to Hay let him have as much as he will eat (which will not be
much, if he have his fill of better food) till a day before he is to ride his
Match, but then you must hold your hand, that he may have time to digest that
which he has eaten, and then and not before you may muzzle him with your
Cavezone; and be sure that day, and so till the morning he is led out, to feed
him as much as possible, for such a days Labor will require something to
maintain strength. Therefore in the Morning, an hour before you are to lead
out, give him a Tossed or two of White-bread steept in Sack. which will revive
his Spirits, and so lead him into the Field.

But if you are to run for a Plate, which usually is not till three a clock in
the Afternoon, then by all means have him out early in the morning to air,
that he may empty his Body, and when he is come in from Airing feed him with
Tosts in Sack; for you must consider, that as too much fullness will endanger
his wind, so too long fasting will cause faintness. When he has eaten what you
think fit to give him, put on his Cavezone, and then having chafed his Legs
soundly with Piece-grease and Brandy warmed together, or Trainoyl, (which ought
likewise to be used daily at Noon for a Week, before the Match, or longer if
you see cause,) shake up his Litter, and shutting up your Stable close, and
preventing any Noise to be made near him, leave him to his Rest till the hour
come that he is to go into the Field.

As to platting his Main and Tail, shooing him with Plates, pitehing his Saddle
and Girths, and the like preparations, they are things which every Groom can
instruct you in, and therefore I shall not trouble you with Rules concerning
them, but in lieu thereof shall add some farther Directions how to judge of the
State of your Horses Body, and if you find any thing amiss therein how to
redress it.

CHAP IX. Of the Means to judge of your Horses State of Body, and of curing all
Casualties that may happen after Matching.
THere are several Observations to be made by you during your Dieting your
Horse, which if you miscarry in, may be the loss of your Match, or your share
in the Plate. Therefore, that you may know how to proceed regularly in this
Art, I shall endeavor to sum them up.

First then you are to observe his Chaule, his Ribs, and his Flank, according
to the Rules formerly laid down; for if he be clean within, he will also be
clean there; but yet he may feel clean there, when he is not clean within; and
therefore those Grooms are very conceited, who upon their first view of a Horse
and handling of his Flank, pronounce him to be in a true state of Body; for
gentle Airing, warm Clothing, scanty Feeding, may disperse the gross Fat and
Glut, and drive it from the outward parts, so that he may appear clean, when in
reality he is not so: and therefore you are only a competent Judge, who know how
he was cleansed.

Therefore you are to observe, first, whether in all points you have proceeded
according to Art in his Training; as whether he performs his Heats with vigor
and true courage, whether he have been all along home-fed, whether you have not
suffered pursiveness to increase by too little labor, or abated his Flesh and
strength by too much. These things are the very grounds of Keeping, and
therefore ought to be scanned and considered with judgment.

Next you are to observe his manner of Feeding, as whether he holds his
Appetite or no; and observe what sort of Food he likes best, and of that give
him oftenest; and in case his stomach abate, keep him out longer Morning and
Night, at his airings.

In like manner you must observe his Dung, which tho it be as fallacious
oftentimes as a Sick-man's Water, it being liable to alteration on the change
of Diet, or being influene'd by the air, yet being clean and in health it will
usually be a pale yellow color, and be voided in round Pellets; but if it be
loose, and soft, it is an infallible sign of weakness, and therefore must by
good Feeding be remedied as soon as possible. But if it be hard and dry, so
that he cannot dung but with difficulty and straining, then you must endeavor
to relieve Nature, but not with scowrings, which would weaken too much, but
rather choose to give him this Glister, which will both cool and refresh him.

Take a Quart of Whey, of Syrrup of Violets, and Pulpe of Cassia, of each Four
Ounces and of Manna half an Ounce; this will Purge him gently, and is most
excellent to cool his Bowels.

The next thing to be considered is Lamness, which if it proceed from old
strains you must make use of this Ointment, which I have several times
experimented with good success.

Take fresh Butter, Oil of Bays, Dialthea, and Turpentine of each Two Ounces,
mix and boil them together on a soft fire, and when they are well
incorporated, as hot as the Horse can suffer it, anoint the Horse twice a day,
and give him exercise, by Airing him abroad Morning and Evening a foot pace,
and you will find it a certain Remedy for any Strain in the Shoulder, Clap on
the back sinews, or any grief what soever, that proceeds from Strains.

But if you only fear Lameness from Old Strains, then you must be careful that
your Exercise be moderate, and always when you come in from Water and his Legs
are rubbed dry, anoint them with such supple Ointments, as are accounted good
for the Limbs, as Linseed, Train, Sheepsfoot, Neatsfoot, Nerve-Oyle and the
like; all which may be used on his days of Rest, but on his heating days
Urine and Saltpeter. Some Horsemen make use of Brandie and Sallet Oil mixed,
and bathe his Legs, and afterward heat it in with a hot Iron, and commend it
as the best thing for the Limbs of an Old stiff Horse.

But if your Horse through Negligence, or any casualtie happen to have the
Grease fall into his Heels, you must endeavor to remove it by a good sound
heat, and a scowring after it, and apply to his Legs this Poultiss.

Take of Honey a Pound, of Turpentine, common Gum, Meal of Linseed, and the
Meal of Fenugreek, of each 4 Ounces, and the Powder of Bay Berries well
searched 3 Ounces, mix and boil all these well together; then take it off, and
put to it a Pint of White Wind, then boil it again, till it be very thick: and
with this, as hot as the Horse can suffer it, lap his legs about Plai
ster-wise, and renew it only once in three days, and it will certainly bring
his Legs within compass.

If your Horses Feet be bad, either surbated, or foundred, then instead of
Cow Dung, you may stop them with blew-clay and Vinegor temperd together, and on
his Heating-daies at Night stop them with grey-sope, and keep it in with a
piece of an old Shoo-sole.

If your Horse be troubled with any Dose in his head give him Mustard Seed
amongst his Provender, but if it be a worse Cold, which you will perceive by
his Rattling, then give him this Lambitive, or Electuary.

Take of Honey and Treacle, each half a Pound, having mixed these together, add
to them Powder of Comminseed, Liquorish, Bay Berries, Anniseeds, each an Ounce,
mix all these together, and put them to the Honey and Treakle, which will make
it of a thick consistance. If your horse has a Cold, instead of his Oats
before Water, give him the quantity of a Walnut of this Lambitive on the top of
a stick or in a Spoon, and let him lick it off; and the same do after Airing,
when first you come in, and you will find the advantage of it.

These at present are all the Inconveniences that I can call to mind, which
are liable to Hunters, or Gallopers in their Keeping; and tho through
inadvertency, or want of memory I should have omitted any, yet from these
Grounds, you may form your Remedies for any common Accident or Distemper; and
now that we draw near to the Match-day, and the End of our Discourse, we will
only discuss some few Rules relating to the Trial of the Hunting Match. I mean
Rules to be observed in Riding, and so conclude.

CHAP. X. Of riding a Hunting-Match, or Heats for a Plate, and the Advantages
belonging to each.
I Have endeavored to show the Necessity and the Manner of Training and
Dieting Horses, but this alone is not sufficient to the winning of either Match
or Plate without a knowing and an honest Rider, and a skilful Judge or Tryer be
joined thereto; but since no man is fitter to ride the Horse than he that has
the training of him, I shall lay down some general Rules how to ride to the
best Advantage either a Hunting-Match, or three Heats and a Course for a Plate.

The first Requisite in a Rider, next to faithfulness in his Trust, is to have
a good close Seat, his Knees being held firm to his Saddle-skirts, his Toes
turned inward and his Spurs outward from the Horses sides, his left hand
governing his Horses Mouth, and his right commanding his Whip; observing during
all the Trial throughout to sit firm in his Saddle, without waving, or standing
up in his Stirrops, which very much incommodes the Horse, notwithstanding the
conceited Opinion of some Jockeys that it is a becoming Seat.

When you spur your Horse, strike him not hard with the Calves of your Legs, as
if you would beat the wind out of his body, bust just turn your Toes outward,
and bring the Spurs quick to his sides; and such a sharp stroke will be more
serviceable to the quickening of your Horse, and sooner draw blood. Be sure not
to spur your Horse but when there is occasion, and avoid spurring him under the
fore bowels, between his Shoulders, and his Girths near the Heart (which is the
tenderest place) till the last Extremity.

When you whip your Horse let it be over the shoulder on the near side, except
upon hard running, and when you are at all; then be sure with a strong jerk to
strike your Horse in the Flank, for there the skin is tender'st, and most
sensible of the Lash.

Observe when you whip or spur your Horse, and that you are certain he is at
the top of his speed, if then he clap his Ears in his Pole, or whisk his Tail,
be sure that you bear him hard, and give him as much comfort as ever you can,
by sawing his Snaffle to and fro in his Mouth, and by that means forcing him to
open his Mouth, which will comfort him, and give him wind.

If there be any high wind stirring when you ride, observe if it be in your
Face to let your Adversary lead, and to hold hard behind him till you see your
opportunity of giving a Loose; yet you must observe to ride so close to him,
that his Horse may break the Wind from yours, and that you by stooping low in
your Seat may shelter your self under him, which will assist the strength of
your Horse. But if the Wind be in your Back, ride exactly behind him, that your
Horse may alone enjoy the benefit of the Wind, by being as it were blown
forward, and by breaking it from him as much as you can possible.

Next observe what Ground your Horse delights to run best on, bearing your
Horse (as much as your Adversary will give you leave) on level Carpet-ground,
because your Horse naturally will be desirous to spend himself more freely
thereon. But on deep Earths etc. give him more liberty, because he will
naturally favor himself thereupon. Be sure, if you are to run up hill, to
favor your Horse and bear him, for fear of running him out of wind; but down
hill, (if your Horses Feet and Shoulders will endure it, and you dare venture
your own Neck) always give him a Loose.

Only take this for a general Rule, that if you find your Horse to have the
Heels of the other, that then you be careful to preserve his Speed till the
last Trainscent, if you are not to run a straight Course, but if so, then till
the Course, and so to husband it then too, that you may be able to make a Push
for it at the last Post.

Next you are to observe the nature of your Opposites Horse, and if he be
fiery, then to run just behind, or just cheek by joul, and with your Whip make
as much noise as you can, that you may force him on faster then his Rider would
have him, and by that means Spend him the sooner. Or else keep just before him
upon such a slow Gallop, that he may either over reach or by treading on your
Horses Heels (if he will not take the leading) endanger falling over.

Observe on what ground the contrary Horse runs worst and on that Earth be sure
to give a loose that your Adversaries being forced to follow you, may hazard
stumbling, or clapping on the back Sinnws.

Observe likewise in your Riding the several Helps and Corrections of the Hand
the Whip and the Spur, and when and how often he makes use of them; and when
you perceive that his Horse begins to be blown by any of the former Synptoms,
as Whisking his Tail, clapping down his Ears, holding out his Nose like a Pig
etc. you may then take it for granted that he is at the top of what he can do;
therefore in this case observe how your own rides, and if he run cheerfully and
strongly without Spurring, then be sure keep your Adversary to the same speed
without giving him ease and by that means you will quickly bring him to give
out, or else distance him.

Observe at the End of every Train-sent what Condition, the other Horse is in;
and how he holds out in his Labor; which you may be able to give a judgment of
by his Looks, the Working of his Flank, and the slackness of his Girths. For if
he look dull it is a sign his Spirits sail him; if his Flanks beat much, it is a
token that his Wind begins to fail him, and then of necessiity his Strength
must too. If his Wind fail him, then his Body will grow thin and appear tuckt
up, which will make his Girths appear slack to the Eye. And therefore take this
for a Rule that there is no greater Sign of Weakness then this which I have
last mentioned; so that if your Adversaries Horse want girting after the first
Scent, provided he were closegirt at his first starting, you need not much
despair of winning your Wager.

When each Train-scent is ended (and so likewise after every Heat for a Plate)
you must have dry Straw, and dry Clothes both Linen and Woollen which have
been steeped in Urine and Saltpeter a day, or two, and then dried in the Sun;
and likewise one, or two of each which have been so steeped, must be brought
wet into the Field; and after the Train is ended you must have two or three
Helpers, and after your Groom has with a Knife of Heat (as the D. of New Castle
calls it) which is an old piece of a Sword blade, scrapt off all the Sweat from
your Horses Neck, Body etc. you must see that they first with Straw, and then
with their dry Clothes rub him dry all over, whilst others are employed about
his Legs; and as soon as they are rubbed dry then chafe them with your wet
clothes, and never give over till you are called by the Judges to start again.
This will keep his Joints plyant and nimble, and prevent any inflammation which
might arise from any old Strain.

The next thing to be considered is the Judges, or Tryers Office, which is to
see that all things are ordered according to the Articles, which to that end
ought to be publicly read before the Horses Start.

Next that each Tryer on whose side the Train is to be led, according to the
Articles give directions for its leading according to the advice of the Rider,
or his Knowledge of the Nature and Disposition of that Horse on whose side he
is Chose.

Next that each Tryer be so advantageously Mounted, as to ride up behind the
Horses, (but not upon them) all day; and to observe that the Contrary Horse
ride his True-ground, and observe the Articles in every particular, or else not
to permit him to proceed.

Next that after each Train scent be ended, each Tryer look to that Horse
against whom he is chosen, and observe that he be no ways relieved but with
rubbing, except Liberty on both sides be given to the contrary.

Next, as soon as the time which is allowed for rubbing be expired, which is
generally half an hour, they shall command them to mount, and if either Rider
refuse, it may be lawful for the other to start without him, and having beat
him the distance agreed on, the Wager is to be adjudg'd on his side.

Next, the Tryers shall keep off all other Horses from crossing the Riders, or
leading them; only they themselves may be allowed to instruct the Riders by
word of mouth how to ride, whether slow, or fast, according to the Advantages
he perceives may be gained by his Directions

Lastly, if there be any weight agreed on, they shall see that both Horses
bring their true weight to the starting place, and carry it to the end of the
Train, on penalty of losing the Wager.

The same Rules are to be observed (especially this last) by those Gentlemen
which are chosen to be Judges at a Race for a Plate; only they usually stay in
the Stand, that they may the better see which Horse wins the Heat.

Now for running for a Plate, there are not so many Observations to be made,
nor more Directions required than what have been already mentioned; only this,
that if you know your Horse to be tough at bottom, and that he will stick at
mark, to ride him each Heat according to the best of his performance, and avoid
as much as possible either riding at any particular Horse, or staying for any,
but to ride each Heat throughout with the best speed you can.

But if you have a very fiery Horse to manage, or one that is hard-mouthed, and
difficult to be held, then start behind the rest of the Horses with all the
coolness and gentleness imaginable; and when you find your Horse to begin to
ride at some command, then put up to the other Horses, and if you find they
ride at their Ease, and are hard held, then endeavor to draw them on faster;
but if you find their Wind begin to rake hot, and that they want a Sob, if your
own Horse be in wind, and you have a Loose in your hand, keep them up to their
speed, till you come within three quarters of a Mile of the End of the Heat;
and then give a Loose, and push for it, and leave to Fortune and your Horses
Goodness the Event of your Success.

Many more Rules there are which may not occur at present to my memory, and
others which I purposely omit; but these may serve the honest Jockey, and for
the others which relate to Foul-play, as crossing, hanging on the Posts,
leaning on the other Horseman, yoking, etc. I desire not to instruct any one in
them, and could wish that they might never be made use of, but be wholly
relinquished by all honest Horsemen.

Lastly, when either your Hunting-Match, or your Trial for the Plate is ended,
as soon as you have rubbed your Horse dry, you shall cloth him up, and ride
him home, where the first thing you give him shall be this Drink to comfort him.

Take a Pint and a half of sweet Milk, and put three Yolks of Eggs beaten into
it; then make it lukewarm, and put in three pennyworth of Saffron, and three
Spoonfuls of Sallet-oyl, and give it him in a Horn.

When this is done dress him slightly over with your Curry Comb, Brush, and
Woollen Cloth; and then bath the place where the Saddle stood with warm Sack to
prevent Warbles, and wash the Spurring-places with Piss and Salt, and then
afterward anoint them with Turpentine and Powder of Jet mixed together; and
be sure let the Stable be very well litter'd; and then cloth him up with all
speed, and so let him stand two hours. Then feed him with Rye-bread, after that
with a very good Mash: then give him his Belly full of Hay, and what Corn or
Bread he will eat. Then bathe his Legs well with Urine and Saltpeter, leave
him Corn in his Locker, and so let him rest till the next Morning; at which
time order him as before directed in his days of Rest.

Thus I have imparted to the Public what my own Experience has taught me,
relating to this part of Horsemanship. I desire no Person to rely on it further
then they shall find it advantageous upon Practice and Trial. If others more
skilful would be as free to communicate their Observations on this Subject,
this profitable part of Knowledge might then perhaps be improved to perfection.
The giving a Specimen was all that is here designed. If the Reader finds any
Errors, he is desired either to pardon or amend them. To those that either know
no better, or want other Helps, this possibly may prove no unwelcome piece of
Service.

ERRATA.
Page 15. l. 19. for rot read moot. p. 22. l. 22. for lyare r. lyard. p. 28. l.
3. for Doser. Pose. p. 45. l. 7. for that by r. that if by. p. 47. l. 1. for to
feed him etc. in some copies, r. him, and so feed him by little and little. p.
51. l. 26. for Daler. Pale. p. 73. l. 1. for so inhumane, r. too inhumane ib.
l. 2. dele so.

FINIS.

