Newly Printed.
THE Modern Conveyancer; Or, Conveyancing Improved: being a choice Collection
of PRESIDENTS on most Occasions. Drawn after the manner of Conveyancing now in
Use. By the greatest Hands of the present Age; of which some are still living.
Consisting of Settlements of Estates upon Marriages, Mortgages, Assignments,
etc. With an Introduction concerning Conveyancing in General, in large 8 vo.
Printed for J. Walthoe in Vine-Court, Middle Temple.

LEX CVSTVMARIA: OR, A TREATISE OF Copyhold Estates, In respect of the Lord,
Copyholder. WHEREIN The Nature of CUSTOMS in general, and of particular
Customs, Grants and Surrenders, and their Constructions and Expositions in
reference to the thing granted or surrendered, and the Uses or Limitations of
Estates are clearly Illustrated. Admittances, Presentiments, Fines and
Forfeitures are fully handled, and many Quaeries and Difficulties by late
Resolutions settled. Leases, Licenses, Extinguishments of Copyhold Estates, and
what Statutes extend to Copyhold Estates are explained. AND ALSO Of Actions by
Lord or Tenant, and the manner of declaring and pleading, either Generally, or
as to particular Customs; with Trial and Evidence of Custom, and of Special
Verdicts. TOGETHER With a Collection of many CASES wherein a Copyholder may
receive relief in the Court of Chancery. To which are Annexed, PRESIDENTS of
Conveyances respecting Copy-holds, Releases, Surrenders, Grants, Presentiments,
and the like. As also PRESIDENTS of Court Rolls, Surrenders, Admittances,
Presentiments, etc.

By S. C. Barister at Law.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins Esquires, for John
Walthoe, and are to be sold at his Shop in Vine Court, Middle Temple, adjoining
to the Cloister. 1696.

THE PREFACE TO THE PRACTICERS OF THE LAW.
SIR Edward Coke in Bagnal and Tucker's Case, in Brownl. 2 Rep. is of Opinion,
That the third part of this Realm is in Copyhold. If we consider the long and
continued Series of Practice that this Great Man was Conversant in, either at
the Bar or Bench, and to whom persons from all parts and corners of the Nation
resorted, as to the Oracle of the Law, we shall not easily conceive his
Judgment was not Temerarious, but rather that he had good Reason for such
positive conjecture: However, it is most certain, That a vast number of Estates
(and those considerable too) depend upon no other than Custom, in point of
Title, and are no other ways preserved in point of Evidence, then by Copies of
Court Rolls.

Now we find large and very elaborate Volumes published concerning Estates and
Tenures at Common Law, and yet very little has been professedly wrote upon
this Subject, though so great a part of the Lands and Estates of this Nation are
protected and preserved by it; which I the more wonder at, for that to know
when a Custom is good and allowable in Law requires a more than ordinary skill,
and amongst the infinity of Customs to try them by, and pertinently to apply
them to those four standing Essentials, Antiquity, Continuance, Certainty and
Reasonableness, is a Work of great Judgment and Dexterity; besides
Constructions and Expositions of Grants and Surrenders, the Penalty and fatal
Consequence of Forfeitures under an obstinate Lord, especially such as are
wilful, the nicety and variety of Customs, seem very well to deserve a
particular and designed Treatise.

I remember but two that have professedly handled this piece of Learning, my
Lord Coke in his Complete Copyholder, and Mr. Calthrop in his Readings, which
though they are done with good Judgment, yet, as they do totally omit many Titles
which are of great Use, so they extend to very few more Cases than those which
are amast together in the 4th Report; since which we have thousands of Cases
Argued and Debated, and some Points started which are primae impressionis; and
in truth it is not fit to crowd so much excellent Learning, and of such general
Use into a Manual.

In this Treatise you will find Totum Domini and Totum Tenentis. The Lord may
see his power (though moderated) and the Tenant may understand his Duty and his
Privilege. For Tempora mutantur; when Bracton and Fleta wrote, poor
Copyholders tempestive and intempestive pro voluntate Domini possent resumi
and revocari.

But the Lord now is not Enthroned like a Grand Seigniour, whose Proceedings
are Arbitrary and his Humors Laws; no, he is a mixed Monarch, he is bound up by
the Customs and Constitutions of his little Empire. It Is true, they are Tenants
Ad voluntatem Domini, yet this Will is abridged, clogged and restrained
secundum consuetudinem Manerii.

The Learning of Copy-holds is subtle and curious, in the Arguments and
Pleadings. As for the purpose, That great Question, whether and how Copy-holds
may be Intayled, has been Argued with great subtilty and penetration, as you
may read Popham, p. 32. Gravenor's Case. Cro. Car. 42. Rowden and Malster's
Case. And in Carter's Reports 22. Tailor and Shaw's Case.

Now the mentioning of this Argument has presented me with an Answer to what I
foresee will be imputed as Faults to me.

In some Cases I am thought too tedious, and write a great part thereof
Verbatim, and I think I have reason so to do (though that is but seldom.) The
reason of some Cases will ill bear abstracting; as, to Instance in that Great
Man's Reports, I mean my Lord Hobart and Mr. Justice Yelverton's Cases. They
that can satisfy themselves with half a Case, let them dabble in those silly
Abridgments of Moor, Croke, etc. I was always of this mind, That in the gelding
a close and well compacted Argument, the Vigor of it is in a great measure
dwindled and emasculated.

Another Crime perhaps may be, that I cite one Case two or three times; and I
do so when I meet with a copious prolifick Case, which brancheth it self into
several Points, I thought it more Intelligible and Methodical to Graft each
Shoot into its proper Title, whether it be a point in Law, or a Formality in
Pleading.

But not to spend time in creating Apologies for Crimes perhaps which I shall
never be accused,

Gentlemen, I surrender the whole to your Use, and hope thereby to gain
Admittance into your favorable Opinion.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS IN THE Ensuing TREATISE.
CAP. I. OF the Original and nature of a Manor, and of what it consists. Of a
Manor real and by reputation. Of a customary Manor. Of Grants and Leases of
Manors, chiefly respecting Copyhold Estates, and what shall be said parcel of
a Manor, and what shall be said severance of Copyhold from the Manor. CAP. II.
The notion and nature of a Copyhold as to its Basis and Foundation. How a
Copyholder and a Tenant at Will at Common Law differ. The general Maxims and
Rules of Copyhold Estates, together with the several differences and
diversities, by the perusal whereof the ensuing Cases will be rendered the more
easy and Intelligible. CAP. III. The Privilege of Copyhold Estates.
Privileges of the Lord. Of the Tenant. Of Infants Copyholders. Of the Kings
Prerogative and Privilege in respect of Copy-holds. CAP. IV. The nature of
Custom in general, and the general Maxims of it. What things are requisite to
make a good Custom. Time out of memory, what, and explained. What shall be said
an Interruption of Custom or not. The unreasonableness of Customs by whom to be
judged. Several particular Customs ratione loci. Of enabling and disabling
Customs. Of Customs and Prescriptions, and the different manner of Pleading
them. The several sorts of Prescriptions, and how and where Prescription must
be made, and by whom. And when a Custom shall be said to be persued or not.
CAP. V. Of particular Customs enabling or disabling in respect of the Lord, of
the Tenant, and of the Estate limited or leased, and in respect of Discents.
CAP. VI. Customs of Manors as to Wives and Widows of Copyholders, what are
good and what not. And where the severance of the customary Tenements from the
Manor shall not prejudice the Copyholder. CAP. VII. Customs as to Timber,
Woods and Under-Woods, and what Prescription by a Copyholder to cut Trees,
etc. shall be good or not. CAP. VIII. Customs as to Commons, and where
severance of the customary Tenements from the Manor by the Lord, shall not
prejudice, and how the Copyholder in such Cases shall be relieved by his
Pleading. CAP. IX. Of customary Incidents or Collateral Qualities of Copyhold
Estates, and how guided, with the Illustration of several particular Cases.
CAP. X. The several sorts of Copyholders, and who shall be said to be
customary Tenants. Of Copyhold Borough English. Of the Court. Two sorts of
Courts Baron. Of the Copyholders Court. Who may keep Courts, and to what
purposes, and where. Of the Steward, his Office and power of Deputation, and
what he may do ex officio, or not. CAP. XI. What things may be granted by Copy
of Grants by the Lord, Legitimus Dominus pro tempore. What Grants by Disseisor
Infant, etc. shall be good, void or voidable. Grants in respect of the Lords
Person or Estate, what shall be good or not. Of Grants by the King (Lord.) Who
shall be said a Lord sufficient to grant Copies. What amounts to a Grant, at
what place to be granted. Of Grants by the Copyholder to the Lord. CAP. XII.
Exposition of Grants. By what words in Grants Copyholds shall pass or not. What
thing shall pass by Grant of another thing, as Appurtenant or Incident. CAP.
XIII. Of Surrenders. The nature of a Surrender. General Rules and Diversities
for the Explication. Of the Alienation of Copyhold Estates in general, and of
the selling of Copy-holds by Commissioners of Bankrupts in particular. Of
Surrenders in Court. By what words a Surrender will pass. What amounts to a
Surrender. Of a Surrender out of Court. Who may take a Surrender out of Court*
What Surrender out of Court is good or not. CAP. XIV. What shall pass and by
what words in a Surrender. Of Attornment. The Construction and Exposition of a
Surrender. Where no Use or Estate is immediately limited in whole or in part;
and where an Use is limited how far the construction shall be guided according
to the Rules of Common Law, or not. Of use upon Use. Surrender to the Use of
ones Wife. Where a Surrender is void for the uncertainty. Of a Surrender to the
Use of a person not in esse, and of a Surrender to take effect in futuro. CAP.
XV. Constructions of Surrenders as to Limitations of Remainders and Reversions.
Of contingent Remainders. Where the Heir shall be in by Descent or Purchase. Of
a Surrender to the Use of ones last Will, and how to be construed. Surrender
upon Condition or Contingency. Of Surrender before Admittance. Surrender, by
whom and to whom. By a Feme Covert Countermand of a Surrender, and what Remedy
to force a Trustee to Surrender. CAP. XVI. Of Presentment, how and when to be
made, how to be pursuant to the Surrender. Of the death of Surrendror, or cesty
que use, or of the customary Tenants before Presentment or Admittance. Two
Surrenders, and the second first presented. CAP. XVII. Of Admittances upon
voluntary Grants. Surrenders and Discents. By whom Admittances upon Surrender
made shall bind. In what Cases the Admittance of one shall be the Admittance o
another. Of Admittance by Attorney. Admittance where to be made. Of Admittance
upon Descent. The time of Admittance. What things the Heir may do or not do
before Admittance. In what cases, and to what purposes the Copyhold Estate
shall be in the Tenant before Admittance. In what case the Lord shall be
compelled to admit. CAP. XVIII. Fines certain, uncertain. Fines upon Descent or
Purchase. Of excessive Fines. What Customs are good as to payment of Fines. Of
Fines as to Remainders. What refusal to pay a Fine shall be a Forfeiture or
not. How the Lord shall recover his Fine. CAP. XIX. Of the Entayling Copyhold
Estates. The different Opinion of the Judges, with an Abstract of the Reasons
or Arguments how Copy-holds are or may be Intayled, and when the Law settled as
to that point. How such Copyhold Intayls may be barred. And what Acts of a
Copyholder may be a Discontinuance. CAP. XX. Of Leases of Copyhold Estates.
Leases by the Lord, and Rent reserved, and his remedy. Of Leases made by
Copyholders. What Leases are a Forfeiture or not. When a License to make a
Lease shall be said to be pursued or not. Commencement of Leases. Leases, by
whom made. Bishops Tenants in Tail. Infant. Of Rents. What things are demisable
by Copy. CAP. XXI. Of Licenses. What License shall be good. By whom made shall
bind or not. License taken for a Confirmation. When, and where, and how a
License is to be pleaded specially. CAP. XXII. What shall amount to a
Forfeiture. Non-fezance, Mis-fezance. Of refusal of Rent, Services, etc.
Nonappearance at Courts. Of making Leases not warranted. What shall be said a
Covenant and so no Lease, and so no Forfeiture. What alienation shall be a
Forfeiture or not. Of Forfeitures by Waste in Trees. By Attainder of the
Tenant. What act of the Husband shall forfeit the Wives Lands or not. Who shall
take advantage of a Forfeiture. Where the Lord shall take advantage before a
Presentment or not. Where the Forfeiture of one Copyhold shall be the
Forfeiture of another, either as to Estates or Persons. What shall be a
dispensation of a Forfeiture; and if the Heir shall take advantage of a
Forfeiture made in the Life of his Ancestor. CAP. XXIII. Of Extinguishment of
Copy-holds. How Copy-holds are destroyed by the act of the Lord, or of the
Copyholder. Where and how a right to a Copyhold shall be estopp'd or
extinguished, by acceptance of a new Estate, or release of the old. Where and
in what Cases a Copyhold shall be suspended, and revived or re-granted. CAP.
XXIV. How and where a Copyholder shall hold his Land charged or not. Of
charges by the Lord Copyholder, as Dowers, Rent-charges, Statutes, etc. and by
whom they shall be avoided. CAP. XXV. Of Harriots. The nature of Harriot-Custom
and Harriot-Service, and how they differ. What Customs for Harriots are good or
not. Where they shall be apportioned, and by whose Acts. Who shall pay Harriot
or not, and the Pleadings. CAP. XXVI. What Statutes extend to Copyhold Lands,
and within what Statutes Copyhold Lands shall be contained by Construction of
Law, without express words, and what not, and therein how Copy-holds shall be
barred by Fine and non-claim, etc. CAP. XXVII. Of Embleaments. Who shall have
them, the Lord or the Copyholder. CAP. XXVIII. What shall be said a Disseisin
as to Copyhold Estates, or not. CAP. XXIX. Of Actions and Suits. What Actions
may be brought by the Lord, and what Actions may be brought by Copyholders or
their Executors, against the Lord or against Strangers, in respect to their
Copyhold Estates and Privileges. CAP. XXX. Of Copyholders being impleaded
and impleadable in the Lords Court, and a Faux Judgment in the Lords Court, and
how and where to be relieved. CAP. XXXI. Of Declarations of, for and concerning
Copyhold Estates, how to be brought and laid, and Presidents in what Cases
they have been brought. CAP. XXXII. Of Pleadings. The general Rules of Pleading
as to Copyhold Estates. The different Forms of Pleading Customs and
Prescriptions. Of Pleading in reference to Common belonging to Copyhold, and
when to be pleaded by way of Custom, or by way of Prescription. The manner of
Pleading when a Lease is to be answered which is set forth in the Avowry. Where
in pleading the Commencement of the Estate must be showed, and by whom granted
or not. And how a License must be pleaded by the Lessee. Prescription of
Copyholder to be discharged of Tithes, how to be pleaded. Of Traverses, when,
how and where to be taken. Forms of Pleading of Surrenders, Admittances Estates
in Fee, Tail, for Lives, or Years. Pleadings of Presentiments and Grants.
Presidents of bars by Commons, Woods, Ways, Enclosures, Forfeitures, and all
other Pleadings necessary for the Copyholder to set forth his Title or defend
it. CAP. XXXIV. Evidence, Trial, Issue. What shall be a good Evidence to prove
the Custom alleged or not. What shall be tried by the Jury, and what by the
Court Rolls. Who may be admitted to give Evidence. When Issue is taken upon a
Surrender, where to be tried. Venue. CAP. XXXIV. Of Special Verdicts. Imperfect
Custom not well found. Failure of Prescription. How the Custom must be found by
the Jury. Presidents of special Verdicts. CAP. XXXV. How and in what Cases
Copyholders have been relieved in Chancery. Presidents of Conveyances
respecting Copyhold Estates, and Presidents of Surrenders, Grants,
Admittances, Presentiments.
Lex Custumaria: OR, A TREATISE OF Copyhold ESTATES, etc.
CAP. I.
Of the Original and Nature of a Manor, and of what it consists. Of a Manor
Real and by Reputation. Of a Customary Manor. Of Grants and Leases of Manors,
with respect to this Subject of Copy-holds; and what shall be said Parcel of a
Manor, or what shall be said a Severance.

FOR the right understanding of the Law as to Copyhold Estates, it is necessary
to premise something of the Nature and Notion of a Manor, upon which they
depend as the Materia, though Custom is the Form thereof. And I shall say no
more of Manors, than what shall have a direct influence upon the Explication of
the nature of Copyhold.

Original of Manors.
As for the Original of Manors, Take this brief Account out of Perkins, 670.
Horns Mirror, Lib. 1. Cap. de Roy Alfred. Fulbeck, f. 18. Lambert, verbo
Thaine. Bacon's Elements of the Law, 41, 42, etc.

The ancient Kings of this Realm, who had all the Lands of England in Demesne
(that is, in their own Hands, or totally at their own disposal) did grant a
certain compass or circuit of Ground upon some great Personages, with liberty
to parcel out the Lands to other inferior Tenants, reserving such Duties and
Services as they thought fit, with power to keep Courts, where they might
redress Misdemeanors, within such their Precincts, and decide Controversies of
meum and tuum within their Jurisdictions; these Lords and Noblemen performing
such Services, and paying and yielding such Rents, as the said Kings by their
Grants reserved. These Grantees were called Barons, and were such as came to
Parliament, and from thence it keeps the name of Court Baron to this day,
though in process of time, by the Grants of such Barons, these Lands and Manors
came into the Hands of meaner Men by Purchase, etc. as it is at this day.

And according to this our Custom, all Lands holden in Fee throughout France
are divided into Feifs, and Arrear-Feifs; into Feifs or Knights Fees, and Mesne
Fees, whereof the former are such as were granted by the King, the second such
as the Kings Feudatories do again grant to others.

Now by Justice Winch, in his Argument in the Case of Rowles and Mason, 2
Brownlow, 195. Manors are divided into three sorts of Tenures.

1. The first holds by Knight Service, and this is for defense of the Lord.

2. The second holds by Socage, and this is to Plow and Manure the Demesns of
the Lord, etc. since turned into Rent.

3. The third holds by base Tenure, and these are at the will of the Lord, and
these were to do Services, and some had greater Privileges than others, to
encourage them to perform their Services, as it is in Ireland at this day. Out
of these, by length of time and Custom, sprang up the Race of Copyholders.

For the Name or Etymology of the word Manor, Etymology.
some fancy it to be Manerium quasi Manurium, from manuring the Ground; and
then it takes its Name either from the Lords Demesns, which the Tenants are
bound to Manure, or from the Lands remaining in the Tenants hands; and others
(with more probability) think it to be derived from the French word Mesner, to
govern or guide, because the Lord has the government of the Tenants within his
Jurisdiction. But that I may come to the thing intended (and to leave the
flourishes of guess and fancy)

It is a Maxim common in our Books, Of what a Manor consists.

Demesns, what.


That a Manor consists of Demesns and Services.

As for the word Demesns, Dominicum, or Domainium, it is taken it two senses.
It is most properly taken for those Lands which remain in the Kings hands, and
so all Subjects are excluded from being seized in Dominico, and we have little
of that now but ancient Demesne Lands, which are such as were in the hands of
King Edward the Confessor. But in a sense less proper, Demesne Lands may be said
to be in the hands of an inferior Lord or Tenant, and as my Lord Coke on
Littleton, f. observes, the form of Pleading shows this difference; for an
inferior Lord or Tenant never pleads, That he is seized in Dominico absolutely,
but qualified with this addition, in dominico suo ut de feodo; Pleading.
and the word Fee or Feif implies that his Estate is not absolute, but
depending on some superior Lord. So that Copyhold Land may well be parcel of
the Demesns, and the Frank-tenements are resting in the Lord, but indeed the
customary Inheritance is in the Copyholder, and he shall plead, That he is
seized (with this farther addition) In Dominico suo ut de feodo secundum
consuetudinem Manerij.

Services.
As for Services, whether Corporeal, Annual, or Accidental, they are Duties
accrewing to the Lord by reason of his Seigniory. And respecting Copy-holds, I
shall under their proper Titles hereafter speak of Herriots, Forfeitures,
Amerciaments and Fines for not doing Suit and Service, and the like.

It was ingeniously said by Doddridge, in Herns and Strouds Case, Latch, 63.
That no Case resembles a Manor more than a Rectory: as a Manor is entire so is
a Rectory, and the Glebe Lands resemble the Demesns, and the Tithes the
Services.

If I let my Manor excepting the Demesns, the Exception is void, Winch p. 23.

Description of a Manor.
The New Expositor of Law-Terms, describes a Manor, as a thing compounded of
diverse things; as of an House, Land, Arable, Pasture, Meadow, Wood, Rent,
Advowson, Court Baron, and the like; and this ought to be by long continuance
of Time, to the contrary whereof Man's Memory cannot occur.

So that a Manor consists of Demesns and Services, Manor not made at this day.
and a Court Baron as Incident, and this must be time out of Memory, for a
Manor cannot be made at this day, because a Court Baron cannot now be made; To
a Manor, a Court Baron is incident, and two Suitors at least.
and a Manor cannot be without a Court Baron, and Suitors or Freeholders, Two
at the least; for if all the Free-holds except one Escheat to the Lord, or if
he purchase all except one, there his Manor is gone, for that it cannot be a
Manor without a Court Baron, and a Court Baron cannot be holden but before Two
Suitors at the least. A Court Baron is incident to a Manor, as a Court of
Pye-powders to a Fair. By the Grant of a Manor cum pertinentijs, the Court
passes, and a Man cannot grant his Court, but he may grant the Profits of his
Court, 1 Brownl. 175. Browns Case.

Now though a Man cannot make a Manor at this day, yet he may make Gifts in
Tail, reserving a Tenure and Suit of Court, Yet a Tenure may be created.
because, though he may create a Tenure, yet he may not create a Court, and a
Court cannot be but with a continuance time out of mind, 35 H. 8. Broke Tenure,
102.

A Manor, as I said before, may not be made at this day, neither by a common
person, The King cannot make a Manor, or parcel of a Manor at this day.
nor by the King himself; and the King cannot make a thing parcel of a Manor at
this day; as if he grants Lands to hold of him, as of the Manor of Greenwich,
by a certain Rent, this Rent is not parcel of the Manor. Yet though a Seigniory
or Appendancy cannot be made at this day, yet if an Advowson be Appendant to a
Manor, Advowson appendant.
and the Lord grants part of the Manor with the Advowson to J. S. it is now
Appendant to that part, Cro. El. p. 39. Morris and Smith.

In truth, Manors cannot at this day be created but by way of derivation, as
being derived out of an ancient Manor, Manor by derivation.
or by act in Law, as in the Case of Copartners. Vide infra.

A Manor is entire.
A Manor is an entire thing, and cannot be divided. If the Lord will transfer
over unto a Stranger the Services of all his Tenants, and reserve unto himself
the Demesns, or if he will pass away the Demesns, and reserve the Services; Now
in both Cases the Lord has not a Manor really, but nominally only and in
reputation; Manor in reputation.
and if I am disseised of a Manor, and the disseisor sever the Demesns from the
Services, as it is 4 E. 4. I which have right, ought to make my demand
according to my right, and not to take notice of his severance, for to me it is
a Manor still.

Manor in suspense.
If a Manor descends to Copartners, and they make partition, and the entire
Demesns are allotted to one, and the entire Services to the other, the Manor is
now in suspense, for neither has a Manor but in name only; but if part of the
Demesns and part of the Services be allotted to each, then they each of them
have a real Manor, 26 H. 4.8. 6 Rep. 64. Sir Moyle Finch's Case. To Explain
this, I shall cite a Case or two.

Joynt-tenants make partition of a Manor, yet both keep but one Court.
If two Joynt-Tenants make partition this day of a Manor, and each of them has
Demesns and Services, yet each of them has not a Manor, nor can keep several
Courts, but must both keep one Court, Croke El. p. 39. Morris's Case.

A. seized of a Manor, whereof part of the Tenants were Freeholders and part
Copyholders; had Issue two Daughters, and died; the Daughters entered and made
partition of the Demesns only, but the Services of the Freeholders and
Copyholders remained in Common. By the partition the Demesns are now become in
gross, and severed from the Manor; and if partition be made of a Manor so, as
the Demesns be allotted to one Sister, and the Services to another, now the
Manor is dissolved (or rather suspended; Manor suspended and revived.
) yet if the other Sister dies without Issue, and her part descends to the
other, now it is become a Manor again, 1 Leon. p. 204. Thetford's Case.

By this you see we read in our Books of two sorts of Manors.

1. A real and perfect Manor, such as is before described.

2. A nominal Manor, a Manor by reputation, A Manor nominal.
as you may see by several Instances before. Some call it a Manor in gross; as,
Manor in gross.
a man may have the Right and Interest of a Court Baron with the Perquisites
thereunto belonging; but this is improperly called a Manor in a strict sense,
and another may have the Site and every Foot of Land thereunto belonging. And
as to this, I will only cite a Case which refers to practice, 6 Rep. 64, 65.
Sir Moyle Finch's Case. Reputation is sufficient to pass a thing in a
Conveyance by the name of a Manor, Manor in reputation will pass by the name of
a Manor in a Conveyance, not in a Fine.
which is not re vera a Manor, yet it ought to be in truth and not reputation,
which ought to challenge and hold Privilege of a Manor, as to have a Court
Baron, etc. But a Manor in reputation which is not in truth a Manor, will not
pass by the name of a Manor in a Fine or Common Recovery, for they shall not be
taken by intendment, Croke Eliz. 524. Mallet's Case.

Of Customary Manors.
A customary Manor may be held by Copy, and such customary Lords may keep
Courts and grant Copies, and such customary Manor may pass by Surrender and
Admittance, 11 Rep. 17. Sir H. Nevil's Case. And so it is resolved in More and
Goodgame's Case, Croke Jac. 327. That within one Manor there may be another
Manor demisable by Copy, and within that Manor there may be customary Tenants;
for as well as there may be a Tenant at will of a Manor at the Common Law, so
there may be a Tenant at will according to the Custom of the Manor. Vide infra,
sub titulo Courts. Pleading.
But the way of pleading it must be thus. That such a Manor has been used time
out of mind to be granted by Copy, and also that time out of mind, such
Grantees had used to hold Court Barons, and to grant Copies of Court Rolls to
others, and so to prescribe in this time out of mind, 1 Bulstr. 57. The King
and Stafferton. Yelv. p. 190. mesme Case. The Manor of Haylsham in the County
of Norfolk, is held by Copy, and such a Manor by Escheat cease to be a Manor.
For by the Escheat the Services be extinct, and one Court Baron only shall be
held after the Escheat. But though one Manor may be held of another Manor, One
Manor cannot be parcel of another.
yet one Manor may not be parcel of another Manor, and both be in esse at the
same time; for being Liberties and Franchises of the same nature, non possunt
stare insimul. More's Case.

The Lord may create a customary Manor.
Though the Lord by his own act may not make out of one Manor at Common Law,
diverse several Manors, consisting of Demesns and Freeholds, yet he may well by
his own act make a customary Manor, consisting of Copy-holds, and they shall
hold Court. As if he grant the Inheritance, or makes a Lease of all his
Copyhold Lands for two thousand years, the Grantee or Lessee may hold Court
for the Copyholders, 4 Rep. 26, 27. Melwyche's Case, and Neal and Jackson's
Case. Vide infra, sub titulo Courts. For they have a kind of Seigniory in
gross, and may keep a customary Court where the Steward shall be Judge, and
shall take Surrenders and make Admittances.

Of Grants and Leases of a Manor, and how Services shall pass, and what and
when shall be said to continue as parcel of the Manor, after a Grant or Lease,
and what shall be a severance.
A man seized of a Manor, leaseth part of the Demesns for Years or Life,
Reversion.
the Reversion remains parcel of the Manor.

A man seized of a Manor in the right of his Wife, Leased part of it for Years,
without his Wife; the Reversion thereof is not parcel of the Manor. Contrary if
the Lease had been made by the Husband and Wife.

By Feoffment of the Manor, the Services do not pass without Attornment, Lit.
127. Attornment.
6 Rep. Bracebridge's Case.

If a man make a Feoffment of a Manor in which are Tenants at will according to
the Custom, there Services shall pass by the Feoffment, without their
Attornment, Rolls Abridgment 293.

By a Grant of all the Demesns, the Waste passes, unless excepted, 2 Keb. 558.
North and Howland.

W. H. was seized of twelve Acres, holden of the Manor of W. by Suit and
Services, and devised to the Defendant F. H. in Tail, the remainder in Fee.
After which F. H. purchased the Manor; this being by purchase, makes not the
Land parcel, but by Escheat it does. 2 Keb. Holmes and Hanby. But this Case is
more clearly Reported by Mr. Siderfin, as follows.

If one who had Land held of a Manor, be Tenant in Tail of it, and the Manor is
given to him, the Land in Tail shall not pass by Grant of the Manor.
The Lord of a Manor devises to J. S. the Manor in Tail, the remainder over: J.
S. had twenty Acres in Fee, which were held of the Manor by Suit of Court, and
he being so seized of all, conveys the Manor to A. in Fee; Per Cur. these
twenty Acres shall not pass as Demesne of the Manor, for if it pass as part of
the Demesns, this ought to have been so time out of memory; and there is a
diversity between Land Escheated, which comes in lieu of other Land, and Land
purchased as this was, Siderfin 284. Holmes and Hanby.

Lands holden in Fee of a Manor, are not parcel of a Manor, but the Rents and
Services issuing out of it are parcel of the Manor, Brook, Manor 2.22 H. 6.53.

Reversion.
If a man let all the Demesns of a Manor for Life, rendering Rent, yet the
Reversion is parcel of the Manor, and it shall pass by the grant of the Manor,
Dyer 6. 7 El. 10.

Attornment.
If a man let ten Acres of the Demesns of a Manor, for ten years, rendering Rent,
and afterward demiseth the entire Manor, by the name of a Manor, etc. for
twenty years, to commence at a day to come. An Interest in the ten Acres shall
pass to the Lessee of the Manor, after the expiration of the first ten years,
although no attornment be by the first Termor, for this shall pass as parcel of
the Manor, and not as a Reversion, for the ten Acres were never severed from
the Manor, but the Freehold and Fee of it remains parcel and member of the
gross and body name of the Manor, Dyer 18 El. 350.18. Pl. Com. Bracebridge's
Case, 423.

Without express Grant, the Copyhold cannot be severed by any distinct
reservation or service, yet the entire Manor may be held by different Services,
as to the Demesns, How Copyhold may be severed from the Manor, and how not.
although not the Services, as well by the Grant of the King, as of a common
person, without disjoyning any part of the Manor, as reservation of one Service
on the Grant of the Manor, another on the Advowson. 1 Keb. 720. Lee and Boothby.

After partition of a Manor by Coparceners, Coparceners.
one party cannot Lease her part by the name of the moity of the Manor, 1
Anders. 222.

It was cited by Richardson and Hutton, Note.
to be one Hurston's Case, Ejectment.
That an Ejectment cannot be of a Manor, because there cannot be an Ejectment
of the Services; but if they express farther a certain quantity of Acres, it is
sufficient, Hetly, p. 80. Norris and Isham. Neither is it safe to bring
Ejectment of a Manor, unless the attornment of Tenants be proved, Hetly 146.
Warden's Case.

Pleadings.
Unum Manner. parcel. alterius, Ra. Entr. 25.271.357. Terre pleded esse parcel
del Manor usque concession' tali die. 1 Rep. 431.

CAP. II.
The Notion and Nature of a Copyhold, as to its Basis and Foundation. How a
Copyholder and Tenant at Will differ. The general Maxims of Copyhold Estates
Explicated, and thereby the ensuing Cases in this Book rendered more easy and
intelligible.

THE Style of a Copyholder imports three things, according to my Lord Coke Lit.

1. Nomen, his Name, and that is Tenant by the Copy of Court Roll, not Tenant
by the Court Roll, but Tenant by the Copy of Court Roll; and he is the only
Tenant in Law which holds by the Copy of any Record, Deed, or Charter, or any
other thing; forasmuch as the Title or Estate of the Copyholder is entered into
the Roll, whereof the Steward delivers him a Copy, thereof he is called a
Copyholder. But by the Custom of Godmanchester in Huntingtonshire, they pass
their Estates, by writing on wooden Indented Tallies.

2. Originem or Commencement, ad voluntatem Domini, for originally he was not
but a bare Tenant at Will to the Lord. Quod quis tempestive and intempestive
resumere possit pro voluntate sua and revocare, Bract.

3. Titulum, his Title or Assurance, secundum consuetud. Manerij; for the
Custom of the Manor had fixed his Estate, and assured the Land to him, so long
as he did the Services and Duties, and performed the Customs of the Manor, 9
Rep. Comb's Case.

Although a Copyholder had not in Judgment of Law, but an Estate at Will, yet
Custom had so established and fixed his Estate, that this by the Custom of the
Manor is descendible, and his Heirs shall Inherit it, and therefore his Estate
is not merely ad voluntatem Dom. but ad voluntatem Dom. secundum consuetudinem
Manerij, so that the Custom of the Manor is the life and soul of Copyhold
Estates; for without a Custom, or if they break their Custom, they are subject
to the Will of the Lord. And by Custom a Copyholder is to have his Land
according to the Custom, as he which had Freehold at Common Law; as you may see
by many Cases in 4 Rep. 21. Brown's Case.

Copyhold at Common Law is but an Estate at Will; but the Common Law so takes
notice as to establish it by Custom, that there may be a possessio fratris of
it, and he may have Trespass against his Lord. And as Copyhold is created by
Custom, it is guided by Custom.

A Copyholder does not derive his Estate out of the Estate or Interest of the
Lord only, for then the Copyhold Estate should cease When the Estate of the
Lord determined; but the Copyholder is in by the Custom, 4 Rep. 23. a.

Yet it is but a base Estate, and not looked upon so worthy as Freehold. And
therefore in Indictment sur Stat. 8. H. 6. of forcible Entry, for expelling one
Syms from his Copyhold. The Exception to it was because ( disseisivit) was not
in the Indictment, and yet it is good; for though the Statute 21 Jac. 15. gives
restitution of Possession to Tenants for years and Copyholders, in which there
shall be an Entry or Deteiner by force: yet the Statute does not give an
Indictment of forcible Entry of a Copyhold; but by Noy a Copyholder now shall
have an Indictment of forcible Entry, but ( disseisivit) shall not be in it,
for no Jury can find that, for it is impossible, because a Copyholder has no
Freehold, but he shall have a Pleint in nature of an Assise against a Stranger,
Syms's Case, Mich. 2 Car. B. R.

Note, This Custom goes not to Collateral things; as, Entries upon Condition,
vid. the Chapter of Collateral Incidents, infra.

A Copyhold as to passing Estates, is in many Cases like a Will, and therefore
a party shall take by the Habendums in the Admittance, which was no party to
the Premises. Vide infra. Tit. Surrender.

How a Copyholder and a bare Tenant at Will differ.
Tenant at Will, according to the Custom of the Manor, may have an Estate of
Inheritance; but a Tenant by the course of the Common Law, not so. Therefore,
if a man seized of Lands (which are not customary) and lets them to another, to
have and to hold to him and to his Heirs, at the will of the Lessor, these
words (to the Heirs of the Lessee) are void: for if Lessee dies, his Estate is
absolutely determined, and if his Heir enter, Lessor shall have a good Action
of Trespass, vi and armis, before any Entry made by him; otherwise of a Tenant
according to the Custom of the Manor.

Fealty.
Tenant at Will, who may be put out at the pleasure of the Lord, shall not do
Fealty; for to what purpose were it, to swear to do his Customs and Services,
when he has no certain Estate? but a Copyhold Tenant shall do Fealty, which
proves he has a fixed Estate, so long as he observes the Customs of the Manor,
Coke Lit. 1.62, 63. And the Copyholder may justify against his Lord, and so
cannot a Tenant at Will; and he shall have the Aid of his Lord in an Action of
Trespass, 1 Leon. p. 4.

If a Tenant at Will be Outlawed, his Estate is determined, but a Copyhold is
not forfeited or determined by Outlawry, Littleton's Rep* 234.

As for Tenants by the Verge, Tenants by the Verge.
they are but Copyholders, and have no other Evidence but by Copy of Court
Roll; but they are so called, because when they Surrender, they deliver a
little Rod into the Stewards Hand, the which they deliver to the Steward, and
he shall deliver the Rod to him that takes the Land in the name of Seisin. It
may be any other thing as well as a Rod, according to the Custom, as a single
Penny, a Glove, etc.

Maxims of Copyhold Estates.
1. When there is no Custom to guide Copyhold Estates, they shall be directed
by the Rules of the Common Law. Vide this more Explained, Maxim 3, 4.

2. Copyholders have no other Evidence concerning their Tenements, but only
the Copies of Court Rolls. This is to be understood of Evidences of Alienation,
for a Copyholder (that comes in by way of Admittance) may have a Release of a
right by Deed, and that is sufficient to extinguish the right of the Copyhold,
which he that makes the Release had, Lit. Sect. 75. Coke Lit. 60.

3. When the Custom has created Estates of Inheritance, and that the Land
shall be descendible, then the Law shall direct the descent, according to the
Maxims and Rules of the Common Law, as incidents to every Estate descendible;
therefore there shall be a possessio fratris to make the whole Blood to Inherit
before a Son by the second Venture; and this shall be though the elder dies before
Admittance; but such customary Inheritances shall not have by the Law any other
collateral Qualities, which concern not Descents of Inheritance, as other
Inheritances at Common Law shall have. Therefore such Copyhold Inheritance
shall not be Assets to charge the Heir; nor shall the Wife be endowed, nor the
Husband Tenant by the Courtesy, without special Custom, 4 Rep. 22. b. Brown's
Case.

4. As well Estates as Descents shall be directed by the Rules of Law, as
necessary Consequents upon the Custom (unless there be a special Custom in the
Manor; as, sibi and suis, sibi and assignatis) may make an Estate of
Inheritance. Therefore a Surrender to the use of A. without any Limitation, is
but an Estate for Life, 4. Rep. 29. Bunting and Lepingwel.

5. Copyhold ought to be dimissa and dimissibilis, as it is in Murrels Case, 4
Rep. vide infra, Tit. Custom.

Yet this Rule is not Infallible. For if a Copyhold Land be in the hand of a
Subject, who is after preferred to Dignity Royal, the Copyhold is extinct; for
it is below the Majesty of a King to perform servile Services: and yet after
his Decease, the next who has right shall be admitted, and the Tenure shall be
revived in him, 2 Siderfin 82.

CAP. III.
Privileges of Copyhold Estates. 1. Privileges of the Lord. 2. Of the
Tenant. 3. Privileges of Infants Copyholders. 4. Of Copy-holds in respect of
the Kings Prerogative and Privilege.

BEfore I come to Treat farther of Copy-holds, I thought it might not be amiss
to set down the Privileges of Copyholders and Lords, and Prerogative of the
King; that so the Student being well settled in these, they need not be
mentioned or explicated hereafter, though they may lie here and there scattered
in the following Cases.

Privileges of the Lord.
The Lord may upon Seizure of a Copyhold maintain an Ejectment, till the Heir
come to be admitted, 1 Keb. 287. Pateson and Danges.

The King shall not have the custody of the Land that the Idiot holds by Copy,
The Lord to have the custody of an Idiot.
for this is no more than an Estate at Will at Common Law; and if the King
should have the custody of the Land, he would much prejudice the Lord. Yet
alienation made of it by the Idiot, after Office found, shall be avoided, Coke
4 Rep. 126. Beverly's Case.

Copyhold Lands granted to three, for the Lives of two; if the Tenants pur
auter vie, dye Living cesty que vie, the Lord shall have it, for there shall no
be Occupancy, 1 Rolls Abridg. 511. Ven and Howel's Case. No Occupancy.


The Lord shall have the custody and not the Prochein Amy.
The Copyholder is surdus and mutus, the Lord shall have the Custody and not
the Prochein Amy, for otherwise he should be prejudiced in his Rents and
Services, Cro. Jac. 105. Evers and Skinner.

The Lord is Chancellor in his own Court, to dispose of the Estate when the
Tenant leaves it uncertain. Vide infra sub Tit. Customs in reference to
Estates, and sparsim per tout.

If a Copyholder surrender to the use of one, and the Lord refuses to admit
him, no Action of the Case lies against him; so if such Copyholder prays the
Lord to hold a Court, and he refuses. Where a Surrender is to be made to a
Tenant of the Manor, if he will not take such Surrender, yet no Action of the
Case lies against him, 1 Rolls Abr. 108.

In what capacity the Lord stands in reference to the Copy-holder's Estate.
He is an Instrument of Conveyance upon Surrenders, and a Conveyer himself upon
voluntary Grants.

He is Chancellor in his own Court, and may proceed by Bill, vide infra.

Of the Privileges of Copyholders.
In this Chapter I shall sum up some general Privileges of Copyholders, which
lie scattered in the several Customs hereafter treated of.

A Copyholder may make a Lease for a year, without License of the Lord, vide
Lease. Lease.


Copyholders of a Manor may have Solam and separalem pasturam, in the Soil of
the Lord, Sola and separalis pastura.
and exclude him, 2 Sanders 326, 327, 328.

If a man be obliged in a Statute Staple, Stat. Staple, Elegit.
his Copyhold Land is not extendible; but aliter upon a Statute of Bankrupts,
vide Tit. Grant. Its not extendible upon Elegit. If a Copyholder Lease for
years by License of the Lord, this is not extendible in the Hands of the
Lessee, Rolls Abr. 888. Picto's Case.

Copyholder of Inheritance may dig for Mines in his Land. So the Parson in his
Glebe, as it seems, Siderfin, p. 152. The Lord of Rutland against Gee, per
Hobart and Warburton.

Copyholder may dig for Marle, without any danger of Forfeiture; Digging for
Marle.
but he ought to lay the said Marle upon the same Copyhold Land, Winch, p. 8.

A Custom is that the Lord of a Manor may dig for Coals and open Mines in the
Land of his Copyholder. Coals.
It was made a doubt in Goodrick and Gascoin's Case, if Lessee of the Manor may
have this liberty, and whether such liberty can pass by Grant of the Manor,
without special words, Latch, p. 189.

A Copyholder may hedge and enclose, but not where it was never enclosed
before, Winch, p. 8.

Note, a difference between Privileges which are annexed to the Seigniory, and
Privileges annexed to the Tenancy. The first the Lord may destroy, but not the
last: Therefore

If Tenant at Will be Outlawed, his Estate is determined; Outlawry.
but a Copyhold is not forfeited or determined by Outlawry, Lit. Rep. 234.
cited to be adjudged in 44 Eliz. Yet vide 1 Leon. p. 99. Where a Copyholder is
Outlawed, the King shall have the Profits of his Copyhold Lands, and the Lord
has not any remedy for the Rent.

If the King grants a Manor in which are Copyholders in Fee-farm, Fee-Farm
Rent.
the Lands or Goods of the Copyholders are not liable to the Fee-farm Rent,
although the Freehold is, for the Copyholders are elder than the Rent, being
by Prescription: So

Rent by Prescription.
If the King had a Rent by Prescription, out of the Manor in which there are
Copyholders, if the King had not used to Levy this upon the Copy-holds, it
seems he cannot charge them, forasmuch as they are in by Prescription also, M.
12 Jac. B. 2 Rolls Abr. 157.

Assets.
Copyhold Inheritance shall not be Assets to charge the Heir, Popham 188.

Copyholder makes a Lease for years by License, and dies, this shall not be
Assets in the Hands of his Executors, Popham 188.

Copyholder shall have Aid of the Lord, where the right of the Seigniory comes
in question upon the Issue taken, Aid.
21 H. 6.37. But where he has Aid of a Bishop, and after the King has the
Temporalties, he shall not have Aid of the King, for so the Plaintiff may be
perpetually delayed, 21 H. 6.37.39.

Privilege of Infants Copyholders; Or Resolutions concerning Infants, in
respect of Fines, Admittances, barring Estates, and being bound by Customs or
not.
Custom of a Manor is, That if a Copyhold descends to any man, that
Proclamation shall be made at three several Courts, that he shall come in to be
admitted, Infant not comprehended within the Custom of coming in after three
Proclamations.
and if he come not in, it shall be a forfeiture to the Lord; yet an Infant
shall not be comprehended within this Custom, for he by intendment of Law is
not at discretion to make his Claim, 8 Rep. 100. Letchford's Case.

It seems to be a Rule in Law, An Infant cannot be protected by the Law by his
nonage in any Case, but where his Right which he had while an Infant, and
descended to him, might have been barred and interrupted by non-claim; so in
case of forfeiture; the reason of the Rule is, because the Law conceives he
will have that knowledge to preserve his right when he is of full Age, Carter's
Rep. 86. in Smith and Painton's Case.

It was holden in Rumny and Eve's Case, Not bound during his Minority to pray
Admittance.
1 Leon. p. 100 Pl. 128. If a Copyholder dies, his Heir within Age, he is not
bound to come into any Court during his nonage, to pray admittance, or to
tender his Fine.

An Infant who surrenders his Copyhold Land, within Age, may enter at his full
Age, Infant Surrenders, he may enter at full Age.
without being put to any Suit for it. A Case cited in Popham 39. in Bullock
and Dibler's Case.

Infant Copyholder in Fee makes a Lease for years, without License, Infant
shall not forfeit by making a Lease without License.

Acceptance at full Age makes it good to Lessee.


rendering Rent at full Age, he accepts the Rent, and after outs the Lessee.
Lessee brings Ejectment, and Judgment for Lessee. Per Cur. this Lease may be
affirmed by acceptance, and such a Forfeiture shall not bind an Infant, 8 Rep.
44. Noy 92.

Of Copy-holds and Copyholders, in respect of the King and his Prerogative.
Per Stat. 2 Ed. 6. Cap. 8. Copyholders shall enjoy their Estates, where the
King is entitled by Office, though they be not found by Inquisition.

The Statute of Chantries, gives no Copyhold Land to the King, 1 Ed. 6.14.

The Estates of the Kings Copyholders, confirmed by Decree in the Exchequer,
or Dutchy-Chamber, shall be good according to the same Decree. Stat. 7 Jac.
Cap. 21.

A Popish Recusant shall forfeit all his Copyhold Land, 35 Eliz. Cap. 2.

Whether the King shall have the Copyhold granted in Trust for an Alien.
It was a Question in Car. 1. between the King and Holland, whether the King
shall have a Copyhold, which is granted to one, in Trust for an Alien. The
better Opinion seems to be, that he shall, Styles Rep. p. 20.37, 75.

Vide this Case Reported in Rolls 1. Abr. 194. Tit. Alien. If an Alien Amy
Purchase Copyhold in Fee, in the Name of J. S. in Trust for himself and his
Heirs, It was a great Question and much Argued, whether the King shall have the
Trust of this Copyhold? but no Opinion given as to this Point; But the Trust
being traversed and found for the King, yet Judgment was given against the
King, because, by the Inquisition by which this Trust and matter was found, J.
S. who was the person trusted, and who had the Estate in Fee in the Law in him,
Where the King has no possion by force of the Inquisition.
was put out of possession of it by the Inquisition, where the Alien had but
the Trust and no possession; and therefore admitting that the Trust should have
been given to the King, yet the King may not have the possession by force of
this, but ought to have sued to have the Trust executed in a Court of Equity.

The King is seized of a Manor in Fee, in which is a Copyhold demisable at
Will, according to the Custom of the Manor. The King demised this Copyhold to
J. G. for Life, King need not recite in his Grant that it is Copyhold.
by Letters Patents; J. G. dies. The great Question was, if it be destroyed, or
the King may grant it again by Copy. Per Cur. 1. The King need not recite in
the Grant that it is Copyhold, 24 H. 8.21. 2. Copyholder for Life dies, the
King may regrant.
That after the Estate for Life determined, the King may grant this House and
Land again by Copy of Court Roll: It is otherwise in the Case of a common
person. The Rule, That a Custom is an entire thing and cannot be apportioned,
shall not bind the King, although it do bind a Common person. The Kings Gifts
shall be taken favorably, and not extended to two intents, where there is no
necessity for it, Kings Grants favorably construed.
as there is not here; and we are not here to intend a collateral intent, and
so the Copyhold is not destroyed; for the Law takes care to preserve the
Inheritance of the King for his Successors, and it may be a benefit to the King
to have it continue Copyhold, viz. to have Common, Styles p. 266. Cremer and
Burnet.

If a Bishop, Tenant in Tail, for Life or Years, lets a Copyhold, yet this
shall not bind the Successor, Issue in Tail, or him in Reversion, to grant this
by Copy again; neither shall it bind an Infant Lord of Manor; and the Estates
and Possessions of the King, are in like manner under the protection of the
Law. And if this Copyhold should be extinguished, Extinguishment.
perhaps a common Appendant or Appurtenant would be lost, 2 Rolls Abr. p. 197.
mesme Case.

If the King grants a Manor, in which are Copyholders in Fee-farm, the Lands
or Goods of the Copyholder are not liable to the Fee-farm Rent, although the
Freehold is, Fee-Farm Rent.
because the Copyholders are elder than the Rent, being by Prescription, 2
Rolls Abridgment, p. 157.

Loss of Issues.
If the Lord of a Manor lose Issues, being summoned upon a Jury, Process shall
issue out of the Exchequer, to levy them upon the Lands of the Copyholders
Lessees for Life or Years; for the loss of Issues lies upon the Land, as an
inherent Servitude by the Law, in whose Hands soever it comes, 1 Rolls Abr. 157.

Surrender to the King, without other matter of Record.
A Surrender of a Copyhold to the King, Lord of a Manor was in Lee and
Boothby's Case, 1 Keb. 720. adjudged good, without other matter of Record.

All the Demesne Lands.
The King grants all his Demesne Lands in W. his Copyhold Lands shall not pass:
Aliter in a common person, 1 Rep. 46. Alton Wood's Case.

CAP. IV.
The Nature of Custom in general. Maxims of Customs. What things are requisite
to make a good Custom. Time out of Memory Explained. What shall be said to be
an Interruption of Custom or not. The reasonableness of Customs, how to be
judged of. Several particular Customs, Ratione Loci. Of Customs, enabling and
disabling. Of Customs and Prescriptions; their difference, and the different
manner of Pleading them. The several sorts of Prescription, and how
Prescription to be made, and when, and when not, and by whom. And when a Custom
shall be said to be pursued or not.

Custom. The Nature of Custom in general.
A Custom which has obtained the force of a Law, is always said to be Jus non
scriptum, for it cannot be made or created, either by Charter or by Parliament,
which are Acts reduced to Writing, and are always matter of Record: But being
only matter of Fact, and consisting in Use and Practice, it can be recorded and
registered no where but in the Memory of the People.

For a Custom takes beginning and grows to perfection in this manner. When a
reasonable Act once done is found to be good, and beneficial to the People, and
agreeable to their nature and disposition, then do they use it and practice it
again and again, and so by often iteration and multiplication of the Act, it
becomes a Custom; and being continued without interruption time out of mind, it
obtains the force of a Law. So that Custom in the intendment of Law, is such
an Usage which has obtained vim Legis, and is revera, a binding Law to such a
particular place, persons and things wherein it is concerned. Davis's Preface
to his Reports.

Custom then may be defined a reasonable Act, iterated, multiplied and
continued by the People, time out of mind.

Custom in some Cases alters the nature of Freehold, 5 Rep. 84. Pennyman's
Case, A fortiori of a Copyhold, Hetly, p. 126, 127. Turner and Hodges.

Consuetudo private communem Legem. Custom is a ground and need not be proved,
for the reason of every Custom cannot be showed, as it was said in Knightly and
Spencer's Case: But though Custom takes away Common Law, yet Common Law
corrects, allows, and disallows both Statute Law and Custom; for if there be
repugnancy in Statute, or unreasonableness in Custom, the Common Law disallows
and rejects it, as appears in Dr. Bonham's Case, 8 Coke 27.

Now Custom being the life and soul of Copyhold Estates, I shall in the next
Chapter largely treat thereof in the full extent of it.

Maxims of Customs.
1. A Custom shall in construction be taken strictly, and shall not be extended
beyond the words of it. One entitled himself to a Copyhold in this manner,
That within the Manor there is such a Custom, that if one takes to Wife any
customary Tenant of the Manor in Fee, and has Issue by her, if he over-live
the said Wife, he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy. The Case was, he married a
Wife, who at the time of the marriage had no Copyhold; but afterward, during
the Coverture, a Copyhold descended to her. It was held in Sir John Savages
Case, cited in Beal and Langly's Case, 2 Leon p. 208. That no Tenancy by the
Courtesy did accrue by the Custom, which did not extend, but where the Wife was
a Copyholder at the Marriage. So a Custom was, If a Copyholder in Fee dies,
having Issue Three Daughters, the eldest shall have all. The Case was, A
Purchaser of a Copyhold dies without Issue, having many Sisters, they shall be
C^parceners, for the Custom extends only to Daughters. So Borough English, The
middle Brother Purchases Lands, and dies sans Issue, the eldest shall have it
and not the youngest, 2 Rolls Rep. 368. So a Custom which goes in bar or
deprivation of an Estate, shall be taken strictly, Carter's Rep. 87, 88. Yelv.
p. 1. Baspool's Case. Forfeiture of a Copyhold for Life, shall not forfeit the
Remainder. Custom was, If any Copyholder in Fee Surrender out of Court, and
the Cesty que use does not come into Court to take his Copyhold, after three
Proclamations, then the Lord shall seize it, as forfeited: And if a Copyholder
in Fee surrender to the use of one for Life, remainder over in Fee, and Tenant
for Life comes not in Court upon the Proclamations, this shall not forfeit the
remainder, The Custom shall be taken strictly, being in destruction of an
Estate, and it shall be intended only of a Tenant in Fee, in possession, and
not in remainder, 1 Rolls Abr. 568. Baspool and Long. And yet it shall not be
taken literally always, as in the common Case. Custom to grant Lands in
Fee-simple, yet they may grant in Tail, for Life or Years; but that stands upon
this Rule, Omne majus includit in se minus.

2. Customs are to construed according to vulgar apprehension, because Customs
grow generally, and are bred and brought up amongst the Lay-gents, therefore
they are called Vulgares Consuetudines, and they shall be interpreted according
to the most effectual operation of the Law, Styles 146.

3. Custom does not trench to things collateral to the Estate; such as Entries
for Conditions. Copyholder by License lets the Land for 60 years rendering
Rent, upon condition of re-entry; Copyholder surrenders to J. S. in Fee, who
demands the Rent, which not being paid, Enters: His entry per Cur. is not good,
for Copyhold Land is not within the Statute of Conditions; nor the Surrender
of such a Copyhold, such an Assignee as the Statute intends, he being in only
by Custom, is not privy to the Lease made by the first Copyholder, nor in by
him, but may plead his Estate immediately under the Lord, Yelv. p. 222. Brasier
and Beal.

4. When a Custom warrants a greater Estate, it warrants a less. The Custom
was, That Copyhold Lands may be granted to any person in Fee-simple; A Grant
to one and the Heirs of his Body is within this Custom: So a Grant for Life or
Years: And a Fee-simple includes all, 4 Rep. 23. The Custom is to grant for
one, two or three Lives; A Grant to one durante viduitate is good, 4 Rep. 29.
Down and Hopkins. Cro. El. p. 323. mesme Case.

5. Custom of a Manor cannot extend out of a Manor; therefore it ought to
appear in Pleading, That the Locus in quo, etc. est infra Manerium, Hobart, p.
286. Roberts and Young.

6. Custom may enlarge a Grant farther than Common Law; as, Sibi and suis. So
to one and his Heirs, by Custom may be restrained to particular Heirs, 2 Keb.
158.174.

7. If a Custom has a reasonable commencement, it may be good. And therefore a
Custom for Copyholders to have, solam and separalem pasturam, may have a
reasonable commencement by voluntary Agreement of the Lord with his
Copyholders, to induce them to hold their customary Estates at Will, and
bestow their pains and labor in improvement, Sanders 2. p. 326, 327. Robins
and Hoskins. Vide Vaughan Rep. North and Coe, good reasons for the contrary
Opinion.

8. What may be claimed by Prescription may be good by Custom, and what may
have commencement by Grant, may be claimed by Prescription, 2 Sanders 326.

9. A Custom never extends to a thing newly created. If there be a Custom
within a Manor, That for every House or Cottage two shillings Fine shall be
paid; now if the Tenant make two Houses of one, he shall pay no Fine, for the
new made House; But alteration of Rooms alters not the case in Prescription.

10. Custom is an entire thing, and cannot be apportioned; yet this Rule shall
not bind-the King. Vide supra.

11. Consuetudo semel reprobata, non potest amplius induci: As Continuance
makes the Custom, so Discontinuance destroys it.

Custom. What things are requisite to make a good Custom.
Four things are required to make a good Custom.

Antiquity. Continuance. Certainty. Reason.
1. Antiquity. Every Custom had a beginning, although the Memory of man does
not extend to it. And this is one of the grand Pillars of Copyhold Estates:
Therefore in pleading, we say such Lands or Tenements are demised and
demisable, A tempore cujus contrarij memoria hominum non existit. And yet this
Rule fails in the Kings Case; vide supra. It was said by Rolls Chief Justice in
Pilkington and Bagshaw's Case, Styles 450. That a Custom cannot be urged for a
thing that had its beginning since the time of Richard 1. if a Record can be
showed to the contrary. But what measure of time shall make a Custom, many
differ: Some judge it from the time of Henry 1. to the Stat. of Merton, Cap. 8.
which appoints the Limitation in a Writ of Right, and others say otherwise.
And by the Statute W. 1. the Limitation was from the time of R. 1. and these
are Limitations as to Writs; but this is since altered by 32 H. 8. What shall
be said time out of memory.
which is reduced to sixty years next before the Test of the Writ. But the
true measure is Littleton's Rule, Where a Custom has been used so long that
man's Memory cannot remember the contrary; that is, when such a thing is
pleaded that no man then living has heard or known any proof to the contrary;
for if there be any sufficient proof of Record or Writing to the contrary,
albeit it exceed the memory of any man living, yet it is within the memory of
man; and therefore, regularly a man cannot prescribe or allege a Custom
against a Statute, for that is the highest Record, but affirmative Acts do not
take away a Custom. If Land has been demised by Copy for fifty years, and yet
some alive remember the same occupied by Indenture, this is not a good Copy,
hold: And if Land has been demised by 40 years by Copy, and none alive can
remember the same to be otherwise demised, this is a good Copy. But sixty, or
eighty, or an hundred years may make a good Limitation, Calthrop's Reading.
Coke Lit. 114, 115.

2. Continuance. Custom ought to have continuance without interruption, time
out of memory; for if it be discontinued time out memory, the Custom is gone.
As if a Copyhold be let by the Lord for life or for years, according to the
course of the Common Law, it shall never be demised as Copyhold, according to
the Custom afterward. Consuetudo semel reprobata non potest amplius induci;
and as Continuance makes the Custom, so discontinuance destroys it. The
Continuance for fifty years is enough to fasten customary Conditions upon the
Land against the Lord: And per Cur. Though the original Commencement and the
customary Interest did commence 10 H. 8. from which time sixty years passed,
yet the seizure for a Forfeiture in the mean time interrupted utterly the
Continuance from the time which might by the Law have perfected the customary
Interest. What shall be said an interruption of a customary Estate, or not.
Within the time of forty seven years, a customary Interest cannot be Attached
upon the Land, 3 Leon. 107. Tavernor and Cromwell.

If the Lord of a Manor is seized of an ancient Copyhold for Forfeiture, or by
Escheat, and let the same at Will, without Copy, for diverse years; this is not
any interruption of the customary nature of the Land, but that he may grant it
again by Copy. Ibid.

Interruption.
If customary Land has been of ancient time grantable in Fee, and now of late
times, for the space of forty years, the Lord has granted the same for Life
only; yet he may, if he please, resort to his ancient Custom, and grant it in
Fee, 1 Leon. p. 56. Kemp and Carter.

Customary Land within a Manor has been grantable in Fee and it Escheats, the
Lord may grant the same to another for Life; for the Custom which enables him
to grant in Fee, shall enable him to grant for Life; and after the death of
Tenant pur vie, the Lord may grant the same again in Fee, for the grant for
Life was not any interruption of the Custom, 1 Leon. 56. id. Case.

3. Certainty. Custom ought to be certain, for incerta pro nullis habentur. 13
Ed. 3. Fitzh. dum fuit infra aetatem, 3. A Writ of Dum fuit infra aetatem was
brought against an Infant, the Tenant pleads a Custom, That when the Infant is
within such an Age as that he may count twelve Pence, or measure an Ell of
Cloth, that then his Feoffment shall be good; this Custom is adjudged void for
the incertainty. Why an uncertain Custom shall be void.
Now the Reasons why an uncertain Custom shall be void, are 1. Because an
uncertain thing may not be continued time out of memory. 2. A man cannot
prescribe in a thing which may not at the beginning be well granted, and an
uncertain thing cannot well commence by Grant. And if Tenants of a Manor
prescribe that they ought not to pay for a Fine to renew their Copyhold
Estates, more than the Rent of two years, but ought to pay the Rent for two
years or less; this is not a good Prescription for the uncertainty, for
sometimes they are to pay two years Rent, and sometimes less, 2 Rolls Abridg.
264, 265. Green and Berry.

4. Reason. Custom must be reasonable, therefore it must not be against common
Right, or purely against the Law of the Land, as is Littleton's Case. The Lord
prescibes, That there has been a Custom within his Manor, that every Tenant,
who marries his Daughter without License of the Lord, shall make Fine, etc.
This Prescription is void, it is against the freedom of a Freeman, who is not
bound thereto by particular Tenure. Alit. if it be upon a special Reservation
of Gift of Lands, or Tenure in Villanage, Lit. Sect. 209. So in Sect. 212. To
prescribe that the Lord of the Manor has used to distrain Cattle Damage
feasant, and to retain the Distress, till Fine were made to him for the
Damages, at his will: This Prescription is void, for its against reason a man
should be Judge in his own Cause. If the Lord will prescribe to have of every
Copyholder belonging to his Manor, for every Court he keeps, a certain Sum
of Money, this is a void Prescription, because it is not according to common
Right, for he ought to do it gratis, for Justice sake. But if the Lord
Prescribe to have a certain Fee of his Tenants, for keeping an extraordinary
Court, which is purchased only for the benefit of some particular Tenants to
take up their Copy-holds, and such like, this is a good Prescription, and
according to common Right, Coke, Cop. 81.

But now to distinguish what Customs are unreasonable and what not, observe
these differences.

Every Custom is not unreasonable which is contrary to a particular Rule or
Maxim of the positive Law. For its a Rule Consuetudo ex certa causa rationabili
private communem Legem. As the Customs of Gavel-kind and Borough English, are
against the Maxim of descent of Inheritance, and the Maxim of Escheat; as in
Kent, the Father to the Bough, and the Son to the Plow. So the Custom that the
Wife shall have the whole for her free Bench, is against the Maxim of Common
Law for Dower. These Customs might have a reasonable beginning, where they are
not prejudicial to the Commonwealth, nor to the present Interest of any
particular person; yet a Custom may be prejudicial to the Interest of a
particular person, and reasonable also, where it is for the benefit of the
Commonwealth in general, as to make Bulwarks upon another man's Land in time of
War, etc. But

Custom, which is contrary to the public Good, or injurious to a Multitude,
and beneficial only to some particular Person; such Custom is repugnant to the
Law of Reason, and void ab initio, and no Prescription can make it good;
therefore the Custom of a Manor was, That no Commoner should put in his Beasts
till the Lord had put in his, and it was adjudged void, 2 H. 4.24. For if the
Lord would never put in his Beast, the Commoners should lose their Common. As
to Customs being reasonable or unreasonable, vide several more instances in the
Argument of Rolls and Mason's Case, 2 Brownl. 86, 88. Customs may be
reasonable, ratione loci.

Custom is, Several particular Customs in several places.
where Copyholder had Issue only Daughters, the eldest shall have this for
Life, and after her death it shall go to the next Heir Male of the Father, to
him and his Heirs, and if no such Heir, then it shall Escheat to the Lord.
Copyholder dies, Borderers on Scotland.
his Wife has it durante viduitate, leaving two Daughters, and during this
time the eldest dies; The Question was, if the second Daughter or the Lord by
Escheat had the better Title. Per Cur. 1. The Custom is good, and the Estate
which the Daughter had is an excrescent Estate, and not properly a descent. 2.
She that was eldest at the time of the death of the Mother shall have it, and
not only Primogenita filia, Siderfin, p. 267. Newton and Shafto. This Custom
was good ratione loci, for such Manor is bordering on Scotland, where were
frequent Invasions.

And Feme sole Merchant is good, ratione loci, Feme Sole Merchant.
London.

The Custom of the Isle of Man, That one shall be hanged for stealing a Capon,
Isle Man.
but not for stealing an Ox, is good.

In the Manor of Bemister in Dorset, Bemister.
is this Custom, That a Copyholder ought to nominate his Successor, otherwise
the Land shall Escheat, and it has been allowed to be a good Custom.

So the Manor of Taunton, Taunton Dean.
That the Wife of the Copyholder shall have the Inheritance of her Husband,
Siderfin, p. 267. id. Case.

The Custom of Millan in Norfolk is, Millan in Norfolk.
If any Copyholder will sell his Land, and agree upon the Price, at the next
Court the next of his Blood, and if he refuse, any other of his Blood may have
the Land. And such like Custom there is at Ham in Middlesex, Ham in Middlesex.
The next Clivener, which is he that dwells next to him, shall have the
refusal, giving as much as another will; and he which inhabits on the East, the
first, and then the South, etc. 2 Brownl. 177.

As for the other Rules of the validities of Customs, as that they ought to be
on good Considerations, and beneficial to the Prescriber, as Calthrop, and
Cokes Copyholder treat of, they may be referred to the forgoing Rules.

Now you see there are three supporters of a Copyhold Custom.

1. Time, and that must be out of the memory of Man; so that Copyhold cannot
begin at this day.

2. That the Tenements be parcel of the Manor, or within the Manor.

3. That it has been demised and demisible by Copy of Court Roll; Demised and
demisible, how understood.
for it need not be demised time out of mind by Copy of Court Roll; but if it
be demisible it is sufficient: For Example, If a Copyhold Tenement Escheat to
the Lord, and the Lord keeps it in his hands many years, during this time it is
not demised but demisible, for the Lord has power to demise it again, Coke
Lit. 58. b.

Customs of Manors are Disabling, Enabling.
Disabling is, That the Tenant by a particular Custom shall not be allowed to
do that which he might by the general Custom of Manors. As a man may sell Land
to whom he will by the general Custom of Manors, yet in some Manors by special
Custom he must make an offer to the next of Blood: Vide supra, Customs, ratione
loci.

Enabling is, where the Tenant by a particular Custom shall be enabled to do
that from which he is restrained by the general Custom of Manors. By the
general Custom of Manors the granting of Copyhold Land for more than one year
without License, is a Forfeiture; yet in some Manors they may do it, and it
shall not be a Forfeiture, Coke Copyhold. 79. Sect. 33.

You will find Prescription mentioned in the ensuing Cases; therefore it will
be of good use a little to open the nature of Custom and Prescription, and to
show how and wherein they agree, and wherein they differ, and also the
difference as to Pleadings.

Custom, Prescription, and Usage, are of great Affinity, yet they differ thus:

Custom is where by continuance of time a Right is obtained concerning diverse
persons in Common.

Prescription is where by continuance of time one particular person obtains
Right against another, either a Person or Body Politic.

Usage is by continuance of time, and an efficient cause of both.

Limitation is where a Right may be obtained by reason of Non-claim, by the
space of a certain number of years, Calthrops Reading.

1. Prescription, is made in the Person, and so the Pleading is, That he and
all his Ancestors, etc. Or he and all those whose Estate he has time out of
mind, used to have Common of Pasture in such a place, etc. being the Land of
some other, etc. as pertaining to the said Manor. Custom is, a Copyholder of
the Manor of D. does plead, That within the same Manor there is and has been
such a Custom timeout of mind used, that all the Copyholders of the said
Manor, have and used to have Common, etc. Coke Lit. 113. b.

So Custom lies upon the Land. As, infra manerium talis habetur consuetudo,
etc. 8 Rep. Swain's Case. And such Custom binds the Land, as Gavel-kind,
Borough English, etc.

Prescription ought to have a Lawful beginning, not so of Custom.
So is Coke 6 Rep. Gateward's Case. Prescription is alleged in the Person, and
a Custom ought always to be alleged upon the Land; for every Prescription by
common intendment ought to have a lawful beginning; but it is otherwise of a
Custom; for this ought to be reasonable, and Ex certa rationabili causa
usitata, but it need not to have an intendment of a lawful commencement; as,
Custom to have Land devisable, or of the nature of Gavel-kind, etc. but by
common intendment they may not have a lawful commencement by Grant or
Agreement, but by Act of Parliament, Gatward's Case, 6 Rep.

So 4 Rep. 32. in Foyston's Case. Prescription is personal, and is always made
in the name of a person certain, and his Ancestors, or of those whose Estate he
has: But Custom is local, and alleged in no person; but that within a Manor,
etc. is such a Custom; and this shall serve for those which cannot Prescribe in
their own name, nor in the name of a person certain. In Gateward's Case, 6 Rep.
Defendant justifies in Trespass by Custom, That all the Inhabitants in such an
Ancient Message, within the Vill of D. ratione commorationis, have used to
have common of Pasture in loco in quo, etc. this is ill pleaded, for in this
word, Inhabitants are included Tenants in Fee, for Life, Years, by Elegit, at
Will, and also he that has no Interest, but Habitation only. Now Tenant in Fee
ought to Prescribe in his own Name, Tenant in Fee in whose name to Prescribe,
in whose name others.
and the others which have Interest in the name of the Lord, and he that has
no Interest cannot have Common. But there is no one that has an Interest, be
he Tenant at Will, but by good Pleading he may enjoy it. Now Copyholder in Fee
or for Life, may by Custom of the Manor have Common in the Demesns of the Lord
of the Manor, but then he ought to allege the Custom of the Manor to be Quod
quilibet tenens customar cujuslibet anti qui Mesuagii Custumarii, etc. How a
Copyholder shall plead.
and not Quod quilibet Inhabitans infra aliquod antiquum Mesuag. Custumar. etc.
And a Prescription for the Inhabitants to be discharged of Tithes by a Modus,
or Freemen of London to be discharged of Wharfage, etc. must be pleaded by way
of Custom, When a thing must be pleaded by way of Custom, and when by way of
Prescription.
and not by way of Prescription, because the Inhabitants or Freemen cannot
Prescribe in their persons, and therefore are allowed to lay a Custom for their
Discharge, and the nature of the things is not changed, but remains still a
Prescription in his kind, though it be allowed to be pleaded by way of Custom,
for necessity sake. And in Gateward's Case, a thing lying properly in
Prescription, as Common did in that Case, being an Interest which must inhere
in some body, Common for Copyholders in the Lords Soil must be pleaded by a
Custom in the Soil of another by Prescription.
cannot be pleaded by way of Custom, as there they would have made it for
Inhabitants, that are not permanent to Prescribe; but yet Common for
Copyholders in the Lords Soil, is allowed to be pleaded by Custom, for
necessities sake; whereas in the Soil of another, it must be laid by
Prescription in the Lord, and yet the nature of both is a Prescription; but a
matter of discharge may be laid by way of Custom, for that is not an Interest
but an Exemption; thus that great man, my Lord Hobart, p. 86. in Day and Savage
his Case.

My Lord Coke in the Argument of Rowls and Mason's Case, makes four differences
between Prescription and Custom.

1. In the beginning, pugnant ex diametro, for nothing may be good by
Prescription, but that which may have beginning by Grant.

2. Prescription is incident to the Person, and Custom to some Place, and holds
place in many Cases which cannot be by Grant. As Lands may be devised by
Custom: So Gavel-kind and Borough English, etc. which cannot have their
beginning by Grant. But Prescription and Custom are Brothers, and ought to have
the same Age, and Reason ought to be the Father, and Congruence the Mother, and
Use the Nurse, and Time out of Memory to Fortify them both.

3. They vary in Quality; for Prescription is for one man only, and Custom for
many, if all but one be not dead.

4. They vary in Extent and Latitude; for Prescription extends to Fee-simple
only, but Custom extends to all Interests and Estates whatsoever, as appears by
the Pleading. Prescription that a Copyholder of Inheritance may sell the
Trees, is not good, but such a Custom is good. Tenant in Tail for Life or Years
cannot Prescribe in a Que Estate, nor against the Lord in his Demesns, Who may
prescribe in a Que Estate or not.
but they ought to allege the Custom, and against a Stranger they ought to
Prescribe in the name of the Lord, 2 Brownl. 198.

In a Manor the Custom was, That every Copyholder for Life, had Estovers for
Fuel, etc. in the customary Lands: Now if the Lord aliens the Woods, etc. in
Fee, and after Grant Copyhold Lands and Houses for Lives, the Grantees shall
have Common of Estovers, Pasture, etc. notwithstanding the Severance; but after
such Severance of the Waste or Woods, Common is due to the Copyholder,
notwithstanding Severance by the Lord, and how to be pleaded.
the Copyholder, when he would entitle himself to Common or Estovers, the
Copyholder shall not plead generally, Quod infra Manerium praed. talis
habetur, etc. consuetudo, etc. for after the Severance, this Waste or Wood is
not within the Manor, but absolutely divided from it; but he shall plead, That
until such a time ( viz.) before the Severance Talis habebatur and a toto
tempore, etc. consuetudo, etc. and then show the Severance, as in Murrel's
Case, 4 Rep. So he must do where the Lord aliens the Freehold and Inheritance
of the Copyholder, Swain's Case, 8 Rep.

2. It is said a Prescription goes to one man, and a Custom to many, 1 Brownl.
Rep. 133. in Rowls and Mason; and yet in Foystons Case, 4 Rep. the Custom for
Common may be applied to one single Copyholder.

3. The Allegation of a Custom shall serve when it is referred to a thing
insensible, as that such Lands are devisable, etc. Foystons Case.

There is nothing more common than for the Lord to Prescribe for his Tenants,
by Copy in another man's Land, whereas if it be laid in his own, it shall ever
be laid by Custom, Hobart, p. 286. Roberts and Young.

There is a difference between a Prescription for Freehold Land and for
Copyhold Land; for Custom which concerns Freehold, Difference between a
Prescription for Freehold Land and for Copyhold Land.
ought to be throughout the County, and cannot be in a particular place, 45
Ass. but Precription concerning Copyhold Land, is good in one particular, Cro.
El. p. 353. Taverner and Cromwell.

4. A Prescription must be in a thing done, and not in posse, therefore a
Custom that Quaelibet femina vira cooperta poterit devisare, her Copyhold
Inheritance to her Husband, is not good, 3 Leon. 83. Skipwith's Case.

To Customs and Prescriptions, these two things are inseparable Incidents, viz.
Possession or Usage, Interruption in the possession in the right.
and Time. Possession must be Longa, continua and pacifica. Now observe, a
Title once gained by Custom or Prescription cannot be lost by interruption of
the Possession for ten or twenty years; but by interruption in the Right. As if
a man has had a Rent or Common by Prescription, unity of Possession of as high
and perdurable Estate, is an interruption in the Right, Co. Lit. 114. b. And if
a man has Common by Prescription and takes a Lease of the Land for twenty
years, the Common is suspended for that time, and after the years ended, he may
claim the Common again by Prescription.

1. Personal Prescription, and in that Inhabitants may Prescribe, as for a Way,
or matter of Ease or Discharge, Gateward's Case.

2. Real Prescription, and this is inherent to the Estate, and this is where a
man Prescribes, That he and all those whose Estate he has, etc.

Prescription as to the Estate of the Land, and not to the Land it self.
3. Local Prescription, not as to Land, but to the Estate, and therefore the
Custom was, That the Copyholder should have Common in the Waste of the Lord;
the Lord by Deed confirms to a Copyholder, to have to him and his Heirs, with
its Appurtenances. The Question was, whether his Copyhold now being destroyed,
he shall have Common by the word Appurtenances? Per Cur. the Common is extinct,
and not revived, for this is a local Prescription, not to the Land, but only to
the Estate, and this proves well the words of the Prescription, for the
Copyholder ought to Prescribe, That every customary Tenant within the Manor,
etc. So he has his Common in respect that he is customary Tenant, and this is
in respect of the Estate which he has by the Custom, and not in respect of the
Land, 2 Brownl. 210. Marsham and Hunter.

Copyholder for Life cannot Prescribe against his Lord, but Copyholder in Fee
may, Copyholder for Life may not Prescribe against his Lord.

Copyholder in Fee may, and how.


for he has the Copyhold in nature of Land of Inheritance, Styles 233. Cage
and Dod.

Per Cur. a Copyholder may Prescribe by an usitatum est against his Lord, but
against a Stranger he must Prescibe in the name of the Lord, More, n. 647. 6.
Rep. 60.

Copyholder of Inheritance may Prescribe in the name of the Lord, to be
discharged of Tithes, Noy, p. 132.

Copyholders may not Prescribe against their own Lord; omnino, nor against any
other, but only in the name of their Lord, and the manner of laying it is by a
Custom, when they claim any thing or profit out of the Lords Soil, vide Sanders
324, 5, 6. Hoskin and Roberts.

What shall be said a pursuance of a Custom or not.
If the Custom be, That the Lord may Demises Copyhold in Fee, he may Demise
them for Life, Years, or in Tail; for these Estates are included in a Fee,
which is greater, 1 Roll. Abr. Staunton and Barns. Cok. Lit. 52. Vide supra
Maxims and Customs, 4 Rep. 23. The Case of the Manor of Allesly in Warwickshire.

( Solummodo) how expounded
If the Custom be, That the Lord may solummodo Demise his Copyhold Land in Fee,
yet the Lord may Demise this for Life or Years, or in Tail, though there was
never any such Estate made before; for the word solummodo is not to be taken so
strictly to restrain the Lord of this liberty which the Law gives upon the
general Custom; but that he had used solummodo to grant in Fee, which does not
take away the liberty which the Law gives, 1 Rolls. Abr. 511. mesme Case.

Custom is to Grant for one, two, or three Lives, a Grant to one, durante
viduitate, is within the Custom; for the Estate granted was less than the
Custom warranted. The Custom was, That the Wife shall have the Land for term of
her Life. The Evidence was, That the Custom was, that she shall have it,
durante viduitate. Per Cur. This Evidence does not maintain the Custom, 4 Rep.
30. Down and Hopkin's Case.

A Grant to three for the Lives of two is within the Custom of three Lives.
If the Custom be, That Copyholds may be granted for three Lives, a Copy may be
granted to three for the Lives of two, within this Custom. For it is no
inconvenience to the Lord although it be pur auter vie, for there shall be no
occupancy of it, but the Lord shall have it, if the Tenants pur auter vie dye,
living cesty que vies, and this is not a greater Estate than three Lives, but
lesser, Rolls Abr. 511. Ven and Howel.

But to one for Life Remainder to another for Life, etc. is not good.
A Copyholder where the Custom was to Demise for three Lives, demised to one
for Life, the remainder to such an one as he should marry, and the first Son of
his Body; resolved, that both the remainders were void, but the Estate for his
own Life is good, More, n. 922. Webster and Allen.

Custom is, when any Tenant sells his Tenement, three Proclamations shall be
made the next Court day, and if any of the Blood of the Vendor, will give as
much money as the Vendor will, he shall have it. A Tenant in consideration of
one hundred pounds in Money, and that the Vendee, being his Physician, had cured
him, sold it to him; and the next of Blood at next Court offers a hundred
pound, yet he shall not have it, for it was given partly for the other
consideration, and the Custom shall be for money only, 1 Rolls Abr. 568. So if
he had sold it in consideration of a Lease for years, and 1 d. ibid.

CAP. V.
Of particular Customs, either enabling or disabling; in respect of the Lord,
of the Tenant, and of the Estate, Limited or Leased; and in respect of Discents.

WHAT particular Customs have been adjudged good, or what not; either enabling
or disabling Customs, Vide supra of Customs, ratione loci.

And they may be considered in three respects.

Of the Lord. Of the Tenant. Of the Estate.
1. In respect of the Lord and his Privilege.
The Wife of the Lord shall not be endowed against a Copyholder, for the title
of Dower is not consummate before the death of her Husband; Dower.
so as the title of the Copyholder is paramount and completed before the
title of Dower, Leon. 152.

Waste.
The succeeding Lord shall not take advantage of Waste done in the time of the
preceding Lord, 2 Siderfin, p. 9. Chamberlain and Drake; Vide infra.

Common.
A Custom, That none shall put his Cattle into the Common before the Lord puts
in his, is not good; Vide supra, the Rules of Customs, 1 Bulstr. Earl of
Northumberland verse. Wheeler, 21 Ed. 4. 28 b.

Fine.
A Custom that a Copyholder shall upon the change of every Lord pay a Fine, is
void; Vide the Rules of Customs. For the Lord may change his Manor every day.
Had it been that after the death of the Lord he should pay a Fine, it had been
good. This was resolved by the Judges in Serjeants-Inn, in a Case of one
Armstrong, referred out of Chancery.

Lord cannot grant a Copyhold in Reversion.
The Lord of a Manor cannot grant a Copyhold in Reversion, without a special
Custom, March. Rep. 8. Whether the Lord of a Manor might grant Copies in the
remainder only, with the assent of the Tenants, was a question if it was a good
Custom, but not resolved, 3 Leon. 226.

The Copyholder is surdus and mutus, the Lord shall have the custody, for
otherwise he shall be prejudiced in his Rents and Services, and not the
Prochein Amy, Cro. Jac. 105. Eavers and Skinner.

To seize the Estate of a Convict Felon.
Custom was, if a Copyholder be convict of Felony, the Lord shall seize the
Copyhold Estate, it is a good Custom, 1 Leon. p. 1. Bornford and Packington, 2
Brownl. 217. Hitchins and Cooper.

Custom was, that if the Tenant did not repair, and it was presented by the
Homage, To repair or be presented.
The Tenant shall be amerced, and the Lord shall distrain the Beasts of the
Tenant and under-Tenant; a good Custom, March p. 161. Thorn and Tyler. For the
Custom which gives the distress, knits it to the Land, and so it is not merely
personal; otherwise the Lord by such a devise as this, viz. by making the Lease
for one year by the Tenant, should be defeated of his Services; and though a
Custom cannot extend to a Stranger, Custom cannot extend to a Stranger.
Under-Tenant not a mere Stranger.
yet the under-Tenant is not a mere Stranger, but as a customary Tenant, for he
shall have the Privileges of a customary Tenant, and qui sentit commodum, etc.
And transit terra cum onere. He that shall have the Land ought to undergo the
charge: By all the Judges in that Case.

Customs as to Surrenders, vide Surrenders.

Customs as to Forfeitures, vide sub titulo Forfeitures.

Customs as to Admittances, Fines, vide Fines, Admittances.

Custom, The Lord not compellable to make a Grant, but he is to make an
Admittance.
That after the death of Tenant for Life, of a Copyhold, the Lord is
compellable to make the Estate to the eldest Son for Life, and if he has no
Son, to the Daughter, and so imperpetuum; this is not a good Custom, but
against Law, because the Lord by this Custom is compellable to make a Grant.
Aliter if it be to make an Admittance, More, n. 1088. The Lord Grey's Case.

Customs in respect of the Tenants.
As to Forfeitures, vide sub titulo Forfeitures.

As to Surrenders, vide Surrenders.

As to Fines, vide Fines, etc. and Sparsim per tout*

That the Lord shall have the Estate of a Felon.
The Custom was, if any Copyholder of a Manor commit any Felony, that he shall
forfeit to the Lord his Copyhold Estate, and that the Lord upon presentment of
this by the Homage, may enter and seize the same; its a good Custom: But the
Case went farther H. a Copyholder had killed one P. and the same was presented
by the Homage, If he be acquitted.
and they find that H. was Indicted for the same, and Acquitted; after this
acquittal the Lord did enter and seize the Estate as forfeited. But as to that
point, the Court gave not any Opinion. 2 Brownl. Rep. Gittins and Cooper.

Bylaws.
Custom was, That the Steward of a Manor might make Laws and Ordinances for the
well ordering of the Common; and to assess a Penalty on those who broke those
Bylaws, also to prescrribe to Distrain for the Penalty. Per Cur. The Custom is
reasonable, and the difference is, where the Law or Ordinance takes away the
whole profit of the Commoners, and where it abridgeth it only. And the
Commoners are bound to take notice of these Ordinances, March. p. 28. James and
Titney.

Custom to make Bylaws. And this Law was made, That no Tenant of the said
Manor, should put into such a Common, any Steer being a year old or more, upon
pain of 6 d. for every such Offense, and that it should be lawful to distrein
the same. Its avoided by Law, for its against common Right, where a man has
Common for all his Cattle commonable, to restrain him to one kind of Cattle;
and had it been that none should put in his Cattle before such a day, that had
been good, for this does not take away, but order the Inheritance, 1 Leon. 190.
Erbery and Latton.

Custom was, A Copyholder for Life may nominate his Successor to have it for
Life, To compound for the Fine.
and the person nominated to compound with the Lord for the Fine, and if he
could not compound, then he should give such a Fine as the Homage should
Assess, and should be admitted and hold for his Life, its a good Custom, Cro.
Jac. 368. Ford's Case. 1 Rolls Rep. 125.195. More, n. 1071. mesme Case. 2
Brownl. 85. Rolls and Mason. Noy Rep. 2. Yestmester Custom. In this he has a
greater Estate than a Sole Tenant for Life.

In Replevin and Avowry for not doing Suit, To tender 8 d. for doing suit in a
Court Baron.
the Plaintiff sets forth a Custom, That if any Tenant live at a distance, and
comes at Michaelmas, and pays eight pence to the Lord, and a penny to the
Steward, he shall be excused for not attending; and then he said he tendered
eight pence, and the Lord refused: Tender and refusal all one with payment.
if he avers, That there are sufficient Copyholders that live near the Manor,
its good, and tender and refusal by Hales, is all one with payment. Modern Rep.
p. 77. Legingham and Porphiry. Its a good Custom, this not being a customary
Court, but a Court Baron, where the free Suitors are Judges, Siderfin p. 361.
mesme Case. 2 Keb. 344, 380, 851, mesme Case.

The Custom was, Lord not compellable to make a Surrender.
That after the death of Tenant for Life of a Copyhold, the Lord is
compellable to make an Estate to the eldest Son, for Life, and if he has no
Son, to a Daughter, and so in perpetuum. The Justices were of Opinion, that
this was against Law, More, n. 1088. Lord Grey's Case, Vide prius.

Of Customs in respect of the Estate.
Here I shall recite some few Cases of Customs about Leasing and Limitation of
Estates, when good or not.

As to the Custom concerning Leases, Vide Leases and Licenses.

As to the Custom of Intailing Copy-holds, and barring them, Vide sub titulo,
Entails.

As to the Ceremony of Presentment, vide Presentment.

Pled. quod si terre sunt concesse habend. sibi and suis, grantee habet in
feodo, Ra. Entries 627* 116, 155.

Pled. quod si terrae sunt concessae al. 2 pro vitis, ille qui primo nominatus
in copia habeat terras solus pro vita, 3 Br. 475. Hern 73, 83, 124, 654, 712.

Simile de terris concessis al 2. pro vitis in reversione, Co. Entr. 184.

Paying Fine and renewing Leases.
The Custom was, That the Land was demiseable for twenty one years, paying the
treble value of the Rent; and if he dyed within the Term that the Term should
be to his Heir, paying a Fine certain of one years Rent, and if he Assigned the
Term, the Assignee should have it, paying for a Fine one years value of the
Rent* and he who had it might by the Custom renew it for twenty one years,
paying three years value and this was admitted to be a good Custom by the
Court, Croke Jac. p. 671. Page's Case.

To assign one to take the Profits of a Copyholder Infant.
The Custom was, The Lord of a Manor might assign one to take the Profits of a
Copyhold descended to an Infant, during his Nonage, to the use of the
Assignee, without rendering an account; it was held to be a good Custom, as a
Rent granted to one and his Heirs to cease during the Nonage of every Heir;
and admitting the Custom were void, yet an Action of Account lies not, Prochein
Amy.
for the Defendant has not entered and taken the Profits as Prochein Amy, in
which case although he was not Prochien Amy, he is chargable as Prochein Amy,
according to his Claim, but here he claims by the Custom and Grant of the
Lord, and not in the Right of the Heir, 1 Leon. p. 266. Case 357. Anonymus.

The Custom was, The Lord to dispose the Estate when the Tenant leaves it in
incertainty.
That if any one surrender to the use of another, without expressing any
Estate, that the Lord may grant it in Fee to him to whose use the surrender was
made, its a good Custom, for he is a Chancellor in his own Court to dispose
thereof, when the Tenant leaves it uncertain, Crok. El. 392. Brown and Foster.

Custom in the Manor of Sedgly in Com. Staff. was, Lease to be void if
Copyholder dye within the year.
If a Copyholder make a Lease without License of the Lord for one year, and
dies within the term, it shall be void against the Heir. Per Cur. its a good
Custom, for then the Lord may know his Tenant, and the Tenant may have the
Estate and pay his Fine. Its void by the act of God; but had the Custom been,
That if a Copyholder within the year surrender his Copyhold, that the Lease
shall be void, this is an unreasonable Custom, Lit. Rep. 233. Hutton 126, 127.
Turner and Hodges.

Custom, To Lease without License.
That five Copyholders without License (they being seized in Fee) may make any
Lease for one year or many years, and when they dye the term shall cease, and
the Heir may enter; its a good Custom, Hutton, p. 101.

Custom, To hold after the term ended.
That a Lessee for years may hold the Land for half an year after the term
ended; its no good Custom, More, n. 27.

Not to alien without License.
Custom, That a Copyholder shall not alien without License, is good, for it may
have a lawful commencement by agreement.

To Lease. without License.
A Custom, That on payment of a years Rent, the Lord should License to let for
99 years, and if he refused, the Tenant might do it without License, adjudged a
good and reasonable Custom, Grove and Bridges, cited in Porphyry and
Legingham's Case, 2 Keb. 344.

For Lessee pur vie, to let for another man's. Life.
A Custom, That Lessee for Life may let for another man's Life, is no good
Custom; but the Lord may by Custom Lease the same for Life and forty years
after, More, n. 27.

To commit a forfeiture, and so to bar the Intayl.
A Custom for a Copyholder, tenant in tail, to make a Lease for years without
License, to commit a Forfeiture, on purpose to bar the Intayl, and to transfer
the Lands over to any other person, is a good Custom, and is but in the nature
of a Surrender or Common Recovery, 2 Saunders 422. Grantham and Coples. And the
Lord in such cases may not admit any other but him to whom it is appointed by
the Tenant making such Forfeiture, and when such Cesty que use is admitted, he
shall avoid all mean acts or dispositions made by the Lord, as well as upon a
Surrender, and this though he was not admitted in the life of the Tenant so
forfeiting, Vide infra Tit. Intayling Copyholders.

In respect of Discents.
The Manor of Wadhurst in Com. Sussex, consisted of two sorts of Copyhold,
viz. Sookland and Bondland, and by several Customs in several Manors; as if a
man be first admitted to Sookland, and afterward to Bondland, and dies seized
of both, his Heir shall inherit both; but if he be first admitted to Bondland,
and afterward to Sookland, and of them dye seized, his youngest Son shall
Inherit, 1 Leon. p. 36. Kemp and Carter.

A. Seized of Copyhold in Fee, Copyhold, Borough English.
in the nature of Burrough-English, surrenders this into the Hands of the Lord
ea intention, That he shall re-grant this to him and his Wife, and to the
Heirs of himself, and the Lord re-grants this accordingly. And there is a
Custom, That if any person seized in Fee of such customary Lands, and dies so
seized, that the Land shall descend filio juniori, etc. And A. having Issue
three Sons, and ten years after his death, the youngest Son dies in the Life of
his Mother, without Issue. Per Jones and Crook, The elder Brother shall have
this as Heir to the youngest, and not the middle Brother, Custom not to extend
to Collateral Descents.
for the Custom may not extend to a collateral Descent, viz. to direct the
Descent amongst the Brothers, for this is out of the Custom; and the Custom was
once satisfied by Descent to the youngest, and there is an end of the Custom,
and where Custom fails, Common Law shall guide the Descent. Where Custom fails,
Common Law guides the Descent.
And by this special Custom; he which is youngest Son at the death of the
Father shall have the Land, and not he which comes to be youngest afterward;
but Bramston and Berkly contra, 1 Rolls Abr. 624. Reeve and Malster. Vide
Maxims of Copy-holds, supra.

CAP. VI.
Customs of a Manor as to Wives and Widows of Copyholders. What are good and
what not. As also of Tenancy per le Courtesy. And where the Severance of the
customary Tenants from the Manor shall not prejudice.

CUstom of Manors, That Husbands shall be Tenant per le Courtesy, and the
Pleading, More 171.

Custom of a Manor is, That the Wife shall have it during her Life; and on
Evidence it appears the Custom was, she should have it durante viduitate; this
Evidence does not maintain the Custom, because it is a less Estate, Cok. 4.
Rep. 30.

That the Wife of a Copyholder for Life, may hold it durante viduitate, was
agreed to be a good Custom; and so the Custom of Taunton-Dean, That if a
Copyholder in Fee marries a Wife, If the Wife survives she shall have the Fee.
if the Wife survives she shall have the Fee, and sic e converso, agreed to be
good, Noy Rep. p. 2.

There can be no Dower nor Tenancy by the Courtesy of the Copyhold, unless by
special Custom, 1 Anderson 292.

Lease made before admittance.
A man may be Tenant by the Courtesy by Custom. Though the Husband enter into
the Land in the right of the Wife, before admittance, and the Wife dies before
admittance, his Lease shall be good, 1 Anderson 192. Ewer and Astwick.

It was admitted by the Court to be a good Custom, That an Executor or
Administrator shall have an year in the Land of the Copyholder, Custom, that
the Executor shall have an year in the Copyhold.
against the Wife that claims her Free-Bench, Noy, p. 29. Remington and Cole.

If a Woman be Dowable of Copyhold by Custom, if the Husband after the
marriage makes a Lease for years, good by the Custom, Tenant in Dower shall not
avoid a Lease made by the Husband.
the Tenant in Dower shall not avoid it, but it shall precede the Dower, More,
n. 147. Holder and Fairly. For he comes under the Custom as well as the Feme.

The Custom of a Manor was, Quod quilibet tenens per Copiam poterit dimittere
terras suas pur vie, or in Fee, or in Tail, Custom, that the Wife Feme covert
may Devise.
and that a Woman cooperta viro poterit devisare her Copyhold Land to her
Husband or to any other, by the assent of her Husband. Per Cur. The Custom is
not unreasonable: But because it was poterit devisare which is a word of
justification, and it should have been usi sunt devisare, by way of excuse; it
was adjudged against the Plaintiff, More, n. 268. And so was one Welsh's Case,
in C. B. 41 El. 3 Leon. p. 81. Skipwith's Case.

The Custom was, That Widows should enjoy during their Widow-hood. Where the
severance of the customary Tenants from the Manor shall not prejudice the Widow
in her customary Estate.
The Lord Grants a customary Tenement of the Manor unto J. B. for Life, by Copy
and after conveys the whole Manor to W. who conveyed the Inheritance and
Freehold of B's Tenement for money paid by B. to J. S. and others, and their
Heirs, during the Life of J. B. the remainder to Ellen, then Wife of J. B. the
remainder to J. B. in Fee. J. B. Grants his remainder in Fee to his Son and his
Heirs. The Son having Issue a Son, dyed, and then Ellen dyed. J. B. marries
Frances, and dies seized of his customary Estate. Frances shall enter and enjoy
her Widows Estate; for it is clear, That the customary Estate of J. B. remained
as it was during his Life, not extinct nor altered by the purchase of the
Fee-simple, which during his Life was in others, not in him; and then it
follows by consequence, That all customary Incidents to such a customary Estate
remain, whereof this is one, which by Custom and Law grows of it self out of
that Estate, as a Descent should have done if J. B. had been a Copyholder in
Fee, and the Freehold had been granted to another in Fee, Hobart, p. 181.
Howard and Bartlet. It is not in the power of the Lord to destroy Widows
Estates. By the severance Incidents to the Tenancy are not destroyed, but
Incidents to the Seigniory are.

The Law vests the Estate in a Woman that is to hold durante viduitate before
admittance.
The Custom is, That a Woman shall hold durante viduitate, she shall make a
Lease before admittance, for in that case there is no Fine due to the Lord, and
the Law vests the Estate in her, Noy 29. Remington and Cole. Hobart 181. Vide
Admittance.

The Lord Enfeoffs the Copyholder; this destroys Free-Bench.
A Custom of a Manor was found to be, That if a Copyholder in Fee dies seized,
his Wife should hold it during her Life, as Free-Bench; the Lord Enfeoffs the
Copyholder, who dyed seized. Per Cur. she shall not hold her Free-Bench;
aliter, if the Lord had enfeoffed a Stranger of that Land, yet the Land
remained Copyhold, and the Custom is not taken away, Crok. Jac. 126. Lashmer
and Avery.

Damages recovered in Dower.
A Woman recovered Dower in the Lords Court, and 40 l. because her Husband dyed
seized, and she brought Debt for the Damages in the King's Bench. Per Cur. The
Action lies not, because the Court Baron could not hold Plea, nor award
Execution of 40 l. Damages, although the Damages were there well assessed,
More, n. 559.

If a Feme Copyholder holds the Land durante viduitate, and then takes
Husband, the Lord shall have the Corn, Oland's Case. Vide Emblements.

The Widows customary Estate is due to her, Divorce.
though there was a Divorce a mensa and thoro, Hobart, p. 181. Howard and
Bartlet.

Tenant of a Copyhold for Life, Whether the Widow attaint for Felony shall
have her Estate of viduity.
in which the Custom was, That the Wife should have her Widows Estate, and the
Husband was attaint of Felony and Executed. The Question was, whether she
should have it? Winch, not without a special Custom. Winch Rep. 27. Allen and
Branch.

That the Wife shall not have her Dower, The Wife to claim her Dower within a
year and day.
except she claim it within a year and a day; its said to be a good Custom, 3
Leon. p. 226.

Pleadings.
Custom. Quod Uxores habeant Tenementa custumaria durante viduitate sua, Dyer
192. 3 Br. 403, 476. Hern 73.

Quod Uxores Tenen. custumar. in feodo habeant pro vita Tenementa unde viri
obierunt seisita. Et si viri dimiser. tunc revers. and reddit, Cok. Ent. 123.

CAP. VII.
Custom as to Timber, Woods and Underwoods; and what Prescription by a
Copyholder to cut Trees shall be good or not.

TEnant by Copy of Court Roll cannot by the Common Law take Trees for
House-bote, Hedge-bote and Cart-bote, etc. as Tenant for Life or Years may do,
who have an Estate certain; but a Copyholder by special Custom may do it, Cro.
El. p. 5. Lord Mountague against Sheppard.

Where a Custom was alleged to be, That every Copy holder may cut down Trees
at his pleasure, this Custom is against Common Law Winch, p. 1.

If a Custom be, That a Copyholder may not cut down Trees, it is good or not
good with this difference: If he be a Copy-holde of Inheritance, such a Custom
is good; but if he be a Copyholder for Life, its no^ good, 1 Bulstr. 150. Earl
of Northumberlan^ against Wheeler. The Tenant prescribes to c^^ and dispose all
the Trees upon his Tenancy* its an ill Prescription. Aliter of a Copy-holde of
Inheritance, Noy, p. 2. So it is adjudged it 1 Rolls Abr. 650. Glascock and
Peche. Its a good Custom, Copyholder in Fee may cut Trees and sell them by
Custom.
That Copyholder in Fee may cut Trees and sell them at his pleasure; aliter
(...) a Copyholder for Life, Rook and Higgins's Case Ibid.

Queen Eliz. Seized of the Manor of H. i^ Fee, demiseth the same to J. W.
except Omnibus boscis subboscis arboribus and maremiis, etc* Habend. for twenty
one years; He 35 Eliz. Assigns his Interest to J. P. and others. Queen Eliz.
dies, King James grants to F. S. and W. reversionem praed. ac premissa sic ut
prefertur except. to them and their Heirs, the Lessees Attorn; afterward F.
and W. by Deed release to S. and his Heirs. And at a Court held by the Lessees
their Steward grants by Copy to W. B. Def. certain of these Copyhold Lands, on
which Oaks and Ashes grew, for term of Life, secundum consuetudinem Manerij;
and that there is such a Custom, That every Copyholder Tenant for Life, used
to take all Trees growing upon his Copyhold, to be employed for Fuel, Bounds,
Fences. Grantee by voluntary Grant shall have Trees (though they are severed by
an Exception.)
The doubt was, in as much as the said Lessees hold the Court by virtue of the
said Lease of the Manor (out of which Lease the said Trees were excepted) if
the Tenant may shroud them, etc. Per Cur. 1. Notwithstanding the Severance by
the Exception, and notwithstanding the Tenant comes in by Voluntary Grant for
Life; yet such Grantee shall have the Estovers: for the Estate of the Copyhold
is not derived out of the Lord, And so though the Waste be aliened in Fee by
the Lord, and so severed.
(who is but an Instrument) and though the Grant be new, yet the Title to the
Copyhold is ancient. 2. When the Copyholders for Life have used to have
Common, or Waste, or Estovers, or any other Profit apprender; and afterward
the Lord alien, the Waste, Woods, etc. in Fee, and after grant certain
Copyhold Houses and Lands, for Lives, such Grantees shall have Estovers, etc.
notwithstanding the Severance, for the Title of Copyhold is paramount the
Severance. 8 Rep. Swain's Case. 63, 64. 2 Brownl. 231. mesme Case. Vide infra.

What Is included by Timber Trees.
If a Copyholder by the Custom cut down Timber Trees for reparations, he shall
have the Trees, Lop, Top and Bark; and though he cannot repair with the Tops
and Bark, yet he may sell them toward defraying the charge in repairing, 3
Bulstr. 281. Sandford and Stephens.

Where Copyholder by Custom may not Fell and Sell Trees, but take the Shrouds
of the Trees for Fuel; if the Copyholder by force of the Custom shrouds the
Trees, and the Lord takes the Body of the Trees, Copyholder may bring Action
of the Case against him, Goswell's Case, cited in Ford and Hoskins Case. Rolls
Rep. 196.

To cut Timber for repairs to what that extends.
The Custom is, for Copyholders of Inheritance to cut Timber for Repairs; he
nor his Lessee cannot employ Trees felled with the Wind to any such use, in
regard that hereby his special property cease; much less can Lessee or
Copyholder for Life, by any such Custom take Trees, 1 Keb. 690.

Custom for the Copyholder to cut down all the Trees.
Copyholder for Life, by the Custom has power to name a Successor; such
Copyholder may cut and sell all the Trees growing upon the Copyhold. A bare
Tenant for Life cannot be warranted by Custom to do such an act, Powel and
Peacock's Case; yet here he had a greater Estate than for Life, for he has
power to make another Estate for Life. 2 Brownl. p. 192. Rolls and Mason. In
this Case which was well argued by the Judges in 2 Brownl. 195. There were two
Customs. 1. That a Copyholder for Life may name his Successor. 2. That such
Copyholder may cut down all the Trees growing upon the Copyhold Lands. The
first Custom was adjudged good and reasonable, and the second was adjudged void.

Copyholder may justify cutting Boughs for House-bote, Hedge-bote, Cart-bote,
etc. To sell Trees.
2 Brownl. p. 329. Heydon and Smith.

But Tenant by Copy of Court Roll cannot make Waste, nor cut Trees to sell, but
for his benefit in repairing his House.

If a Copyholder for Life cuts down Timber Trees, the Lord may take them. If
under Lessee for years of a Copyholder cuts down Timber, it shall not be a
forfeiture of the Copyhold Estate, Styles p. 233.

A Copyholder may prescribe to have the Toppings of Trees for Fire-bote and
Hedge-bote, Uncertain Pleading.
but the Prescription was to cut ramos aliquarum arborum, which is uncertain;
if omnium arborum, it had been well, Noy, p. 14. Cross and Abbot.

Presidents of Customs as to cutting Wood and Trees.
Quod tenentes custumarii mes. habuer. communiam estoveriorum in solo alterius,
solvendum annuatim, 2d. Dyer 363.

Quod tenentes custumar. in feodo succidant arbores ad libitum, Cok. Entr. 284.
Ub. 130. Simile, 1. Br. 252.

Quod tenentes custumarii amputent pollingers, 13 Rep. 67.

Quod tenen. custumar. repararent sepes int. terras custumar. and boscum per
lignum capiend. in bosco, 1 Leon. 313.

Quod tenentes custumarii usi fuer. amputare arbores pro sepiment. and focali,
and succidere arbores pro reparatione domorum per assigna', Hern 226.

CAP. VIII.
Customs as to Commons, and where Severance shall not prejudice. And Pleadings
in such case.

THE Custom is that Copyholders for Life have used to have Common in Waste, or
Estovers in Wood, or any other profit appendant in parcel of the Manor; after
the Lord aliens the Waste, Woods, etc. in Fee, and after grants certain
Copyhold Lands, and Houses for Lives; such Grantees shall have Estovers,
Common, etc. notwithstanding the Severance; Severance by the Lord shall not
prejudice the Common of Estovers.
for the title of Copyhold is pararamount the Severance, 8 Rep. 63, 64.
Swain's Case, 2 Brownl. 231. mesme: But after such Severance the Copyholder
when he would entitle himself to Common or Estovers; he shall not plead
generally, Quod infra manerium tali^ habetur, Pleading.
etc. consuetudo; for after the Severance the Waste or the Woods are not within
the Manor, but absolutely divided from it; but he shall plead, That until such
a time ( viz.) before the severance, talis habetur and a toto tempore, etc.
consuetudo, etc. and then show the Severance, mesme Case.

Where Copyhold is extinct the Common is lost, though the word cum pertin. be
in the Grant.
Common which was first gained by Custom, and annexed to the customary Estate,
is lost when the Copyhold is extinct and infranchised; for Common is not in
its own nature incident to a Copyhold Estate, but a collateral interest gained
by usage; therefore, Copyholder of a Message and two Acres of Land for Life,
had Common in the Lords Waste; the Lord grants and confirms the said Copyhold
Message and Lands, cum pertinentiis, to him and his Heirs. The Question was,
whether he should have Common still. Per tot. Cur. he should not. Custom has
annexed the Common to his customary Estate, which being determined and
destroyed by his own act in making it a Freehold, the Common is also destroyed,
and cannot continue without special words; and the general words, cum
pertinentiis will not help, Yelv. p. 190. Cro. Jac. 253. Marsham and Hunter's
Case. Noy 136. mesme Case. This is a local Prescription, not to the Land but to
the Estate, and this proves well the words of the Prescription; for the
Copyholder ought to Prescribe, That every customary Tenant within the Manor,
etc. so he has his Common in respect that he is a customary Tenant; and this
is in respect of the Estate, which he has by the Custom and not in respect of
the Land. So was the Case of Forth and Ward, where a Copy holder had used to
take Estovers, to repair his Hedges, and the Lord granted to him the Freehold
of the Copyhold, by the words of Grant unto him all the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments thereunto appertaining, and thereto used and occupied. It was
resolved, he should not have Common in the Land of the Lord, 2 Brownl. 209.
Marsham and Hunter, More, n. 866. Forth and Ward; the words cum pertinent, do
not create a Common.

A Copyholder claims Common in another man's Land, and the Lord Enfeoffs the
Copyholder of his Copyhold Land, he has now lost his Common: But if a
Copyholder has Common in the Lords Wastes, and the Lord Enfeoffs him of the
Copyhold, with all his Commons, the Common is not gone, 1 Brownl. 173. Lee and
Edwards. And all Pastures and Common whatsoever, to the said Message or
Tenement belonging, or used or demised with the same, and it his intent that a
like Common shall be granted, 2 Anderson 168. Wolredg's Case.

Abbot of F. was was seized of a Manor, and there was a Prescription for Common
in the Waste of the Manor, as belonging to every Ancient Tenement. King H. 8.
granted the Manor to Sir J. G. which came to Sir T. G. who was Plaintiff in
Trespass: The Defendant justifies by an usitatum fuit, That it had been there
used time out mind, that every Tenant for years of an Ancient Tenement and
Close within the said Manor used to have Common of Turbary on the Waste of the
said Manor, and that the Tenement and Close he now has, is an Ancient
Tenement, and was granted to him with all Common appurtenant to the said
Message and Close, accepted or reputed as part, parcel or member of the same.
And the Question upon a special Verdict was, when the Lord of a Manor is seized
of a Waste, and a Tenant of an ancient Tenement prescribes to have Common in
the Waste of the Lord; afterward the Tenement is severed from the Manor, and
granted for a Term to the Defendant, with all Common appurtenant to the said
Message and Close, whether this Common that was before belonging to this
Ancient Tenement shall pass to the Grantee? Per Cur. This Prescription as it is
here laid with an usitatum fuit, Pleading by an usitatum fuit annexed to the
Estate of a Termor is not good.
is not good. It was agreed, That if a Copyholder does purchase the
Inheritance of his Copyhold, and afterward grants this with all Commons
belonging to the same; The Common that was before used with the Copyhold,
shall pass to the Grantee, but the Pleading here is not good. The beginning of
this Common was by Grant, and by permission of the Lord, and this for the
advancement of his Tenant, and not by Prescription, and no remedy he has for
this but only in Equity, Per Williams a Termor may prescribe, but not in his
own name, but in the name of his Lord, That he has had for himself and his
Farmers, etc Had it been laid here, with all Commons, Profits, used, occupied
and enjoyed with the Tenement, by the Farmers, this with an averment had been
good, but not as it is here; the Grant is here with the usitatum fuit; now here
the usitatum est is annexed to the Estate of the Termor, which is not good, 1
Bulstr. 17, 18. 7 Jac. Grimes and Peacock, 2 Brownl. 222. mesme Case. Lessee
for years cannot allege an Usage; for every usitatum ought to go in one self
same current, not interrupted, as in the Case of a Copyhold; but it might pass
by apt words.

It was pleaded, That all the Inhabitants in such an ancient Message ratione
commorantiae, Pleading Common ratione commorantie.
have used to have Common of Pasture in loco in quo, etc. it is ill; for in this
word ( Inhabitants) is included he which has no Interest but Habitation only,
and he that has no Interest cannot have Common, 6 Rep. Gateward's Case: My
Lord Hobart's Reason is good. Common is an Interest which must inhere in
somebody, and cannot be pleaded by way of Custom for the Inhabitants that are
not permanent to prescribe.

Tenants in Fee must prescribe for Common, etc. in their own name, and others
that have Interest, as for Life, Years, by Elegit, at Will, etc. in the name of
the Lord, Gateward's Case, 6 Rep.

It was a Question in Roberts and Hoskin's Case, Modern Rep. 74. and 2 Keb.
757. Sanders p. 324. Sola and separalis pastura, excluding the Lord is a good
Custom.
Vaughan 251. North and Coe. Whether a Custom for the customary Tenants to have
solam and separalem pasturam, excluding the Lord, were a good Custom. Per Cur.
it is, notwithstanding this Prescription for the sole Pasture, yet the Soil is
the Lords, and he has Mines, Trees, etc. And my Lord Coke is express in the
point; a man cannot Prescribe for sole Common, but for sole Pasture he may. As
for the manner of pleading it, Vide the Books cited.

Customs as to devising by last Will and Testament, Vide infra Surrender to the
use of (...) man's last Will.

CAP. IX.
Of custumary Incidents, or collateral Qualities. Of Copyhold Estates, and how
to (...) governed. With the Illustration of seven particular Cases.

YOU may observe what has been before treated, about the nature of Copyhold
Estates, that (amongst the rest of the Cons^derations in that Chapter) where
the Copyhold Estate is inheritable, and the Land discendible, That in such
Case the Law shall direc^ the descent, according to the Rules and Ma^ims of the
Common Law, as incidents to ever^ Estate descendible, as it was in the Case of
Uses When they had gained the reputation of Inheritances descendible, the
Common Law directed the descent of them, and that there should be a possessio
fratris of them, as well as of other Inheritances. So it is in Copyhold
Inheritances, possessio fratris facit sororem esse haeredem, Vide prius, sub
titulo Maxims.

But now such customary Inheritances shall not have by the Law any other
collateral Qualities, which do not concern descents of Inheritance, which other
Inheritances at the Common Law have, unless it be by Custom; for though they
are Estates of Inheritance according to the Custom, yet they are not Estates of
Inheritance simpliciter, that is, to have all collateral Qualities, as Estates
in Fee-simple have, but only such which Custom has settled and allowed, 4 Rep.
22. Brown's Case. And accordingly my Lord Hobart in Cox and Darsen's Case, p.
215. etc. says, The collateral Incidents of Estates, as Dower, Tenancy by the
Courtesy, Wardship, etc. are not without special Custom.

And therefore Copyhold Inheritance shall not be Assets to charge the Heir in
an Action of Debt, upon Bond made by his Father, Copyhold Lands, not Assets in
the Heir.
though he has therein bound his Heirs; neither shall the Wife of such customary
Estate be endowed, nor the Husband be Tenant by the Courtesy, neither shall the
descent of any such Estate toll the Entry of him that had customary Right, etc.
But to explain this, in these beforementioned Qualities, and others, I shall
Illustrate it by several Cases and Resolutions. Dower.


The Wife shall have Dower of a Copyhold by special Custom, otherwise not; and
when she is to be endowed of a Copyhold by the Custom, then she shall have all
the incidents to Dower; as to recover Damages for the Profits from the death of
her Husband, by the Statute of Merton, C. 1. De viduis, 4 Rep. 30. Shaw and
Tompson.

Tenant by the Courtesy, and that without admittance of the Wife.
The Custom of a Manor was, That if any man had a Wife, who was a Copyholder in
Fee of the Manor, and had Issue by her, that he should be Tenant by the
Courtesy of the Land. A. a Copyholder was seized, and had Issue a Daughter,
who was married to J. S. who had Issue. A. dyed, his Wife entered; the Wife dyed
before admittance. The Question was, if by the Entry of the Husband, without
admittance of the Wife, he should be Tenant by the Courtesy. Per Cur. he shall;
the delay of the admittance of the Wife, shall not prejudice the Husband being
a third person, More, n. 425. Ever and Aston; but if a Woman Copyholder in Fee
takes Husband, who had Issue, and the Wife dies, there the Husband shall not be
Tenant by the Courtesy without special Custom, 4 Rep. 22. Ryers Case.

Descent tolls not an Entry. Discontinuance.
The Descent of a Copyhold does not toll an Entry, 4 Rep. 22, 23. Bullock and
Dibly, and 3 Rep. 9. You may see there where the Entry shall be congeable by
the Issue, after a Surrender or Lease by License of the Lord, made by the
Ancestor, and shall not be a Discontinuance.

The Lord seized a Copyhold without cause, and grants it to another, in Fee,
Grantee dies seized, and his Heir is admitted. The first Copyholder dies, his
Heir enters, and Surrenders to the use of a Stranger. Per Cur. 1. Descent of a
Copyhold shall not take away the Entry of another Copyholder who has right.
2. The Entry of the Heir without admission is lawful, and being in, his
Surrender is good, Cro. Jac. 36. Joyner and Lambert.

If one seized of Copyhold Land in the Right of his Wife, Surrender this to
the use of another in Fee, who is admitted accordingly; the Husband dies, this
is no discontinuance to the Wife, nor her Heirs, but the Wife may enter, and
not be put to her cui in vita, nor her Heir to her sur cui in vita.

If Copyholder for Life Surrender to the use of another in Fee, this is no
Forfeiture, Surrender by Copyholder for Life to one in Fee, is no forfeiture.
for this passes by Surrender to the Lord, and not by Livery. And Copyhold
Estates shall not have such qualities as Estates at Common Law have, without
special Custom, 4 Rep. 4. Clun and Pearse; and therefore where by Custom of the
Manor, But recovery by Pleint in a real Action shall be a discontinuance.
Pleints have been made in the Court of the Manor, in the nature of real
Actions, That if a Recovery be in a Pleint in the nature of a real Action,
against a Tenant Copyholder in Tail, its adjudged that this shall be a
discontinuance, and shall take away the Entry of the Heir in Tail; for these
Pleints, in the nature of real Actions, are warranted by the Custom; this is an
incident which the Law annexeth to the said Custom, and such recovery shall be
a discontinuance, 4 Rep. 23. Deal and Rigden.

Having finished the Learning of Customs, in order to the understanding of
Copyhold Estates; it will be convenient to say something of the customary
Tenant, and of the Court, and the Steward, which shall be attempted briefly in
the next Chapter.

CAP. X.
The several sorts of Coph-holders, and who shall be said to be customary
Tenants. Of Copyhold, Burrough-English. Of the Court. Two sorts of Courts
Baron. Of the Copyholders Court. Who may keep Courts, and to what purposes,
and where* Of the Steward, his Office and power of Deputation; what he may do
ex officio, or not.

WE read of three kinds of Copyholders in our Book.

I. Terra Nativa: These were called Bond-Lands also, because they held in
Villenage.

II. Custumary. And this was held by Free-Tenants.

III. Mensales. As also Dominica, because by this the Table of the Lord is
maintained.

Some Copyhold Land is called Poadland, and some Molland, a molli redditu,
where some small Rent was reserved.

There were two other manner of Copy-holds.

Old Aster and new Aster.

Aster signifies a Chimney; those Copyhold Lands which had had usually for a
long time an House on them, they called Old Aster Lands, but those which of
late had an House built on them, they called New Asters. And in old Records,
the Bastard Eigne did plead, That he was Filius Askarius, as much as to say,
Born in the House. 2 Rolls Rep. 235. M. 20 Jac. B. R. Smith and Reynard.

Some Copyhold Land is in the nature of Burrough-English, Cro. Jac. 56.
Curtis's Case. Copyhold Burrough-English.
And so shall descend to the youngest Son. Some Copyhold is of the nature of
Burrough-English, as well for the Brother as the Son. Cro. Jac. 101. Whitton
and Williams. Between a Copyhold in Burrough-English, and a Freehold in
Burrough-English, there is not any difference as to descents, Cro. Car. 411.

Baron and Feme, Copy holders for Life of Copyhold, of the nature of
Burrough-English, Reversion to the Husband in Fee; he had Issue three Sons
William, George and Charles. The Father dyed seized of this Reversion, which
descended to Charles. Charles dies without Issue, the Wife dies: Question was,
whether William, Brother and Heir of Charles, or George should have it? Berkly
and Bramston were for George, because there being a Reversion expectant upon
Estate for Life, George shall take his Title from his Father, and take by
descent from him who had seisin of the Freehold, and not make mention of him
who had the Reversion expectant upon an Estate for Life. In all Writs where a
man conveys by descent, there shall not be mention of any but those who had
seisin.
And in all Actions and Writs where a man conveys by descent, there shall not
be mention of any, but of those who took the Estate and had seisin, and not
from others who never had seisin, the Law esteeming them as if there had been
never any such persons; and by consequence he may claim here as youngest Son,
by the custom as Heir in Burrough-English, as if Charles had never been,
because he has it in course of descent; and this is true at Common Law; but
Jones and Croke held, that William had the better Title, for Charles being
youngest Son at the time of the death of his Father, that makes him Heir in
Burrough-English, by the Custom; and when it rests in the youngest Son, as Heir
by the Custom, the Inheritance is fixed in him, and he only who is in esse at
the time of his Fathers death, shall have as by Custom; this seems to be the
better Opinion, Crok. Car. 410. Reeve and Malster.

Who may be said to be customary Tenants.
A Wife that has her Widows Estate, according to the Custom of the Manor, is a
good customary Tenant.

So Tenant per the Courtesy, per the Custom.

In Gloucestershire there is in a Manor a Custom, That Executors shall have the
Profits for a year: In some sense they are good customary Tenants.

Under-Tenant in what respect.
Custom was, That for Waste to be amerced, and to distrain for such amerciament,
the Beast of the under-Tenant as well as the Tenant is liable. The under-Tenant
is a customary Tenant to this purpose, and no Stranger: Transit terra cum
onere, he enjoys the Privilege of a customary Tenant, and he shall undergo the
Charges, March Rep. 161. Thorn and Tyler.

Note.
There is difference between customary Lands, and Copyhold Lands; Freehold as
well as Copy may be customary Lands; as ancient Demesne may pass by Surrender in
some Manors, and by Copy: and ancient Demesne may pass by Feoffment, as
Surrender, Vide Peryman's Case. Rep.

Court. The Nature of a Court Baron, and who may keep Courts or not.
A Manor cannot be without a Court Baron, Vide supra, it is inseperably
incident to a Manor, without any Grant from the King to keep the same, and this
is not drawn from the Crown, but is to be held de necessitate, 1 Bulstr. 6. The
King and Stafferton.

The Court Baron must be holden within the Manor, Where to be held.
for if it be holden without the Manor, it is void; unless a Lord being seized
of two or three Manors, has usually, time out of mind, kept at one of his
Manors Courts for for all the said Manors; then by Custom such Courts are
sufficient in Law, albeit they are not holden within the several Manors, Co.
Lit. 58. a.

There may be a customary Manor held by Copy, and such a customary Lord may
keep Courts and grant Copies, 11 Rep. Nevil's Case, Cro. Jac. 260. contra.

Now there are two sorts of Court Baron, Two sorts of Court Baron.
one at Common Law, incident to every Manor, and is of Freeholders, and the
Freeholders are Judges. There is also a customary Court, consisting of
customary Tenants, for without them it cannot be, and this Court may be holden
without any Free Tenants, or other Suitors, except Copyholders, and of this
Court the Lord or his Steward is Judge, Co. Lit. 58. And when the Court Baron
is of this double nature, the Court Rolls contain matters appertaining to both.

Honor, what?
An Honor consists of many Manors, yet all the Courts for the Manors are
distinguished, and have several Copyholders, and though there is for all the
Manors but one Court, yet are they quasi several and distinct Courts; One Court
kept for many Manors.
and so it was usually in the time of the Abbots, they kept but one Court for
many Manors, Cro. Car. 361. Seagood and Hone.

When the Lord of a Manor having many ancient Copy-holds in a Vill, grants the
Inheritance of all his Copy-holds to another, Customary Court, how made and may
be held.
the Grantee may hold Court for the customary Tenants, and accept of
Surrenders, and make Admittances and Grants; for although this is not a Manor
in Law, because there want Freeholders, yet there may be holden a Court for
Copyholders, and the Lord or Steward is Judge. And as the other being a Court
Baron may be called the Freeholders Court; this may be called the Copyholders
Court, so if all the Freehold do Escheat, or if the Lord release the Tenure and
Services of all his Free Tenants, yet the Lord may hold a customary Court for
his Copyhold Tenants So if the Lord demise all his Lands granted by Copy to
another, for a thousand years, such Lessee may hold Court for the Copyholders,
4 Rep. 26 Melwich's Case, and Sir Christopher Hatton's Case, cited in Neal and
Jackson's Case. 27. These number of Copy-holds may support a Custom, but a
single Copyhold cannot hold a Court.

Tenant at Will of a Copyhold Manor, may grant Copyhold Estates, but cannot
keep Courts.

Guardian in Socage keeps Courts in his own name, and grants Copies, its good,
and shall bind the Heir. Vide Tit. Grants, Cro. Jac. 55, 98. Shopland and Rider.

The Lord himself may Grant or make Admittance out of the Manor, at what place
he pleases, but so cannot the Steward, 4 Rep. 26. Melwich's Case. 27 Clifton
and Mollineux; Court may be held out of the Manor by Custom.
but by Custom the Court may be held out of the Manor, and Grants and
Admittances there made, be good; as diverse Abbots, Priors, etc. have kept one
Court for many Manors.

Steward.
Every Steward of Courts, is either by Deed or without Deed; for a man may be
retained a Steward to keep his Court Baron and Leet, without Deed, and that
retainer shall continue till he be discharged, Co. Lit. 61. b. 4 Rep. 30. And
such Steward may take Surrender of customary Tenants out of the Court, 4 Rep.
30. Holcroft's Case.

In all real Actions which concern Lands, the Suitors are the Judges; but in
personal Actions under the Sum of forty shillings, the Steward is the Judge.
Steward without Deed may take Surrenders out of Court, but the Custom must
warrant it.

Note, Difference between a Steward of a Manor, and the Steward of a Court.
A difference between Steward of a Manor and the Steward of Courts; Steward of
a Manor may take Surrenders in any place, 1 Leon. p. 227. Case 307. Blagrave
and Wood.

Steward appoints his Deputy to keep a Court ad tradendum Copyhold Land to W.
for Life, Deputy.
the Deputy commands H. his Servant to keep Court and grant the said Land (and
the Custom found did not extend farther than the Deputy.) though a Deputy
cannot transfer his Authority over, being an office of Trust; yet Per Cur. to
take a Surrender and grant Land by Copy, Act done by the Servant of a Deputy.
is not any judicial Act, and the admitting of a Copyholder is not any
judicial Act, for there need not be any Suitors there who are Judges, and such
a Court may be holden out of the Precincts of the Manor: Per Cur. the Grant is
good, What Court may be held out of the Manor.
especially if the Lord of the Manor agree to it afterward, 1 Leon. 288. Lord
Dacres's Case.

One is made Steward ad exequendum per se vel sufficien' deputatum suum. J. S.
makes A. his Deputy, hac vice to take a Surrender, and ad ulterius faciend,
etc. its a good deputation, and though the authority was to take the Surrender
absolute, and he takes a Surrender upon a Condition, yet its good, by reason of
these words, Et ad ulterius faciend. Cro. Eliz. p. 48. Burdets's Case.

The Kings Copyholder is attainted of Felony, whereby his Copyhold Escheats;
the Steward may grant this over ex officio, without any especial Grant, yet its
his duty before he does it, to inform the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer and
Barons, 4 Rep. 30. Harris and Jay.

Surrender by a Deputy Steward, not according to his Warrant.
Stewardship was granted to A. to execute the Office per se vel sufficien'
Deputat. suum. A. made a Deputation to M. ad capiend. unam sursum redditionem
of one J. W. and J. his Wife, and to examine J. ea intention, that the said J.
W. and J. might take back an Estate for their Lives, the remainder over to J.
B. in Fee. M. took two several Surrenders from the Husband and Wife, the
remainder to J. B. in Fee, upon condition to pay a certain Sum of money, etc.
Per Cur. The proceedings are well warranted by the Deputation aforesaid, 1
Leon. p. 289. Burgess and Foster. I can conceive this to be the same Case as
the former, and one will well help to explain the other.

If the Surrender and Re-grant is entered in the Roll of the Court, dated to be
hold^^ the second day of May, and the Deputation bears date the third day of
June after. Per. Cur. This misentry of the date of the Court shall not
prejudice the Party, for this Entry is not matter of Record, Vide ibid.

The Kings Auditor and Surveyor for the County of N. appointed a Steward for
one of the Manors, illa vice; The Kings Auditor and Surveyor cannot appoint a
Steward, hac vice.
He kept Court and granted Copyhold, etc. their appointment is not good; they
have no authority to appoint Stewards, the one being to take Accounts, the
other to survey Land, and the Grant is void. Things of necessity done by one
who is but in a reputed Authority is good, if they come in by presentment from
the Jury, or of necessity are good; as the admittance of an Heir upon a
presentment, or admittance by a Surrender to an Use. But acts voluntary, Things
of necessity by a reputed Steward, good, not acts voluntary.
as Grant of a Copyhold, is not good. If the Steward diminish the ancient
Rents and Services, its a void Copy. If a Lord command a Steward that he shall
not grant such Land by Copy, Lord countermands a Steward.
if he grant it, it is void, Cro. El. 699. Harris and Jay. 4 Rep. 38. mesme
Case. They ought to have Letters Patents of the Office of Steward. Infant not
to be Steward.


Infant is not capable of the Stewardship of a Manor, March p. 41.

Copyholder moved the Court, That the Steward might be ordered to bring in the
Court Rolls to enable him to defend his Title, but the Court denied it, Styles
128.

Baron and Feme Copyholder in right of his Wife, surrender out of Court into
the Hands of the Steward, and she was examined by him, and it was not proved
that he was Steward by Patent, Though it is not proved he is Steward by Patent,
etc. yet Surrender out of Court into his Hands is good.
nor any special Custom to warrant it; yet Per Cur. it was good, Cro. Jac. p.
526. Smithson and Cage.

Declaration.
Pro Senescallo Cur. Maner' impedit de Officio unde ei conces. pro vita, Rast.
Ent. 5.9 Co. 42. 1 Br. 192. Hern 232.

CAP. XI.
What things way be granted by Copy. Of Grants by the Lord, legitimus Dominus
pro tempore. Disseisor. Infant. And in respect of the Lords person or Estate,
what shall be good or not. Of Grants by the King, Lord. Who shall be said a
Lord sufficient to grant Copies. What amounts to a Grant, at what place to be
granted. Of Grants by the Copyholder to the Lord.

A Manor may be granted by Copy, C^. Lit. 58. b. i. e. a customary Manor; and
so a Manor may be parcel of another Manor.

Generally all Lands and Tenements with in the Manor, and whatsoever concerns
Lands and Tenements may be granted by Copy; as a Fair appendant to a Manor may
be granted by Copy, Co. Lit. 58 b.

Underwoods without the Soil may be granted by Copy to one and his Heirs, and
so may the Herbage or Vesture of Land.

The Lord granted to one and his Heirs, subboscum in M. Wood, annuatim
succidend. by four or five Acres at the least, and then made a Lease of the
Manor: The Lessee cut Trees. Copyholder brought Trespass. Lessee justifies
with averment, That he had left sufficient for the Copyholder to cut down by
four or five Acres yearly. 1. Per Cur. Order of direction, not of instruction.
Underwood may be granted by Copy, if the Custom permit it. 2. That the whole
Wood passed, and the words annuatm succidend. is an Order only appointed for
the cutting it, and not to restrain the Grant, More n. 480. Tailor and Hoe, and
Cro. El. 413.

The Market of Crokeham in Sommersetshire is always demised by Copy, 4 H. 6.21.
cited in Hoe and Taylor's Case, More, n. 480. and Cro. Eliz. 413. Hoe and
Tailor.

The grant of Waste by Copy is void, unless so granted time out of mind; also
were it good, it would not bind the Successor, in the Case of a Bishop, 3 Keb.
p. 124. Bishop of London and Row.

Tonsura Prati, is grantable by Copy. So Herbagia, 1 Rolls Abr. 498.

Of Grants by the Lord, or voluntary Grants. Copyholder.


Copy-holds come to the Lord by Escheats, Note.
or Forfeiture, or Purchase: What comes by Escheat or Forfeiture, he may grant
again.

H. 8. seized of a Manor in which are Copyholds, Grants Copyhold for Life
generally: It was a Quaere, in March Rep. 206. Fulham's Case, and not resolved
whether this be a good Grant or not; and Per Cur. The Grant is not void; it
never recites in any Grant of the King what is Copyhold. But the great
Question was, whether the Copyhold was destroyed or not? It was not there
resolved, but seems so. But Downcliff and Minor's Case is more full to the
purpose, 1 Rolls Abr. 498. If the King be seized of a Manor, whereof Blackacre
is parcel and demisable by Copy in Fee, Grant by the King good, tho not recited
to be Copyhold.
and this comes to the King by Escheat or Surrender; and after the King lets
Blackacre to J. S. for Life, not taking conusance, that this was demisable by
Copy; this is a good Grant, though the King recites not, that this was
demisable by Copy; and by consequence this will destroy the power to grant this
by Copy at any time after, M. 15 Car. 2.

Voluntary Grants by the Lord may be considered in respect of his Person.
Estate.


Disability o^ person no hinderance to the Lord to grant.
As for his Person, notwithstanding his disability, yet his Grants of Copyhold
shall be good and valid in the Law; as suppose he be an Infant, Non compos
mentis, Lunatic, Outlawed, Excommunicate, yet he is capable to make a
voluntary Grant by Copy. So a Feme Lady of a Manor takes Husband, and they two
join in a voluntary Grant by Copy, this shall for ever bind the Wife and her
Heirs, and the reason is, the Custom of the Manor being the main Foundation on
which is built the whole Fabric of the Copyhold Estate, what the Custom does
confirm to the Copyholder, the Law will ever allow and support it,
notwithstanding any such Imperfections in the Grantors person, Co. Lit. f. 58.
b. 8 Rep. 63. a. b. Swain's Case. Noy, p. 21. Grant by an Infant is good, as
well as presentation to a Benefice.

If the Lord release to a Copyholder in Fee, Habendum to him in Fee to the use
of another, this is a good use, for upon such Release a Rent may be reserved, 2
Rolls. Abr. 788. Sams's Case.

What voluntary Grants by the Lord shall be good or not, in respect of the
Estate or Interest which he has in the Manor, and what not.
Voluntary Grants of Copyhold Estates, are of such as come to the Lords hands
by Escheat or Forfeiture, and the Lord may grant them by Copy again. It was
adjudged in Harris and Jay's Case, Cro. El. 699. M. 41 El. B. R. That a
Copyhold Escheated, and which has been kept in the Lords hands diverse years,
may be granted over by the Lord himself, or by his Steward.

This may be considered in respect of the Quantity and Quality
of his Estate.

He must be Legitimus Dominus, a lawful Lord at the time of his voluntary
Grant; and then as to the quantity of his Estate in the Manor, be it great or
little, is not material, whether he be seized of, or interested in the Manor,
in Fee or Tail, Dower or Courtesy, for Life or Years, Tenant per Statute,
Elegit or at Will, or on Condition, he may grant any Copyhold Escheated to
him, for as long time as the Custom does allow, the Rents and Services being
truly reserved, and these Grants shall bind them that have the Inheritance or
Freehold of the Manor; the Reason is well delivered in Coke For a Copyholder
upon voluntary Grants made by Copy, does not derive his Estate out of the Lords
Estate only; for then the Copyholders Estate should cease when the Lords
Interest determines, but the Life of the Copyholders Estate is the Custom of
the Manor; and therefore whatsoever befalls the Lords Interest in his Manor,
be it determined by course of time, death, forfeiture, or other means, yet if
the Lord were Legitimus Dominus pro Tempore, though his Estate in it be very
small, yet that is enough; for the same Custom that fixes a Copyholder
instantly in his Land upon his Admittance, will likewise protect and support
his Interest to the end in such manner, that though the Lords Interest fails,
yet the Copyholders Interest shall not fall, being upheld by such a Pillar,
unless he forfeit it by his own act.

Where Lord may augment the Rent, and where not.
Where Copyhold Land comes into the Hands of the Lord, by Escheat or
Forfeiture; the Lord may grant this Land by Copy, rendering greater Rent, but
not when he admits a Tenant

Blewet Lord of a Manor, wherein are many Copyholders, grants the Stewardship
to S. for Life, and after becomes a Lunatic, and found upon Inquisition, and
thereupon committed W. to E. C. and others, under the Seal of the Court of
Wards, The Lord Lunatic by his Steward may grant Copy-holds, but the
Committees by their Steward cannot.
etc. The Question was, whether the Committees by their Steward may grant
Estates by Copy, according to the Custom? Per Cur. they cannot, for by the Law
they have no Estate in the Manor, nor are Lords thereof for the time being; but
the Lunatic by his Steward may grant Copy holds and so it was decreed. But it
was ordered that the Steward should grant none without the privity of the
Committees, and warrant from the Court, but this was only for caution, Sir
James Ley's Rep. f. 47. Blewit's Case.

Therefore if the Lord sever a Copyhold from the Manor, Severance from the
Manor, what it operates.
by granting the Inheritance to a Stranger; now though one of the chief Pillars
of a Copyhold Estate is wanting, viz. to be parcel of the Manor, yet because
the Land at the time of the Copyholders admittance was customary, and had this
necessary incident, this severance being a matter ex post facto, and being the
Lords own act, shall not amount to the destruction of the Copyhold.

There is this Custom in a Manor, That every Copyholder Tenant for Life, had
used to take all Trees growing upon his Land to be employed for Fuel, and
Repairs, and Estovers. Queen Eliz. being Seized of this Manor, demiseth it to
J. W. except Omnibus boscis subboscis arboribus and maremiis, Habend. (except
pre-except) for twenty one years; who assigns all his Interest to J. P. and
others. Queen Eliz. dies, King James grants reversionem praed. ac premissa sic
ut prefertur except. to A. F. R. S. and P. W. and their Heirs, the Lessees
Attorn; A. F. and P. W. release to R. S. and his Heirs. Lessees and their
Steward, etc. grant to W. B. Def. a Message and a Vierge of Land whereon the
Trees grew, for term of Life, secundum consuetudinem Manerij; The Question was,
inasmuch as the Lessees hold the Court by virtue of the said Lease of the Manor
(out of which Lease the said Trees were excepted) if the Def. (the Grantee of
the Lessees) may take the Trees. Per Cur. he may, notwithstanding the Severance
by the Exception, and notwithstanding he comes in by Voluntary Grant and not by
Surrender; for the Estate of the Copyholder which comes in by Voluntary Grant,
is not derived out of the Estate or Interest of the Lord of the Manor, for he
is but as an Instrument to make the Grant, The Estate of the Copyholder who
comes in by voluntary Grant, is not derived out of the Lord.
but the Custom of the Manor (after the Grant made) has stablish'd and fixed
this firm to the Grantee. So if the Copyholders for Life used to have Common
in the Lords Wastes or Woods, and the Lord aliens the Wastes or Woods to
another in Fee, and after grants certain Copyhold Lands or Houses for Lives,
such Grantees shall have Common of Pasture or Estovers, notwithstanding the
Severance, for the Title of Copyholder is paramount the Severance, and the
Custom unites the Common or Estovers, which are but accessories and incidents
so long as the House and Land, being the principal, is maintained by the
Custom; which customary Appurtenants are not pertaining to the Estate of the
Lord, for he is Owner of the Freehold and Inheritance of the whole Manor, but
they are appertaining to the customary Estate of the Copyholder, after the
Grant made. 8 Rep. 63. Swain's Case.

Voluntary Grants made by Feoffee of Manor on Condition, good.
Feoffee of a Manor upon Condition grants Land by Copy, and afterward the Manor
becomes forfeited, and the Feoffor enters, yet the Copyhold Estate remains
untouched; so if Feoffee of a Manor on Condition to Enfeoff a Stranger, and the
next day makes a voluntary Grant by Copy, this shall bind, Coke Cop.

Voluntary Estates granted during the time of the Lords Interest shall be good,
though the Lords Estate be avoided ab initio.
Nay, though the Estate of the Lord in the Manor, by Relation happen to be void,
ab initio, yet if he grant by Copy during the continuance of his Interest it is
good. So Copyholders Estates granted before a Divorce causa praecontractus,
shall be good. So if a man espouseth the Lady of a Manor, under the Age of
consent, and after she disagreeeth, though the Marriage by relation was void ab
initio; yet Copy-holds granted before disagreement shall never be avoided. So
by Popham in Rowse's Case, Owen 28. If a Manor be devised to one, and the
Devisee enters and makes Copies, and then the Devise is found to be void, yet
such Copies of Surrenders are good. Aliter where such Devisee makes new or
voluntary Copies.

If the Lord of a Manor commits Felony or Murder, and Process of Outlawry is
awarded against him; after the Exigent he grants Copyhold Estates according
to the Custom and then is Attainted; these Grants are good though by relation
the Manor was forfeited from the time of the Exigent awarded. So if the Lord
had been Attainted by Verdict or Confession.

If the Lord of a Manor acknowledges a Statute, and then grants Lands by
Copy, Grant after Stat. acknowledged, and the Manor extended, yet shall be good.
and after the Manor is delivered to the Conusee in Extent, the Grant cannot by
this be impeached.

Lease for years is made of a Manor, and to be void upon breach of a Condition;
Condition is broken, and Lessee before entry of the Lessor, grants Estates by
Copy; these Grants shall never exclude the Lessor, for upon breach of the
Condition the Lease is void. But in case of a Lease for Life, or Grant in Tail,
or Fee of the Manor on such Condition, the granting Estates by Copy, before
Entry of the Lessor, etc. may be good; for before his Title be executed by
Entry, the Tenant, etc. has a lawful Interest to grant by Copy, Coke Cop. p.
100, 101. Sect. 34. But if a Parson before Induction grant Lands by Copy, being
parcel of a Manor which is Glebe Land, this admitting binds not, though he be
afterward Inducted, Ibid.

Tenant in Dower shall not avoid such Grant.
If the Lord of a Manor takes a Wife, and after that grants Copyhold
Estates, according to the Custom, and dies, and the Feme has this Manor
assigned to her in Dower, yet she cannot avoid these Copyhold Estates, because
the Copyholders are in by a Title paramount to the Feme, viz. by Custom, Coke
8 Rep. 63. b. Swain's Case. But if the Lords Heir make such assignment of
Dower, she may avoid them.

But in all these Cases before put, observe these three Rules.

1. These Grants must be according to the Custom of the Manor, and Rents and
Services customary must be reserved.

2. Though it is not material what Estate or Interest the Lord has, Tenant at
sufferance Grants, etc. shall not bind.
yet it must be an Estate or Interest, and therefore Tenant Pur aver vie of a
Manor is, Cesty que vie dies, the Tenant continued possession of the Manor, and
held Courts, and made voluntary Grants by Copy. Per Cur. This shall not bind
the Lord, for he was but Tenant at sufferance, who had not any Interest, and so
he was a Disseisor of the Manor, More, n. 369. Rouse and Artois.

3. As to the Lords Grant of the Copyhold Estate in respect of his Estate in
the Copyhold, there the quantity of the Lords Estate is to be regarded; for if
a Copyholder in Fee surrender to the use of the Lord for Life, the remainder
over to a Stranger, or reserving the reversion to himself, if the Lord will
grant this by Copy in Fee, whatsoever Estate the Lord has in the Manor, yet
having but an Estate for Life in the Copyhold, no larger Estate shall pass
than he himself has, Coke Cop. 96.

What acts of the Lord in granting Copy-holds are not confirmed by Custom, but
only strengthened by the Power, Interest and Authority of the Lord, have no
longer continuance than the Lords Estate continues. Therefore if a Tenant for
Life of a Manor, grants a License to a Copyholder to alien and dies, the
License is destroyed and the power of Alienation cease.

Now as to the Quality of the Lords Estate, he must be Legitimus Dominus, he
must have a lawful Estate in the Manor.

The Rule in Cokes 4 Rep. Clark and Pennyfeather's Case, is universally true.
Grant by one that has a tortious Title, not Good.
If a Disseisor or Feoffee of a Disseisor or any other who had a tortious or
defeazable Estate or Interest, subject to the Action or Entry of another, hold
Court, and make any voluntary Grant upon Escheat or Forfeiture of a Copyhold,
such voluntary Grant shall not bind him that has right, when he has
re-continued the Manor by Action or Entry, for to this intent the said Custom
shall be understood of a Lord, who has a lawful Estate or Interest. A Grant
upon an usurped Title shall never bind the right Owner, but that by Action or
Entry he may avoid them; for the Law will not support a Custom which shall work
or tend to the disherison of the right owner. If the Heir of a Disseisor (who
comes in by descent) Grants any Copyhold Estate, it may be avoided by the
Disseisee. So of a Feoffee of a Disseisor who comes in by Title.

If Tenant in Tail of a Manor, discontinueth the Tail, and after the
discontinuance grants Copyhold Estates, and dies; now the Discontinuee
comes in under a just Title, and shall enjoy against all the World, during the
Life of Tenant in Tail, yet his Interest being determined by the death of
Tenant in Tail, Grants made, by whom shall be avoided.
the continuance of the Possession is a Tort to the Heir, and upon his rcovery
in a Formedon in the Descender, he shall avoid these Grants. So in cases of
alienee of a Manor, whereof a man was seized in jure Uxoris, making Grants, may
be avoided after his death by the Feme. So Lessee for years of Tenant for Life,
of a Manor: So by a Tenant at sufferance, as Tenant pur auter vie, who
continues in after the death of Cesty que vie. Vide supra. Rous and Artois
Case, 4 Rep. 24. mesme Case.

By Lessee of a Manor.
Lessee for years of a Manor grants a Copyhold in Reversion, and before the
Reversion happen, the Term is expired, the Grant is void. So if such Lessee
surrenders his Term, and then before his Lease should have ended in point of
Limitation, the Reversion falls, yet the Grantee shall not have it.

Infant.
One that has in present a Lawful Estate or Interest in a Manor, defeasable
upon breach of Condition, Enters, he may make Grant by Copy before such Entry,
and it shall be good: If Infant infeoff me of a Manor, though he may enter upon
me at his pleasure, yet Grants made before his Entry, shall not be avoided by
any subsequent Entry; vide supra.

Guardian in Socage may hold Courts and grant Copies, not the Bailiff of a
Manor.
A Guardian in Socage may hold Courts in his own name, and may grant Copies, for
he is Dominus pro tempore, and has interest in the Land; but a Bailiff of a
Manor has no interest, therefore he cannot make Grants and Copies, but the
Guardian has interest Provisione Legis, but so as to be accountable for Fines,
Owen, p. 115. Shopland and Radlen.

Grants of Copies in Reversion.
The Lord of a Manor for Life, or a particular Tenant having interest in the
Manor might grant Copies in Reversion, although they were not executed in the
Life of the Grantor, More, n. 292. Sir Peter Carew's Case 236. contra. So a
Tenant in Dower of a Manor may grant Copyhold, parcel of that which she has
assigned in Dower in Reversion ( Habend, post mortem A. P.) though it was
doubted in the Earl of Arundel's Case; and the reason is the Custom. For it is
said in Gay's Case, Cro. El. p. 661. There is a Custom alleged, That Dominus
pro tempore, may demise for one, two or three Lives, Copyhold not to be
granted by parcels.
in Possession or Reversion: But one who has a particular Estate in a Manor,
cannot grant a Copyhold by parcel, or demise part, and retain the residue
himself. If a Feme be endowed of several Copyhold Tenements, she cannot grant
part of them by Copy in possession, or Reversion, per Popham, ibid. Vide mesme
Case 1 Rolls Abr. 499.

In some special Case, an Estate may be granted by Copy, Where a Grant may be
good by one who is not Dominus pro tempore.
by one that is not Dominus pro tempore, nor that has any thing in the Manor;
as if the Lord of a Manor by his Will in writing devises, That his Executors
shall grant the customary Tenements of the Manor, according to the Custom of
the Manor, for the payment of his Debts, and dies; (the Executor, though he
has nothing in the Manor) may make Grants according to the Custom of the
Manor, Co. Lit. 58. b.

At what place the Lord may Grant.
The Lord of a Copyhold Manor may himself grant a Copyhold at any place out
of the Manor, 4 Rep. 26. b. Melwich's Case.

What amounts to a Grant.
The admittance of the Lord amounts to a Grant to him who had a Title; Aliter,
if it is to him who was in by wrong, as by disseisin, 4 Rep. 22. Winch Rep. 67.
Hasset and Hanson.

Grant by the Copyholder to the Lord.
Though a Copyholder may not convey his Copyhold to a Stranger, without
Surrender and Admittance; yet he may grant his Estate out of Court to the Lord
of the Manor, by Bargain and Sale; for the Custom is not between the Lord and
his Tenant, but between themselves only, Winch Rep. p. 57. Hasset and Hanson.

A Copyholders Release to the Lord is a good Release, 1 Keb. 808.

CAP. XII.
Exposition of Grants. By what words in Grants, Copyhold shall pass or not.
What things shall pass by Grant of another thing as Appurtenant or Incident.

A Copyholder of a Manor which had Common by Prescription, in sixty Acres,
parcel of the Demesns of the Manor Escheated, and the Lord by Deed granted it
to another in Tail, Per nomina, etc. communiarum quarumcunque dicto Messuagio
sive tenemento spectan sive in aliquo modo pertinen. vel cum eodem Messuagio
dimisso usitat. Though the ancient Common is determined by unity of possession
in the Lord upon Escheat, yet revived by a new Grant, and by what words.
The Question was, whether by these words the Grantee shall have Common in
those sixty Acres? Per Cur. The Donee in Tail shall have such Common as the
Copyholder had. But the ancient Common which was by Prescription, is
determined by unity of possession in the Lord, but the Grant enures as a new
Grant of the same Common: As, a Grant to Islington of the like Liberties which
London has, is a new Grant of the like Liberties, Cro. Eliz. p. 794. M. 42
Eliz. B. R. Worledge and Kingswel.

If the Lord of a Manor be seized of a Copyhold Estate, and grants this to
another, Nothing passes to one named in the Hab. that is not named in the
Premises.
Hab. to him and his Wife, and to the Heirs of their Bodies; the Wife shall
take nothing by this Grant, because she was not mentioned in the Premises, and
here is not any Surrender precedent to direct the Grant; Where a Grant shall be
expounded as a Grant at Common Law.
but it passes only by the Grant, and so it ought to be expounded as a
Conveyance at Common Law. So if a Copyhold Tenant Surrender to the Use of
himself Habend. to him and his Wife and to the Heirs of their Bodies; it seems
that this is void, for it is in nature of a Grant at Common Law, 2 Rolls Abr.
67. Brooks and Brooks: But in Surrender aliter. Vide infra Tit. Surrender.

Copyholder in Fee Surrenders to the Lord ad intentionem, That the Lord shall
grant this again to him for Life, the remainder to his Wife until his Son shall
come at full Age, and after to his Son; the Copyholder dies, and after the
Lord executes it to the Woman. Per Cur. This Interest to the Wife is a Term,
Dyer 251, 259.

By ( cum pertin.) what passes.
Copyholder had Common of Estovers in the Lords Woods, appurtenant to his
Copyhold, and he purchased the Freehold of Inheritance in the Copyhold, and
had words in his Deed of Purchase, of all Commons appertaining to his said
Message. Per Cur. The Common which he had in the Copy-Estate was extinct
because the Common appertained to the customary Estate, which is determined,
and because now he claims from the Lord, in whom the Common may not stand
divided from the Land and Soil of the Wood; but had there been special words in
the Grant of the like Common as he had in the Common. Before the Surrender it
had been good, as a new Grant of the Common, More, n. 915.866. Fort and Ward.

By what words in Grants Copy-holds shall pass or not.
What shall pass by the words ( All the Demesne Lands.)
King Ed. 6. by Patent granted omnes terras Dominicales Manerij de W. It was
adjudged, That customary Lands held by Copy, parcel of the same Manor shall not
pass, and yet they are in the Law parcel of the Demesns of the Manor; but in
the Case of a common Person they shall pass by those words, 1 Rep. 46. in Alton
Wood's Case.

But if a man grant all his Demesne Lands, his Copyhold Lands will not pass, if
he had other Demesns to satisfy the words of the Grant, 2 Rolls Rep. 236. And
if I grant all my Lands and Tenements in D. my Copyhold Lands there pass not,
because they cannot pass by any such assurance, Owen.

Upon a special Verdict, King H. 8. seized in Fee of the Manor of D. granted by
his Letters Patents to Richard Andrews and Peter Temple in Fee, ( Inter alia)
omnia Messuagia terras tenementa redditus reversiones servitia and
hereditamenta sua in D. subscripta (viz.) totum illum annualem redditum
quindecim solidorum and alia ser vitia ex^untia de terris W. K. ac totum illud
Messuagium and 6 vergatas terrae in D. in tenura J. D. Habend. and tenend.
omnia predicta Messuagia terras tenementa redditus reversione servitia and
hereditamenta in D. pred. to the said Richard Andrews and Peter Temple, and
their Heirs. The Question was, whether this was a good Patent to convey the
said Lands of the said W. R. (being a Copyholder pur vie.) Per Cur. It was a
void Patent to convey the Lands of the Copyholder to them; for there is not
any Land granted but the Rents and Services of W. R. which is intended
Freehold, and there being none such the Grant is merely void, Cro. Car. 21.
Castle and Hobbs. By Hobart, if the King grant you his Demesns, you shall not
have his Copy-holds, in Waste and Pretty's Case, Winch, p. 3.

What things shall pass by Grant of another thing, as Appurtenant or Incident,
or not.
If there be a Common appendant to a Copyhold Tenement, Appurtenant.
and the Lord makes a Feoffment of the Tenement with all Profits, Commodities
and Common to this Appurtenant; Yet the Feoffee shall not have any Common, for
this was Appurtenant to the Copyhold, and not to the Freehold, 2 Rolls Abr. 61.

So if he Lease the Copyhold Tenements for years, with such words as before,
yet Lessee shall not have any Common for the reason aforesaid, ibid.

What passes or not by the words, cum pertinentijs.
There being a Copyhold Message called Symonds, whereto diverse Copyhold Lands
were appertaining, the said Message called Symonds cum pertinentiis, being
surrendered to the Lord and all his rights therein: It was moved, whether by
that surrender the Copyhold Land shall pass, or only the said House with the
Orchards, Yards and Curtelage. And Per Cur. The Copyhold Land shall not pass
by these words cum Pertinentiis; and in this it is all one in case of a
Copyhold as a Freehold, Cro. Jac^ p. 526. Smithson and Cage.

By Feoffment of the Manor Copy-holds pass, 3 Keb. 456.

Copyholder had Common of Estovers in the Lords Wood appurtenant to his
Copyhold, and he purchased the Inheritance of the Copyhold, Common.
and had the words in his Deed, of all Commons appertaining, the Common is
extinct, had there been special words; aliter, More, n. 915.866. Vide supra.

Cum Pertin.
Copyholder has Common in the Wastes of the Lord; the Lord by Deed confirms to
a Copyholder, Hab. to him and his Heirs, with the Appurtenances; the Common is
extinct, for he has his Common in respect as he is customary Tenant, 2 Brownl.
210. Marsham and Hunter.

CAP. XIII.
Of Surrenders. The nature of a Surrender. General Rules and Diversities for
the better Explication. Of the Alienation of Copyhold Estates in general, and
of selling Copy-holds by Commissioners of Bankrupts in particular. Of Surrender
in Court. By what words a Surrender will pass. What amounts to a Surrender. Of
a Surrender out of Court. Who may take a Surrender out of Court. What Surrender
out of Court is good or not.

Of Surrenders. The Nature of a Surrender.
A Surrender is a giving up of the Land by the Tenant to the Lord, according to
the Custom, to the use of him that is to have the Estate, and is entered in this
manner. The form thus, according to Mr. Littleton.

Ad hanc curiam venit A. de B. and sursum reddidit in ead. curia unum
Messuagium, etc. in manus Domini ad usum C. de D. and Haeredum suorum, vel
Haeredum de corpore suo exeuntium, vel pro termino vitae suae, etc. Et super
hoc venit paerdictus C. de D. and cepit de Domino in ead. Curia Messuagium
praed. etc. Habend. and tenend. sibi and haeredibus suis, vel sibi and
haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, vel sibi ad terminum vitae, etc. Ad
voluntatem Domini secundum consuetudinem manerij, faciendo and reddendo inde
redditus servitia and consuetudines inde prius debita and consueta, etc. Et dat
Domino pro fine, etc. Et fecit fidelitatem, etc. Note, The Surrender to the
Lord is general, without expressing any Estate, for that he is but an
Instrument to admit Cesty que use; for no more passes to the Lord, but to
serve the Limitation of the Use, and Cesty que use, when he is admitted, shall
be in by him that made the Surrender, and not by the Lord.

And therefore if Copyholder in Fee Surrender to the use of another for Life,
nothing more passes from him, but what shall serve the Estate limited to use,
9 Rep. 107. Podger's Case.

A Surrender is in nature of a Deed Poll, rather than of an Indenture, and
enures by way of limitation of use, 1 Sanders 151.

If a Copyholder Tenant Surrender to the use of himself, Habend. to him and
his Wife, and the Heirs of their Bodies, it seems this is void; for it is in
nature of a Grant at Common Law, for she was not named in the Premises, 2
Rolls Abr. 67. Brooks's Case, Vide infra.

A Surrender is to this purpose, that the Lord should not be a Stranger to his
Tenant.

A Surrender is but a Conveyance by matter of Fact, and no higher, and
therefore where Surrenderer is Infant, and dies, his Heir shall enter, Cro. El.
90. Knights's Case.

It must be an actual Surrender in Court and not a Surrender in Law.
If a Copyholder in Fee take the same Land of the Lord by other Copy for Life,
this is not any Surrender or Determination of his Copyhold Inheritance; for a
Copyhold may not be surrendered but by actual Surrender in Court; sursum
reddens this into the hands of the Lord, and not by Surrender in Law, 1 Rolls
Abr. 501. Shepard and Adams.

In grant of a Reversion, Attornment, why not needful.
Attornment is not necessary for a Copyholder, because there is no time when
the Termor should Attorn; for before the Surrender he cannot Attorn, and after
the Surrender and Admittance it is too late. The Copyhold Estate is like an
Estate raised by Uses or Devise, in which an Attornment is not necessary, 1
Brownl. 179. Swinnerton and Miller. The Surrender and Admittance are in the
nature of an Inrolment, and so amount to an Attornment, or at least supply the
want of it, 1 Leon. 297.

General Rules and Maxims.
1. Implication is not good in a Surrender, though it be in a Will. A Surrender
of Copyhold Land was to the Use of the second Son for Life, after the Death of
the Tenant and his Heirs, it was adjudged not good, 1 Brownl. Rep. 127. Allen
and Nash, Noy. 152.

2. In Copyhold Cases, a Surrender to the Use, etc. This is no Use properly,
but an Explication showing how the Land shall go, 1 Brownl. 127.

3. It is the general Custom of the Realm, That every Copyholder may Surrender
in Court, and need not to allege any Custom therefore; so if out of Court he
Surrender to the Lord himself, he need not in Pleading allege any Custom; but
if he Surrender out of Court into the Hands of the Lord, by the Hands of two or
three Copyholders, or by the Hands of the Bailiff, etc. or by the Hands of any
other, these Customs are particular, and therefore he must plead them, Co. Lit.
59. a.

The Estate of Cesty que use shall ensue the Limitation in the Surrender, and
not in the Admittance of the Lord, Co. Lit. 659. b. If two Joynt-Tenants be of
Copyhold Lands in Fee, and the one out of Court, according to the Custom,
surrender his part to the Lords Hands to the use of his Will, and by his Will
devises his part to a Stranger in Fee, and dies, and at next Court the
Surrender is presented; by the Surrender and Presentment, the Jointure is
severed, and the Devisee ought to be admitted to the moiety of the Lands, for
now by relation the state of the Land was bound by the Surrender, and the Lord
cannot grant a larger Estate than is expressed by the limitation of the Use, 1
Rol^ Rep. 438. In Grant of a Reversion, Attornment is not necessary for a
Copyholder, Vide supra.

5. Copyhold may not be surrendered but by actual Surrender in Court, and not
by a Surrender in Law, Vide infra.

6. A Copyholder cannot Surrender an Estate to another, and leave a particular
Estate in himself, no more than a Freeholder, Vide apres.

Before I come directly to treat of Surrenders (one of the most useful pieces
of Learning as to Copyhold Estates,) I shall premise some general
Considerations, as to the Alienation of Copyhold Estates, or of a Transferring
of Copyhold Interest from one to another* and more particularly of the Selling
and Aliening of the Copyhold Lands of a Bankrupt, the knowledge whereof is
very necessary, and not very common.

The Assurance of Copyhold Land from one man to another (who is not Lord) must
be made by Copy of Court Roll, according to the Custom, and this must be by
Surrender, and for the perfecting thereof must be Presentment and Admittance
generally. For,

If I would have my Estate pass according to my Will, I cannot devise this
Copyhold by Will, but must surrender it to the use of my last Will, and in my
Will I must declare my intention. But for the manner of doing it, and the
operation in Law, Vide postea sub Titulo Surrender to the Use of a man's last
Will. And

If I would Exchange Copyhold Land with another, I cannot do it by Deed of
Exchange, but we may Surrender it each to other, and the Lord shall admit us
accordingly.

But Copyhold Estates in some Cases may pass and be transferred from one to
another without Surrender, and that by Release: Copyhold in some Cases may
pass otherwise than by Surrender.
But then we must observe this difference between a Release that enures by way
of extinguishment, or by way of an enlargement of an Estate.

By Release sometimes a Copyhold may be transferred when it enures by way of
extinguishment, As by Release.
and so may serve to drown a Copyhold Right. As for the purpose, A man is
admitted upon a void Presentment, and where the Presentment and Admittance is
not according to the Surrender; as where the Presentment is absolute and the
Surrender conditional, and so void; It was resolved that the Admmittee had a
customary Estate by Possession, and is in by Title, and is capable of a Release
from him who had the right; and here is a customary Estate upon which the
Release may well be grounded; besides the Lord is not prejudiced, he being
satisfied his Fine upon the Admittance. So if I am ousted of a Copyhold, and
the Lord admit the Disseisor, according to the Custom, a Release made by me
will extinguish my right. But if one be disseised of a Copyhold Estate, a
Release by the Disseisee to the Disseisor is void, for this is a prejudice to
the Lord in losing his Admittance Fine, if it should be good, and there is no
customary Right upon which a Release should enure, there never having been
Admittance as was in the other Case: So is Mortimer's Case, Hetly, p. 150.

But a man cannot pass a Copyhold Estate by way of Lease and Release, because
this Release enures by way of enlargement of Estate, and to transfer an
Interest, but this must be by a Lease for a Year (which is warranted, etc.) and
by Surrender of the Reversion into the hands of the Lord, and he to grant it
over to the Lessee.

One Joynt-Tenant releaseth to his Companion.
One Joynt-Copy holder released to his Companion, and it was resolved in the
Case of Wase and Pretty, Winch Rep. p. 3. That the Release was good, without
Surrender or Admittance; for the first Admittance is of them and every of them,
and the ability to Release was from the first Conveyance and Admittance.

In some Cases Copy-holds cannot pass by Surrender, Release, Admittance, or
otherwise. As for the purpose;

The Lord grants an ancient Copyhold to S. in Fee, and after he grants the
Inheritance of that Copyhold, to a Stranger in Fee. S. makes his Will, and
demiseth it to M. which was surrendered at next Court; now by the severance of
the Copyhold from the Manor, the Copyhold is not destroyed, but it is not
parcel of the Manor; now if one would alien this, he cannot do it by Surrender,
for its not parcel of the Manor, neither can the Feoffee make Admittance, for
he is not Dominus; but if such Copyholder will alien, there is no way but to
have a Decree against him and his Heirs in Chancery, and so to bind his person,
but by it the Interest of the Land is not bound, 4 Rep. 24, 25.

By the Statute of 13 El. Cap. 7. Copyhold Lands are to be sold by Deed
Indented and Enrolled in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record (as other the
Bankrupts Land;) but by the same Statute it is provided, That all Persons to
whom any such Sale shall be made, shall before such time as they shall enter
and take the Profit of the same, agree and compound with the Lord of the Manor,
of whom the same shall be holden, for such Fines or Incomes as heretofore has
been usual and accustomed to be yielded or paid therefore; and upon every such
Composition the Lord for the time being, at the next Court to be holden at and
for the said Manor, shall not only grant to such Vendee upon request, the same
Copy or customary Lands or Tenements, by Copy of Court Roll of the said Manors,
for such Estate or Interest, as to them shall be sold, and reserving the
ancient Rents, Customs and Services; but also in the same Court admit them
Tenants of the same Copy or customary Lands, as other Copyholders of the same
Manor have been wont to be admitted, as also to receive their Fealty
accordingly.

Note, Copyhold Lands are within all the Statutes of Bankrupt, Cro. Car. 550.
Crisp and Plat.

Title to a Copyhold cannot be made by the Commissioners, without Surrender or
Admittance, 1 Keb. 24.

How and to what purpose such Estate Vests before Admittance.
Cro. Car. 569. In Parker and Bleke's Case it is adjudged, That by Bargain and
Sale made by the Commissioners of Bankrupts, the Estate of the Copyholder is
vested in the Bargainee before Admittance, though he may not enter and take the
Profits till Admittance: The Bargain and Sale binds the Copyholder and bars
his Estate, and he is no Copyholder after the Bargain and Sale enrolled. And
where the Bargainee is admitted by the Lord, it shall have relation to the
Bargain and Sale: And where the Custom was, That the Wife of a Copyholder
dying Tenant shall have a Life Estate, it was adjudged the Copyholder dying,
after the Bargain and Sale, his Wife shall be barred of her Widows Estate.

A Bankrupt purchases a Copyhold, and the Tenant Surrenders into two Tenants
Hands, to the use of the Bankrupt, and now he will not be admitted: This may be
sold by the Commissioners and the Vendee may pay the Admittance.

Of Surrender.
Now I shall treat of Surrenders, then of Presentment and Admittance, for that
they make up but one Copyhold Title.

First of Surrenders.

We have seen in the last Chapter, how that in some Cases Copyhold Lands may
pass without Surrender. Now

In some few Cases a Surrender is sufficient without Admittance, or
Presentment, Where Surrenders is sufficient without Admittance.
as if the Copyholder Surrender to the Lords use, there needs no Admittance.
And

In some Cases Admittance will do without a Surrender; Where Admittance is
sufficient without a Surrender.
as if the Lord make a voluntary Grant of the Copyhold in his hands, no
Surrender is needful, but Admittance only.

But regularly Estates of Copyhold must pass by Surrender and Admittance; and
if the Surrender be out of Court there must be a Presentment.

Of a Surrender in Court.
By what words a Surrender will pass.

It cannot well pass by any other word then sursum reddidit, Surrender; if it
pass in the Court by the words, Give, Grant, Bargain, Sell, this will not so
pass it, but the Heirs of the Copyholder shall avoid it: It is vocabulum
artis, as Warrantizare, and some other Law words are.

What will amount to a Surrender in Court or not.
By Hobart in Hutton Rep. p. 81. What Words.
If a Copyholder comes into Court, and says, That he is weary of his
Copyhold, and requests the Lord to take it, that is a Surrender: And by some,
if he come into the Court, and desire the Lord to admit his Son into the
Copyhold, this is a good Surrender to the use of the Son: But if a Copyholder
comes into Court, and says, He renounceth his Copy, this is not any Surrender;
and if the Copyholder say in the presence of any other Copyholders, He is
content to Surrender to the use of J. S. This is not a good Surrender. Any
words in the Court that declare his intention of surrendering into the Lords
Hands, is good, 3 Rep. 80. in Belfield's Case.

What Acts.
It was agreed between the Lord of a Manor and J. S. That in Consideration of 5
l. paid to the Lord, J. S. should enjoy the customary Lands for his Life, and
also of Alice his Wife, durante viduitate, and that J. S. should have election,
whether the said Lands should be assured to him and his Wife by Copy or by
Bill, etc. and he chose by Bill, which was made accordingly. Per Cur. Here is a
good Surrender of the said Lands, and that for Life only; 1 Leon. p. 191.
Collman and Sir H. Portman's Case.

Cannot be surrendered but by actual Surrender.
If a Copyholder in Fee takes the same Lands of the Lord, by other Copy for
Life, this is not any Surrender or Determination of his Copyhold Inheritance,
for a Copyhold may not be surrendered but by actual Surrender in Court* and not
by a Surrender in Law, 1 Rolls Abr. 501. Shepard and Adams: But in 3 Bulst. p.
80. Belfield and Adams, its Reported thus: Copyholder in Fee comes into the
Lord's Court, and there takes a new Estate of his Copyhold from the Lord to
himself, for his Life, after to his Wife for Life, and after to his Son for
Life, this was admitted a Surrender, and so was the other Case in 1 Roll 501.
In whom the Reversion after a particular Estate remains.
Postea 13 Jac. But the Reversion is in the Surrenderor, no disposition having
been made of it. So in this Case, this is not a giving up his Estate of
Inheritance, but only it shall enure by way of Surrender, to the use of himself
for Life, after to the use of his Wife for Life, and after to the use of his
Son for Life: But if a Copyholder of Inheritance takes a Lease by Indenture
for years, by this his Copyhold Estate is gone; and this is a Surrender of his
Inheritance; in the other Case the Inheritance remains in him, and is thus
Reported by Rolls;

If a Copyholder in Fee comes into Court, Copyholder by accepting of an
Estate is not Estopt from claiming another Estate.
and accepts by Copy an Estate to himself for Life, remainder to his Wife for
Life, remainder for the Life of his Son. The Question was, whether this shall
Estop him from claiming another Estate, and so to lose the Inheritance. And Per
Cur. he shall not be estopped; its but as a Surrender, and the Reversion in Fee
continues in his own person, 1 Rolls Rep. 265. Southcot and Adams. 1 Rolls Abr.
171, 172. mesme Case.

Of a Surrender out of Court.
A Surrender into the hands of two Tenants, they are but as Instruments, and
therefore in an Arbitrament, if its awarded that one Party shall Surrender into
the hands of two Tenants of the Manor, who shall present this, etc. this is a
good Award, although it is to be made to Strangers, who are not compellable,
because they are to be used as Instruments, M. 13 Jac. B. R. Pooley and Coot.

A Surrender out of Court, if it be duly done, is as binding as that that is
done in Court.

Who may take a Surrender out of Court.
A Copyholder may Surrender into the hands of the Lord himself out of Court,
The Lord himself.
without a particular Custom to warrant it, and in Pleading he need not to
allege any Custom, Co. Lit. 59. a. b.

By the hands of two Tenants.
Copyholder may Surrender out of Court, into the hands of the Lord, by the
hands of two or three Copyholders, or by the hands of the Bailiff or Reeve,
etc. or by the hands of any other, but this cannot be without particular
Customs, and therefore he must plead these Customs, Co. Lit. 59. a.

By Steward.
The Steward of a Manor may take a Surrender of a Copyhold out of the Manor, M.
13 Jac. B. R. Housey and Wild. And the Lord or his Steward may grant Copies out
of Court as well as in Court, Cro. El. 103.

But in such Case how it must be presented, Vide sub Titulo Presentment, infra.

By special Steward appointed by the Lord to go to the Surrenderor.
If he who ought to Surrender cannot come in Court to Surrender in person, the
Lord of the Manor may appoint a special Steward to go to the Prison and take
the Surrender, 1 Leon. p. 36. So if a Copyholder be in extremis, the Custom
was to Surrender into one Tenants hands, A Surrender to one Tenants hands and
presented to be done to another, yet good.
in the presence of credible Witnesses, a Surrender was made accordingly, but
presented to be done to another Tenant, yet being proved to be done to a Tenant
of the Manor, it was holden by Wadham Windham Justice, to be good, May's Case,
Norfolk Summer Assizes, 1663.

What Surrender out of Court is good or not.
A Surrender by Letter of Attorney to two customary Tenants out of Court, is
good; for as a Copyholder may Surrender in Court de communi jure, by the
common Custom of the Realm, and at Common Law, so he may do it by Attorney, as a
thing incident at Common Law; and the reason is founded upon a dive rsity. If a
man had a naked Authority, coupled with a confidence as Executors have to sell
Land, they cannot do it by Attorney; When one may do a thing by Attorney and when
not.
but if a man has absolute Authority as Owner of the Land, which a Copyholder
has, having a customary Estate of Inheritance, he may do it by Attorney, and so
this need not be pleaded as as a Custom. And though a man have an Authority
joined with an Interest, yet if the Authority be warranted by special Custom
only, it cannot be executed by Attorney. As if there be a special Custom, That a
Copyholder for Life may make Estate for twenty years to continue after his
death; this Estate cannot be made by Attorney; so for an Infant to Surrendr at
the years of discretion, Co. Cop. 105. But in Chapman's Case, Hill. 28. El. B.
R. Where the Custom of a Manor was, That the Copyholder out of Court may
Surrender into the hands of the Lord of the Manor, by the hands of two
customary Tenants; in such Case the Copyholder by his Attorney may not
Surrender into the hands of the Lord, by the hands of two Copyhold Tenants,
for without special Custom to warrant it, its not good. Authority to be pursued
strictly.


But such Attorneys ought to pursue the manner and form of the Surrender, in
all points, according to the Custom, as the Copyholder himself ought to have
done; as if by the Custom it ought to be done by the Rod, or any other thing,
etc.

The form of a Letter of Attorney was in this manner.
That the Copyholder does Constitute W. T. and E. A. two Copyhold Tenants of
the Manor of, etc. his lawful Attorneys to Surrender vice and nomine suo, to
the Lord of the Manor, ten Acres, etc. to the use of J. N. and his Heirs, and
after at a Court held in the Manor, 8 July, Anno, etc. The said Attorneys tunc
tenentes Dom. per Copiam Rot. Cur. and in ead. Curia ostenderunt script. praed.
geren. dat. praed. 12 die November. etc. Et iidem W. and E. authoritate eis per
praed. literam per Attornatum dat. in plena curia sursum reddiderunt in manus
Dom. praed. etc. Acras, etc. ad opus and usum, etc. Now the Attorney must do the
Act in the name of him who gives the Authority, as it is in Brownl 94. The
Letter of Attorney must say for him and in his name, yet the Entry aforesaid is
good; for it is W. and E. sursum redderunt and authoritate eis dat. What Entry
as to the form of a Letter of Attorney is good.
which is as much as if they had said, We as Attorneys of, etc. Surrender. I as
Attorney of J. S. do Surrender, or by Authority of this Letter of Attorney, I
Surrender, it is all one, 9 Rep. 76. Combe's Case.

Not to be done without Deed, but admittance by Attorney may be without Deed.

Lessee for years cannot Surrender by Attorney, and how he may.


A Copyhold Estate cannot be surrendered to another by an Attorney, without Deed,
but one may be admitted to a Copyhold Estate, by Attorney without Deed, Styles
Pract. Reg. 74.

Lessee for years cannot Surrender by Attorney, but he may make a Deed
purporting a Surrender, and a Letter of Attorney to another to deliver it, 1
Leon. p. 36.

Copyholder of Inheritance makes a Letter of Attorney to two jointly and
severally, to Surrender his Copyhold Lands to certain uses, according to the
Custom of the Manor after his death, Quaere, if this be a good Custom, Styles
Rep. p. 291, 311. Wallis and Bucknal, and p. 243. Roby and Twelves.

Litera Attornatus ad sursum reddend. tenementa custumaria, sursum redditio and
admissio, Co. Ent. 575, 676.

Pled. quod tenentes custumarij possunt sursum reddere Tenementa tam extra
Curiam in presentia 2 vel 3 tenentium quam in curia manus, Senel. Ra. Ent. 645.
Simil. per 1 vel 2 Tenentes ut Attornatus, Co. Ent. 657.

CAP. XIV.
What shall pass, and by what words in a Surrender. Of Attornment. The
Construction and Exposition of a Surrender. Where no Use or Estate is
immediately limited in whole or in part. And where an Use is limited, how far
the Construction shall go, according to the Rules of the Common Law, or not. Of
Surrender to Use upon Use. To the Use of one's Wife. Where a Surrender is void
for the uncertainty. Of a Surrender to the Use of a person not in esse. And of
a Surrender to take effect in futuro.

What shall pass, and by what words in a Surrender.
B. Covenants to assure all his Copyhold Lands to A. after he Surrenders out
of Court, according to Custom, diverse parcels by particular Names, the
Surrender is enrolled accordingly, with this Conclusion, By the name of all his
Copyhold Lands there; yet no more shall pass than what was named in the
Surrender, Dyer 8 El* 251.

Harvy Justice said, he knew it to be adjudged, That a Surrender, cum
pertinentijs, will pass Land, Hetly, p. 2. And that a Surrender of a Message
and three Acres, would pass more Acres if diverse Copies successive have been
so. I suppose he means if the words cum pertinentijs be in.

What Ceremony, etc. is requisite or not to make good a Surrender.
Attornment.
A Copyholder with License, leased for Years, rendering Rent, and afterward
surrendered the Reversion, with the Rent, to the use of a Stranger, who is
admitted: Here needs no Attornment, either to settle the Reversion, or create a
privity; for the Surrender and Admittance are in the nature of an Inrollment,
and amount to an Attornment, or at least supply the want of it, 1 Leon. 297.
But there must be an Admittance by the Lord; but in such case there shall be no
Entry for Condition broken, without Attornment, Hobart 177. Swinnerton and
Miller, 1 Rolls Abr. 235. mesme Case. Vide sparsim de Attornment.

The Construction and Operation of Surrenders. Where no Use or Estate is
immediately limited in whole or part.
Surrender to the Lord, without expressing what use.
If* a Surrender be made to the Lord in general, without expressing to what use,
it shall be taken to the Lords use, Kitch 81. And therefore in Bunting's Case,
cited in Brown and Foster's Case; A Custom was, That if any surrendered to the
use of another, without expressing any Estate, that the Lord may grant it to
him to whose use the Surrender was made: It was adjudged a good Custom, and the
Lord shall ascertain the Estate. A Copyholder sold his Copyhold Estate, but
shows not what Estate, Or what Estate.
but surrendered it the use of the Bargainee, and the Lord granted it in Fee to
the Bargainee, and it was adjudged good, Cro. El. 392.

Copyholder in Fee surrendered his Lands into the hands of the Lord, without
saying to whose use the Surrender should be; and at the next Court the said
Copyholder was admitted Habend. to him and his Wife in Tail, And then
admittance is to uses; this subsequent act explains a Surrender.
remainder to his right Heirs. Per Cur. The subsequent Act shall explain the
Surrender, and when the Copyholder accepted a new Admittance, the Law intends
the Surrender was made to such an use as is specified in the Admittance. Quando
ab est provisio partis, adest provisio Legis, Popham, p. 125, 126. Brook's
Case, Cro. Jac. 434. mesme Case.

Copyholder Surrenders to the use of M. and R. without limitation of any
Estate, they shall only have it for their Lives; and in such case, A Surrender
to one for Life, without limiting the Fee, the Fee is in the Surrenderor.
if the Lord make Admittance, and deliver Seisin to M. and R. and the Heirs of
R. this was only an Admittance to them for term of their Lives, the Reversion
over to R. who made the Surrender, for the Lord is but an Instrument, and when
he has made Admittance according to the effect of the Surrender, nothing
remains in him, but the Reversion is in the Surrenderer, 4 Rep. 29. Bunting and
Lepingwel.

But it is otherwise in the case of a Copyholder for Life; as if a Copyholder
for Life Surrender to the use of J. S. for Life, and J. S. dies, this shall not
revert to the first Copyholder for Life, Mich. 7. Car. 1. Diversity.
King and Loder's Case. And therefore in Dyer, 9 Eliz. f. 264. The Husband
seized in the right of his Wife, Reversion to B. Reversion to C. for their
Lives; the Husband surrrenders to the use of B. for his Life, to whom the Lord
grants it for his Life, and is admitted, and after dies; the Husband shall not
have it again during his Wives Life, for he had dismissed himself of it, Lord as
Occupant.
and C. shall not have it during the Wives Life, but the Lord as Occupant.

Where an Use is limited, how far the Construction shall be according to the
Rules of Common Law or not.
Some lay it down for a Rule, That the same Construction which the Law makes
upon words in a Deed, it will make upon a Copy, is not always true, though
regularly it is so. As if Copyhold be granted to a Corporation, where no
Estate is named, its a Fee-simple. So if Surrender to one and his Heirs, and he
reciting this Surrender, does Surrender it to my use in the same manner as I
surrendered it to him, this is a Fee-simple. So if I Surrender to J. S. as large
an Estate as he has in the Manor of Dale, he has a Fee-simple in that Manor,
Co. Cop. 132.

The Wife shall take by the Admittance, tho not named in the Premises in the
Surrender.
But a person may take by the Hab. in the Admittance, who was not named in the
Premises, as to Copyhold; therefore in Brook's Case above cited, Copyholder
Surrenders his Lands, without saying to whose use, and at the next Court the
said Copyholder was Admitted, Habend. to him and to his Wife in Tail, the
Remainder over. Per Cur. the Wife shall take by this Admittance, though she was
not named in the Premises. But this Case of a Copyhold is like to the Case of
a Will, or to the Case of a Frank-Marriage, in which it is sufficient to pass
an Estate, albeit the Parties be only named in the Habendum; aliter, where the
Surrender is to Uses, and she is not named in the Premises.

And the like Rule is laid down in Bunting and Lepingwel's Case, 4 Rep. 29. As
well Estates as Descents to be directed by the Rules of Law.
That as well Estates as Descents, shall be directed by the Rules of Law, as
necessary consequents upon the Custom, unless there be a special Custom to the
contrary; as, a Surrender sibi and suis by the Custom, may make an Estate of
Inheritance; but a Surrender to one and tribus assignatis suis, by his death,
the Estate in the Copyhold is determined, Yelverton, p. 16. Arnold's Case.

Though we have observed, Surrender passes not by implication.
That the passing of Estates of Copyhold is much resembled to Devises, yet an
Use shall not pass in a Surrender by implication, and therefore in Seagood and
Hone's Case, Cro. Car. 366. A Copyhold is surrendered to the use of F. K. and
J. R. Son of the said F. and of the longest liver of them both, and for want of
Issue of J. the Son of his Body, lawfully begotten, the Lands to remain to the
youngest Son of M. S. Per Cur. J. had but an Estate for Life, and being an
Estate for Life, limited by express limitation, it shall not be a greater
Estate by implication.

Of Surrender to a Use upon Use.
Surrender by A. to the Use of B. and his Heirs, to the use of such person as
A. should name by his Will, Per Twisden in Leaper and Wroth's Case, it is ill;
no Use can be raised upon an Use, although it being Copyhold it is not
executed by the Statute. But H. nominated by the last Will of A. had surrendered
to B. the Court conceived no doubt in that Case, 1 Keb. 627.

Contingent Remainder.
Surrender is to the Use of one in Fee upon Condition to pay 100 l. to a
Stranger, and if he failed, it should be to the Use of a Stranger in Fee. The
Question was, whether that should be a good Limitation to the Stranger, being a
Fee upon a Fee. Beaumont conceived it to be well enough, being as an Use
limited on a Feoffment, but it was found specially, Cro. El. 361. Paulter and
Cornhil, vide infra.

To the Use of ones Wife
Is good, though he which is admitted is in by him who makes the Surrender, yet
a man may Surrender to the Use of his Wife, because the Husband does not do
this immediately to the Wife, but by two means. 1. By Surrender of the Husband
to the Lord, to the Use of the Wife. And 2. By Admittance of the Lord to the
Wife, according to the Surrender, 4 Rep. 29. Bunting and Lepingwel.

Where a Surrender is void for the uncertainty.
Averment.
A Copyhold was granted to a Father, and to his Son and Heirs, who at the time
of the Grant had but one Son, it was adjudged a good Limitation to that Son,
Cro. Jac. 374. Cobb and Betterson. But in Winkmore's Case, cited there, where a
Copy was granted to S. the Father and to his Son, and he does not demonstrate
which of his Sons shall have it; it was adjudged to be a void Grant for the
uncertainty, he having many Sons at that time.

But that which is wholly uncertain, no subsequent manifestation of my
intention can help it, as a Surrender to the Use of my Cousin or my Friend, or
to the Use of J. S. or J. N.

Surrender to the Use of a Person not in esse.
And in this point Limitations of Estates are not directed according to the
Rules of Law. In this, Estates are not directed according to Law.
For at Common Law if the Grantee (immediate) and be not in rerum natura, and
able to take by virtue of the Grant, its void presently. But though at the time
of the Surrender the Grantee is not in esse, or not capable of a Surrender, yet
if he be in esse, and capable at the time of Admittance, that is sufficient; as
a Surrender to him that shall be Heir to J. S. or to the Use of the next Child
of J. S. or to the next Wife of J. S. though at the time of the Surrender J. S.
had no Child, Heir or Wife; yet if he afterward has, his Heir, Wife or Child
may come into Court and compel the Lord to admit according to the Surrender;
the reason of this Construction seems to be, the Surrender is a thing
executory, and is executed by the subsequent Admittance, and nothing vests in
the Grantee before Admittance; and therefore if at the time of the Admittance,
he be capable to take, its enough, Co. Copy. Put the Case at Common Law, J. S.
bargains and Sells to the Use of the next Son of J. D. and he has no Son then,
but after he has a Son before the Deed is enrolled, yet this shall not be
good, and yet its as an executory Grant, i. e. not perfected till enrollment,
and nothing passes till enrollment, or vesteth in the Bargainee till then, no
more than by Surrender.

I will put this Case. A Surrender is to the Use of A. B. for Life, and after
to the next Child that J. S. shall have. A. B. forfeits his Estate, J. S.
having no Child at that time, but afterward he has a Child; shall this Child
compel the Lord to admit him? Q. for such a Remainder at Common Law would be
destroyed.

But a Surrender to the Use of the right Heirs of J. S. he being alive, is
void, because it cannot take effect according to the intent of the Grantor,
which is to be executed presently.

To one in (...) mere.
Surrender Habend. after his death, to the Use of his Child, then in ventre sa
mere, his or her Heirs and Assigns, and if it dye before full Age or Marriage,
then to the Use of another in Fee. Copyholder dies, Infant was born, but dies
before Age or Marriage; this is not good, he cannot make such a conditional
Surrender to operate in futuro: But whether the Surrender to an Infant in
ventre sa mere be good, has been much much questioned, Cro. Jac. 376. 1 Rolls
Rep. 109, 131. 2 Rolls Abr. 415, 416. 2 Bulstr. 274, 275. Simson and Sothern.
Some are for it and some against it. I conceive it is allowed to be good, as
well as a Devise to an Infant in ventre enter sa mere. Surrender to the Use of
J. S. for Life, remainder to the Use of an Infant, in ventre sa mere, is good.

Of a Surrender to take effect in futuro.
A Surrender of a Copyhold in Fee, a tempore mortis, is void, 1 Sanders 151.
Or a Surrender at a day to come is void.

Copyholder in Fee Surrenders out of Court, into the hands of two Tenants in
Writing, as follows.

Memorandum, Such a day and year, A. S. the Copyholder, Surrenders the Land,
etc. to the Use of B. and C. etc. This Surrender not to stand and be of force
till after the decease of A. S. Per Cur. If this Memorandum should be good,
then this had been a Surrender at a day to come, and consequently void, and
therefore the Surrender being perfect before, by the first part of the
Instrument, this Memorandum shall not make it void, but the Memorandum shall be
void, 2 Rolls Abr. 61. Seagood and Hone. And the Reason is given in Simpson and
Southern's Case, Cro. Jac. p. 376. A Copyholder cannot Surrender an Estate to
another, and leave a particular Estate himself, no more than a Freeholder, for
so the Surrenderer should have a particular Estate in him without a Donor or
Lessor, which by the Rule of Law cannot, be, March. Rep. 177. Bambridge and
Whitton; therefore Noy, p. 152. is not Law, Vid. 1 Roll Rep. 135.

CAP. XV.
Constructions of Surrenders as to Limitations of Remainders and Reversions. Of
Contingent Remainders. Where the Heir shall be in by Descent or Purchase. Of a
Surrender to the Use of ones last Will and how to be Construed. Surrender upon
Condition or Contingency. Of Surrender before Admittance. Surrender by whom, to
whom, by Feme Covert. Countermand of a Surrender. What Remedy to force a
Trustee to Surender.

Construction of Surrenders as to Reversion Remainder
Limitation.

What shall be good to pass by the Name of a Reversion or not.
Surrender by the name of a Reversion.
Copyholder by License of the Lord demised the Copyhold to the Plaintiff for
twenty years by Indenture, rendering Rent; the same Copyholder surrendered the
Reversion of the one moity to A. and of the other to B. and they were admitted.
Per Cur. The Surrender by the name of a Reversion was good in this Case, though
the Lease was not made by Surrender (which had then been directly derived out
of the customary Estate) but by Indenture, for it is still the Lease of the
Copyholder and not of the Lord, and the Rent will be divided by moities.

Husband seized of Copyhold Land in the right of his Wife, who had the Fee,
surrendered the Copyhold Land, by the name of a Reversion, after the death of
the Husband and Wife, the Surrender is void; for by that pretense there shall
be a particular Estate left in the Wife, and also in the Husband, One cannot
leave a particular Estate in himself.
whereas the Husband had nothing before, which cannot be: And when one is
seized in Fee, he cannot by any matter in Fact give away the Inheritance after
his death, and so leave a particular Estate in himself: Peradventure by matter
of Record he may, Cro. Eliz. p. 29. Clamp's Case.

Copyholder in Fee by License of the Lord, 15 Feb. 4 Jac. makes a Lease for
sixty years, rendering Rent, and the Lease was to commence at Michaelmass next
ensuing. Lessee enters and was possessed, Postea scil. 8. May, the Copyholder
surrenders the Reversion to diverse Uses, the Grantee of the Reversion distrains
for Rent, this Grant of the Reversion seems not to be good, the Surrender being
made the 8th of May, which was before the inception of the Lease; perhaps if no
day had been named it had been good, Lit. Rep. 17, 18. Surrender of a Reversion
bears date before the inception of the Lease.
Mary Selby and Beck and Drewet's Case, there cited. A Feme Copyholder in Fee,
comes into Court and offers to Surrender to J. S. in Fee, but she desires to
retain to her self an Estate for Life; the Steward enters that she surrenders
the Reversion of her Copyhold to J. S. after her her death, its naught, Vide
Attornment supra.

Limitations in Remainder and Construction thereon, and of Contingent Remainder.
Tenant for Life and he in Remainder of a Copyhold, he in Remainder surrenders
his Remainder to the Use of Tenant for Life, and after his decease to the Use
of himself and his Wife; the Estate limited to the Tenant for Life, is void,
but the Estate limited to Baron and Feme, is good, by way of present Estate,
and not of Remainder, 1 Sanders Rep. 150, 151, 152. So in Siderfin, Remainder
over good by way of Grant, and does not depend upon a particular void Estate.
p. 360. Copyholder in Remainder surrenders to a Copyholder for Life,
Remainder over; this Remainder over, is good, by way of grant in the Estate
limited to the Tenant for Life, because he had an Estate in it for his Life
before; and therefore it was argued, That the Remainder limited after this
particular Estate which is void in its creation, are void also. But Per Cur.
the intent was, that Husband and Wife shall have the Land joynly for their
Lives, in possession after the death of Tenant for Life, as by mediate
Settlement. A Surrender is rather in nature of a Deed Poll than of an
Indenture, and enures by way of limitation of Use, and ut res magis valeat,
Wade and Bath.

Fee upon a Fee, upon a Contingency.
A Fee may be limited upon a Fee, upon a collateral Contingent in Copyhold
Estates: As if a man surrender a Copyhold in Fee to the Use of J. S. and his
Heirs, who is an Infant, and if J. S. dies before the age of twenty one years,
or marriage, then he surrenders this to the use of J. D. in Fee. This is a good
Remainder to D. upon the Contingent, 2 Rolls 791. Simpson and Southwood. Its
made a Quaere in Styles, in the Argument of Pausley's Case, If by the
destruction of a particular Copyhold, a Contingent Remainder be destroyed.
Rolls conceived not, because it does not depend upon the particular Estate, but
ought to expect till the Remainder happen, Styles 251. and there is one in esse
to take the particular Estate. But it seems the Law to be contrary, and that if
the particular Estate be destroyed the Contingent Remainder is gone: As to this,

A Surrender is to the Use of a Feme Covert, the Remainder to the right Heirs
of the Body of the Husband and Wife; he in the Remainder shall not take till
the Husband dies, for he which is to have this, ought to be Heir of the Body of
both, 2 Rolls Abr. 415. Lane and Panel: A like Case as this is also Reported,
3 Leon. p. 4. Copyholder is surrendered to the Use of the Wife for Life, the
Remainder to the Use of the right Heirs of the Husband and Wife; the Husband
entered in the right of his Wife. Per Cur. The Remainder is executed for a
moiety presently in the Wife, and the Husband was seized of that in the Right
of his Wife, and the Wife dying first, her Heir shall have it, but if the
Husband had dyed first, his Heir should have had one moiety.

But the Case of Lane and Panel (wherein was good Law* and nicely argued,) is
better Reported in 1 Rolls Rep. 238, 317, 438. The Case was this: Lane was
seized of a Copyhold in Fee, and having a Wife, surrenders it to the Use of
Dixon and the Wife for their Lives, and after to the Use of the Heirs of the
Body of the Husband and Wife; and the Wife and Dixon are admitted to them and
their Heirs, and after Dixon surrenders his moiety to the Husband and Wife, and
their Heirs, upon which they were admitted; and afterward they Surrender it to
the Use of one Davis in Fee, who was admitted; then the Wife dies having Issue,
and after the Husband dies, the Heir brings an Action of Trespass; its not
maintainable. The great Question was, whether the Wife had an Estate Tail
executed (vested) in her. Per Coke, Whether Estate Tail Executed, or rests in
Contingency.
its Estate Tail executed in the Wife; but by the Reporter it seems it is not
executed but rests in contingency; the Case as to that is but this: A man gives
Lands to the Use of his Wife for Life (for as to this, the Estate of the
Stranger is not material,) and after to the Use of the Heirs of the Body of the
Husband and Wife, begotten; (for had it been to the Use of the Wife for Life,
the Remainder to the Use of the Heirs of the Wife by the Husband begotten, it
had been no Question) he which is to have this, ought to be Heir of both their
Bodies, which cannot be before the death of both; and then it may so happen,
that this Remainder shall never take effect, for if the Wife dye who had the
particular Estate, during the Life of the Husband (as it was here) her Heir of
her Body cannot take it, because he is not Heir of the Body of the Husband
also, and then he not being capable of the determination of the particular
Estate, he shall never have it, and where an Estate rests upon Contingency this
may not be executed before the Contingency happen. Per Cur. when the Wife and
the Estranger are admitted in Fee, this does not alter the Estate, but they
shall be seized according to the Surrender. And when Dixon surrenders his
moiety to the Use of the Husband, Severance of a Jointure.
this was a severance of the Jointure, between him and the Woman, and the
Husband aliening the whole to the Defendant, he had a moity for the Life of the
Wife, defeazable by the Wife, and the other moiety for the Life of Dixon, and
after when the Wife dies, the Estate of Panel is determined, as to one moity,
and on this the Remainder ought then to have vested; but the Plaintiff being
Heir of the Body of the Wife begotten by the Husband, Remainder destroyed,
because not vests on the determination of the particular Estate.
cannot take the Remainder which was limited to the Heirs of the Body of the
Baron and Feme, during the Life of the Husband, because non est haeres
viventius, and he which takes this Remainder ought to be Heir of both their
Bodies, or otherwise he shall not take it at all, and therefore the Remainder
is destroyed, as to this moiety.

As to the Admittance of him in Remainder, Vide Admittance.

Note, The possession of a Lessee for years, is the possession of him in
Remainder, yea, so as to make a possessio fratris, Modern Rep. 102. Blackburn
and Greaves.

Where the Heir shall be in by Descent or Purchase.
It is a common diversity in our Law, where a Man surrenders to the Use of
himself for Life, and afterward to another in Tail, the Remainder to the right
Heir of him who surrendreth, there his Heirs shall have it by descent;
otherwise, where the Surrenderer has not an Estate for Life, or in Tail, there
his Heir shall enter as a Purchaser. To illustrate this by a Case or two:

A Copyholder surrendered his Lands to the Use of a Stranger for Life, and
afterward to the Use of the right Heirs of the Copyholder, who afterward
surrendered his Reversion to the Use of a Stranger in Fee, and dyed, and Tenant
for Life dyed, the right Heir of the first Copyholder entered. Per Coke,
nothing remained in the Copyholder upon the first Surrender, but the Fee is
reserved to his right Heirs, for if he had not made any second Surrender, the
Heir should be in, not by Descent, but by Purchase, 1 Leon. Allen and Palmer.

Heir.
A. seized in Fee of a Copyhold, surrenders this to the Use of his last Will,
and after by his last Will devised it to B. for Life, and after his death to
the Heir of his Body begotten for ever. Per Cur. The word (Heir) being limited
to the Body of B. is nomen collectivum, and all one with the word Heirs, and so
B. had a Fee executed, and his Heir shall have this by Descent and not by
Purchase: And it is not like to Archer's Case, 1 Rep. Where the Devise is to B.
for Life, and after to his Heir Male, and to the Heirs Males of such Heir Male,
for there the Inheritance is limited to the Heir Male of the Body of such Heir
Male, Styles 249, 271. 2 Rolls Abr. 253. Powsly and Lowdal.

Not a good Remainder within the Custom.
A Copyhold which by Custom was demisable for three Lives, was demised to one
for Life, the Remainder to such a Wife as he shall marry, and to the first Son
of his Wife, Per Cur. These two Remainders are void, but the Estate for his
Life was good, More, n. 1922. Webster and Allen, Vide supra.

Of a Surrender to the Use of one's last Will, and how to be construed.
A man cannot devise Copyhold Estate to transfer it by his last Will only, but
he must Surrender it in Manus Domini, to the Use of his last Will, and then he
may devise it to whom he pleases; but its apparent that nothing passes by the
Will, but all by the Surrender; and the Will is only a Declaration of the Uses
of the Surrender, 1 Bulst. p. 200. Semain's Case: But if a Copyhold he devised
without Surrender, Decreed.
it cannot be executed in point of Interest, but only by Decree in Chancery, 2
Keb. 837. Harrison and Grosvener.

But a Custom, that a Copyholder shall Devise his Land, is not good without
Surrender, p. 35 Eliz. E. R. Rot. 334. Wrot's Case.

A man seized of Copyhold Lands, devised a certain parcel of them to his Wife
for Life, A general Surrender restrained by the Will.
the Remainder to his Brother and his Heirs, and afterward in presence of
three persons of the Court, said to them, I have made my Will, and have
appointed all things in my Will as I will have it; and afterward he said, And
here I Surrender all my Copyhold Lands into your Hands accordingly. Per Cur.
The Surrender is restrained by the Will, and not all his Copyhold Lands, but
only so much as are mentioned in the Will, pass to the Wife, 3 Leon. p. 18.

Copyholder in Fee surrenders into the Hands of a Tenant, according to the
Custom, to the Use of a Will, which he said he would make and leave in the
Hands of his Partner Moss. Moss dies, and after the Copyholder makes his Will,
and recites the Surrender; it seems that the Devisee shall have the Lands, for
the words, Words of Demonstration, and not of restraint.
That he would leave in the Hands of Moss, are words of demonstration, and not
of restraint; and then it is a ground in our Law, When an act is to be done,
with referrence to another thing, which is impossible, illegal or variant, the
act shall stand, and the reference shall be void, Lit. Rep. p. 23. Littleton
against Eaton.

Let us see now when a man has surrendered to the Use of his last Will, how the
Estate stands in the Surrenderer.

Copyholder surrenders to the Use of himself, for Life, and after to the Use
of R. his Son for Life, and after to the Use of his last Will. R. dies, the
Father afterward surrenders it to the Use of J. S. in Fee, and dies, without
making any Will. Its a good Surrender, for a Copyholder may surrender parcel
of the Estate, and the residue shall be in himself, and the Fee Simple of the
Copyhold being limited to the Use of his Will, remains in the Copyholder, and
not in the Lord, Cro. El. 441. Co. 4 Rep. 23. Finch and Hockly, and that the
Fee lies not in the Lord, is Bullen and Grants Case, 1 Leon. p. 174. When one
surrenders to the Use of his last Will, and thereby devises Copyhold Lands to
his middle Son, and the Heirs of his Body, who dies without Issue, and the Lord
grants it to the youngest, the eldest Son may enter, and Admittance is not
necessary.

Copyhold devised to pay Debis.
J. S. seized in Fee of Copyhold Lands, devised it to his Wife for Life, and
that she should sell the Reversion for the payment of his Debts, and after in
Court did Surrender the Lands to the Use of his Wife, for Life, according to
the Will and Deed, she may sell the Land; he surrendered and referred to the
Will, and she surrendered upon Condition to pay 12. l. this was held to be a
good Sale, according to the Will. Cro. El. 68. Bright and Hubbard.

If there be two Joynt-Tenants, By Joynt-Tenants.
and the one Surrenders into the Hands of two Tenants to the Use of his last
Will, and makes a Will of the Land, and dies; the Surrender is afterward
presented. Per Cur. Its a severance of the Jointure, and shall bind the
Survivor, for being presented, it shall relate to the first time of the
Surrender, Cro. Jac. 800. Porter's Case, 1 Brownl. Rep. 127. Allen and Nash.

Pleadings.
Quod tenens custumar. in feodo possit devisare in feodo pro termino vitae vel
annorum, Coke Ent. 124.

Surrender upon Condition or Contingency.
Copyholder may Surrender to the Use of another, on Condition, if the
Copyholder pay to the Surrendree, etc. ad Domum suam Mansionalem, etc. that
then the Surrender shall be void, 5 Rep. 114. Wade's Case.

A Copyholder may Surrender to the Use of another, reserving Rent, Condition,
Re entry for non-payment of Rent.
with Condition of re-entry, for non-payment, and for default of payment, he
may re-enter, 4 H. 6.11.21 H. 6.37.

A Copyholder surrenders upon Condition, and afterward by his Deed releaseth
the Condition; its good without surrender, for properly a Right or Condition
cannot be given or determined by Surrender but by Release, Cro. Jac. 36. Hull
and Shardbrook, 4 Rep. Kite and Quinton.

Surrender to the Use of one in Fee, upon Condition to pay 100 l. to a
Stranger; it was a Question, if the tender of 100 l. to a Stranger, and he
refusing, the Condition is saved? By Beaumont, it is saved, aliter, in Case of
an Obligation, where he takes upon him to do it, Cro. El. p. 361. Paulter's
Case.

K. L. Father of the Defendant, Copyholder in Fee, surrendered to the Use of the
Defendant in Fee, upon Condition he should perform the Covenants in such an
Indenture; the Defendant was admitted, and after surrenders the Land to the Use
of the Plaintiff in Fee, upon Condition if the Defendant paid 10 l. the
Surrender to be void. The Defendant neither paid the 10 l. nor performed the
Covenant in the Indentures. The Father enters and dies seized, and it descends
to the Defendant, Additional Surrenders defeated by Entry.
and he enters, upon whom the Plaintiff enters: The Question was, if this Entry
were lawful, and adjudged it was not; for by the Entry of the Father both the
Surrenders are defeated. So the Defendant may confess and avoid what was done
to the Plaintiff, Judgment pro Defendente, Cro. Eliz. 239. Simonds and Lawnd,
Trin. 33. Eliz.

One cannot pass a Copyhold Estate to begin at a day to come, no not upon a
Contingency.
A Copyholder says, he surrenders his Copyhold Estate, and if his Child which
shall be Born dies before his Age of 21 years, that then his Brother shall have
it; its not good. This Case falls upon a Rule in Law, That one cannot pass a
Copyhold Estate to begin from a day to come, nor yet upon a Contingency, no
more than a Freehold at Common Law, 2 Bulstr. 274. Simpson and Southern.

If a Copyholder surrenders his Copyhold of Inheritance into the hands of the
Lord, Use vests presently, the Condition to take effect in futuro.
to the Use of J. S. paying of an 100 l. to his Executors, within such a time
after his death, he to whose Use this Surrender is made, takes by force of this
presently, Per Dodridge, 2 Bulst. p. 275. idem Case.

Surrender upon Condition or Contingency.
Copyholder may surrender to the Use of another, on condition if the
Copyholder pay 250 l. ad domum suam mansionalem, etc. that then the Surrender
shall be void, 5 Rep. 114. Wade's Case.

A Copyholder may surrender to the Use of another, reserving Rent, Condition
of re-entry for non-payment of Rent.
with condition of re-entry for non-payment, and for default of payment, he may
re-enter, 4 H. 6.11.21 H. 6.37.

A Copyholder surrenders upon condition, and afterward by his Deed releaseth
the condition, its good without surrender, for properly a right or condition
cannot be given or determined by Surrender, but by Release, Cro. Jac. 36. Hull
and Sharebrook, 4 Rep. Kite and Quinton.

Surrender to the Use of one in Fee, upon condition to pay 100 l. to a
Stranger; it was a Question if the tender of the 100 l. to the Stranger, and he
refusing, the condition is saved. By Beaumont it is saved; aliter in Case of an
Obligation, where he takes upon him to do it, Cro. El. p. 361. Poulter's Case.

The Form of a Surrender of Copyhold Land upon Condition, Vide Conveyancers
Light, p. 827. Vide infra Presidents.

Of Surrender before Admittance, whether it shall be good or not?
Purchaser has nothing before Admittance, neither can he Surrender.
A Surrender to J. S. J. S. Surrenders to a Stranger, who is Admitted. The
Stranger takes nothing, for J. S. had no Estate before Admittance, and the
right and possession still remains in him who surrendered, and this shall
descend to his Heir. But the diversity is, an Heir to whom a Copyhold descends
or comes in remainder, he may surrender before Admittance, because he is in by
course of Law, for he Custom which makes him Heir to the Estate casts the
Possession upon him, from his Ancestors. But a Stranger to whom the Copyhold
is surrendered, had nothing before Admittance because he is a Purchaser, and the
Copy made to him upon his Admittance is his Evidence by the Custom; and before
this he is not a customary Tenant, and so he can transfer nothing to another.
Yelv. p. 144, 145. Wilson and Weddel. Cro. Jac. p. 36. Joyner's Case.

The Heir may surrender the Reversion before Admittance.
Copyholders Baron and Feme to them and the Heirs of the Husband: Husband dies,
the Heir may surrender his Reversion into the hands of two Tenants, out of
Court, (if the Custom be so,) before any Admittance, and during the Life of the
Wife, and its a good Surrender, for the Reversion was cast upon him by the
Surrender, before any Admittance, 1 Rolls Abr. 499. Calchin and Calchin.

Surrender, by whom.
By Infant.
An Infant who Surrendered his Copyhold Land within Age, may enter at his full
Age, without being put to any Suit for it, Popham. p. 39.

Infant within Age, surrenders to the Use of another, its not good, in
Chancery, Mich. 9 Jac. Hughs and Carpenter.

Baron seized of Copyhold in right of his Feme, in Fee, surrenders without his
Wife, By Husband of the Wives Land.
to the Use of J. S. in Fee, who was Admitted; Baron dies, Wife dies, the Heir
of the Wife enters, and makes a Lease, and good; this was not any
discontinuance against the Wife, to put the Heir to his Plaint, in nature of a
sur cui in vita. That Action is given, where Recovery by default is against the
Baron and Feme, Popham 39. Bullock and Dibler.

Copyholder pur vie Surrenders to the Use of another, By Copyholder for Life.
there can be no possibility of having it again, if he survive; for the
Surrenderer is merely in by the Lord, and not by the Copyholder; but if a
Copyholder in Fee surrender to the Use of another, for Life, who is admitted,
he is in quasi by the Copyholder, and by his death the Copyholder shall have
it again, Cro. Car. 204* King and Lord.

Tenant for Life of a Copyhold, where the Remainder is over, may surrender to
the Lord, 9 Rep. 107. Podger's Case.

A Feme Covert and J. S. are Tenants for Life of a Copyhold, By Joynt-Tenants.
and J. S. surrenders his moiety to the Husband of the Wife; this is a
severance of the Jointure, so that he is Tenant in Common with his Wife, 2
Rolls Abr. 88. Lane and Panel.

Two Joynt-Tenants of a Copyhold, and the one surrenders his moiety into the
Hands of the Lord, to the Use of his last Will, and thereby devises it to
another; this is a good Devise, because by the Surrender the Jointure was
severed between them, Co. Lit. 59. b. So if there are two Joynt-Tenants in Fee
of a Copyhold, and the one Surrenders his part out of Court, into the Hands of
the Lord, to the Use of his last Will, and by his last Will afterward
devises it to the Use of a Stranger in Fee, and after at next Court the
Surrender is presented; by the Surrender and Presentment the Jointure was
severed, and the Devisee ought to be Admitted to the moiety of the Land, for
now by relation the State of the Land was bound by the Surrender, Co. Lit. 59
b. Constable's Case, cited there.

Where a Copyhold granted by a Disseisor, etc. shall be good, and stand in
force against the Disseisee, and where not.
By Disseisor, etc.
Tenant for Life, Remainder for Life of a Copyhold, the Remainder man for Life
enters upon Tenant for Life in possession, and makes a Surrender; nothing at
all passes hereby; for by his Entry he is a Disseisor, and has no customary
Estate in him whereof to make a Surrender, Mod. Rep. 199. Bird and Keck.

Of the lawful Lord, who can make Grants and admit upon Surrenders.
This diversity was unanimously agreed. If Disseisor or Feoffee of a Disseisor,
or any other who has a tortious or defeasible Estate, or Interest subject to
the Action or Entry of another, hold Court, and make any voluntary Grant upon
Escheat or Forfeiture of a Copyhold, such voluntary Grant shall not bind him
that had right, when he shall re-continue the Manor by Action or Entry; for to
this intent the said Custom shall be intended of a Lord which had a lawful
Estate or Interest; but if such Lord who had a tortious or defeasible Estate,
admit any upon Surrender made to the Use of another, or give Admittance to the
Heir upon a Descent, such Admittance shall be good, and within the Custom; for
such acts are lawful, and quodammodo judiciales, and which he may be compelled
to do in a Court of Equity, 4 Rep. 23. b. Clark and Penyfeather. So every one
who had a lawful Estate or Interest in a Manor ( Dom. pro Tempore) both in Fee
or Tail, or Dower, or by the Courtesy, or for Life, or Years, or as Guardian,
or Tenant by the Statute, or Elegit, or at Will. Otherwise of Tenant at
Sufferance: For if there be Tenant pur auter vie, of a Manor, and Cesty que vie
dies, and the Tenant continue in the Manor, and hold Courts, and makes
voluntary Grants, by Copy, this shall not bind the Lessor; aliter of Admittance
upon Surrender, or upon Descent, 4 Rep. 24. Rous and Archer's Case; such Grants
shall not be avoided by disability of the person, or defect of Interest, or
exility of the Estate of the Lords (as at Will, sur condition, etc.) 8 Rep.
63. Swain's Case: Or whether it were granted by non compos mentis, Infant,
Bishop, Parson, non sanae memoriae, etc. it is not material in Surrenders, Vide
supra in Tit. Lords Grants. If a Copyhold Escheat or come into their Hands
during their time, they may re-grant it, reddendum the ancient Rents, Customs
and Services, and this shall bind the Lord who had the Inheritance or
Freehold, 4 Rep. ibid. So such Grant by Baron and Feme shall bind the Wife,
notwithstanding the Coverture; So a Grant by a non compos mentis, a Bishop,
Infant, and so Feme Covert, non sanae memory, Infants, Successors of Bishops,
Parsons, Prebends, are bound by the said Custom, it being that the Tenements
sunt dimiss. and dimissib. per Dom. Manerij pro tempore existen, etc. ibid.
vide supra.

By a Feme Covert.
A Tenant out of Court cannot take a Surrender of a Feme Covert, for that she
is secretly to be examined by the Steward, Tothil, p. 108. unless by special
Custom.

Sola and secreta examinat.
The Surrender of a Feme Covert being so le examined, shall bind her; but
whether such a Surrenderer, upon her examination made before two Tenants of the
Manor, such Surrenders before them, being used to be made, be good, was the
Question in the Case of Erish and Rives, Mich. 41 El. B. C. and Per Cur. by
special Custom to warrant it, it may be good.

By Infant, Vide supra.

By the Husband of the Wives Land, Quid operatur.
Feme Tenant for Life of a Copyhold, the Reversion being granted over to B. for
Life, Remainder to C. for Life, cum acciderit post mortem sursum redditionem
vel forisfacturam of the Feme, and after the Husband Surrenders to the Use of
B. for Life, and so he is Admitted Tenant, and after dies. In this Case C.
shall not have this, because his Estate is not to commence till after the
Death, Surrender, or Forfeiture of the Feme; and the Feme here is in Life and
had not made any Surrender or Forfeiture, and the Wife had right in this in the
nature of a plaint de cui in vita. But the Lord in this Case may retain it in
his own proper hands or disposition, Occupant.
during the Life of the Husband, quasi an Occupant, Dyer 9 El. 264. Sect. 38.

Surrender, to whom.
To the Wife.
By the Husband to the Use of the Wife is good, vide supra, and 4 Rep. 29.
Bunting's Case, for it is done by Surrender to the Lord and Admittance.

To the Steward.
A Surrender made to the Steward, to the Use of the Steward, is good, for the
Entry is, quod sursum reddidit in manus Domini, and the Steward is but the
Lords Servant, and the surrender is to the Lord, and not to him, Cro. El. p.
717. Erish and Rives.

So Infant, Vide supra.

Of Countermand of a Surrender. Where the Surrender of a Copyhold may be
Countermanded by the Party himself, and what collateral Act without the assent
and privity of the Party shall be a countermand, and where, and what not.
Grant by Baron and Feme shall bind the Feme notwithstanding the Coverture: so
Grant by non compos mentis, Infant, Vide supra.

Vide supra. Where and what Grants by Lords of Manors shall be good or
defeasible in respect of the Estate they had therein.

Surrender is not Countermanded by the death of Surrenderor before Presentment,
4 Rep. 29 Bunting's Case.

Where the Customs are not pursued, the surrenders are void, Vide sparsim, and
5 Rep. 84. Peryman's Case.

Surrender by Steward or Deputy Steward and of persuing their Warrants, vide
Steward, supra.

What remedy to force a Trustee to Surrender.
A Copyholder does surrender to the Use of one A. in Trust, In the Lord's
Court.
that he shall hold the Land until he has levied certain Moneys, and that
afterward he shall surrender to the Use of B. The Moneys are levied. A. is
required to make surrender to the Use of B. he refuses, B. exhibits a Bill to
the Lord of the Manor against A. who upon hearing of the Cause Decrees against
A. That he shall Surrender; he refuses: Now the Lord may seize, and admit B.
to the Copyhold, for he in such case is Chancellor in his own Court, Per totam
Curiam, 1 Leon. 2. Or relief may be had in Chancery.

CAP. XVI.
Of Presentment. How and when to be made. How to be pursuant to the Surrender.
What the Law is if Surrenderor or Cesty que use, or the customary Tenants, into
whose Hands the Surrender was made, dye before Presentment or Admittance.
Where two Surrenders are, and the second Surrender is presented first.

Presentment.
No good Surrender till presented.
IF the Surrender be made out of Court into the Hands of the Lord himself, which
the general Custom will warrant, or into the Hands of the Bailiff, or of two
Tenants of the Manor (which is warrantable only by special Custom) there must
be a true Presentment of the Surrender in Court, by the same Persons into whose
Hands the Surrender was made, and the Admittance of the Lord must be according
to the effect and tenor of both the Surrender and Presentment. It is not an
effectual Surrender till it be presented in Court. And therefore in an Action
on the Case on Assumpsit, in Consideration that the Plaintiff would surrender
to the Defendant and his Heirs a Copyhold according to the Custom of the Manor,
Defendant assumed to pay 500 l. and for breach of this promise the Plaintiff
brings the Action and had a Verdict; but Judgment was arrested, because the
Consideration on the Plaintiffs part was not performed; for the Consideration
was, That he should surrender the Copyhold to the Defendant and his Heirs, and
he has alleged the surrender to be into the Hands of a Copyhold Tenant of
the Manor, to Use of the Defendant, which is no surrender until it be
presented at the next Court, and so it is uncertain whether it shall take
effect or not, Styles, p. 256. Shaan and Shaan.

The Presentment by the general Custom of Manors is to be made at the next
Court day, When to be. be made.
immediately after the surrender, but by special Custom, at the second or third
day afterward, and by Rolls in Jay's Case, Styles 275. there is no certain
time, but as the Custom is, so that it be within the Life of the Tenant, it is
to be made by the same persons that took the Surrender, and in points material,
according to the true tenor of the Surrender.

But if the Surrender be conditional, Presentment must pursue the Surrender.
and the Presentment absolute, the Surrender, Presentment and Admittance are
void, except the Steward in the entry of it omits the Condition, and upon
sufficient proof made in Court of that, the Surrender shall not be avoided, but
the Roll amended, and this shall be no conclusion to the Party to plead, or
give in Evidence the truth of the matter, 4 Rep. 25. Kite and Quinton.

But in May's Case, Norf. Summer Assizes, 1663. The Custom of a Manor was for a
Copyholder in extremis to surrender into one Tenants Hands in the presence of
credible Witnesses, and a Surrender was made accordingly, but presented to be
done to another Tenant, yet being proved to be done to a Tenant of the Manor;
It was holden by Wadham Windham Justice to be good.

Of Presentment where the Surrenderor or Surrendree, Cesty que use, or
customary Tenants dye before Presentment or Admittance.
Surrenderor dies.
If one Surrender out of Court, and dye before Presentment, if Presentment be
made after his death, this is good, 4 Rep. 29. Bunting's Case.

Cesty que use, dies.
If ( Cesty que use) he to whose Use the Surrender is made, dies before
Presentment, yet upon Presentment made after his death, his Heir shall be
admitted, Styles, p. 145. Barker and Denhan.

Surrenderor and Cesty que use, both dye*
If one Surrender out of Court, to the Use of one for Life, the Surrenderor and
the Lessee for Life both dye before the Presentment, yet upon Presentment made,
he in Remainder shall be Admitted.

Surrendree dies.
Surrendree dies before Admittance, his Heir may be Admitted, and if it be
Burrough-English, the youngest Son, 2 Siderfin, 38, 61.

The Tenants into whose hands the Surrender was made, dye.
If the Tenant, into whose Hands the Surrender was made, dye before Presentment,
yet upon sufficient proof made in Court, That such a Surrender was made, the
Lord shall be compelled to admit, Co. Lit. 62.

Nothing passes till presentment.
But nothing passes till Presentment. Therefore T. H. was Copyholder in Fee,
and surrendered out of Court into the Hands of H. B. and W. J. two Copyholders
of the Manor, to the Use of R. W. in Fee. R. W. entered and paid the Rent to the
Lord. T. H. who surrendered, dyed. H. B. and W. J. who took the Surrender are
dead. The Heir of T. H. entered. R. W. reenters. Per Cur. By the Surrender into
the Hands of two Tenants, nothing passed until it was presented in Court, and
in the interim the Interest remains in him who made the Surrender, which
Interest descended to the Heir, and the acceptance of the Rent by the hands of
Cesty que use gives not any Interest unto him; and there is no Estate in Cesty
que use, but an Inception, until this Surrender be presented in Court: But they
held also, That it was not of necessity, that the Parties who took the
Surrender should present it; and although they are dead, and the Party who made
it is dead, yet (as the Custom is found) if it be presented by any other
Copyholder when the Court is held, its well enough, and he may be thereupon
admitted, Cro. Jac. 403. Froswel and Welsh, and so is Buntings's Case, 4 Rep.
so resolved: And Cesty que use shall procure a Court to be held for his own
advantage, 1 Bulst. 215. mesme Case.

Two Joynt-Tenants in Fee of a Copyhold, Cesty que use to procure a Court to be
held for his own advantage.
and one surrenders his part into the Hands of the Lord, to the Use of his last
Will, and after devises this to another in Fee, and dies, and after at the
next Court this is presented, the Devisee shall have it; for now by relation
the Jointure was severed, and the Estate of the Land bound by the Surrender,
Constable's Case. Rolls 1 Abr. 501. So Cro. 30 Jac. Mich. Porter's Case.

Custom for a Copyholder to Devise, and if the Will be not presented within a
year and a day next after, the Devise to be void; they were several Customs,
and so differ from Peyrrman's Case. Now suppose no Court be holden in that
time, Carter's Rep. 71, 72, 88. Smith and Painton. It shall be presented at a
Court within the year, or at next Court after the year ended, else it shall be
void, 5 Rep. 84. 2 Anderson 125.

In Perryman's Case, 5 Rep. 84. It is a Question, what remedy if the
Copyholder will not present the Surrender made out of Court? the Answer is,
Caveat emptor; but certainly there is good remedy in Equity, as in all Cases of
Trustees or Instruments of Conveyance.

The Custom is, That it should be presented at next Court, otherwise it was
void. One surrenders his Copyhold into the Hands of two Tenants out of Court,
upon condition of payment of Money 25 July after to be void. After he surrenders
out of Court to the Use of J. S. the Money was paid before the 25 of July. Then
he surrenders to the Use of a third person before the payment. At the next
Court the surrenders were presented, Two Surrenders, and the second Surrender
presented first.
but not the first, and the Lord grants Admittances severally to these two
Persons. Per Cur. The second Surrender was good, for nothing by the Surrender
out of Court was divested out of him that surrendered, until the Surrender was
presented, but he was absolute Owner to bring Trespass or any other Action, and
then that not being presented, and the second was presented, the first
Surrender was void, and the second was good, Jones 306. 1 Roll. Abr. 500 Burgis
and Spurlin's Case. Cro. Car. 273, 283. mesme Case.

CAP. XVII.
Of Admittances upon Voluntary Grants, Surrenders, Descents. By whom
Admittances upon Surrender made shall bind. In what Cases the Admittance of the
one shall be the Admittance of another. Of Admittance by Attorney. Admittance
where to be made. Of Admittance upon Descent: The time of Admittance. What
things the Heir may do or not do before Admittance. In what Cases, and to what
purposes the Copyhold Estate shall be in the Tenant, and to what purposes not.
And what Leases, etc. made by them shall be good, and in what Cases the Lord
shall be compellable to make Admittances, and where not.

Of Admittances on voluntary Grants.
NOTE, a diversity between the Heir who comes in course by Descent, and another
Stranger who comes in by Surrender, and has these words, Dominus concessit and
admissus est; but when the Heir of a Copyholder is to be Admitted, he has
only these words, Et admissus est.

Admittances are of three sorts, upon a Voluntary Grant. Surrender, Descent.


As to voluntary Grants made by the Lord, in some sense he may be said to be
the absolute Owner of the Land, and may dispose of it at his pleasure, yet he
is bound to observe the Custom of the Manor in his Grants, neither can he alter
the Estate or Tenure.

If the Custom does warrant an Estate to a Woman durante viduitate only, and
the Lord admits for Life, this shall not bind his Heir.

The Custom must be pursued.
So in Reservations according to the accustomable Rent, the Lord must strictly
pursue it; as where he reserves 10 s. where the usual Rent was 20 s. So where
the Rent has been accustomably paid at four Feasts, and the Lord reserves it at
two Feasts, these are void. So if two Copy-holds Escheat to the Lord, the one
of which has been usually demised for 20 s. rent, and the other for 10 s. and
he grants them both by Copy for 30 s. its not good.

But in this kind of Surrender, the Lord is not considered barely as an
Instrument, because he is not bound to dispose the Land but to whom he
pleases, yet he is an Instrument in respect he is tied unto Custom; but in the
other sort of Surrender he is barely an Instrument.

Where to be made.
The Lord himself may grant or make Admittances out of the Manor, at what place
he pleases, but so cannot the Steward, 4. Rep. 26, and 27.

Several Tenures and several Fines.
The Lord admits, Tenenda per antiqua servitia inde prius debita, and de jure
consueta. And if the Tenures are several, the Fines must be several.

In Westwick's Case, 4 Rep. The Entry of the Roll was, Ad hanc curiam venerunt
Willielmus Westwick and Johanna Uxor ejus and ceperunt de Domino Tenementa
praed. cum pertin. in quibus, etc. prefat. Willielmo Westwick and Johannae
Uxori ejus Tenend. eisdem Willielmo and Johannae and haeredibus suis, etc. When
the Surrender was to the Use of William Westwick in Fee, yet the Admittance
shall enure only to the Husband, The Admittance must be pursuant to the
Surrender.
for the Lord can but make Admittance secundum formam and offectum sursum
redditionis, de quo vide in Cap. Surrenders.

Cesty que use cannot surrender before Admittance and the Entry of the
Surrenderer does not make an Admittance, it being entered thus, Compertum est
per homagium, etc. and not as its usual, dat. Domino de fine and fecit
fidelitatem and admissus est inde tenens, at the end of Popham p. 127, 128.
Rawlinson and Green.

Of Admittances upon Surrender.
The nature of it will be Explained by two or three Rules.

I. The surrender of a Copyhold to J. S. has no effect till J. S. be admitted
Tenant; Till admission the Tenant has no Estate.
therefore if J. S. before he is admitted, surrenders to J. B. who is admitted;
this avails nothing to J. B. for J. S. himself had nothing, and so can pass
nothing, and the Admittance of his Grantee shall not be taken by implication as
Admittance to himself, for the Admittance ought to be of a Tenant certainly
known to the Steward, and entered in a Roll by it self, and in such case the
Right and Possession remains still in him who surrendered, and descends to his
Heir; he to whom the Copyhold is surrendered, comes in as a Purchaser, and his
Copy is his Evidence by the Custom, and till he is admitted, he can be no
customary Tenant, and therefore can transfer no right to another, Yelverton
145. Wilson and Weddel. 1 Brownlow 143. Aliter in Case of Descent, Vide infra.
The Admittance of a Copyholder is compared to the Induction to a Benefice,
which gives Possession. At the end of Popham, p. 127, 121. Rawlinson and Green,
That Case was, Copyholder surrendered his Copyhold Estate to the Use of
another, which was presented at next Court, and found by the Homage, and he to
whose Use the Surrender was made, was there in Court accepted by the Steward,
and a Copy by him granted unto him; afterward he to whose Use this Surrender
was made, surrenders the same again to the Use of another, which was presented,
and a Copy granted to him, and he accepted as a Copyhold Tenant, but no
Admittance Entered, as Cepit de Dom. and admissus est inde tenens, etc. Per Cur.
He to whom the first Surrender was made, had no Estate in him before
Admittance, and whether and how far he might transfer this Interest, Curia
dubitav. and whether what was done to the second Surrendree is not an assent by
the Lord to the first Surrenderer? It was granted, That if the Steward accepted
a Fine as of a Copyholder, it amounted to an Admittance, 3 Bulstr. 237. mesme
Case.

II. Surrenders of Copy-holds are not to be likened to Surrenders at Common
Law; for if a Copyholder in Fee surrenders to the Use of another for Life,
nothing more passes out of him than shall serve the Estate limited to the Use,
and he which made the Surrender shall not pay any Fine for re-Admittance to the
Reversion, for this continues always in him, 9 Rep. 107. Margaret Podgers Case.

III. The Lord has a bare customary power to admit secundum formam and
effectum sursum reddit. Therefore if there be any variance between the
Admittance and Surrender, either in the Person or the Estate, or in the Tenure,
its void, etc. The Lord does only transfer an Estate according to the
Surrender. Where the Lords Admittance of a Copyholder, in other manner than
agrees to the Surrender shall be good, and how it shall be construed and enure.

Admittances as to Limitations, alter not the Estate, for he is in by force of
the Surrender.


If J. surrender to the Use of J. S. and the Lord admits J. N. this Admittance
is wholly void, and yet the Lord may afterward admit J. S. according to his
Authority; but had he admitted J. S. and J. N. jointly, then the Admittance had
been void for the one, and good for the other, Co. Cop. 127.

If a man surrender to the Use of J. S. and J. D. for their Lives, the
Remainder over to another; and J. S. and J. D. are admitted in Fee, yet this
does not alter their Estate, but they shall be seized according to the
Surrender, 1 Rolls Rep. 317. Lane and Panel.

Surrender is upon Condition, the Presentment is absolute, and the Admittance
is absolute; the Presentment was void: But the Surrenderors Release to Cesty
que use shall make his Estate good, Vide supra, 4 Rep. Keit and Quinton.

If the Lord after Surrender grants to Cesty que use, and to Stranger, all
shall enure to Cesty que use; or if he admit the Cesty que use upon a
Condition, the Condition is void, for after Admittance he is in by him that
made the Surrender. So if a Copyholder surrender to the use of another, pur
vie, and the Lord admit him, to hold to him and his Heirs, yet Cesty que use
had but an Estate for Life, for he is in after Admittance by force of the
Surrender, 4 Rep. Westwick and Wier.

Note, A Copyhold Estate cannot be surrendered to another by an Attorney,
without Deed, but one may be admitted to a Copyhold Estate, by Attorney,
without Deed, Styles Pract. Reg. 74.

By whom Admittance upon Surrender may be made and shall bind.
By those that have defeasible Titles.
Admittances made by Disseisors, Abators, Intruders, Tenant at sufferance, or
others, who have defeizable Titles, are good against them who have Right,
because these are lawful Acts, and they were compellable to do the same, Co.
Lit. 58. b.

If Disseisor of a Manor accept a Surrender of a Copyhold of Inheritance to
the Use of another and his Heirs, and he admits Cesty que use accordingly; this
is good, and shall bind the Disseisee, p. 40 Eliz. B. R. Martin and Rieve, 4
Rep. 24.

If A. Copyholder for Life surrender to the Disseisor of a Manor, to the Use
of another, for the Life of A. and the Disseisor admits him accordingly; this
shall bind the Disseisee, ibid. Martin's Case: But without Admittance it shall
not bind.

Surrender by Dom. pro tempore, and his Estate determines before Admittance.
If the Lord pro tempore of a Copyhold Manor be Lessee for Life, or for Years,
Guardian, or any who had particular Interest; or Tenant at will of a Manor,
accept a Surrender, and after, before Admittance, the Lessee for Life dies, or
the Years, Interest, or Custody or the Will is determined, although the next
Lord comes in paramount the Lease for Life, or for years, the Custody, or the
particular Interest or Tenancy at Will, yet he shall be compelled to make
Admittance according to the Surrender, 17 Jac. Lord Arundel's Case, Co. Lit.
59. b. Trin. 1 Jac. Rot. 854. Shopland and Ridler.

By the Deputies Servant admitting, no Judicial Act.
The Deputy of a Steward, commands H. his Servant to keep Court, and grant Land
and Admit, Per Cur. it is good; for the taking a Surrender, granting Lands by
Copy, admitting a Copyholder, is not any judicial Act, for there need not be
any Suitors there, who are Judges, 1 Leon. 288. Lord Dacres's Case.

What amounts to an Admittance.
If a Copyholder in Fee surrender to the Use of another, Cesty que use
surrenders to another.
and after at another Court he to whose Use the Surrender was, surrenders the
Land to the Use of another; this shall enure as an Admittance upon the first
Surrender, and after a Surrender; for by the acceptance of the Surrender, he is
admitted Tenant, Acceptance of a Surrender.
1 Rolls Abr. 505. Calchin's Case, 3 Bulst. 230. mesme Case.

If a Copyholder surrender to the Use of another, Acceptance of Rent.
and after the Lord having knowledge of this, accepts the Rent of Cesty que use
out of Court, this is an Admittance in Law, Rolls 1 Abr. 505. Freswel and Welsh.

If the two Tenants into whose Hands the Surrender was, pay the Rent to the
Lord, yet his acceptance shall not amount to an Admittance; but if he had
alleged the payment of the Rent, and acceptance of it by the Lord, as of his
Copyholder; this would have amounted to a good Admittance of him, 3 Bulstr.
215. mesme Case.

Any act to imply the consent of the Lord to the Surrender, What acts or words
by the Lord amount to an Admittance.
it shall be a good Admittance; the Presentment by the Homage does not make an
Admittance; the acceptance by the Steward of the Presentment, is no Admittance,
Bridgman Rep. 82. Robinson and Groves.

Copyholder surrenders his Estate to the Use of J. S. who again surrenders the
same to the Use of J. N. this is good, vide supra; Or in such case, if the Lord
meet J. N. and says to him, Such a Surrender is made to your Use, to which I
agree, or am content; this saying amounts to a good Admittance, 3 Bulstr. 230.
Elken's Case 215, 216.

If the Steward accept a Fine as of a Copyholder, it amounts to an Admittance;
granted in Rawlinson and Green's Case, 3 Bulstr. 237.

In what Cases the Admittance of one shall be the Admittance of another.
If a Copyholder surrender to the Use of one for Life, the Remainder to
another, the Admittance of Tenant for Life is Admittance for him in Remainder
also, for that they are but one Estate, and but one Fine is due for both, 4
Rep. 22, 23. Fither's Case. Aliter of him in Reversion, More, n. 488. Dell and
Higden. He in Remainder after a Tenant for Life, who was admitted, surrenders
to the Use of a Stranger in the Lifetime of Tenant pur vie, and good, Cro.
Jac. 31. Auncelm's Case: But such Admittance of Tenant for Life, shall not
prejudice the Lord of his Fee due by the Custom, 4 Rep. Brown's Case, 22, 23.
Foxton and Colston. But in Hippin and Bunner's Case, Popham thought only one
Fine to be due upon such surrender, which the Tenant for Life shall pay before
his Admittance, except there be especial Custom that two Fines shall be due,
Cro. Eliz. 504.

The Admittance of Tenant for Life, or Years, shall be an Admission of all in
Remainder, Per Hales, and there is no inconvenience in it; for Fines are to be
paid by the particular Remainder, except a Fine be assessed for the whole
Estate, and then there is an end of the Business. The Estate is bound by the
Surrender and shall go to them in Remainder, Mod. Rep. and 3 Keb. 29. Blackburn
and Greves.

A Copyholder Surrenders to the Use of several Persons for years, successive,
the Remainder in Fee to J. S. an Admittance of a particular Tenant is an
Admittance of all the Remainders to all purposes, but only the Lords Fine; and
the Possession of Lessee for years is the Possession of him in Remainder, ibid
so as to make a Possessio Fratris, and the Sister of the whole Blood shall have
it before a Brother of the second Venture.

Admittance by Attorney.
The Lord may refuse to admit by Attorney him to whose Use a Surrender was made,
for that he ought to do Fealty, which he cannot do by Attorney. 9 Rep. 76.
Comb's Case. Yet if the Lord will admit him by Attorney, its good, ibid.

A Copyholder surrendered to the Use of his last Will, and devised the Lands to
his youngest Son, in Fee: The youngest Son being in Prison, makes a Letter of
Attorney to one to be admitted to the Land in the Lords Court, in his room, and
also after Admittance to surrender the same to the Use of B. and his Heirs, to
whom he had sold it for the payment of his Debts; by two Judges, its not a good
Surrender.

Admittance of an Heir is good by Prochein Amy, By Prochein Amy.
for by such Admittance he is to do corporal Service, which cannot be done but
in person, and yet it has been adjudged good, the Heir consenting; but
otherwise 2 Siderfin 37, 61, Blunt and Clark, 4 Rep. Brown and Clerk's Case.

The Case was, Copyholder surrenders to the Use of J. S. and his Heirs,
Proviso, That if the Copyholder pay eight hundred pounds, at such a day, the
Surrender shall be void. J. S. dies before the day, not being admitted, and his
Heir beyond Sea. A Neighbor comes and is admitted in the name of the Heir, the
Heir comes back and brings Ejectment, Per Cur. Its a good Admittance, for a
Consent subsequent is as strong as an Authority precedent in this Case, and the
Heir affirms his Admission. And if a Surrender (Per Glyn) be to the Use of J.
S. and J. N. is admitted and J. S. consents, its a good Admittance.

Admittance, where to be made.
The Lord of the Manor may make Admittance out of the Manor also, Co. Lit. 61.
b.

The Steward of the Manor may admit upon a Surrender out of Court, as well as
in Court, 4 Rep. 26, 27. Freswel and Welsh.

Admittances upon Descent.
The diversity between Admittance upon Surrender, and Admittance upon Descent
lies.

In Admittance upon Surrender, nothing is vested in the Grantee before
Admittance, no more than in voluntary Grants, but in Admittance upon Descents
the Heir is Tenant by Copy immediately upon the death of his Ancestor.

The time of Admittance.
There is thirty years between the death of the Father, Excuse.
and the Heirs not being admitted who made a Lease: Per Cur. this is supina
negligentia, and shall disable his Person to make any Demise, but the Lessor at
the time of the death of his Ancestor was two years of age, and that after his
full age, no Court had been holden for a long time, and that at the first Court
lately he prayed to be admitted, and the Steward refused him. And Per Cur. this
is a good excuse, 1 Leon. 100. Rumny and Eves.

If a Copyholder dies, When the Heir must pray to be admitted.
his Heir within age, he is not bound to come at any Court, during his nonage,
to pray Admission, or to tender his Fine; also if the death of the Ancestor is
not Presented, nor Proclamations made, he is not at any mischief, although he
be of full Age, ibid.

What things the Heir way do or not before Admittance.
Upon the death of the Ancestor he may enter upon the Land before Admittance;
he may take the Profits, punish any Trespass done upon the Land, 4 Rep. 21.
Brown's Case, and 23 Fitch and Huckly.

He may before Admittance surrender to whose Use he pleases, paying the Lord
his Fine.

The Lord may avow upon him before Admittance, for arrears of Rents or other
Services.

If Baron and Feme Copyholders to them and to the Heirs of the Husband are,
and the Husband dies, the Heir of the Husband may surrender his Reversion into
the hands of two Tenants of the Manor, out of Court, before any Admittance,
during the Life of the Wife, and this is a good Surrender, for the Reversion
was cast upon him before any Admittance, Calchin's Case, 1 Rolls Abr. 499.

Possessio Fratris before Admittance.
There shall be a possessio fratris before Admittance; for if a Copyholder in
Fee have Issue a Son and a Daughter by one Venture, and a Son by another Venture;
What makes a Possession or not for that purpose.
and his Son by the first Venture enter into the Land and dies before
Admittance, the Daughter shall Inherit as Heir to her Brother, and not the Son
by the second Venture as Heir to his Father. And sometimes the Possession of a
Termor, without any actual Entry or Claim made by the Heir, will make a
possessio fratris; as if the Copyholder by License of the Lord, makes a Lease
for years, and dies, and the Son of the first Venture dies before the
expiration of the Term, being neither admitted, nor having made any actual
Entry or Claim; yet this Possession of the Lessee is sufficient, and the
Reversion shall descend to the Daughter of the first Venture, and not to the Son
of the second Venture; but if the Lease had determined, the Son living by the
first Venture, and afterward he had dyed before any actual Entry made, the Law
would have fallen out otherwise, because there was a time when he might have
lawfully entered. The same Law was as to the possession of a Guardian.

Heir before Admittance, is not a complete Tenant to all purposes.
But yet the Heir before Admittance, is not a complete Tenant to all intents and
purposes, for before that he cannot be sworn of the Homage, and he cannot
maintain a Pleint, in the nature of an Assise, in the Lords Court, till he is
admitted, Co. Cop.

As there may be possessio fratris, etc. before the Heirs Admittance, so there
may be a Tenant by the Courtesy, ( Dyer, f. 292.) before Admittance of the
Feme, More, n. 425.

By Hales, in the Case of Blackburn and Greaves, Modern Rep. 120. If a
Surrender be to the Use of A. for Life, the Remainder to his eldest Son, etc.
or to the Use of A. and his Heirs, and then A. dies, the Estate is in the Son,
without Admittance, whether he takes by Purchase or Descent.

One seized of a Copyhold Tenement in right of his Wife, in his Demesne, as of
Fee; surrenders this Copyhold Tenement without his Wife, to the Use of a
Stranger in Fee, who was admitted by the Lord accordingly; Husband dies, and
Wife dies, the Heir of the Wife without Admittance enters on the Stranger, and
made a Lease, and good, Popham 39. Bullock and Dibler: This is no such
discontinuance against the Heir, as to put the Heir to a Plaint in the nature
of a cui in vita; its no more than a Grant which passes no more than his own
Estate, and the Heir may intermeddle with the Possession before Admittance.

Upon a Custom to surrender to two Copyholders out of Court, Surrender to the
Heir (as a Copyhold Tenant) is good before Admittance.

Heir may enter and have Trespass before Admittance.


a Surrender to the Heir of a Copyholder before Admittance, is good, 1 Keb.
25. Munifas and Baker.

Copyholder dies, the Lord admits a Stranger, the Heir may enter, and upon
re-entry, maintain a Trespass without Admittance, Noy, p. 172. Simpson and
Gillion.

He shall have Trespass, and this before his Admittance upon Descent, 2 H.
4.12. Pl. 49. 4 Rep. 23. b. Cro. El. 349. Berry and Green.

When the Heir shall be in by Purchase and not by descent.
If a Copyholder of Inheritance surrender this to the Use of another, and his
Heirs, and he to whom the Surrender is made, dies before Admittance, and after
the Lord admits his Heir, he shall be in by Purchase, and not by Descent, for
he is in by the Lord, for nothing was in his Father by the Surrender before
Admittance, 1 Rolls Abr. 827. More's Case.

Where there needs no Admittance.
In the Cases of the Heir per Descent, Vide supra.

When one comes in as of an old Estate.
A. surrenders Copyhold into the hands of the Lord, and the Lord de novo
re-grants the same to A. for Life, and afterward to J. his Wife, during the
nonage of the Son and Heir of A. and after to the Son and Heir in Tail. A.
dies, the Child being 5 years old: Now the Wife is to have the said Lands for
16 years, by force of the said Surrender and Admittance. The Wife took another
Husband and dyed. Per Cur. The Husband shall have the Land during the nonage
of the Infant, and that without any Admittance, for that he is not in of any
new Estate, but in the Estate of his Wife, as Assignee, 3 Leon. p. 9. Dedicot's
Case.

If a Copyholder be for years, and makes his Executors, Executors.
and dies, the Executors shall have the Term without any Admittance, Sed
Quaere, for Weston in this point was against Dyer and Brown.

Joynt-Tenants Release.
One Joynt-Copy-holder released to his Companion, and it was resolved, That the
Release was good without Surrender or Admittance, for the first Admittance is
of them, and every of them, and the ability to Release was from the first
Conveyance and Admittance, Winch, p. 3. Wase and Pretty.

In what Cases and to what purposes the Copyhold, Estate shall be in the
Tenant before Admittance, and to what purposes not, and what Leases made by
them shall be good.
Upon Surrender nothing is vested in the Grantee before Admittance. Vide supra.

The Copyholder upon Surrender (if the Lord refuse to admit him, He who makes
the Surrender continues in possession till Admittance.
) cannot enter without Admittance, nor have an Action, unless there be a
special Custom to warrant it; for he who makes the Surrender continues in
possession till Admittance, and not the Lord, or Cesty que use, and he shall
have Trespass against any that enters, Cro. El. 349. Berry and Green.

If by the Custom of the Manor, the Copyhold ought to descend to the youngest
Son, and the Copyholder in Fee surrender this to the Use of himself and his
Heirs, and dies, before any Admittance upon the Surrender, and the youngest Son
first enters, the eldest may not justify his entrance upon him before
Admittance, 1 Rolls Abr. 502.

If a Copyholder surrendreth to the Use of one for Life, who is admitted and
dies; He in Reversion.
he in the Reversion may enter without a new Admittance; and therefore H. B.
being seized of Copyhold Land in Fee, and having Issue three Sons, G. H. and
J. he surrenders it to the Use of his last Will, and thereby devised it to his
Wife for Life, the Remainder to H. and the Heirs of his Body; the Wife dyed
after Admittance, Henry dies without Issue. G. may enter, and Admittance for
him is not necessary, 1 Leon. p. 174. Bullen and Grant.

If customary Lands do descend to the youngest Son by Custom, and he enters,
and leaseth to another, who takes the Profits, and after is Ejected; He shall
have an Ejectione Firmae, without any Admittance of his Lessor or Presentment
that he is Heir, 1 Leon. p. 100. Rumny and Eves.

Feme to her Free-Bench, the Freehold of the Copyhold being granted over.
The Custom of Free Bench, was, durante viduitate si tam diu casta vixerit, the
Wife after the death of her Husband comes into Court, and challenged her Right
of Free Bench, and prayed to be admitted, and the Steward refused, and she made
a Lease for one year to the Plaintiff, and if he might bring an Action by
reason the Woman was not admitted, was the Question, (for it was agreed no Fine
was due to the Lord.) Per Cur. If the Freehold of the Copyhold be granted
over, and the Husband dies, Admittance in Law.
there cannot be Admittance in that Case, and yet she may enter: And in this
case she has done all she could for Admittance; and it is an Admittance in
Law, to an Estate created by Custom, and by act of God and Law. Continual Claim
amounts to an Entry, Hutton, p. 18. Jordan and Stone. In this Case after the
death of the Husband, the Law casts the Estate upon the Wife before Admittance,
and she may make a Lease for years, as any other Copyholder may, mesme Case, 1
Rolls Abr. 592.

Steward will not admit Cesty que use. He enters and takes the Profits; Lord
brings Ejectment; the Defendant shall plead not Guilty.
If a Copyholder Surrender to a Stranger, and the Steward will not admit him,
and the Stranger enters and occupies the Land, if the Lord Lease to a Stranger
to try the Title, he to whom the Surrender was made (although he be not
admitted) may well plead not Guilty, and it shall be found for him against the
Lord. In the Case of Arnold and George, Yelv. p. 16. agreed by the four Judges:
Yet Quaere, for how can the Stranger make a Title to the Profits without
Admittance? But perhaps the reason was, That the Lord seemed to be particeps
criminis, for it may be intended he would not suffer the Steward to admit the
Defendant.

She who has a Widows Estate, shall make a Lease before Admittance, for the
Law vested the Estate in her, and there is no Fine due to the Lord, Noy, p.
(...). Remington and Cole.

Husband enters into the Lands in right of the Wife, before Admittance, Entry
of the Husband in Right of the Wife, and Lease by him before Admittance.
and the Wife dies before Admittance, yet his Lease shall be good, 1 Anderson
192. Ewer and Astwick, in More, n. 425. mesme Case. If by the Entry of the
Husband without Admittance of the Wife, he should be Tenant by the Courtesy,
and resolved he shall.

In what Cases the Lord shall be compelled to make Admittances, and how, and in
what not.
If the Lord of the Manor for the time being, be Lessee for Life, or Years,
Guardian, or any that has any particular Interest, or Tenant at Will of a
Manor (all which are accounted in Law Domini pro tempore) do take a Surrender
into his hands, and before Admittance the Lessee for Life dies, or the Years,
Interest or Custody do end or determine, or the Will is determined, though the
Lord comes in above the Lease for Life or years, or other the particular
Tenancies, yet shall he be compelled to make Admittances according to the
Surrender, Co. Lit. 59. b. Earl of Arundel's Case.

Action on Case by the Surrenderor, but not by Cesty que use.
It was resolved in Gallaway's Case, 26 El. The Party that made the Surrender
may have Action on the Case against the Lord, for not holding his Court, and
admitting him to whose Use the Surrender was made, but Cesty que use cannot.

Chancery.
Chancery will compel the Lord to admit a Tenant, Tothil, p. 65.

Custom was, That a Copyholder for Life should name his Successor for Life,
and to compound with the Lord; if he cannot compound, then the Homage to assess
the Fine; he tenders it, the Lord refuses to admit, Action on the Case lies
not against the Lord, and he that is nominated has not any Interest therein,
but he may compel him in Chancery, Cro. Jac. 368. He that has no Interest (as
a Nominee) shall have no Action sur Case.
Ford and Hoskins, 1 Rolls Rep. 125, 195. ibid. 2 Bulstr. 236. mesme Case. The
Nominee has neither jus in re, nor jus ad rem, he has a nomination only,
which is matter merely in Equity; he has neither damnum, nor injuriam here,
because he has no Interest.

Littera Attornatu ad sursum reddend. tenmenta Custumaria sursum redditio and
admissio, Co. Ent. 576.

CAP. XVIII.
Of Fines. Fines certain. Uncertain. Upon Descent and Purchase. Of Fine
Excessive. What Customs are good as to payment of Fines. Of Fines as to
Admittances to Reversions or Remainders. What refusal to pay a Fine shall be a
Forfeiture or not. How the Lord shall recover his Fine.

Fines.
FInes due to the Lord upon Admittance are not to be paid till Admittance,
either upon a Surrender or Descent; for Admittance is the cause of the Fine,
and the Parties being Admitted, intitles the Lord to the Fine, 4 Rep. 28.
Sand's Case and Bacon's Case. Though sometimes they are certain, and by some
Customs uncertain, yet they ought to be reasonable.

Of Fines certain.
It was the Opinion of Richardson Chief Justice, There is scarce a Copyholder
in England but the Fines are uncertain; for (says he) If the Rolls make it
appear that at any time a greater and lesser sum was paid for a Fine, this
makes the Fine uncertain; the ordinary course to search it is by Bill in
Chancery, Lit. Rep. 252. It was but his private Opinion, for Fines are certain
in great numbers of Manors: And I suppose he means as to Evidence; for in the
Case of Allen and Abraham, 2 Bulst. 32. there is diversity between proof in
case of Descents and Purchase: The Case was this. Upon not Guilty in Ejectment,
the matter upon the issue was about the Custom of a Copyhold Manor, whether
the Copyholders upon their Admittances have used to pay Fines uncertain at the
will of the Lord, or certain, i. e. the value of two years Rent? To prove the
Fines uncertain, Evidence to prove uncertainty of Fines.
the Plaintiff showed diverse Court Rolls of Admittances upon Surrenders, and
that the Fines taken by the Lord were not certain, but sometimes one, sometimes
another: Per Curiam, To prove a Custom for uncertainty of Fines, and not to be
certain two years Rent, there ought to be showed Court Rolls, Fines upon
Descent and Purchase.
and that in Cases of Descents; and that upon such Admittances, they used to
pay two years Rent, the proof ought to be in case of Descents; for in case of a
Surrender or Purchase, the Lord may take what Fine he will: But such Fines are
no proof to prove the taking uncertain Fines by the Custom, but the same ought
to be in cases of Descents.

Of Fines reasonable.
Excessive Fines how to be determined.
But where the Fines are uncertain, yet the Lord cannot exact excessive Fines;
and if the Copyholder deny to pay it, it shall be determined by the Opinion of
the Judges before whom the matter depends, Hubbard and Hamon's Case, cited 1
Brownl. 186.4. Rep. 27. mesme Case, Co. Lit. 59, 60. To this purpose is Denny
and Lemon's Case, Hobart, p. 135.

Copyholder brought Trespass against his Lord. Defendant pleads he had
admitted the Copyholder, and had assessed a Fine of twenty Nobles, and had
appointed him to pay it to his Bailiff, at his House within the Manor three
Months after, and alleged he had not paid it. The Plaintiff demurs, Whether in
pleading the reasonableness of the Fine must be averred.
for that the Lord had not averred the Fine was reasonable. But Per Cur. the
Lord is not bound to aver it, but it must come on the Copyholders side, to
show the circumstances of the Case, to make it appear to the Court to be
unreasonable, and so to put it upon the Judgment of the Court; for the Fine in
Law is arbitrary, and is due to the Lord of common Right, and it is only in
point of excuse to the Tenant, if it be unreasonable, and the Court shall judge
the unreasonableness of it. The Copyholder if he be Defendant, may plead not
Guilty, and then it shall come in Evidence whether the Fine were reasonable or
not; and so is the Opinion of my Lord Coke, Comment upon Lit. Sect. 74. The
reasonableness (says he) shall be discussed by the Justices upon the true
circumstances of the case appearing unto them, and if the Court where the Cause
depends, adjudgeth the Fine exacted unreasonable, then is not the Copyholder
compellable to pay it, for all excessiveness is abhorred in the Law.

It was argued in Wheeler and Honor's Case, That all Fines are reasonable,
unless the contrary appear, 1 Keb. 154.

What Customs are good as to payment of Fines.
Of Fines due by the Copyholder to the Lord, some be by change or alteration
of the Lord, and some by change or alteration of the Tenant.

If the Fine be due by the alteration of the Lord, such alteration must be by
act of God; Fines due by the alteration of the Lord.
for if the Lord do allege a Custom within his Manor, to have a Fine of every
one of his Copyholders, at the alteration or change of the Lord of the Manor,
be it by alienation, demise, death, or otherwise, this Custom is against the
Law, as to the change of the Lord by the act of the Party, for by that means
the Copyholders should be oppressed, by the multitudes of Fines by the Lords
own act, but when the change grows by the act of God, there the Custom is
good, By the act of God.
as by the death of the Lord, Co. Lit. 59. b.

Due by the alteration of the Tenant.
But it is a good Custom that the Copyholder had used to pay a Fine upon every
alteration of the Tenant, either by the act of God, or by the act of the Party,
Co. Lit. 59. b. Armstrong's Case.

The Fine is to be assessed by the Lord.

The Fine by whom to be assessed.
But in some places the Custom is, That the succeeding Copyholder shall
compound with the Lord for his Fine, and if he cannot compound, then the Homage
of the Manor shall assess the Fine, as was the Case of Ford and Hoskins, Cro.
Jac. 368.

Custom not to pay a Fine till full Age.
The Custom is not to pay a Fine till one come to Age; its a good Custom, 3 Keb.
90. agreed to in Champian and Atkinson's Case.

Fines as to Admittances to Reversions or Remainders.
Copyholder in Fee surrenders to the Use of another for Life; when Lessee dies
he shall not pay a Fine for his Admittance to the Reversion, for this continues
always in him, 2 Rep. 107. Margaret Podger's Case.

If Copyholder in Fee surrender to the Use of one for Life, the Remainder to
another for Life, the Remainder to another in Fee, there is but one Fine due;
for the particular Estate and the Remainders are but one Estate, 1 Rolls Abr.
505.

What refusal to pay a Fine shall be a Forfeiture or not.
If the Fine be uncertain, Notice to be given if the Fines be uncertain.
notice must be given before there be a Forfeiture; aliter, if the Fine be
certain; but yet Denny and Lemon's Case is good Law: Time and place must be
ascertained, and refusal must be proved, 1 Keb. 154. 4 Rep. 27, 28.

The Lord assesseth a Fine of 12 l. to be paid by a Copyholder, Tendering the
Fine certain though not the Fine assess'd is no forfeiture.
and appoints it to be paid at his Capital Message of the Manor, three Months
after, and the Copyholder pretending the Fine to be certain, viz. two years
Quit-Rent, offered at the day of assessing the Fine, according to the Rent for
two years, but at the day appointed for the payment thereof, comes not thither
to excuse his non-payment, nor makes any other refusal. Per Cur. this is in Law
a forfeiture of his Copyhold; but if he had come at the day assigned him for
the payment, and had then tendered the two years Quit-Rent, being the Fine
certain, (though not the Fine assessed,) it had been no forfeiture, Cro. Jac.
p. 617. Gardner and Norman.

It is adjudged in the Case of Dalton and Hammond, More, n. 851. If the Fine be
certain, the Tenant is to bring it with him to the Court, and pay it before
Admittance; and if he be not ready to pay it, its a Forfeiture; aliter of the
refusal to pay an excessive Fine.

Where a Copyholder has diverse several Lands, For every several Tenure,
several Fines.
severally holden by several Services by Copy, there the Lord may assess and
demand Fines severally, for every parcel which is so severally held; for the
Tenant may refuse to pay a Fine for the one, and so forfeit this, and yet pay
the Fines for the others; and for every several Tenure the Lord ought to demand
and assess a several Fine, as in Tavernor and Cromwell's Case, 4 Rep. 28. Hobart
and Hamond's Case.

How the Lord recover his Fine.
Debt.
Debt lies for a Fine against the Copyholder by the Lord, Siderfin, p. 58.
agreed in the Case of Wheeler and Honor.

Copyholder, Heir waves the possession.
If Copyholder in Fee dies where the Fine is certain, and the Heir waves the
possession and refuses to be admitted, it seems the Lord shall not have an
Action of Debt against him; and yet some hold he may not wave the possession,
because being Inheritance, Interest descends, and for this reason praecipe quod
reddat lies against the Heir at Common Law before his Entry, Siderfin, p. 58.
Wheeler and Honor.

Pled. Vide Presidents, infra.

Custom quod Dominus habeat rationabilem finem pro admissione, Co. Ent. 646.
13 Rep. 1.

CAP. XIX.
Of the Entayling of Copyhold Estates. The different Opinion of the Judges,
with an Abstract of the Reasons and Arguments how Copy-holds are or may be
Entayled, and the Law settled as to that Point. How such Copyhold Entayls may
be barred or dock'd. And what acts of Tenant Copyholder in Tail, etc. shall
amount to a Discontinuance or not.

Of Copyhold Estates being Entayled.
AS to Copyhold Lands being Entayled, whether there be any such Estate Tail by
any particular Custom to be allowed, and how such Entayls arose, it has been
vexatio quaestio. This Question has been curiously debated in our Books, and
therefore I shall be the larger upon it.

It is clear, That the Statute de donis per se does not create an Estate Tail
in a Copyhold, 9 Rep. 105. the Case of Thornton and Lucas, there cited; for
the Statute de donis does not extend to such base Estates at will.

The Question is, if the Statute may co-opperate with the Custom as to make an
Estate Tail. Coke in the Case of Warn and Sawyer, 1 Rolls Rep. 48. cited one
Haslerick and Grays Case to be so adjudged; and in one Hills Case a Custom was
pleaded that a Copyhold might be granted to one and the Heirs of his Body,
with remainder over; but (says he) we of the other side durst not hazard the
matter upon this, but we devised a Plea, That there was another Custom there,
that if a Tenant in Tail alien, this shall be a bar to the Remainder; and upon
issue that Custom was found; for it was agreed, Per totam Curiam, That if an
Estate Tail may be of a Copyhold by Custom, that by a Custom it may be dock'd
and destroyed.

It has been often moved in our Books, When a Copyholder in Fee surrenders to
the Use of one in Tail, there being no Custom to warrant such an Entayl,
whether it be an Estate Tail, by the Statute of De donis conditionalibus; or a
Fee-simple conditional at the Common Law. This point is well argued and settled
in Rowden and Malster's Case, Cro. Car. p. 42. Copyhold cannot be Entayled
within the Statute de donis.
Yelverton held, That it was an Estate Tail by the Equity and intent of the
Statute de donis, but Hutton, Harvy and Croke, That it was not an Entayl, but a
Fee-simple conditional at Common Law. 1. Because it would be prejudicial to
Lords, for by this means the tenure would be altered, for the Donee in Tail
without a special reservation, ought to hold of the Donor, by the same Services
that the Donor holds over, and he who comes in by Surrender and the
Admittance of the Lord, to hold to him and the Heirs of his Body, cannot hold
of him who surrendered, but shall hold of the Lord, and is Tenant at will unto
him, and shall do the Services unto him as Lord. 2. In respect of the baseness
of their Estate, the Statute never intended to provide remedy for them nor
their Alienations; for the words of the Statute are, Quod voluntas donatoris in
Charta sua manifest expressa de caetero observetur, which proves that the
intent of the makers of the Statute was, That no Hereditament should be
intayled within this Statute, but such as either was or might be given by
Charter or Deed, and other Reasons out of the words of the Statute, Carters
Rep. 8. But Copy-holds are no such Hereditaments, and therefore not within the
meaning of the Act. 3. If Copy-holds might be Entayled, then the perpetuity of
such Estates might be maintained, for a Fine cannot be levied of Copyhold
Lands to bar the Entayl, nor can a Recovery in value be intended of such an
Estate where warranty cannot be annexed to it. Ceo reason come jeo pense ne
vault rien pas. Car est agree per touts que poet estre dock't per recovery en
curia del Baron, Vide apres. They held also, That neither Estate Tail, nor
Estate after possibility of issue extinct (which had a necessary dependence
upon an Estate Tail) can by any particular Custom be allowed. Cave Lecteur; for
its agreed by all, That a Custom cooperating with the Statute may create an
Estate Tail. Observe Plowden in Manxel's Case is no Law, 2 Rolls Rep. 383.
mesme Case

Co. Lit. 60. As there may be an Estate Tail by Custom with the cooperation of
the Statute of W. 2. Cap. 1. So may he have a Formedon in discender, i. e. a
Writing in the nature of a Formedon in Descender, in the Lords Court: But as
the Statute without a Custom extends not to Copy-holds, so a Custom without
the Statute cannot create an Estate Tail. Now it is not a sufficient proof,
that Lands have been granted in Tail; for albeit Lands have anciently and
usually been granted by Copy to many men and to the Heirs of their Bodies, that
may be a Fee-simple conditional, as it was at the Common Law; but if a
Remainder has been limited over such Estates and enjoyed, or if the Issues in
Tail have avoided the alienation of the Ancestor, or if they have recovered the
same in Writs of Formedon in the Discender; these, and such like, are proofs of
an Estate Tail: But if by Custom Copyhold may be Entayled, the same by like
Custom may be cut off, Plow. Com. 240.

This was the first Opinion, and by Clench and Gaudy agreed to in Grovener's
Case, Popham 32. The other Opinion is, That an Estate is wrought out by the
Equity of the Statute de donis, for otherwise it cannot be that there should be
any Estate Tail of Copyhold Land; for by Usage it cannot be maintained,
because that no Estate Tail was known in Law before this Statute; and after
this Statute it cannot be by Usage, because this is within the time of
limitation, aftet which an Usage cannot make a Prescription, for a Custom
cannot be made after the Statute de donis. And it appears by Littleton and
Brook, That a Plaint lies of Copyhold Land, in the nature of a Formedon in
Discender at Common Law, and therefore the Statue helps them for their remedy
for Entayled Lands, which is but customary by Equity; and if the Action shall
be given by Equity for this Land, why shall not the Statute by Equity work to
make it an Estate Tail also of this nature of the Land? Popham's Rep. 33.
Gravenor and Brooks; so Bullen and Grant's Case.

A Copyholder Surrendered to the Use of J. for Life, the Remainder to H. and
the Heirs of his Body: it was a Question if this Estate limited to H. was an
Estate Tail, or a Fee-simple conditional; for if it were a Fee-simple
conditional, then there cannot be an other Estate over, (but yet in Case of a
Devise, an Estate may depend upon a Fee-simple precedent, but not as a Will,
but as an executory Devise.) Per Wray, it is an Estate Tail. Coke then said,
They who would prove the Custom to Entayl Copyhold Lands within a Manor, it is
not sufficient to show Copies of Grants to persons and the Heirs of their
Bodies, but they ought to show that Surrenders made by such persons have been
avoided by such matter. But by Wray, that is not so, for customary Lands may be
granted in Tail, and yet no Surrenders have been made within time of memory, 1
Leon. p. 174. Bullen and Grant, Cro. El. 148. mesme Case. Heyden's Case in 3
Rep. 8. is clear, That neither Statute without the Custom, nor the Custom
without the Statute, but both cooperating may create Tail. And as for Custom,
if the Custom be to grant Lands in Fee-simple, this without question may be
granted to one and the Heirs of his Body by Copy* for omne majus includit minus.

My Lord Chief Justice Bridgman seems to argue this point very accutely and
succinctly in Carters Rep. 22. Tailor and Shaws Case. First (says he) a
Copyhold may be Entayled; not Entayled, as within the Statute of W. 2. nor by
virtue of any Construction of the Statute W. 2. but there may be such an Estate
before W. 2. of a Copyhold, which is a kind of base Estate, and which might be
grantable to one and the Heirs of his Body, according to the Custom, and if he
dyed without Issue, it might be aliened again; and that a Copyholder could not
bar his Issue, unless by a Recovery; such an Estate might be by Custom. I hold
(says he) That the Evidence may fall out to be such that we may take it for
granted, that Lands granted by Copy to one and the Heirs of his Body, the
Remainder over may be a good Remainder, and the Reversion may continue in the
Copyholder, the Donor may have a good Reversion, and all this without the help
of W. 2. That which confirms me is the constant practice of most Copyholds, to
have Estates over. As for the reason of it, if we shall give in Evidence (for
the purpose) a Surrender in H. 7ths time, wherein Lands are limited to one and
the Heirs of his Body, the Remainder over; this is an Evidence that it was so
in H. 7ths time, and we have reason to think so it was past time of memory of
Man. And as your Evidence is for Custom, so may your Case be to make an
immemorial Custom. Then all the Question is, whether it will bear it or not? In
this Case of a Copyhold being an Estate at will, you may have it at will,
according to the nature of the Custom; it is not against the Analogy and Reason
of the Law, and it may bear it; the Evidence may be such. If in H. 7th or E.
the 4ths time it appears so, it is a good warrant for matter of Evidence for a
Jury to find, That there were such Copyhold Estates with limitation over. Now
before the Statute of W. 2. it had been a good Custom to grant Copyhold to one
and the Heirs of his Body, the Remainder over; or to grant the Land by the name
of a Reversion; for here is no alteration of Common Law Estates: The
reasonableness of this Custom appears by the Statute of W. 2. That Act does not
create the Estate, Proofs of an Estate Tail.
neither a Remainder nor a Reversion; but the Act prohibiting Alienations, Quo
minus ad exitum illorum, quibus tenementum sic fuerit datum remaneat post
obitum illorum vel ad donatorem (si exitus ejus deficiat) revertatur, by
operation of Law, it comes to a Remainder or Reversion; if by Custom such
Estates may remain or revert, so may Copy-holds by Custom, because they are
Tenants at will. Now as by that construction W. 2. did make a Remainder or a
Reversion, so the Custom of prohibiting Alienations by Copy, may make
Reversions or Remainders of Copyhold Estates.

If the Reader has a mind to see other Cases about the Entayling of Copy-holds
(though they are all reduced to what is before cited) he may peruse 2 Brownl.
42, 76. Keymer and Poel 121. Hill and Upchurch, 1 Rolls Rep. 48. Warn and
Sawyer. Cro. El. 717. Erish and Rives, etc. 2 Brownl. 121.

The Law about Entayling of Copy-holds is settled and agreed by the Judges, B.
R. 17 Car. 2. Newton and Shaftoe's Case, That it is by Custom and not by the
Statute, so agreed M. 18. Car. Pilkington and Stanhop's Case, queux vide apres.

Of docking or barring Copyhold Estates, being barred by Fine or Recovery, or
otherwise.
It is agreed by all the Judges, 1 Rolls Rep. 48. Warn and Sawyer's Case, That
if an Estate Tail may be of a Copyhold by Custom, that by Custom it may be
dock'd and destroyed, See More, n. 877. A Copyhold may be Entayled by Custom,
and barred by a Recovery by special Custom; and it was agreed that a Surrender
may bar the Issue by special Custom, Chard and Wyat, so Lee and Brown, M. 15
Jac. B. R. And it was agreed to be a strong proof of the Custom, that they to
whose Use such Surrenders had been made, had enjoyed the Land against the Issue
in Tail, 1 Rolls Abr. 506. mesme Case.

The Custom of the Manor of Wakefield was, That they may Entayl their Copyhold
Lands; and the Custom of the Manor to bar the Entayls, and the Remainders
there, is, That the Tenant in Tail shall commit a Forfeiture, as by making a
Lease without Licenc, etc. and then for the Lord to make three Proclamations
and to seize the Copyhold, and then to grant this to the Copyholder and his
Heirs, allowed to be a good Custom; Also this Custom there was good, That if
Tenant in Tail make a Surrender to a Purchaser and his Heirs, of his Copyhold,
and such Purchasor intending to bar the Entayl and the Remainders, commits a
Forfeiture, upon which there is a seizure by the Lord, and three Proclamations,
etc. and so for him to grant; these were adjuged good Customs, though the
Tenant in Tail nor his Issue are privy: See as to this last Custom in a Trial
at Bar in Ejectment, Siderfin, p. 314. Lessee of Pilkington contra Stanhop. So
in Ejectment in Grantham and Coplies Case, 2 Sanders 422. And it was fa^ther
adjudged, If such Forfeiture be presented in the Copyhold Court, and the Land
seized in Manus Domini, the Lord may not admit any other but him to whom it is
limited and assigned by the Tenant who made such Forfeiture, and the Lord
cannot dispose of it otherwise: And farther, That if the Lord admit any other,
and after sells the Manor to a Stranger, by whom Cesty que use is admitted,
Cesty que use has a good Title, and shall avoid all mean acts and dispositions
made by the Lord, as he should if a Surrender had been made to his Use, ibid.

Mr. Keble in the Reporting of this Case of Coply's 2.823. says, A Surrender
is to the Lord to the intent quod inde faciat voluntatem, yet by Custom the
Surrenderer by Petition or Declaration may direct it to any person whatever,
and the Lord must pursue it, and there is no Estate in the Lord, but it remains
in the Tenants hands till Admittance of such party, and the Purchasor might
come in at any time.

The Case of Tailor and Shaw, in Carters Rep. 6, 22. The like Custom is
adjudged void, but that was upon a fault in the special Verdict: Tenant in Tail
of Copyhold Lands, the Jury find a Custom, That this is to be barred by
seizure of the Lord as a Forfeiture, and non alio modo, and not otherwise, as
the Lord Chief Justice Bridgman well observed, and that being naught, the whole
Custom is in vain. As for his first Reason of such a Custom being void, that
its a precarious Custom; you must have the concurrence of the Lord, or you
cannot do it; and Custom implies Right; though this is of weight, yet it might
have been objected in Pilkinton's Case and Grantham's Case, yet in these Cases
such Custom is adjudged good. But his second Reason is cogent; by this negative
Custom you destroy that which is essential to the Estate. If you will allow a
customary Tail, you must allow a customary Recovery, and so this Case differs
from those others.

Now these ways of barring Entayled Copy-holds, are in nature of a Recovery to
dock the Entayl. But Rolls Opinin in Styles 450. Pilkington and Bagshaws Case
is not Law; he conceived there could be no such Custom to cut off Entayled
Lands of Copyhold by the Forfeiture and seizure of the Lord, for his seizure
upon the forfeiture destroys the Copyhold Estate at Common Law; Modus and
Conventio vincunt Legem. And therefore

It was made a Question in Dell and Heydon's Case, If Tenant in Tail of a
Copyhold, Remainder in Fee, is impleaded by plaint in a Court Baron, in nature
of a Writ of Entry in the Post, The manner how, and the reason why a Recovery
shall bar a Copyhold Estate.
and suffers a Common Recovery with Voucher, whether if Tenant in Tail dye sans
issue, this shall bind the Remainder? Cro El. p. 372. But Rolls in 1 Abr. 506.
in the same Case, says this may be barred by a Common Recovery, for a warranty
may be annexed upon this by a Surrender to an Use, or by a confirmation, or by
Release with Warranty, and it may be intended he shall have other Copyhold in
value. And Sir Francis More in the Report of this Case says, if Tenenant in
Tail come in as Vouchee, this is a bar to the Issues and Remainder. Surrender
with warranty to an Use, and grant accordingly, makes the party in the per by
the Surrenderor, and upon this Warranty the Surrenderor may be vouched, and
Recovery in value shall be only of other Copyhold Lands in the Manor, No. 488.
and in 4 Rep. mesme Case, its adjudged that such Recovery shall make a
Discontinuance, and shall take away the Entry of the Heir in Tail.

If a Copyholder surrenders in Tail, and the Heir of the Donee is to bring a
Formedon, he ought to count of a Gift made by the Copyholder who surrendered,
and not by the Lord, for he is but the Instrument to convey it, and nothing
passes from him, Cro. El. 361. Paulter and Cornhil.

And yet in the Case of Clun and Pease, adjudged since Dell and Higden's Case,
Per totam Curiam, A Recovery with common Voucher in a Plaint, in nature of a
Writ of Entry, in Curia Manerij, shall not bind the Issue in Tail, for it shall
not bind but upon expectancy of a Recovery in value, which is the reason it
binds for Land at the Common Law, and here he cannot have any Land in value,
neither at Common Law, nor customary Land; for if it should be so Conveyed, the
Lord should lose his Fine, and one should hold his Land as a Copyholder
without Admittance or Grant from the Lord, which is contrary to the nature of a
Copyhold, but its a Discontinuance clearly, which cannot be defeated by Entry,
Cro. El. p. 391.

Now as a Feoffment will not destroy a Copyhold Estate Entayled, so neither a
Fine or Recovery at Common Law.

It does not make any Discontinuance, Copyhold Estate, how discontinued or not.
for these being Common Law Assurances, they do not work upon the Assurance of
the Copyhold, and that that does not work upon the right of the Estate Tail
cannot make a Discontinuance. And the same reason of a Fine, which is but a
Feoffment on Record, and the same reason holds; a Fine may work to the
destruction of an Estate, where it is not preserved by special Custom, but this
is preserved by special Custom: so for a Recovery, that that is in demand is
the Freehold. True, if the Recovery were in the Lords Court, there the Estate
may be turned to a Right, and a Recovery at Common Law cannot bar a Copyhold
Estate, because of the Recovery in value, to which the Warranty is annexed,
does not go according to the Copyhold, but according to the Freehold. These
being Common Law Assurances, work only a Common Law Interest, and cannot work
upon a Copyhold; this is the Abstract of Glin's Argument in Tailor and Shaw's
Case, Carter's Rep.

How Copyhold barred by a Fine at Common Law.
But the Lord Chief Justice Bridgman in that Case put a nice difference, as to
the barring Entayled Copy, by a Fine at Common Law; if a Copyhold be
suspended, while it is in suspense a Fine at Common Law bars it; for one cannot
be a Copyholder in Tail and have the Inheritance of Freehold in himself, it
must be suspended for a time, as if he divide the Copyhold from the Freehold
for a time; and he there gave a notable difference, Difference, as to what may
pass by a Fine or be barred by a Fine.
where a man may pass a thing by a Fine, and where he may bar by a Fine; a
right of Copyhold cannot be passed by a Fine, but may be barred by a Fine. A
man that has a Rentcharge, he levies a Fine of the Land, the Rentcharge is
gone by it, yet the Fine is not levied of the Rent but of the Land; as for his
other Reason from the words of the Statute, 32 H. 8, Of Lands any ways
Entayled, etc. I conceive that cannot extend to Copyhold Lands, Carter's Rep.
25, 26.

Where by the Custom Plaints have been made in the Court of the Manor, in the
nature of real Actions, if such a Recovery be against Tenant in Tail
Copyholder, this shall be a Discontinuance, and shall take away the Entry of
the Heir in Tail, for they are warranted by Custom, and it is an incident that
the Law amounts to the said Custom, that such Recovery shall make a
Discontinuance, 4 Rep. 23. Deal and Rigden.

Discontinuance
If a man seized of Copyhold Land in right of his Wife, surrender it to the Use
of another in Fee, who is admitted, and the Husband dies, this is not any
Discontinuance to the Wife, nor to her Heirs, but that she may enter, and shall
not be put to a cui in vita, nor her Heir to a sur cui in vita, 4 Rep. 23.
Bullock and Dibler. Yet Walmsly in Collins and Cranks Case, Cro. Jac. 105. held
it was a Discontinuance. Quaere his Reason.

Surrender by Tenant Copyholder in Tail, If Surrender make a Discontinuance.
makes not any Discontinuance, except a special Custom be, and then its a bar,
Vide prius, and Cro. El. p. 148. Bulle's Case. But in Cro. El. 717. Erishes
Case, That such a Surrender is a Discontinuance to put the Issue to his Action,
this being as strong as a Livery by Tenant in Tail, and the Alienee is in by
the Tenant in Tail, though he comes in by Grant of the Lord, 1 Leon. p. 95.
Case 124. Knight and Footman, there holden, That the surrender of Copyholder
in Tail to the Use of another in Fee, does not make any Discontinuance, but the
Issue in Tail may enter, and the Sergeants Case there cited to be so.

One under age surrenders and dies, having Issue A. A. may enter, and shall not
be put to his dum fuit infra aetatem, 1 Leon. 95. Knights Case.

But it is settled, That a Surrender makes not a Discontinuance. Vide infra,
pres a pres.

A farther Discourse of what shall amount to a Discontinuance or not, Vide hic
Cap. supra.

If a Copyholder in Tail (admitting it be an Entayl) surrender to the Lord to
make his Will, and he re-grants this to the Copy holder, this is not any
Discontinuance, although a Surrender to the Use of an Estranger should be
admitted to be a Discontinuance, for a surrender to the Lord may not make any
Discontinuance, forasmuch as he had the Reversion; agreed upon Evidence at the
Bar, in Lee and Brown's Case, Mich. 14 Jac. B. R. So a Surrender of a Copyhold
Entailed to certain Uses, etc. is no Discontinuance, though the Court there
said, it had been a great Question; but by a special Custom such surrender may
be a Discontinuance.

Discontinuance to the Wife.
If the Husband seized of Copyhold in the right of his Wife, surrender this to
the Use of another in Fee, who is admitted accordingly; Husband dies, this is
not any Discontinuance to the Wife, 4 Rep. 23. Bullock and Dibler's Case, nor
her Heirs, but the Wife may enter and not be put to her cui in vita, nor her
Heir to a sur cui in vita.

A Discontinuance may be of a Copyhold Entayl (admitting it to be a Tail) as
by a Recovery in a real Action, in the Lords Court, 4 Rep. 23 Deal's Case.
Quaere, if it be not more properly a Bar for the time than a Discontinuance, 1
Rolls Abr. 634. Morris's Case, 44 Eliz. B. R.

In Chard and Wyat's Case, More, n. 877. The Court were divided in Opinion,
whether a Surrender was a Discontinuance. The Case was this: A Copyholder in
Fee surrendered to the Use of his Will, and having a Daughter born, and his Wife
with Child, he devised by Will part of his Land to his Son or Daughter with
which his Wife went, and haeredibus suis legitime procreat. and the residue he
devised to his Daughter born, to have to her and the Fruit of her Body, and if
she dye without Fruit of her Body, the same shall remain to the Child in the
Mothers Belly; and if both dye without Fruit, then J. S. should sell the Land,
and willed the one Sister to be Heir to the other. The Wife of the Devisor
entered and was admitted, and had a Daughter, which afterward dyed; the Mother
took Husband and they surrendered. Resolved 1st. That this was a Fee Tail in the
Daughter, 2ly. That one in ventre sa mere could not take an Estate in
possession by Purchase; but in this Case she may take in Remainder: But whether
it were a Discontinuance the Court was divided; but they all agreed a Copyhold
may be Entayled by Custom, and barred by Recovery by special Custom, and yet in
Moor, n. 1087. afterward it was adjudged, a Surrender by a Tenant in Tail of a
Copyhold, was not a Discontinuance; but by what is said before, the Law is
settled as to this point. But (to cite no more in this point) where by Custom of
the Manor Pleints have been made in the nature of real Actions; That if a
Recovery be in a Pleint in nature of a real Action against a Tenant Copyholder
in Tail, its adjudged that this shall be a Discontinuance, and shall take away
the Entry of the Heir in Tail, for these Pleints are warranted by the Custom,
this is an incident which the Law annexeth to the said Custom, 4 Rep. 23. Deal
and Rigden.

CAP. XX.
Of Leases of Copyhold Estates. Leases by the Lord, and Rent reserved, and his
Remedy by Avowry. And of Leases made by Copyholders. What is a Forfeiture or
not. When a License to make a Lease shall be said to be persued or not.
Commencement of a Lease. Leases by whom made. Bishop. Tenant in Tail. Infant.
Of Rents reserved. What things are demisable by Copy.

Of Leases of Copyhold Land, Vide Title Customs as to Leases and Limitations
of Estates, supra.

Of Leases of Copyhold Land made by the Lord, Tenants.


1. By the Lord, and his Avowries, and remedy for the Rent.
Lease of the Freehold of a Copyhold.
THE Lord leaseth the Freehold of a Copyhold to J. S. this is good betwixt J.
S. and the Lord: But the Lord cannot reserve the Rent upon such a Lease, 1 Keb.
15. Gerrard's Case.

Custom.
A Custom, That on payment of ten years Rent, the Lord should License to let for
99 Years, and if he refused, the Tenant might do it without License, was
adjudged good and reasonable, Grow and Bridges, cited in 2 Keb. 344. Porphyry
and Legingham.

If a man be seized of a Manor wherein are diverse Copyholders admittable for
Life or for years, Lord lets for Life, he may Lease by Copy in Reversion, to
commence after the death of the first Copyholder.
and he leaseth the Manor to another for term of Life, the Lessor may make a
Demise by Copy in Reversion, to commence after the death of the first
Copyholder, and that is good enough, but the Custom of some Manors is to the
contrary, and that is allowed, Hetly, p. 54. M. 3 Car. B. C. Davis and
Fortescue.

Lord of the Manor made a Lease to two of the Copyholders of the Court Baron
for 200 years, Lessees of Copyhold and Court Baron for 200 years, what acts
they may do.
saving to himself the other Demesns and Services, the Lessees keep Court
there, and a Copyholder surrenders to the Use of A. in Fee. Per Cur. this is a
good Copy; the Court may well continue for that purpose, as to Admittance of
Copyholders, for otherwise every one of his own act may destroy his
Copyholders Estate, Cro. El. p. 394. Jackson and Neal, and Lord Hatton's Case,
cited there.

If the Lord of a Manor grants a Copyhold, Who shall have the Rent.
rendering Rent praefato Domino, at a certain time, and servitia de jure debita
and consueta, his Heirs and Assigns after his death shall have this Rent, this
being reserved by a Copy, 2 Rolls Abr. 450. Crisp and Friar.

Copyholder makes a Lease, rendering Rent, Avowry by the Lord for part of his
Rent.
and after surrenders parcel to the Lord, the Lord may avow on the Lessee for
part of this Rent, without alleging notice or attornment by him, 1 Keb. 94.
Blat and Mole, vide.

The Lord may Distrain a Copyholder for his Rent as well as Seize: Quaere,
Distress.
if a man makes a Lease at will rendering Rent, whether he may Distrain for this
Rent? 2 Brownl. p. 279. Ravel and Down.

Entry. Acceptance of Rent.
The Lord after acceptance of Rent, cannot enter upon the Lessee of a
Copyholder, 1 Keb. 15.

Whether the accustomed Rent be reserved upon a Lease by a Bishop Lord of the
Manor.
Treacer was a Copyhold Manor, within the Manor of B. The Bishop of Exeter
held both these Manors in the right of his Bishopric, the old accustomed Rent
was 67 l. 1 s. 5 d. Hall Bishop demised these two Manors to P. for 99 years,
determinable upon three Lives, reserving the old Rent. P. assigns them over to
N. except the Demesns of Treacer. N. surrenders both Manors, except Treacer.
The Bishop redemiseth to him the said Manors, except Treacer, and one Farm
more, reserving the old Rent, 67 l. 1 s. 5 d. Per Cur. this second Lease was
good, and the 67 l. 1 s. 5 d. was the old accustomed Rent within the Statute 1
El. Mod. Rep. 203. Thredneedle and Lynham.

Of Leases made by a Copyholder, and of Rents reserved thereupon, vide Customs.

When Leases made by a Copyholder for Years are a Forfeiture, Vide sub Tit.
Forfeiture.

Note. Lease no disseisin.
A Copyholders Lease is no Disseisin, though it be a Forfeiture, nor does it
alter the Estate of the Lord, 2 Keb. 598.

Note. Lease not Assets.
Copyholder made a Lease for years by License, and Lessee dyed, this shall not
be accounted Assets in the hands of the Executors, Quaere. Nor be extended,
Popham 188. But if Copyholder make a Lease for an year, this is a Lease by the
Common Law, and not customary, and shall be accounted Assets in the Hands of
the Executors of the Lessee, Popham 188. Yelv.

What Leases shall be good or not, in respect of License when it is persued or
not.
Copyholder may make a Lease for one year, without License, for that is
warranted by the Law, by the force of the general Custom of the Realm, Lit.
234. and this shall be accounted Assets in the Hands of the Executors of the
Lessee.

If the Lord give License to a Coph-holder for Life, to let the Copyhold for
five years, the Copyholder may Lease this for three years, for this is
comprehended within the License, inasmuch as he had given him License to let
for more years, M. 15 Jac. B. R. Woolridg and Bambridge; adjudged upon a
special Verdict: so it was adjudged in the same Case, Cro. Jac. 417. If the
Lord give License to a Copyholder for Life, to Lease the Copyhold for five
years, if the Copyholder shall so long live; and he lets this for five years
generally, without this limitation, If he shall so long live; yet this is a
good pursuance of the License, and so a good performance; for the Lease is
determinable by his death, by a limitation in Law, and therefore so much is
implied by the Law, as if he had made the actual limitation. So is the Case of
Heart and Arrowsmith, Noy 121. the operation of Law made, such a limitation to
the Estate which he made, i. e. if he shall live so long: But if the
Copyholder had had an Estate in Fee, it had been a Forfeiture to have made an
absolute Lease, because in this case he does more than he was licenced to do,
Popham Rep. 105.

A Lease not warranted by the License, as to the commencement.
A. obtains a License in Court to let his Copyhold for 21 years from Mich.
last past; he makes the Lease to begin at Christmas following: Per Cur. this
Lease (...) not warranted by this License, and so no Eject. firmae lies upon
it, Cro. El. p. 394. Jackson and Neal.

Commencement.
When a Lease shall begin in point of computation and not in point of Interest.
Land is demised by Copy for three Lives successive, and then a Lease is made
for 30 years, of the same Land, to commence after the determination of the
first Estate; the Survivor dies, leaving a Widow, who claims durante viduitate,
according to the Custom: The Quaere was, when this Lease shall begin, if after
the death of the Copyholder, or after the determination of the customary
Estate in the Woman? It shall commence presently in point of computation, but
not in point of interest, till after the death of the Widow, 2 Siderfin, Clark
and Caudle, Capel and Stephens, 1653.

By Tenant in Tail, if warranted by the Stat. 32 H. 8.
Arthur, Copyholder for Life, surrenders to Sir Francis Knolls Knight, Lord of
the Manor, in Tail, Reversion in the Crown. Sir Francis makes a Lease, for
three Lives, to commence from the day of the date, and of the ancient Copyhold
Rent was reserved and more. Three Questions were moved by the Jury. 1. Per Cur.
If this Land shall be said usually demised within the Statute 32 H. 8. being
never demised before but by Copy? And the Court ruled, that so 2. If this
Copyhold Rent shall be said the ancient accustomed Rent within the Statute?
and ruled, that so 3. Though an Herriot was not reserved in the new Lease which
was payable by the Copyhold Custom, yet it was resolved, that it was a good
Lease within the Statute of 32 H. 8. if Livery was made after the day of the
date, Moor, n. 1050. Banks and Brown.

The Land is accountable usually demisable when it is always demised; it was
Sir James Marvin's Case. Tenant in Tail lets a Copyhold by Indenture, rendering
the same Rent as before; its a good Lease within the Statute of 32 H. 8.

A Manor by Act of Parliament was Entayled to A. Wife of the Lord M. with
diverse Remainders over, with a Proviso, That the Donees non facerent aliquid in
nocumentum vel ex heredat. haeredum suorum, vel, etc. sed tantum pro junctura,
vel pro termino vitae vel pro annis, vel ad voluntatem secundum consuetudinem
manerij reddend. antiquum redditum. The said Manor consisted of diverse free
Rents, amounting to 7 l. 15 s. Copyhold Tenements held for Lives, the
customary Rent of which was 3 l. and Waste and Herriots. The free Rents or
Copyhold Rents or Herriots were never devised before for Life or Years, or
otherwise. A (post mortem viri) by Fine grants and renders the moiety of the
Manor for 300 years, rendering Rent, amounting to the Free and Copyhold Rents,
and 8 d. more, payable at two Feasts, whereas the ancient Rents were payable at
four; Per Cur. the Lease was void; the Copy-holds ought to have been granted by
Copy, and not by Fine, and the reservation at two days, where the Rent was
payable at four days before, made the Grant void; for its ad nocumentum haered.
and there can be no apportionment in that case, for Copy-holds for Lives are
uncertain, and Herriots accidental. When two Ferms are joined together the
entire Rent which is reserved out of both of them is a new Rent, and not the
accustomable Rent, 5 Rep. 5. Lord Mountjoy's Case.

By whom made.
Ecclesiastical person.
If a Bishop let Copyhold Land for Life, rendering the ancient Rent; its not
good, because the Successor cannot Distrain the Copyholder for Rent; but if it
be of a Manor to which a Copyhold belongs, its good, Lit. Rep. 305. in Sheers
Case.

Dean and Chapter of Worcester, Lord of a Manor in jure Ecclesiae, of which
Manor H. G. was a Copyholder for Life of Lands, under the Rent of 8 s. 8 d.
per annum, payable Quarterly, and Herriotable at the death of the Tenant; the
Copy-holds were by the Custom grantable for three Lives, they demise the said
Lands to H. G. and his Assigns, for the Lives of R. J. and M. and the survivor
of them, renduring 8 s. 4 d. per annum, at two Feasts. Question was, if this
Lease were good, or might be avoided by the Successor? Per the Statute 13 Eliz.
Cap. 10. It was resolved. 1. The Lease was good, though it was made pur auter
vies, and that the Occupants shall be punishable for Waste. 2. Customary
Demises are within this Law, Customary demises are not in the Statute 13 Fl.
cap. 10.
for this Estate granted by Copy was in judgment of Law an Estate at Will, and
without doubt Lands which have been accustomed to be demised at will by those
which have the Inheritance of the Land, rendering rent, are Lands accustomably
let to Farm within the said Act. 3. The said Act of 13 El. does not avoid the
Lease, if the accustomed yearly Rent, or more be reserved, and for that an
Herriot is not a thing Annual, nor a thing depending on the Rent, it suffices
if the Annual Rent be reserved, 6 Rep. 37. Dean and Chapter of Worcesters Case,
Cro. Jac. 76. Baugh and Heyns, mesme Case.

As to Leases by Bishops of Manors consisting of Copyhold Lands, and Services
of Free-Tenants, and reserving the ancient Rent, vide 3 Keb. 372. Mod. Rep.
203. Threadneedle and Lynham.

Infant Copyholder in Fee leaseth for years, Infant.
without License by parcel, rendering Rent, Lease affirmed by acceptance.
at full Age he accepts the Rent, being admitted to the Copyhold, and after
ousts his Lessee. Lessee brought Ejectment, Judgment for the Lessee: Per Cur.
this Lease for years is no Disseisin to the Lord, though it may be a
Forfeiture, and this Lease is not void but voidable, and may be affirmed by
acceptance, Noy, p. 92. Ashfield's Case, Lach. p. 199. Vide Rolls Rep. 256.

By a Copyholder or Heir before Admittance, vide Admittance.

As to Rents reserved.
Lands at Common Law and Copyhold Lands are leased by one Indenture, Lease of
Freehold and Copyhold, the Rent issues out of both.
rendering Rent; the whole Rent shall issue out of the Lands at Common Law, and
not out of the Copyhold: But if a man leaseth Land, part of which he has by
Disseisin, rendering Rent there the Rent shall issue out of the whole Land, and
by the entry of the Disseisee the Rent shall be apportionted, Moor, n. 144.
Term. Pasch. 5 El.. But the Law is not so, for in Collins and Harding's Case,
Moor, n. 723. the Judges were divided in Opinion about this very point. But in
Rolls 2 Abr. p. 426. it is resolved, That this Rent shall issue out of the
Copyhold Land as well as out of the other Land; for a Rent may be reserved out
of the Copyhold Land, and this is such a thing to which one may resort for a
Distress, Collins and Harding's Case: And this Case is farther Reported by
Rolls 1 Abr. p. 234. If a man Lease for years Freehold Land, and also Copyhold
Land by License of the Lord, reserving a Rent, and after grants the Reversion
of the Free Land to another, and the Lessee Attorn, the Rent shall be
apportioned, for this waits upon the Reversion, Rent apportioned.
vide Collins and Harding's Case also Reported in Cro. El. p. 600, 622. The
Rent issues out of both, and is not like to a Lease of Lands and Goods, for
all the Rent is there issuing out of the Lands, and it is now in the Hands of
the Grantee, as one entire Reversion, Pleading.
and he shall declare accordingly, and although they be several Reversions, yet
he shall declare upon the truth of the matter.

Copyholder by License of the Lord demised the same by Indenture to the
Plaintiff for twenty years, under the Rent of 25 l. per annum, the Copyholder
surrenders the Reversion of the one moiety of the same Copyhold to the Use of
one N. W. to which he was admitted, and then the Reversion of the other moiety
to W. who was admitted. Per Cur. the Surrender by the name of a Reversion, is
good (though the Lease is by Indenture and not by Surrender, Rent apportioned.
which if it had been so, it had been derived directly out of the customary
Estate) for still it is the Lease of the Copyholder, and not of the Lord.
Quaere, if the Copyholder in this case should forfeit his Estate, the Lease
would stand good against the Lord being by License? And Per Cur. the Rent is to
be divided by moyeties, according to the halves of the Reversion; and in this
case it was resolved there needed no Attornment upon the Surrender, for the
Admittance, settles the Estate, Attornment.
Hobart 177. Swinnerton and Miller.

It was said by Hale Chief Justice, That a Lease for years of Lands that are
Copyhold, Lease of Copyhold without taking notice that it was Copyhold.
particularly without taking notice, that this was Copyhold, this is good for
the Rent of the Copyholder, and after the Lease spent, the Inheritance takes
place, and severs the Copyhold from being granted by Copy after, during the
Lease; but when that is spent, it is well again, Sir George Sand's Case, cited
in 3 Keb. p. 91. in Cholmly and Cooper's Case.

A. being a Copyholder by License of the Lord, leased his Copyhold to Smith
for years, rendering Rent, and afterward by Deed granted the Rent to another;
Habend. during the term, etc. to which grant the Lessee did Attorn, and paid
the Rent to the Grantee. Per Gaudy, the Grant is good, but now it is but a
Rent-seek; Rent-seek.
the Grantee cannot have an Action of Debt for it, for he is not party nor
privy to the Contract, nor has the Reversion, 1 Leon. 315. Austin and Smith.

Copyholder makes a Lease for years, How a Lease not warranted is good.
not according to the Custom of the Manor, yet this Lease is good, so as the
Lessee may maintain an Ejectione firmae, for between the Lessor and Lessee and
all others, except the Lord of the Manor, the Lease is good, Owen 17.
Downingham's Case.

Of Leases made by those in Remainder or Reversion.
Tenant for Life, By one in remainder by Parol.
the Remainder in Fee of a Copyhold, he in the Remainder makes a Lease by
Parol. Tenant for Life and he in Remainder join in a Surrender, to the Use of
him in the Remainder in Fee. This is a good Lease, and shall take effect in the
life of Tenant for Life, and it shall be good against him in Remainder; for the
Estate of Tenant for Life is extinct, and cannot hinder the Lease to have
operation; like as he in Remainder grants a Rentcharge, and after the Tenant
pur vie surrenders, the Rent shall commence presently, Cro. El. p. 160. Dove
and Williot.

A Lease for Life made in Reversion.
A Lease for Life may be made in Reversion of a Copyholder, according to
Custom, but whether such a Lease be void, if made by Dean and Chapter, per the
Statute of 37 H. 8. which extends to all Colleges, etc. Quaere 1 Rolls Rep.
202. Long and Baker.

As to Remedy for Rents, by Entry or Action, Vide infra titulo, What Statutes
extends to Copyhold Lands, and sub titulo Actions and Suits.

What things are demisable by Copy.
Underwoods may be demised by Copy to one and his Heirs, for this Underwood is
a thing of Inheritance, for after every cutting down they will grow again from
the Stubbs, Cro. El. 413. Hoe's Case.

Tithes may be demisable by Copy of Court Roll, according to the Custom of the
Manor, for they may be parcel of a Manor as (well as a Rentcharge) Com. p. 43
Eliz. Sands and Drury.

Tonsura prati may be demisable by Copy of Court Roll, according to the Custom
of the Manor, by Prescription, per Gaudy; Vide pluis supra.

Pleadings.
Custom quod tenens custumarius in feodo possit dimittere terras pro aliquo
termino annorum sine Licentia Domini, Cro. Entr. 123. Simile non excedens. 21
annos, Hern 81.

CAP. XXI.
Of License. What License shall be good. By whom made shall bind or not.
License taken for a Confirmation. When and where a License is to be pleaded
specially, and when and where not.

QUaere if Lessee for years may grant License to a Copyholder to fell Timber?
To fell Timber. The extent by Lessee how far good or not.
But though it be good against himself, yet it is void against the Lessor,
because the License is derived out of the Interest, and so can be of no greater
extent than it, and the Assignee of the Lessee may take advantage of it, 1 Keb.
26. Muniface and Baker. And by Twisden, Where a Copyholder has License to
fell (though it were repealed by the Grant of the Lord of his Interest, before
the felling) yet this is no Forfeiture, though the License be determined by it,
ibid.

License to make Leases, Vide supra Leases.

The Lord Licenced his Copyholder, to make a Lease of his Copyhold for 21
years, Concurrent Lease.
to begin at Michaelmas following, and he made a Lease accordingly, by
Indenture; and also before Michaelmas, by Deed made another Lease to another,
for 21 years, to begin also at Michaelmas following, Per Anderson, The making
of the second Lease was a Forfeiture; the License is satisfied by the first
Lease, and so the second Lease is without Warrant, and consequently a
Forfeiture. Lease void in Interest and good by Estoppel.
The second Lease is void in Interest and good by Estoppel: If a Copyholder
make a Lease contrary to the Custom, it is a forfeiture before the Entry of the
Lessee, Moor, Case 329.

Once a License to make a Lease and always.
If the Copyholder make a Lease for years, by License of the Lord, the Lessee
may assign this over, or make an under-Lease without any new License, for the
Interest of the Lord was discharged by the first License, 1 Rolls Rep. 509.
Johnson and Smart.

What License shall be good, and by whom, by a Lord at will.
A Lord at Will of a Copyhold Manor, connot give License to a Copyhold Tenant
to make a Lease for years, although that he may grant a Copyhold for Life,
according to the Custom, 1 Rolls Abr. 511. Petty and Debbans.

By Lord for Life, License determinable.
If a Lord for Life of a Copyhold Manor, give License to a Tenant to make a
Lease for years, this Lease shall not continue longer than the Life of the
Lord, ibid. 2 Brownl. p. 40. mesme Case.

License to make a Lease upon condition, void. Aliter upon a Limitation.
The Lord licenceth a Tenant to make a Lease upon Condition, the Condition is
void; for the Lord gives nothing by the License, but does only dispense with
the forfeiture: A License gives not a Right, but only executes it, but a
Limitation to such a License is good; as a License to let for two years, he
cannot Lease for three years, Owen, p. 73. Haddon and Arrowsmith.

If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years by License of the Lord, Copyholder
leaseth for years, and dies sans Heir, if determined. License taken for a
confirfmation.
and dies without Heir, the year not expired; Some say the Lord may enter, for
the Estate out of which this Lease was derived, is detemined, Yelv. contra.
This License shall be taken as a confirmation of the Lord, and the Lease shall
be good against him, Popham 188.

Pleadings. When and Where a License is to be pleaded specially and when and
where not.
In Ejectione Firmae brought by the Lessee of a Copyholder, it is sufficient
that the Count be general, without mentioning of the License; if the Defendant
plead Not Guilty, then the Plaintiff ought to show the License in Evidence: But
if the Defendant plead specially, then the Plaintiff ought to plead the License
certainly in his Replication, and the time and place when it was made; and in
this Case the Plaintiff replied, That the Copyholder by License first then had
of the Lord, did demise, and did not show what Estate the Lord had, nor the
time and place when it was made; it is not good, for the License is
traversable. The Defendant cannot plead, That the Plaintiff by License did not
demise, for this is a negative pregnant, 2 Browl. 40. Petty and Evans.

Licentia dat. ad dimittendas terras custumarias, Co. Ent. 185.

CAP. XXII.
Of Forfeitures. What shall amount to a Forfeiture of a Copyhold Estate by act
of the Party, by non-feazance or misfeazance. Of refusal of Writ, Services,
etc. Nonappearance at Courts. Of making Leases not warranted. Rent shall be
said a Covenant and no Lease, and so shall be no Forfeiture. What Alienation
shall be a Forfeiture or not. Of Forfeiture by wast in Trees. By Attainder of
the Tenant. What act of the Husband shall forfeit the Wifes Land or not. Who
shall take advantage of a Forfeiture. Where the Lord shall take advantage
before a Presentment or not. Where the Forfeiture of one Copyholder shall be
the Forfeiture of another, as to Estates or Persons. What is a dispensation of
a Forfeiture, and of what Forfeitures in the Life of the Ancestor the Heir
shall take advantage.

Of Forfeitures. What shall amount to a Forfeiture of a Copyhold Estate.
BY act of the Party.

By Operatation of the Law.

What act of the Party respecting Non-Feazance. Mis-Feazance.


Of refusal to pay Rent, perform Services or Suit of Court, when they shall be
causes of Forfeitures or not.
A Copyholder has an Inheritance by Custom, but when he does that which is
contrary to the Custom, as to cut down Trees, etc. he shall then be in no
better a condition than a bare Tenant at will, and so it will be a Forfeiture.

If a Copyholder be to pay a certain Rent yearly by his Copy to the Lord, and
the Lord comes upon the Land, and demands the Rent at the day; if the
Copyholder being present, refuses to pay it, this is a Forfeiture; but if in
such Case the Copyholder says to the Lord, he has not his Rent ready, this
is not any Forfeiture, for the Lord may Distrain, 1 Rolls Abr. 506. therefore
the Case in Cokes Copyholder, p. 189. is not Law, which says, That if the
Copyholder tells his Lord, that he wants Money to discharge the Rent, and
entreats him to forbear, unless the Lord gives his consent, that this is a
Forfeiture, vide Noy, p. 58. Crispe and Friar, Cro. El. 505. mesme Case.

A Widow had Copyhold Land, and knew not how to pay her Rent, and diverse
persons came for the Rent, but she dismissed them with dilatory Answers; last of
all comes a young Gallant and demands the Rent, she answers, That she did not
know him, but if he would dance before her, if she liked his dancing, she would
pay it: This denial was adjudged no Forfeiture, not being wilful, Lit. Rep. 268
in Paston and Uthert's Case.

Voluntary refusal.
If the Copyholder be absent when the Lord demands the Rent at a day, and none
is there to pay it, this is a refusal in Law, yet this is no Forfeiture; for
this amounts not to a voluntary refusal; and there ought to be a demand of the
person of the Copyholder to make a Forfeiture, Hob. p. 135. Denny and Lemon,
p. 38. El. B. R. Crisp and Friar. And therefore that other Assertion in Cokes
Copyholder, p. 190, That if the Lord continue in making his demand upon the
Land, and the Copyholder is still absent, Absence.
that this makes the Copyholders Estate subject to a Forfeiture, seems not to
be Law, for the Lord may have other remedy for his Rent, William's Case cited
in Latch 122. Gray and Ulisses was thus: The Lord demanded the Rent of his
Copyholder, and he answered that he had it not with him then, but that he
would pay it as soon as he could; the Lord said, pay this at my House such a
day, which House was within the Manor, it was resolved that the first words
were not any Forfeiture, Notice to pay the Rent at a place out of the Manor.
but when the Lord assigned him a day certain, at which day he pays it not,
this failure amounts to a wilful refusal, and was a Forfeiture: But had the
place been out of the Manor, it had been no Forfeiture, which Crew Chief
Justice agreed to.

Copyholder in Fee, rendering Rent at Michaelmas and Lady Day, Not paid at the
last instant of the day.
he suffers the Rent to be unpaid for three years, the Lord at the last Instant
of the day of payment demands the Rent upon the Land, and the Copyholder is
not there to pay it, the better Opinion was, that it is a Forfeiture, Moor, n.
468. Crisp and Friar.

An Act which makes a Forfeiture ought to be to the disherison of the Lord of
his Copyhold, not of a collateral thing.

Copy-holds are determinable the same way as Estates at Will. When a
Copyholder does acts as Owner, not warranted by the Custom, 5 Rep. 13. as
Waste, unless the special Custom aid, 2 Keb. 466. Ivery's Case.

If the Estate of the Lord of the Manor cease by limitation of Use, and the Use
and Estate of it is transferred to another, Notice of the alteration of the use
and Estate, or else no Forfeiture for denial of payment of Rent.
who demands the Rent of the Copyholder, and he denies to pay it, this is no
Forfeiture without notice given to the Copyholder of the Use and Estate,
Beconshaw and Southcot's Case, cited in 8 Rep. 92. Francis's Case.

Bargainee of a Manor by Deed Indented and Enrolled shall not take advantage of
the Forfeiture of a Copyhold for denial of payment of Rent to him, without
notice given to him of the Bargain and Sale, agreed for Law, in Francis's Case,
8 Rep.

Copyholder before any Rent due says, he will not pay any Rent to the Lord
hereafter; What words of denial amount to a Forfeiture or not.
or when a Court is to be holden, that he will not appear to do any Suit at the
Court of the Lord; these are no Forfeitures: But if his Rent being due, he
denies it, or when the Court is holden, he says he will not do any Suit, the
same is a Forfeiture, Sir Christopher Hatton's Case, cited 3 Leon. 108. in
Tavernor and Cromwell's Case.

Vide supra, Paston and Utbert's Case.

In case of the forfeiture of a Copyhold, either for Rent or Fine, the Lord
must demand the Rent or Fine of the person of the Tenant; Fine.
and therefore in Denny and Lemon's Case, Hob. p. 135. Demand must be made of
the person of the Tenant.
In Trespass by the Copyholder against; his Lord; the Defendant pleads he had
admitted the Copyholder, and assessed a Fine of 20 Nobles upon it, and had
appointed him to pay it to his Bailiff, at his House, being within the Manor,
three Months after, and alleged That he had not paid it accordingly. The
Plaintiff demurs, the Lord having not showed, that the Fine assessed was
reasonable: But Per Cur. the Lord is not bound to aver that, but it must come
on the Copyholders side, to show the circumstances of the Case, to make it
appear to the Court to be unreasonable: But the Opinion of the Court was
against the Lord in this Action, because he had not laid a demand of his Fine
at the time it grew due, or sometime after, of the person of the Tenant.

Refusal to pay an excessive fine, no Forfeiture.
If the Lord demand an excessive Fine of his Copyholder, and he refuseeth to
pay it, its no Forfeiture; aliter where it is a reasonable Fine; and the Court
and Jury shall be Judges of the reasonableness of it. But if a Fine be certain,
the Tenant is to bring it with him to Court, and to pay it before Admittance,
and if he be not ready to pay, it is a Forfeiture, Moor, n. 851. Dalton and
Hammond. Cro. El. p. 779. mesme Case.

No notice need where a Fine is certain; Aliter^ where its uncertain.
Where a Fine is certain no notice or demand is necessary, contra where it is
uncertain; and where the certainty is dubious, the refusal is no Forfeiture, 1
Keb. 154. Wheeler and Honor.

Tender and refusal is good payment, Mod. Rep. 77. Legingham's Case.

Upon unreasonable Fine the Tenant may refuse to pay.
In Dow and Golding's Case, The Question was, whether the Lord of a Manor may
assess two years and and half value of Copyhold Land, according to wracked
Rent, for a Fine upon Surrender and Admittance, and for non-payment enter for a
Forfeiture. All the Court conceived, That one year and an half Rent improved,
is high enough, What Fine is unreasonable.
and two year and an half is unreasonable; and therefore the Plaintiff in
Trepass might well refuse the payment of it, and the Entry of the Defendant for
a Forfeiture is not justifiable: Adjudged pro quer. sur demur.

If the Ancestor had diverse Copy-holds, If the Lord demands one entire Fine for
diverse Copy-holds, the Heir may refuse.
and the Lord demands of the Heir one entire Fine for them all, the Heir may
refuse payment; the Lord ought to make several demands, because the Heir may
accept one and refuse the other. And Waste in one of the Copy-holds is not a
forfeiture of the other, Cro. Eliz. 779. Dalton and Hammond.

If a Fine by the Custom of the Manor, Refusal to pay a Fine certain.
upon the Admittance of a Copyholder be certain; if the Lord demand this Fine,
and the Copyholder denies to pay it on demand, Present Forfeiture without
presentment.
this is a Forfeiture presently without Presentment: But if the Fine by the
Custom of the Manor be uncertain, though a reasonable Fine be assessed, yet it
being uncertain, the Copyholder is not bound to pay it on demand presently, but
shall have convenient time to discharge it, 1 Rolls Abr. 507. But if he assess
an unreasonable Fine, and the Copyholder refuse to pay it, its no Forfeiture;
therefore the Case of Turner and Cromwell, cited in Crisp's Case is not Law, 1
Rolls Abr. 507.

It was held in the Case of Fanshaw and Bond, Refusal to be admitted, and to
pay reasonable Fine.
That if a Copyholder refuses to pay a reasonable Fine, or to be admitted to
the Copyhold, this is a Forfeiture of his Estate, Styles p. 387.

Services.
If a Copyholder do not perform the Services due to his Lord, this is a
Forfeiture, 43 E. 3.25. b.

What words of denial to perform Services shall be a Forfeiture or not.
The Lord comes to the Copyholder and requires him to do his Services, ( viz.)
such and such, and the Copyholder answers, You shall have them, if they are
due by Law, but it shall be tried at Law first; this was adjudged to be no
Forfeiture in P. 16. Eliz. Vernon and Huggin's Case, cited in Lach, p. 122.
Gray and Ulysses Case.

Not appearance at Court.
The not appearing at Court was a Forfeiture. Now a Copyholder said, If it were
a Court he would appear, if none, he would not; though this appear to be a
Court, yet this is no Forfeiture, because no wilful contempt. Per Twisden, in
the Case of Muniface and Baker, 1 Keb. 25. Willis's Case, and Parker against
Corker, cited in the Case of Wheeler and Honor, 1 Keb. 154. Styles, p. 141.
Parker and Cook. Per Rolls, if there were no controversy about the Courts
being well held or not, and that the words were used only as a Shift, its then
a Forfeiture, else not.

Warning of the Courts being held, and where.
It was a Question whether a Copyholder not coming to the Lords Court to do and
perform his Suit in three years time, be a Forfeiture. It must be proved he had
warning of the time of holding the Court, for the Lord may hold his Court when
he pleases, 3 Bulstr. 80. Belford and Adams.

If a Copyholder in Fee retraxit, Scil. withdraw his Suit for many years to
the Court of the Lord, no warning being alleged to be made by the Lord to him
when he held his Courts, its no Forfeiture, it is but a negligence; aliter, if
he had been warned, and then had refused to have done Suit; 1 Rolls Rep. 256.
Adam's Case.

The Manor of declaring when a Copyholder is summoned, Nar.
and refuses to do his Services, 3 Bulstr. 268. Hammond's Case, Styles 241.

If the Copyholder does not come to the Court of the Lord, Not coming upon
notice without refusal express, is a Forfeiture.
after a particular Summons made to their persons; this was adjudged a
Forfeiture without express refusal, Noy, p. 5. Sir Christopher Hatton's Case,
cited in Crisp and Fryer's Case, 1 Rolls Rep. 429. Bullevant and Bickerstaff.

General warning within the Parish is sufficient; General Summons or warning at
Church.
for if the Tenant himself be not resiant upon his Copyhold, but elsewhere,
his Farmer may send notice to him of the Court: If a man be so weak that he
cannot travel without danger, etc. or if he he have a great Office, etc. these
shall excuse, Sir John Branch's Case, 1 Leon. p. 104. Now Sir John had by his
Letter of Attorney appointed the Son of his Farmer his Attorney to do the
Services for him due for his said Copyhold. Per Cur. such a Person so
appointed might Essoyn Sir John, but not do the Services for him, Services not
to be performed by an Attorney. An Essoyn may.
for none can do the same but the Tenant himself; therefore the third
Resolution in Tavernor and Cromwell's Case, Cro. El. 353. seems not to be Law,
Vide Coke's Ent. 288. Tavernor and Cromwell's Case, of a general Summons at the
Church.

The Custom was, If any Copyholder in Fee dye seized, and his Heir comes not
at the next Court and claims the said Tenements, and prays to be admitted to
them; then a public Proclamation shall be made in full Court, That the Heir
shall come to the Court to claim, and be admitted, and so at two other ensuing
Courts the like Proclamation; Custom, if the Heir come not and pray to be
admitted after three Proclamations, he shall forfeit, but not if he be beyond
Sea.
and if the Heir come not, then the Lord to seize them as forfeited, Per Cur.
this Custom and non-claim shall not foreclose the Heir which was beyond Sea at
the time of the Proclamations made; for by intendment of Law he cannot have
notice, etc. But if the Heir had been within the Realm at the time of the first
Proclamation, and after goes beyond Seas, the Proclamations shall bind him,
though he be beyond Sea at the time of the other Proclamations made, for he
shall not defeat the Lord by his own Act, 8 Rep. Sir Rich. Lechford's Case,
Cro. Jac. p. 226. Underhil and Kelsey; he cannot return when he will, and the
Law does not compel one to impossibilites, though Coke then Puisny Justice, in
that Case of Underhil was of another Opinion, and he might by Letter of Attorney
pray to be admitted, and Cro. Jac. 101. Whitton and Williams.

The Proclamations to be proved viva voce.
Proclamations whereby the Lord claims Forfeiture, ought to be proved viva voce,
and not only by the Court Rolls: The Proclamation was, That J. S. come in and
be admitted to the Lands descended unto him, which, the certainty of the Lands
being before declared, How to be made as to the certainty of the Lands.
is sufficient, unless the Custom be contrary, and not like a demand of Rent,
which being generally of so much, is ill; especially the Custom of the Manor
being to demand it generally, and not to specify the Lands, 1 Keb. 287. Lord
Salisbury's Case.

Homage forfeit for refusing to make a presentment.
If a Jury or Homage of the Manor after Oath taken to present the Articles of
the Court, refuse to make a presentment according to their Oath, If they are
Copyholders, this is a Forfeiture of their Estate, Dyer 4 El. 211.

As to Misfeazance, what acts made or done by a Copyholder shall be a
Forfeiture.
Note, Every act that makes a Forfeiture, ought to be 1st. To the disherison of
the Lord, 2ly. A voluntary act against the Custom; therefore a Trespass on the
Demesns of the Lord is no Forfeiture.

As to making Leases not warranted.
For the Lord of a Manor to avoid a Lease for a Forfeiture, by making a Lease
contrary to the Custom, There must be certain proof of such a Lease.
there ought to be direct proof made of a Lease certain, with beginning and
ending certain; so to make any other act or thing a Forfeiture, this must
certainly appear to the Court; and the Oath of a Stranger in the Lords Court to
the Homagers, That a Copyholder had made a Lease for ten years, that so the
Homagers may find and present the Forfeiture, shall not be of force, especially
the Copyholder continuing in possession, and dying seized of his Copyhold
Estate, and this never came in question till after his death, 1 Bulstr. 189.
Hamlen's Case.

Copyholder for Life makes a Lease for a year, A Lease made for years,
excepting two days in each year, etc. is a Fraud, and shall be a ^orfeitu^e.
and afterward makes a Lease to the same party for another year, to commence
one day after the first year, and another Lease for another year to commence at
a day after the second year, and after surrenders his Copyhold to the Lord;
the Lord enters and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff in the Ejectment: Per Cur.
1. Although the general Custom of the Realm allows a Copyholder to make a
Lease for one year, this ought to be in present, and he cannot make one for
another year in reversion. 2. The Lease in reversion was a Forfeiture, and when
the Surrender was made to the Lord, this Lease was void against him, and his
Interest discharged without presentment and seizure for the Forfeiture, for
which his Entry was lawful, and Judgment pro Quer. Jones 249. Mathews and
Weston, 1 Bulstr. 215. mesme Case. Rolls Abr. 510. mesme Case.

This Case is thus Reported by Rolls: If a Copyholder for Life agrees to make
three several Leases by Indenture, the one to commence after the other, there
being two days between the end of the first and the commencement of the
seccond, and so between the second and the third, and after he executes them at
one time, this is a Forfeiture; for this is apparent Fraud, and a greater
Estate than for one year passes presently, Rolls Abr. 508. Mathews and Weston.

If a Copyholder makes a Lease for one year, and covenants, that after the end
of this year he shall have the same for another year, and so in this manner de
anno in annum, during the space of ten years; this is no such Lease as shall
make a Forfeiture of his Copyhold Estate, because he has no lawful Lease but
for one year only, 1 Bulstr. 187, 190. Hamlen's Case,. 6 Rep. 35. b. Plowd.
237. b. Cro. Jac. 301. the Lady Mountagues Case.

A Copyholder makes a Lease for an year; excepting the last day of the year,
and so from year to year, excepting the last day of every year as long as he
lived: The Question was, if this were such a Lease as would cause a Forfeiture;
for it was not a Lease for an entire year, neither is it a Lease for two years
together: Per Cur. it is a Forfeiture. Its a certain Lease for years excepting
two days, which is a Lease in effect for more than one year, Cro. Jac. p. 308.
Lutterel and Weston.

A Lease for three years by Parol is a Forfeiture, whether the Lessee enter or
not, Lease Parol.
and this for the unlawful Contract made to the disherison of the Lord; and a
Lease to commence at a day to come is a Forfeiture, Lease to commence at a day
to come.
because it is not avoidable by any of the Parties, Moor, n. 508. East and
Harding; and so in Harding and Turpin's Case, Hetly, p. 122. If a Copyholder
make a Lease for years, to commence at Michaelmas next, its a Forfeiture
presently; and so Cro. El. Jackman's Case 351. A Lease for years of Copyhold
Land, by Indenture or Parol, is a Forfeiture, unless there be an express Custom
to warrant it, So Cro. El. East and Harding's Case.

The Lord licenceth a Copyholder to make a Lease of his Copyhold for 21
years, to begin at Michaelmas following, and he made a Lease accordingly by
Indenture, and also before Michaelmas by Deed made another Lease for 21 years,
to begin at Michaelmas following, By concurrent Lease.
Per Anderson, the making of the second Lease was a Forfeiture; the License is
satisfied by the first Lease, and so the second Lease is without warrant, Moor,
n. 329.

If a Copyholder Lease for three years by the Custom, and he leaseth for three
years, A Lease from three years to three years.
and so from three years to three years, unto nine years, this is a Forfeiture,
for this is a Lease for six years at least, 1 Rolls Abr. 508. Luttrel and
Weston.

T. Let Copyhold Lands to W. by Articles of Agreement, with promise and
Covenant to hold for a year to halves, at such a Rent, according to the Custom
of the Manor, and so from year to year for five years; the Question was, If
this be a Forfeiture? And by the Justices in C. B. 19 Car. 2. in the Case of
Lenthal and Wallop against Thomas, A Covenant and not a Lease, and so no
Forfeiture.
Its no Lease; A Covenant to hold to halves makes a Lease in no case. A
covenant and promise that J. S. shall have my Lands for five years, may be a
Lease where a Lease may be made, especially where the words Covenant and Agreed
is added, but only by a favorable construction of Law, which shall never work
a Forfeiture, 2 Keb. p. 267.

Lease for years not warranted, is no disseisin to the Lord.
Note, Lease for years by a Copyhold, though it be a Forfeiture, yet its not
any disseisin to the Lord, 8 Rep. 44. Noy, 92. Therefore Infant Copyholder in
Fee, leaseth for years, sans License, rendering Rent, at full Age he accepts the
Rent, and after ousts the Lessee. The Lessee brings Ejectment, and Judgment for
him, Per Cur. this Lease may be affirmed by acceptance; and agreed that such a
Forfeiture does not bind an Infant.

What Alienation shall be a Forfeiture, and what not.
Surrender by a Tenant for Life to the Use of another in Fee, is no Forfeiture,
Moor, n. 983. Oldcot's Case.

If Tenant for Life of a Copyhold suffer a Recovery, as Tenant in Fee, this is
no Forfeiture of his Estate, for the Freehold is concerned; and it is in a
Court Baron where there is no Estoppel, Mod. Rep. 199. Bird and Kick 200.

If he make a Deed of feoffment and no Livery, its not a Forfeiture; nothing
passes, and so its no alienation; aliter of a Lease, Quaere, if the Feoffment
be with Letter of Attorney, Co. Lit. 59.

Of Forfeitures by Waste.
If a Copyholder erect a new House upon his Copyhold without License, Waste.
Erecting a new House.
this is not any Forfeiture, for this is for the melioration of the Tenement, 1
Rolls Abr. 507. Cecil and Cave. A Mill.
If he erect a Mill upon his Copyhold, it is a Forfeiture, by Dodredge, Lach.
p. 123. in Grey's Case.

If a Copyholder build an House upon his Copyhold, and after pulls it down
again, this is a Forfeiture, 1 Bulst. 50. Brook and Bear.

Where the Lord has any other recompense, the Law will not make any
Forfeiture, as Custom to amerce or fine for Hedges Enclosing, Lit. Rep. 267. in
Paston and Utbert's Case.

If a Copyholder commits waste against the Custom of the Manor, it is a
Forfeiture, 4 Rep. 27. Clifton's Case.

Voluntary waste is a Forfeiture of the Copyhold, by the Common Law; Voluntary
permissive.
but negligent waste not, without a Custom, Per Anderson and Walmsly, Noy p.
51. in Farmer and Ward's Case, Vide infra, Co. Lit. 63. a.

If a Copyholder suffer the House to decay and to be wasted, this is a
Forfeiture, 1 Rolls Abr. 508. Rastal and Turnor: Stranger commits Waste.
But if a Stranger commit waste upon the Copyhold, without the assent of the
Copyholder himself; this is not any Forfeiture of the Estate of the
Copyholder, 4 Rep. 27. Clifton's Case.

If a Copyholder for Life cuts down Timber Trees, the Lord may take them:
Under-Lessee cuts down Timber Trees.
If Under-Lessee for years of a Copyholder, cuts down Timber, it shall not be
a Forfeiture of the Copyhold Estate, Styles, p. 233.

Cutting Timber Trees.
If a Copyholder cut down great Trees ( viz. Elms) to repair his Copyhold
House, which is in decay, and employ them accordingly, this is not any
Forfeiture, because the Law allows this to him, without any Custom to warrant
it, M. 38, 39 El. B. R. East and Harding's Case. So, if he cut down two great
Trees for that purpose, and only employ one of them, yet this is not any
Forfeiture, for a man cannot precisely know what is sufficient, ibid. But if he
lets them lie, and suffers them to rot, this is a Forfeiture.

If a Copyholder for Life cuts down great Trees, this is a Forfeiture, and if
a Custom for so doing is alleged, it is unreasonable and not good, Cro Car.
220. Rockey and Higgins.

If a Copyholder fell Trees, its no Forfeiture, because it may be for the
reparation of the House; but an act afterward, as selling them, may cause a
Forfeiture, 9 Rep. 76.

Ampuattion of Topboughs.
A Copyholder by the common Law may lop off under Boughs without especial
Custom; but the amputation of the Top-boughs will cause the putrefaction of the
whole Tree, and so that is Waste, and a Forfeiture, Cro. El. 361. Drawbridge
and Cox.

Dodderidge put the Question in Cornwallis's Case, 227. If Tenant permit waste,
and after repair, may the Lord enter? Per Hicham, it was once a Forfeiture and
so remains.

If the Lord grant to his Copyholder the Trees growing upon the Land, and
which afterward shall grow, and that it shall be lawful for the Tenant to cut
and carry them away; The cutting down the Trees is no Forfeiture of his
Copyhold, because he had dispensed with the Forfeiture by his Grant, but he
cannot cut the Trees that shall grow after, for as to them the Grant is void,
Moor, n. 234.

As to waste about Trees, Vide sub titulo Customs.

If there be no Custom to the contrary, Waste.
waste either permissive or voluntary of a Copyholder is a Forfeiture of his
Copyhold, Co. Lit. 63. a. Vide supra.

The manuring of Land to Hop Ground, was agreed to be a Forfeiture.

If the Copyholder convert part of the Land into a Piscary, its a Forfeiture,
Lit. Rep. 267, 268. in Paston and Utbert's Case.

Of Forfeiture by Attainder of the Tenant.
Custom of the Manor was, if any Copyholder within the Manor committed any
Felony, and this was presented by the Homage, that the Lord may take and seize
the Land. A Copyholder committed Felony, and this was presented by the Homage,
and after the Copyholder was Indicted, and by Verdict Acquitted, and the Lord
entered: Per Cur. Its a good Custom, but they delivered no Opinion, whether the
Lords Entry in this case was lawful, though it seems the Lord is concluded and
he cannot enter; to which purpose there is cited a pretty Case. A man was
Indicted as principal for the death of J. S. and another as accessory in
receiving the principal, after the principal was Outlawed, and the accessory
hanged, and the Lord seized the Land of the accessory as Escheat. Afterward
came the principal and reversed the Outlawry, and was found Not Guilty, and the
Heir of him which was hanged entered upon the Lord; adjudged, inasmuch as there
cannot be an accessory unless there be a principal, that the Entry of the Heir
was lawful, 2 Brownl. 217. Gittins and Cooper; So its a good Custom in 1 Leon.
p. 1. Burnford and Packington.

Copyholder for Life was arraigned for Felony and convicted, and prayed his
Clergy, whereupon the Plaintiff, as Lord, entered for the Forfeiture, without
alleging any special Custom or Attainder, Q. 2 Keb. 451, 456. Jury and Pawlet.

Of other acts which are Forfeitures.
If a Copyholder forgeth a Customary, containing diverse false Customs, and
pretending them to be true Customs; Quaere, if this be a Forfeiture, 3 Leon.
107, 108. Tavernor and Cromwell.

By Enclosure.
Custom is, That the Lord has a Field-course for five hundred Ewes, over the
Lands of the Copyholder, from Michaelmas till Lady Day, in all the Lands of
the Copyholders, not enclosed; the Custom was too, That if they did Enclose he
might Fine them; Per Cur. Enclosure is no Forfeiture, Paston and Utbert, 5 Car.
1. Hutton, p. 102. Lit. Rep. 246. mesme Case.

Rescous.
Rescous by a Copyholder is a Forfeiture.

Replevin by a Copyholder.
If a Copyholder bring a Replevin, it is a Forfeiture, 1 Rolls Rep. 48. in the
case of Warn and Sawyer.

Outlawry.
A Copyhold is not forfeited by Outlawry in a personal Action, for the Lord is
not prejudiced by it, and yet the King shall have the Profits.

Enclosure.
Bare Enclosure is not Forfeiture of a Copyhold, Hetly, p. 7, 8.

The manuring of Land to Hop Ground, was agreed to be a Forfeiture.

If Doal Marks are about a Copyhold, and the Copyholder makes such Ditches
that he defaceth the Doal Marks, this may be a Forfeiture, for in time it may
prove to the disheritance and loss of the Copyhold.

What Acts of the Husband shall forfeit the Wives Land or not.
Feme Copyholder of Inheritance takes Husband, Husband makes a Lease for
years; Lease of a Copyhold shall not bind the Wives Estate of Inheritance.
the Lord enters for a Forfeiture; Husband dies, the Feme dies; the Heir of the
Wife enters, and his entry was adjudged lawful, Palmer's Rep. 387. Savern and
Smith. 35 El. Sandley's Case. 2 Rolls 344. mesme Case.

Denial of Rent by the Husband shall be a Forfeiture against the Wife, and so
shall waste. Denial of Rent by the Husband.
( Quaere, if waste be not a Forfeiture by the Statute of Gloucester, which
extends to Copy-holds) but not collateral acts; as cutting Trees etc. By
Doddridge, waste at Common Law by the Husband shall bind the Wife, but not a
Feoffment; and he took this difference; Diversity*
where the Copyhold came to the Woman after Coverture, his Forfeiture shall not
bind her, for then it cannot be said it was her folly to take an Husband that
would forfeit, etc. Palmer's Rep. 387. Savern and Smith.

If a Feme Copyholder pur vie, Waste committed by Husband.
takes Husband who commits waste, this shall bind the Wife; and the difference
is as to this and the Husbands making a Lease. In waste the Forfeiture goes to
the Inheritance of the waste, which continues for ever; but in Savern and
Smith's Case this Forfeiture determines with the Lease: But if a stranger
commits waste without the assent of the Husband, By Estranger.
this is no Forfeiture, 4 Rep. 27. Clifton and Molineux, Vide pluis infra.

A Feme Copyholder takes an Husband, who lets the Land for more years than the
Custom does warrant; it is Quaere, whether this shall bind the Wife, as a
condition in Law, Per Wray. If the Husband deny to pay the Rent, or to do Suit
of Court, these are present Forfeitures which shall bind the Wife, for they are
things that the Lord must of necessity have; but Quaere, of the Lease, says
the Book, Cro. El. 149. Hedd and Challener: But it has been resolved ut supra,
in Savern's Case.

Who shall take advantage or enter for a Forfeiture, and of what Forfeitures or
not.
After a Copyhold is dismembered from the Manor, yet of what Forfeitures, the
Grantee or Feoffee shall* take advantage.
It was a Question in East and Harding's Case, If the dismembring of the
Inheritance of the Copyhold Land by the Feoffment of the Manor, had disabled
from taking the advantage of the Forfeiture. It was ruled with this difference,
that all Forfeitures which accrue by reason of any matters of the Court, are
discharged, but not Forfeitures at Common Law, as Waste, or Leases made to the
disherison of the Lord, but the Feoffee of them made in his time, shall enter
and take advantage thereof, Moor, n. 508.

Lessee for years. Dom. pro tempore.
Lessee for years of a Manor shall take advantage of a Forfeiture committed by a
Copyholder, for he is Dominus pro tempore, East and Harding's Case: So Tr. 10.
Jac. B. C. Rowls and Mason. Lessee for years shall take advantage of a
Forfeiture by waste, after his Lease, made, and before the commencement of his
Term, Moor, n. 508.

If the Lord of a Manor, in which are Copyholders, Tenants of the Manor, and
the Lord grant to a Stranger the Freehold of a Copyhold in Fee, although by
this his Tenement is divided from the Manor, and not demisable per Copy again;
yet the Grantee of the Freehold shall take advantage of a Forfeiture committed
after by the Copyholder, for he ought to pay his Rent to the Grantee. So in
this case, if the Grantee of the Frank-Tenement make a Lease for years of the
Frank-Tenement, this Lessee for years shall take advantage of a Forfeiture
committed after by the Copyholder, for that he is Dominus pro tempore, 1 Rolls
Abr. 509. East and Harding, Cro. El. 499. mesme Case. For Copyholder as to the
Forfeiture of his Estate, remains in all degrees as before the severance
thereof from the Manor.

If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years, Where Lessee or Feoffee shall take
advantage.
which is a Forfeiture at Common Law, and afterward the Lord make a Feoffment,
or a Lease for years of the Freehold of this Copyhold to another, the Feoffee
or Lessee shall not take advantage of it, for the Lease of the Freehold made by
the Lord before Entry, is an assent that the Copyholder shall continue his
Estate, and so is in nature of an affirmance, or confirmation of the Lease,
Owen, p. 63. Pen and Merival: But

If the Lord of a Copyholder for Life, Where he shall.
Lease the Copyhold for years, to commence after the end, forfeiture or
determination of the Tenant for Life, and after the Tenant for Life commits a
Forfeiture, by making a Feoffment, if the Lord will not enter for the
Forfeiture, yet the Lessee for years may, 8 Rolls Abr. 858. Mere and Ridealt.

He in Remainder.
Copyholder for Life, the Remainder for Life commits a Forfeiture, he in the
Remainder shall not enter, but the Lord, because the Remainder is to commence
in possession after the death of the Lessee by the Custom.

Where the Lord shall take advantage before Presentment, or not.
Presentment, where material or not.
Presentment is not of necessity, but for the Lords better Instruction of the
Title, and he may, if he will, take advantage of the Forfeiture before
Presentment, Cro. El. p. 499. in East and Harding's Case. And therefore the
distinction of Coke's Copyholder is frivolous (except the Custom is so) though
as for those Offenses which by common presumption the Lord himself cannot have
notice without notice given, are usually presented, as if a Copyholder commit
Felony or Treason, or be Outlawed or excommunicate, a Presentment seems
necessary that the Lord may have the profits of his Copyhold Land. So if a
Copyholder alien by Deed, or do a thing notorious (as cutting down and selling
of Trees of the Copyhold Land by the Tenant,) its not material whether it be
presented by the homage or not, 3 Keb. 641. Pascal and Wood's Case. The
presentment is to give notice to the Lord, and not to entitle him, and he may
take notice if he will, Lach. p. 227.

Where and in what Cases the Forfeiture of one Copyhold is the Forfeiture of
another, and where and in what Cases not, as to Estate or persons.
Diverse Copy-holds were granted by one Copy, and several Habendums, and several
Reddendums for every of them, What Forfeiture of part shall be of the whole or
not.
and they all began at one time, and were to end at one time; the Copyholder
commits waste in one of the Copy-holds, The Question was, Whether that should
be a Forfeiture of them all. Per Cur. they are as several Grants and several
Copies, and the Forfeiture of the one is not the Forfeiture of the other, Cro.
El. p. 353. Tavernor and Cromwell, 24 Rep. 14. mesme Case. Its not material if
the Copyhold be in one or several Copies, but if the Tenure be one or several.

If a Copyholder make a Feoffment of one Acre of Land, parcel of his
Copyhold, all the Copyhold is not forfeited by this, but only this Acre, p.
41. El. B. R. Fuller and Terry.

But if a Copyholder cuts down a Tree which grows upon one Acre of Land,
parcel of his Copyhold, this is a Forfeiture of all his Copyhold; for that
the Trees are to be employed in Buildings and Reparation of the Houses and
Copyhold, and therefore by the making of waste all the Copyhold is empaired,
So 3 Keb. 641. Pascal and Wood.

If diverse Copy-holds Escheat to the Lord, and he re-grants them to another,
Tenendum per Antiqua Servitia, etc. they shall be severally held as they were
before the Escheat, 4 Rep. 27. And the Fines shall be several, as Hubart and
Hamond's Case, 4 Rep. 28. and consequently the Forfeitures.

Tenant for Life, Where the Forfeiture of one person shall be the Forfeiture of
another persons Estate, and where not.
Remainder in Fee of a Copyhold, Tenant for Life commits a Forfeiture by
waste, and the Lord enters, this shall not bind him in Remainder, Trin. 39 El.
B. R Rastal and Turner. But the Lord shall hold it during the Life of Tenant
for Life. So Custom is, upon Surrender made to one and his Heirs, if three
Proclamations pass, and he does not come in to be Admitted, that the Estate
shall be forfeit. Remainder not forfeit by the act of Tenant for Life.
Surrender is made to A. for Life, the Remainder to B. in Fee. A. comes not in,
this shall not forfeit the Remainder, Yel. p. 1. Baspool and Land. For the
Estates of A. and B. are divided Estates, and the Custom shall be intended of
an entire Fee-simple given to one person, and the Custom being to bar an
Estate, shall be taken strictly. It is made a Quaery in that Case of Yelverton,
If such a Surrender be made to A. and B. and their Heirs, and A. comes within
the time of the Proclamations, and B. not, if A. shall have all, or that a
moiety shall be forfeit? I conceive a moiety shall be forfeit to the Lord, as
being Joynt-Tenants. But Quaere farther of Copartners in such case who are but
one Heir, Cro. El. 879. mesme Case.

Lessee forfeits his own Estate and not the Estate of his Copyholder.
If a Copyholder let for years by License of the Lord, and after the Lessee
makes a Feoffment, this shall forfeit only his Estate, and not the Estate of
the Copyholder, 1 Rolls Abr. 509. White and Hunt.

If a Woman Copyholder takes Husband, and the Husband makes a Lease for years,
although the Lord enters for the Forfeiture, yet after the death of the
Husband, this is no Forfeiture to the Wife, but that she may well enter, Where
the Wife shall suffer for the Forfeiture of her Husband or not.
for this act was a wrong to the Wife as well as to the Lord, and where it is a
wrong to the Wife there is no reason it should be a Forfeiture, 1 Rolls Abr.
509. Cro. Car. 7. Savern and Smith's Case. But if the Husband seized of a
Copyhold in right of the Wife, do waste, this Forfeiture shall bind the Wife
after the death of the Husband, for this act was not any wrong to the Wife, but
lawful as to her, and only a wrong to the Lord, 4 Rep. 27. Note the difference.

Copyhold is demised to two for Life successive, Cutting of Trees by Tenant
pur vit, is a Forfeiture of the Remainder for Life.
where the Custom is they may not cut Trees; the first Tenant cuts, its a
Forfeiture of him in Remainder, as well as of his own Estate; if a Stranger
cuts Trees, or another who occupies at their sufferance, this is a Forfeiture
of the Copyhold, Moor 149. but Quaery of the last.

What is a dispensation of a Forfeiture, or what acceptance or act shall purge
a Forfeiture or not.
The admittance of an Heir of a Copyholder by a Dominus pro tempore,
Admittance.
is a dispensation with a precedent Forfeiture, 1 Keb. 26. Muniface and Baker.

Admission by the Lord dispenses with a former Forfeiture, Tothil 107. Clerk
and Wentworth. Aliter had the Lord seized an Herriot.

And yet if the Father commits a Ferfeiture and dies, and the Son is admitted
as Heir by descent, this purges not the Forfeiture, because the Father dying
seized of no Estate, the Son cannot be admitted to any, Tothil, p. 107.

If the Tenant be amerced, Amerciament.
the amerciament dispenses with the Forfeiture, though the amerciament be not
estreated or levied, 1 Leon. 104. Sir John Braunches's Case.

If a man comes into a Copyhold tortiously, Disseisor is admitted by the Lord,
and he makes a Lease not warranted, a Release from the Disseisee purges.
and is admitted by the Lord, and afterward he makes a Lease for three Lives,
which is a Forfeiture, yet if he that has the pure right to the Copyhold,
Release to the wrong doer before the Lord enters, that is good, for until the
Lord enter he is Tenant in fait, 4 Rep. 15. I Brownl. 149. in Odingsal and
Jackson's Case, Quaere.

Acceptance.
Copyholder sold Timber off the Land; Lord enters, Copyholder dies; Lord
seises a Beast, the Heir brought Trespass: the Plaintiff justified the seizure
for an Harriot, Per Cur. in Ejectment, this being the Defendants Evidence.
Justification for Harriot Service or Seisin of Ancestor, is an acceptance of
Heir as Tenant, and purges the Forfeiture; contra on Acceptance, Justication
or Avowry for Harriot Custom; but now there being an actual Entry in the
Lifetime of the Ancestor by the Lord for the Forfeiture, no acceptance after
will purge it, 3 Keb. 641. Pascal and Wood.

Repairs of waste.
If a Tenant permit Waste, and after repair, yet it seems this does not purge
the Forfeiture, Lach. 227. But Moor, n. 508. is contra. If a Copyholder cut
down Trees without a Custom, it is a Forfeiture, unless it be for Reparation.
Note, The Repairing with Timber, though after five years cut, and after Action
brought, is a dispensation of the Forfeiture.

Affirmance or confirmation by the Lord, Feoffment or Lease of the Freehold.
If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years, which is a Forfeiture at common Law,
and afterward the Lord makes a Feoffment or a Lease for years, of the Freehold
of this Copyhold to another, the Feoffee or Lessee shall not take advantage of
it, for the Lease of the Freehold made by the Lord before Entry, is an assent
that the Lessee of the Copyholder shall continue his Estate, and so is in
nature of an affirmance or a confirmation of the Lease, Owen, p. 63. Pen and
Merival. So the difference is, when the Lord enters or not, and also whether
the Forfeiture be committed before the Lords feoffment, etc. or after.

Whether Forfeiteres in the time of the Ancestors of the Lord shall descend to
the Heir.
Copyholder does waste, the Lord dies, Where the Heir shall not take advantage
of a Forfeiture.
the waste is presented in the Court, and the Lords Heir enters, the better
Opinion is, he cannot enter. Per Dodderidge, Actions ancestrel shall descend to
the Heir, but not Forfeitures, which is in the Will of the Lord to take
advantage or not, Palmers Rep. 416. Cornwallis and Hammond, 18 Eliz. in Harpers
Rep. cited by Lach. p. 227. in Cornwallis's Case. The Case was, Lord and two
Copartners, Copyholders, the one makes a Feoffment, and the Lord makes a
Lease of the Manor, the Lessee shall not take advantage of this Forfeiture,
because he is not privy to the Title; but if the Lessor dies, it was agreed the
Heir should take advantage of it. Ideo Quaere.

Its a mischievous Case if the Lord should be suffered to rake up old
Forfeitures, a long time past, and yet on the other side there is no reason
that the Lords should be abridged of their Rights. And its adjudged 2 Siderfin,
p. 8. Chamberlain and Drake's Case, That the succeeding Lord shall not take
advantage of waste made in the time of the preceding Lord.

Upon Entry for a Forfeiture, who shall have the Emblements.
Upon Entry by the Lord for a Forfeiture, he shall have the Emblements then
growing, as if a Feme Copyholder durante viduitate, sows the Land, and before
severance takes a Husband, the Lord shall have the Emblements, for her own act
is the cause of the determination of the Estate: If such Woman let for years
and the Lessee sows the Land, and after the Widow takes Husband, the Lessee
shall not have the Emblements, for although his Estate is determined by the act
of a Stranger, yet (as to the first Lessor) he shall not be in better case than
his Lessor was, 5 Rep. Oland's Case, Vide Emblements.

The Lords Remedy for a Forfeiture.
For Forfeitures presented by the homage, the Lord may distrain or seize, 1
Keb. 287. Pateson and Danges.

By Entry, the Lord shall have the Emblements.

CAP. XXIII.
Of extinguishment of Copy-holds. How they are destroyed by the act of the
Lord, or of the Copyholder. Where and how a Right to a Copyhold shall be
Estopped, or Extinguished by Acceptance or Release. Where a Copyhold shall be
suspended, and where it may be regranted.

Where and by what acts a Copyhold shall grow extinct and destroyed for ever,
and where not, and to what purposes and to what not.
By the act of the Lord, Copyholder.


BY the act of the Lord. And here observe two Rules.

By the severance of the Inheritance of the Copyhold from the Manor, the
Copyhold is not destroyed, for though the Copyhold must be parcel of the
Manor; yet severance made by the Lord shall not destroy the Estate of the
Copyholder, Custom has so fixed and established his Estate.

In all cases where the Copyhold is gone by the Grant of the Reversion; it is
not so gone but that the Tenant shall hold his Estate still, and subject to
Forfeiture as before. To Illustrate this, I shall cite two or three Cases.

That the Lords act shall not prejudice the Copyholders Estate.
If the Lord makes a Lease for an hundred years, the Lands are not so severed
from the Manor, as that the Copyhold is extinct, and the customary Interest is
not determined, but the Lord himself has destroyed the Custom as to the
Services; for the Services reserved upon the Copy, Copyhold extinct as to
Services, but remains as to the Customary Estate.
and the advantage of waste, and other Forfeitures are extinct: But by
Anderson, the Rents and Services remain, and waste shall be a Forfeiture,
though such waste cannot be found by an ordinary Presentment, and that the Lord
shall have the Rents and Services, and not the Lessee; quod mirum, says the
Reporter, against his own Lease, 2 Leon. 208. Beal and Langley: But this point
is well settled in Murrel and Smith's Case, 4 Rep. 25. though the Reversion of
the Copyhold be granted and so severed from the Manor, yet the Copyholder
shall hold his Estate, and subject to Forfeiture as before, and shall perform
the same Services, (suit of Court excepted) as before, and the Custom incident
to the Land, as Borough English, Gavel-kind continue still; but Fine upon
Alienations and Suit of Court and Admittances are gone.

The Lord Grants an ancient Copyhold to S. in Fee, and after he grants the
Inheritance of that Copyhold to a Stranger in Fee. S. makes his Will, and
devises it to M. in Fee, which was surrendered at next Court. Per Cur. 1.
Copyhold though severed from the Manor, not destroyed by the Lords act.
By the severance of the Inheritance of the Copyhold from the Manor, the
Copyhold is not destroyed, being the Lords act. 2. The Surrender after the
Severance of the said Copyhold was void, and so was the Will, for the Lands
were not parcel of the Manor at the time of the Surrender, and the devise only
cannot transfer for such customary Estate. 3. After the severance the
Copyholder shall pay his Rent to the Feoffee, and other Services which are due
without Admittance as Harriot, etc. But not Fine or Suit of Court; After
severance Forfeitures continue.
But such Forfeitures as were Forfeitures before the Severance, as Feoffment,
Lease, Waste, are Forfeitures after, 4 Rep. 24, 25.

In Lee and Boothby's Case, Cro. Car. 521. The Question was, If a Copyholder
in Fee surrender to the Lord of the Manor his Copyhold Estate, and the Lord
makes a Lease for years of the Manor, and of the said Copyhold, by the name of
his Tenement called H. whether it was a determination of his Copyhold? Per
Curiam, it is not, because when he lets the Manor, it is included as parcel of
the Manor; the Manor being demised includes the Copyhold as parcel of the
Manor, and the naming of the Copyhold is surplusage: But if he (though he had
been but Dominus pro tempore, or for half a year, though by parol) had made a
Lease for years of the Copyhold by it self, that had destroyed the Copyhold,
for it was then during that time severed from the Manor, and so could never
after be demised by Copy.

Lease for years of a particular Copyhold by name, together with the Manor, by
the King, has not so extinguished that the Copyhold (though by the surrender
of it, it is parcel of the Manor in the King) but that after such Lease the
Patentee of the Reversion may regrant it as Copyhold, 1 Keb. 720.

Act of the Lord with consent of the Tenant, where it destroys it or not.
But the act of the Lord with consent and acceptance of the Tenant, will destroy
the Copyhold, otherwise it shall not prejudice the Copyholder: But in some
sense the Copyholder may assent and yet not be prejudiced, as in Howard and
Bartlet's Case, Hob. 181. The Custom was, Copy hold Estate may remain to some
purpose, notwithstanding the severance from the Freehold.
if Copyholders for Life dye seized, their Wives shall have this during their
Widowhood; and A. being Copyholder for Life, the Lord conveys the Freehold and
Inheritance of the Copyhold of A. by the procurement of A. to J. S. a
Stranger, and his Heirs, during the Life of A. Remainder to B. the Wife of A.
for Life, Remainder to A. and after A. grants the Remainder to W. his Son;
after this, B. the Wife of A. dies, and A. marries C. and dies seized; now
though here appears the Copyholders privity and consent, in that he takes the
Remainder in Fee, and grants it over to his Son, that it should be destroyed,
and though this Copyhold Estate was destroyed before her marriage, yet the
viduity of C. is not extinguished, for the Freehold being in J. S. during the
Life of A. the Estate of A. was not so extinct, but the Custom shall continue
quoad her. The Copyhold Estate here remains, notwithstanding the severance
from the Freehold; and though the Remainder was in him, and he granted it
over, yet he lived and dyed a Copyholder; Hobart, p. 181. Howard and Bartlet,
1 Rolls Abr. 510. Cro. Jac. 573. the same Case by the name of Waldee and
Bartlet.

Copyholder in Tail accepts a Feoffment from the Lord, it destroys not the
Copyhold so as to conclude his Issue, Carters Rep. 6, 7.

2. By the act of the Copyholder.

If a Copyholder accept a Lease for years of his Copyhold, Acceptance of a
Lease.
by this his Copyhold is destroyed, whether it be immediately from the Lord,
or mediately, as was Lane's Case, 2 Rep. 16. b. The King seized of a Manor in
Fee grants Copyhold Lands, parcel of this Manor, to another in Fee, by Copy of
Court Roll, according to the Custom of the Manor: And after the King by his
Letters Patents under the Exchequer Seal, makes a Lease for 21 years to
another, of these Lands; the Lessee grants his Term to the Copyholder;
afterward Queen Elizabeth (reciting the Lease for 21 years,) grants the
Reversion in Fee; the 21 years expire, and the Patentee of the Reversion enters
upon the Copyholder; his Entry adjudged good; for, Per Cur. by the acceptance
of the Term by the Copyholder, the Copyhold Estate was determined, as well as
if the Copyholder had immediately accepted a Lease for years of his Copyhold;
The reason of the Extinguishment.
the reason is the same in both Cases. A Copyhold Interest and an Estate for
years of one and the same Land, may not stand together in one and the same
person, at one time, without confounding the lesser, and if one of them ought
to be determined, it ought to be the Copyhold Estate. Also they are of diverse
natures, and so cannot stand together in the same person; the Estate at the
Common Law cannot drown, it being the more worthy than the customary Estate,
and the customary must. Vide mesme Case in Anderson 1 Rep. 191. and 1 Leon.
170. So it was resolved in Hide and Newport's Case. A Copyholder in Fee took a
Lease for years, of the Manor, the Copyhold is extinct for ever, and not only
during the Lease, Moor Rep. n. 330.

Acceptance to hold the Land by Bill and not by Copy.
Copyholder accepts to hold his Land by Bill under the Lords Hand, and not by
Copy, this determines the Copyhold, 1 Anderson 199. Colman and Bedil.

If a Copyholder takes a Lease for years of the Manor, by this his Copyhold
is destroyed, 4 Rep. 21. French's Case: But such Lessee may re-grant the
Copyhold to whom he will, for the Land was always demised and demisable.

If the Lord make a Lease for Life to the Copyholder by parol, this shall
confound the Copyhold, if Livery be made, otherwise not, Latch. 213.

If there be a Lease for years, of the Manor, and one of the Copyholders does
purchase the Reversion in Fee, by this the Copyhold is destroyed, and the
Lessee of the Manor shall oust the Copyholder, and hold the Land for the time,
Calth. p. 97.

By the Tenants Release to the Lord.
By the Copyholders Release to the Lord.
If a Copyholder releaseth to his Lord, that extinguisheth his Copyhold,
although it be contrary to the nature of a Release to give possession, Hutton,
p. 81.

Or to a Purchasor.
The Lord sells the Freehold interest of a Copyholder of Inheritance unto
another, so as it is divided from the Manor, and afterward the Copyholder
releaseth to the Purchaser, by it the Copyhold Interest is extinct; but if the
Lord be disseised, and the Copyholder releaseth to the Disseisor, Nihil
operatur, 1 Leon. 102. Wakeford's Case, Cro. Eliz. 21.

For if a Copyholder is ousted and so the Lord is disseised, and the
Copyholder releaseth all his right to the disseisor, and dies, his Heir Enters
and brings an Action of Trespass against the disseisor, who pleads his
Frank-tenement. Per Cur. the Release is void, the disseisor not being admitted
Copyholder.

It has been a Question, when a Copyholder bargains and sells his Copyhold
to the Lord of a Manor, in Lease for years, whether the Copyhold Estate was
extinguished. But in Hutton, p. 81. it is agreed that this Copyhold is not
extinguished; but that the Lord, who is Lessee for years, is Dominus pro
tempore, and may grant it by Copy, de novo.

The Lord of a Manor demised Copyhold Lands to three Sisters, Habend. to them
for their Lives successive; the eldest Sister married one C. after which, the
Lord by Indenture leased the same Land to the eldest Sister, the Remainder to
the Husband, Remainder to the second Sister, and no Agreement was made
thereunto by the second Sister by Deed, before or after making the said
Indenture; but four days after the Lease made she agreed to it in pais, and
then married a Husband, Agreement to an Indenture by one in Remainder for Life.
and they claim the Land. The point is, if by Agreement of the second Sister,
her Right to the Copyhold were extinct? The Interest of the eldest Sister is
gone by her acceptance of the Estate by Indenture; now if the second Sister may
come and claim her customary Interest? Per Cur. its no extinguishment in the
second Sister; and yet Judgment was against her; for Per Gaudy, none can take
advantage of the eldest Sister's Estate being determined; the Lord against his
Lease cannot enter or claim; and the second Sister cannot enter during the Life
of the eldest Sister, for her Remainder takes effect in possession after the
death of her said Sister, 1 Leon. p. 73. Curtis and Cottell's Case, 28 Eliz.
Trin. B. R.

By acceptance of a new Estate of Freehold.
Baron and Feme Copyholders, to them and their Heirs; the Baron, in
consideration of money paid by him to the Lord, obtains an Estate of the
Freehold, to him and his Wife, and to the Heirs of their Bodies. Baron dies,
having Issue; the Feme enters and suffers a Recovery, and his Heir enters, Per
Statute 11 H. 7. Per Cur. the Entry is lawful, for the Copyhold by the
Acceptance of the new Estate was extinguished, Cro. El. 24. Stockbridge's Case.

Where and how Right to a Copyhold shall be Extinguished by Release.
A man makes a Surrender of his Copyhold Land to J. S. which is not good; and
after J. S. is admitted; he which made the Surrender releaseth to him being in
possession, and after enters upon him. The Question was, if his Entry be
congeable, and if by the Release by Deed, the customary Right of the
Copyholder was extinct? And Per Cur. it is extinct by the Release; for he to
whom the Release was made, was Copyholder in possession, and admitted to the
Tenements, and therefore the Release of a customary right may enure to him, and
the Lord has no prejudice; for he has received his Fine for Admittance; and
he to whom the Release is made, is in by Title, (viz.) by Admittance of the
Lord, and so this Release enures by way of extinguishment. And there is great
difference between transferring of an Estate, and an extinguishment of a Right:
Diversity between the transferring of an Estate, and the extinguishment of a
Right.
But if a Copyholder be ousted, per Tort, there his Release to the disseisor,
or other wrong doer, does not transfer his Right or Bar him. 1. Because there
is no customary Estate, upon which a Release of any customary Right may enure;
and then 2. It would be a prejudice to the Lord, who would lose his Fines and
Services, Co. 4 Rep. 25. b. Kite and Queinton.

In Replevin, bar to the Conisance, That K.D. was seized of the Manor of R. in
Fee, and that the Tenements in which, etc. were customary held of the said
Manor, and that at such a Court a Copy was granted to the Plaintiff, whereby he
entered and put in his Beasts. The Defendant protesting the Premises were not
customary; for Plea says, That (before the Plaintiffs Title) J. Abbot of the
Monastery of B. was seized of the Manor of R. etc. and one R. T. being seized
of the customary Lands, in which, etc. in Fee, at the will of the Lord, the
said R. surrendered to the Abbot, who was possessed and occupied the said
Premises for diverse years, and afterward demised the said Manor for 40 years
to W. M. and then surrendered the entire Manor and Abbathy to H. 8. who granted
the entire Manor to the Duke of Norfolk in Fee, and he, with the assent of the
Termor, made a Feoffment to Drury of the Manor, to whom the Termor surrendered
his Lease; Drury dies, and it descends to his Heir, who granted the Land, in
which, etc. again by Copy to Tillot, for his Life, who entered and put in his
Beasts. Demurrer. The Question was, if the Custom is destroyed, or if Drury the
Defendant may avoid his Grant by Copy? Note, The custumary Land was never
severed from the Manor, but granted with the Manor, as part of it, and was
demisable by Copy, by all the Lords of the Manor, and so it remained till the
15th of Eliz. when the Defendant granted the Copy to the Plaintiff, Winch Ent.
991, 992.

Where a Copyhold shall be perpetually extinct, or where it shall after become
a Copyhold by regrant.
Forfeit, Escheat.
If a Copyhold Estate be forfeit or escheat to the Lord, or otherwise come into
the Hands of the Lord, if the Lord make a Lease for years or for Life, or other
Estate by Deed, or without Deed, this Land shall never after be granted again
by Copy, for the Custom is destroyed, for that during such Estates the Land was
not demised, nor demisable by Copy of Court Roll: So if the Lord make a
Feoffment, and enter for the Condition broken, it shall never be granted again
by Copy: But if the Lord keep it in his Hands a long time, or let this at will,
then he may re-grant it, Lach, p. 213. 1 Rolls Abr. 498. Downcliff and Minors.

So if the interruption be tortious, as if the Lord be disseised, and the
disseisor dye seized, or the Land be recovered against the Lord by false
Verdict, or erroneous Judgment, yet after the Land recovered, or the judgment
reversed, this is grantable again by Copy.

Legal Interruptions.
But if the Land so Forfeited or Escheated, before any new Grant be extended
upon a Statute or Recognizance acknowledged by the Lord, or the Lords Wife has
this assigned to her in a Writ of Dower, though these are impediments by acts
in Law, yet the interruptions are lawful, and the Lands may never again be
granted by Copy, 4 Rep. 31. Frenches Case.

If Copyholder takes a Lease for years of the Manor, by this his Copyhold is
destroyed; but such Lessee may re-grant the Copyhold again to whom he will,
for the Land was always demised or demisable.

If a Copyhold be surrendered to the Lessor of a Manor, or be Forfeited to him;
he, his Executors or Assigns may well re-grant it to him again.

If a Copyhold Escheat to the Lord, Escheat.
and he alien the Manor, by Fine, Feoffment, etc. his Alienee may re-grant this
Land by Copy, for it was always demised or demisable; but if it be a particular
Copyhold Estate, otherwise, as was said in the beginning of this Case, 4 Rep.
31. Frenches Case.

If a Copyholder sue Execution of a Statute against the Lord of a Manor, Not
destroyed by execution of the Manor at the Copyholders Suit.
and had the Manor in Execution, and after the Debt is levied, the Interest of
the Copyhold remains, Per Manwood, Heydon's Case, Savills Rep.

A Copyholder in Fee marries a Woman, Suspended.
Seignioress of the Manor, and after they suffer a Common Recovery, which was
to the Use of themselves for Life, Remainder over; by some the Copyhold is
extinct, for by the Recovery the Husband had gained an Estate of Freehold. But
Per Cur. by the inter-marriage it was only suspended, Cro. El. p. 7. Anonymus.

If a Copyholder accept of a Lease for years of the Manor, or marry the Lords
Wife, by this the Copyhold is not extinct, but suspended.

If a Copyhold be granted to three for Lives, Suspended.
and the first of them take an Estate by Deed, with livery from the Lord, by
this the Copyhold for that Life is suspended, Dyer 30. 4 Rep. 31.

No prejudice to the Wife, or to him in reversion.
Baron seized of a Manor in right of his Feme, let Copyhold Land, parcel
thereof, for years, by Indenture, and dyed; this does not destroy the Custom as
to the Wife, but that after the death of her Husband she may demise by Copy, as
before: So

If Tenant pur vie of a Manor, let a Copyhold, parcel of the Manor, for years,
and dies, it shall not destroy the Custom as to him in Reversion, Cro. El. P.
38 Eliz. Conesby and Rusketh; for being Tenant pur vie, he may not do wrong by
destroying of Customs.

King H. 8. grants Lands, being parcel of Copyhold of a Manor, without
reciting this to be Copyhold, to Sir J. G. pur vie, Sir J. G. morust. Queen
Mary grants the Manor to Susan Tenny in Fee, who let the Manor for years to
Lee. Lee, before his years expired, grants the Land in question to R. L. in
Fee, according to the Custom of the Manor: Lee's years expire. R. L. let to
Field at will, and the Defendant enters as Heir to Tenny. Judgment pro Quer.
Suspension and not Destruction of a Custom. Kings Prerogative.
The Grant of the King is but a suspension and no destruction of the Custom:
And though the Maxim is, It ought to be demised and demisable, etc. yet this
holds not in the case of the King, 2 Siderfin, p. 142. Vide contra, 1 Rolls
Abr. 498. Downcliff and Minors. Vide sub. Tit. Grants by the Lord.

As to the escheating of Copy-holds; after escheating it cannot properly be
called a Copyhold, Escheat.
except it be because there is power in him to re-grant it as Copyhold. Were
it by Custom that the Wife shall be endowed of the intierty or moiety, and such
customary Copyhold Lands Escheat and the Husband dies; The Wife not to be
endowed after Escheat.
his Wife shall not be endowed of the intierty or moiety, because the Custom as
to her is extinct, 2 Siderfin 19.

A Copyhold Escheated may be demised, notwithstanding the Lords Continuance of
it, in his Hands above 20 years, 2 Keb. 213. Pemble and Stern.

Note, If the Copyholder of a Manor has had time out of memory, Copyhold
extinct, but not a Way over the Copyhold Land.
a Way over the Land of another Copyholder, and he purchases the Inheritance
of his Copyhold, by which the Copyhold is extinct, yet by this the Way is not
extinct, 1 Rolls Abr. 933. Empson and Williamson.

CAP. XXIV.
How and where Copyholder shall hold his Lands charged or not by the Lord, or
Copyholders, as Dowers, Rent-charges, Statutes: And how and where they shall
be avoided.

THE Lord of a Manor (in which were Copyholders for Lives) takes a Wife, Dower
of the Lords Wife.
and after a Copyholder dies; the Lord after Coverture grants the Lands again,
according to the Custom of the Manor, for Lives, and dies; the Lords Widow
shall not avoid these Grants, in a Writ of Dower, yet the Custom, which is the
Life of the Grant, was long before, 4 Rep. 24.

If Feoffee of a Manor, upon Condition, make voluntary Grants of Copyhold
Estates, according to Custom, and after the Condition is broken, By Feoffee a
Manor upon condition.
and Feoffee reenters, yet the Grants by Copy shall stand. Earl of Arundel's
Case, cited in Co. 4 Rep. 24.

Copyholder by voluntary grant, not subject to the Lords Charges.
The Copyholder which comes in by voluntary Grant shall not be subject to the
Charges or Encumbrances of the Lord before the Grant, 8 Rep. 63. Swain's Case.

Lord of a Manor (where the Custom was of Land demisable, for one, two or three
Lives, that he that was first named in the Copy should enjoy it only for his
Life, and so the second, The Remainder preserves the Estate from Charges.
etc.) grants it to J. P. and E. and M. his Daughters for their Lives; if the
Lord had charged the Inheritance of the Copyhold, J. P. shall not hold it
charged during his Life, for the mean Estates in Remainder preserve the Estate
of J. P. by Copy from the Encumbrances of the Lord, 9 Rep. 107. Margaret
Podger's Case.

Rent charge.
Earl of W. seized of Manor by Copy, grants a Rentcharge to Sir W. Cordel for
the term of his Life, and conveys the Manor to Sir W. Clifton in Tail, the Rent
is behind; Sir W. Cordrel dies, the Manor descends to Sir John Clifton, who
grants a Copyhold to H. The Executors of Sir W. Cordel distrain for the Rent:
Per Cur. the Copyholder shall hold the Land charged, 2 Leon. p. 152. and 109.
Cordel and Clifton. But it has been adjudged, That the Wife of the Lord shall
not be endowed against the Copyholder; for the Title of Dower is not
consummated before the death of the Husband, so as the Title of Copyholder is
completed before the Title of Dower; and in this Case the Seisin and
possession continues in Sir John Clifton, who claims only by Sir William
Clifton, who was the Tenant in Demesne, who ought to pay the Rent.

Lord and Copyholder for Life be; the Lord grants a Rentcharge out of the
Manor, Rent charge by the Lord upon the Manor.
whereof the Copyhold is parcel; the Copyholder surrenders to the Use of A.
who is admitted accordingly, he shall not hold it charged; but if the
Copyholder dies, so that his Estate is determined, and the Lord grants to a
Stranger, de novo, to hold the said Land by Copy; this new Tenant shall hold
the Land charged, 1 Leon. p. 4.

Lord of a Manor (where Lands were dedemisable for one, two or three Lives,) in
which Manor was a Custom, that the Lord for the time being, might grant
Copyhold Estates for Life, in Reversion; the Lord granted such Lands for Life,
by Copy in possession, took a Wife, and granted the same Copyhold to a
Stranger, in Reversion, for Life, and dyed, the Copyholder in possession dyed;
this Land (inter alia) is assigned to the Wife for her Dower; Dower.
the Copyholder shall hold the Land discharged of the Dower, 1 Leon. p. 16.
Cham and Dover's Case.

In Cham and Dover's Case, is cited the Case of Slowman, who being Lord of a
Manor ( ut supra) by his Will devised, That his Executors should grant Estates
by Copy, and dyed, having a Wife; the Executors make Estates accordingly; Dower.
the Wife in case of Dower shall avoid them, Dyer 344. and 1 Leon. p. 16.

Lord of such a Manor is bound by Recognizance, Recognizance.
afterward a Copyholder for Life dies; the Lord grants his Copyhold de
novo, the new Grantee shall hold the Land discharged of the Recognizance for
the Copyholder is in by the Custom, which was paramount, 1 Leon. p. 16.

Granted upon an Escheat, shall avoid Charges.
The Lord of a Copyhold Manor, where Copyholders are for Life, grants a
Rentcharge out of all the Manor; one Copyhold Escheats, the Lord grants that
again by Copy; the Grantee shall not hold it charged, because he comes in above
the Grant, ( viz.) by the Custom; the same Law of Statutes, Recognizances,
Dower; and Dyer 270. is deemed for Law, in Swain's Case.

Copyholders Beasts distrainable or not for a Rent charge.
If one is seized of Rentcharge by Prescription, issuing out of the Manor of D.
yet it seems he may not distrain the Beasts of the Copyholders of the Manor,
unless they have been used to be distrained, for that they are in by
Prescription also, and so as high as the owner of the Rent; but it is clear,
That if the owner of the Rent had this by Grant or otherwise, and not by
Prescription, that the Copyholders Beasts cannot be distrained for this, 1
Rolls Abr. 669, 670. Cannon and Turner.

But by Coke Chief Justice. If a Copyholder be of 20 Acres, and the Lord
grants Rent out of those 20 Acres, in the Tenure or occupation of the said
Copyholder (and names him) there, if this Copyhold Escheat, and be granted
again, the Copyholder shall hold it charged, for this is now charged by
express words, Brownl. 208. Sammer and Force.

Tenant by the Courtesy for Life or years of a Manor; a Copyhold comes to his
Hands by Forfeiture or Determination, and then he was bound in a Statute;
Statute by the Lord.
and afterward demised the Land again. Per Cur. this Copyhold shall be liable
to the Statute, because it was once annexed to the Freehold of the Lord, and
bound in his Hands: But if a Copyholder bind himself in a Statute, Statute by
the Copy holder. Diversity.
it shall not be extended, for he had not but an Estate at will, and this
diversity was agreed, in Moor, n. 233. Anonymus.

Lord of a Manor being summoned upon a Jury, lose Issues, Process for Loss of
Issues.
Process shall issue out of the Exchequer to levy them upon the Lands of the
Copyholders, and Lessees for Life and years, parcel of the Manor; for the loss
of Issues lies upon the Land as an inherent Servitude by the Law, into whose
Hands soever it comes, and this is the common practice of the Exchequer.

CAP. XXV.
Of Harriots. The Nature of Harriot Service and Harriot Custom, and of their
Differences. What Custom for Harriots are good or not. Where they shall be
apportioned, and by whose acts. Who shall pay Harriot or not. And the Pleadings.

Of Harriots.
HArriots being one of the ancient Services now most esteemed, and kept up, and
many Copy-holds being Harriotable, I shall Treat of Harriots, chiefly intending
Harriot Customs, and so far of Harriot Services, as to render the whole
Intelligible.

The Normans upon parcelling out their Lands to inferior Tenants, invented this
Service, and termed it Harriot Service; and afterward upon Infranchisement of
their Villains, Harriot Customs were given to the Lords for a future continued
gratulation, and so originally they were de gratia, but now they are de jure.

It is the best Beast (or other thing) that the Tenant has at the time of his
death, and this shall be paid before a Mortuary; but the Lord if he will may
seize the worst, and that seizure gives him property, Hob. p. 60.16 H. 7.5. Co.
Lit. 185. b.

Harriots may be by Tenure, Custom, or Reservation, Plowd. Com. Redsole and
Mantel.

There are two sorts of Harriots, Harriot Service, Custom.
And the nature of them both will be best explained by these diversities.

Harriot Service is generally expressed in a man's Grant or Deed, by which it is
reserved, and is in these words, or to this effect, ac etiam per servitium
reddendi post mortem cujuslibet tenentis deceden. seisit. optimum animal. etc.
1 Anderson 298, 299. Odiam and Smith; But Harriot Custom is only due by Custom
time out of mind, and may be paid after the death of Tenant for Life, Terms del
Ley.

Harriot Service is extinct by Purchase of parcel, but not Harriot Custom, Co.
Lit. 149. b.

It has been made a question in our Books, whether the Lord may seize for
Harriot Service, but it is agreed he must seize for Harriot Custom, Plowd. 96.
a.

In the Case of Woodland against Mantel, it is said the Lord may seize for
Harriot Service; but Anderson 1. p. 298, 299. in Odiham and Smith's Case says,
he ought to distrain, and not to seize; so is Sergeant Benlows p. 18, 39. But
the Law is settled in Cro. Car. 260. Mayor versus Brandwood, and that it is at
the Lords election either to seize it or distrain it if he can find it, though
the pleading seem to justify it; for in Replevin if one justify for Harriot
Custom, its no Plea for the Plaintiff to say, that the place where is horse de
son Fee, for that he claims this Harriot as his proper Gopds, and may seize it
wherever he finds it, Bendl. p. 18, 39. For the Lord may seize for an Harriot
Custom in the Highway, 2 Inst. 132.

What Custom for Harriots shall be good or not.
Custom was, That if the best Beast be esloigned, then the Lord had used to
seize and take the best Beast of any other being Levant and Couchant upon the
Land; its a void and unreasonable Custom: So if it be the Goods of any
Inhabitant or Dweller, Dye 199. b. Paxton's Case, Benl. p. 39. bis. Co. Ent.
666.

The Custom of having an Harriot, whether the man had Goods or not, is a void
Custom, Carter's Rep. p. 86.

A Custom, That the Lord shall seize the Beasts of a Stranger for an Harriot,
it is not good, because it alters the property; but a Custom, That he shall
distrain the Goods in such Case, it is good, because it is as a Pledge, 2 Leon.
p. 725. Parker's Case.

Where Harriot shall be apportionable or not.
By the Act of the Lord. Tenant.


Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Harriot Service, and the Lord purchases part of
the Land, the Harriot Service is extinct, because it is entire valuable:
Aliter, of Harriot Custom; for if the Custom of a Manor be, That upon the death
of every Tenant of the Manor that dies seized of any Land holden of the said
Manor, the Lord shall have an Harriot, although the Lord purchase parcel of the
Tenancy, yet the Lord shall have an Harriot by the Custom of the Manor for the
residue, for he remains Tenant to the Lord, and the Custom extends to every
Tenant, Co. Lit. 149. b. 6. Rep. 1.2. Bruerton's Case, 8 Rep. 105. Talbot's
Case 106.

Feme by Custom is to have a moiety by Survivor; and if Harriot be to be paid
for the whole, if it be part surrendered, both shall pay Harriots, 1 Keb. 356.
Muniface and Baker.

Act of the Tenant.
If Tenant alien parcel of the Tenancy, entire Services, as Homage Fealty,
Harriot, etc. shall be multiplied, Solida a singulis praestantur.

If my Tenant who holds of me by an Harriot, aliens parcel of his Land to
another, each of them is chargable to me with an Harriot, because it is entire;
and though the Tenant purchase the Land back again, I shall have of him for
every portion an Harriot, 6 Rep. 1. Bruerton's Case. 8 Rep. 105. Talbot's Case,
34 Edw. 3.1.

Copyhold was held by Rent and Harriot upon Alienation and Surrender:
Copyholder aliens parts of his Copyhold to one, and part to another, and
retains part in his Hands, and surrenders to the Use of the Alienees. Per Cur.
the Lord shall have an Harriot upon every alienation, in case of a Copyholder,
as well as a Tenant at Common Law. If they should not be multiplied, it would
be in the power of the Tenant to defraud the Lord by Alienation of parcels, and
in this case the Alienor pays the Harriot, because he continues Tenant, and
upon every Alienation after by the Alienees they shall pay it, Palmer's Rep.
342. Sir Francis Snag against Fox, 1 Keb. 357.

If a Copyholder being sick in his Bed does surrender into the Hands of two
Tenants, etc. to the Use of his eldest Son in Fee, and dies before the
Surrender is presented in Court, the Lord must have an Harriot: If Surrender
had been presented in Court, and Admission before the Father's death: Aliter

If an Harriot is due to the Lord upon every descent only, and a Surrender is
made by a Copyholder unto the Use of his Heirs in full Court, and to his
Heirs, and the eldest Son is admitted Tenant accordingly, and the Father dies,
the Lord shall have no Harriot.

Who shall pay an Harriot and when or not.
Where many Purchase Land jointly, an Harriot shall not be paid till after the
death of the Survivor, 8 Rep. 105.

If by Custom a Copyholder dies seized, he shall pay an Harriot to the Lord,
and after the Copyholder is disseised, and dies during the disseisin, yet he
shall pay an Harriot within this Custom, for he was Tenant in right,
notwithstanding this disseisin, 2 Rolls Abr. 72. Norris's Case.

Lease is made to A. for 99 years, if B. C. and D. or any of them so long shall
live, to commence after the determination of a former Lease, rendering Rent
after the commencement of the term, ac etiam post mortem B. C. and D.
respective for an Harriot 3 l. B. dies before determination of the first term,
and Lessor brings det. for 3 l. for an Harriot: Per Cur. no Harriot is due,
because coupled with a Rent, and no Rent is due during the interesse termini,
but both begin together, Siderfin, p. 437. Hangon and Carve.

Lease is made for 99 years, if I. and S. live so long, to commence after the
determination of a former Lease to Sibel, if Sibel lived so long, reddendo 40
s. per annum, and 3 l. in the name of an Harriot, post mortem of each Cesty que
vie. Per Cur. the Harriot ought not to be paid till the Lease come in
possession, which is not till Sibel dye, at which time the second Lease takes
effect, and this shall follow the nature of the Rent, being in company with
such Rents and Services as are to be only done when the Lease comes in
possession; and the Lease to Lessee for 99 years, is but a future Interest,
where the Lessor has no Reversion, nor the Lessee any term, and reddendo is a
reservation, and therefore cannot take effect till there is a Reversion; but
Keeling contra, this being a sum in gross, and here is an express agreement to
pay after the death of either of the Parties, and agreements may reach payments
as well on contingency, as where the Party has Interest, 1 Keb. 677. Lemal
against Cara.

Who shall have an Harriot.
A. is Copyholder for Life, of Lands Harriotable by the Custom if he dye
seized, and the Lord grants the Freehold of the Copyhold to B. for 99 years,
if A. the Copyholder so long live; the Remainder to A. for 1000 years, and
afterward A. assigns over his Lease of 1000 years to C. and afterward A.
makes F. his Executor, and dies seized, Per. Cur. C. the Assignee of 1000 years
shall not have an Harriot, because at the time of the death of A. when the
Harriot became due, he was not Lord, but had only a future Interest; and if any
Harriot be to be paid, the Executor of A. or the Lord in Fee shall have it, P.
15 Jac. B. R. Norris and Norris, 2 Rolls Abr. 72. This Case in March p. 23. is
Reported thus: The Lord granted the Seigniory for 99 years, if the Tenant
should so long live; and after he made a Lease for 4000 years: Tenant for Life
is disseized (or more properly ousted) and dyed. Two points resolved. 1. An
Harriot was to be paid, notwithstanding the Tenant did not dye seized, because
he had the Estate in right, and might have entered. 2. He in the remainder for
years should not have it; their reason was, because the Tenant for Life was not
the Tenant of him who had the future Interest of 4000 years, but of him who had
the Interest for 99 years; but the Court was not agreed that the Grantee for 99
years should have the Harriot; the reason of the doubt was, because that eo
instante, the Tenant died, eodem instante, the Estate of the Grantee for 99
years determined.

A Bishop is seized of the Manor of D. and he lets twenty Acres of it to A. and
B. during the iives of their three Children, rendering 21 s. Rent per Annum, and
also paying and delivering to the Bishop and his Successors, two of the best
Beasts upon the death of every Cesty que vie. The Bishop after lets all the
Manor to W. rendering the ancient Rent; one of the Cesty que vies dies: The
Question was, whether the Harriot belongs to the Bishop or to W. Per Cur. 1.
The Rent issues out of the entire Manor. 2. That the Harriot reserved shall go
with the Reversion, Winch, p. 46, 57. Bishop of Gloucester against Wood.

Pleadings. What shall be a good Avowry or Conizance for an Harriot in
Replevin, or a good Justification in Trespass or not, and how to be pleaded.
If the Lord avow generally for an Harriot, without showing what the Harriot
should be, whether. Beast or other thing, its sufficient, Hobart, p. 176. Shaw
and Tailor.

Exception to an Avowry was, for that in it he sets forth, That if any Tenant
dye seized, the Lord is to have an Harriot, and shows not of what Estate he
should dye seized; for in one case it may be an Harriot Custom may be due, in
another case, an Harriot Service: But Per Curiam, it shows he took them, nomine
Heriotorum, which is good enough, 1 Bulstr. 101. Sylliard's Case.

Defendant says, That all the Tenants for Term of Life, etc. after their
deaths have used to pay to him an Harriot; the Avowry is insufficient. That
Tenants should pay after their deaths, its repugnant: But if he had said, That
he and all those whose Estate he has, etc. have had an Harriot, it had been
good; this is Harriot Custom, for Harriot Service is of Tenants in Fee, 21 H.
7.13, 15. 8 H. 7.10.

Avowry by Harriot Service, he need not show what was the Beast he demanded,
nor the kind or price thereof, Cro. Car. 260. Mayor and Brandwood.

Bar to the Avowry, nulla habuit Animalia, Quaere Hobart 176.

Avowry for three Oxon, Separatim pro separalibus Harriot' Cust. tunc. 3 Br.
313, 333.

Prescription for Harriot sur Alienation, 8 H. 7.10.

Avowry for Harriot Custom; horse son Fee is no Plea. Vide supra, Bend. p. 18.
for Harriot Service, horse son Fee is a good Plea, Up. B. 110. Plowd. 96. a.

Avowry and Distress for Harriot Service, bar by Harriot Custom, Plowd. 94.
Woodland and Mantel.

Bar for Harriot reserved upon a Demise, Tomps. f. 257.

Custom Pleaded, Quod Dominus habeat Harriot Custumar. post mortem cujusllibet
tenentis, Co. Entr. 39.3 Brownl. 313, 403.

Simile and si fuerint elongat. tunc optimum animal. levan and cuban. super
terras, Co. Ent. 666. Dier 199. Moor 16.

Traverse.
Traverse tenure by Services alleged, Co. Lit. 598, 599.

Traverse le seisin, Quod Pater non fuit seisitus, Coke Ent. 613. Plowd. 94, 95.

Traverse le tenure protestando quod non fuit seisitus, pro placito dicit quod
non tenet, etc. 3 Brownl 329, 349, 313.

Traverse del Custom, 3 Brownl. 313.

Justification in Trespass.
Bar. quod Defend. Dom. manerij habuit Harriot custom. de omnibus tenentibus
alienan. sine Licentia. Ra. Ent. 650. Up. B. 182.

Bar by Harriot Custom, Post mortem tenentis, Co. Ent. 39. The like after the
death of Tenant pur vie, 3 Brownl. 402.

Repl. quoad 1 mes. horse son fee, quoad 2 Mes. non est talis consuetudo, Up. B.
222.

Harriot pleaded in Bar al Trespass, 1 Brown 383.

CAP. XXVI.
What Statutes extend to Copyhold Lands, and within what Statutes Copyhold
Lands shall be contained by construction of Law without express words, and what
not.

HOW the Statute De donis extends to Copyhold Lands or not, Vide sub. Tit.
West. 2. c. De donis.
Of Copy-holds Intayled.

It is expressly provided, 1 R. 3. c. 4. Of Juries.
That a Copyholder having Copyhold Land to the yearly value of 26 s. 6 d.
above all Charges, may be impannelled upon a Jury, as well as he that has 20
s. Freehold. But now this is altered by latter Statutes.

Copyhold Lands are within the words and intention of the Statute, 4 Hen.
7.24. 4 H. 7. c. ^4. Of Fines and non-Claim.
of Fines with Proclamations and five years non-claim, and shall be barred; as
a Lessee for years and his Lessor shall be barred; so the Copyholder and his
Lord: Covin.
But if a Copyholder by assent and covin to bar the Lord of his Inheritance,
makes a Feoffment and levies a Fine with Proclamations, such Fine shall not bar
the Lord, no more than it shall the Lessor if it be levied by Lessee, for the
reason in Fermor's Case, 3 Rep. f. 77.

If a Copyholder for Life, or in Fee, be ousted and the Lord be disseised,
Disseisin.
and the Disseisor levy a Fine with Proclamations, and five years pass, as well
the Lord as the Copyholder is barred, and the Lord shall not in such case have
five years after the death of Tenant pur vie; for the Lord may presently have
remedy by Action (viz. Assise, etc.) and recover the Land; and the Lord may
without consent or commandment precedent, or assent subsequent, enter in the
name of the Tenant by Copy, and his own Right, to save their particular
Interests as his own Freehold and Inheritance; for the Lord is no Stranger, but
is privy in Estate: But not if a Stranger who has no Right enter, etc. 9 Rep.
105, 106. Margaret Podgers Case.

The Case was, A Copyhold is granted to A. B. and C. for their Lives,
suecessive; the Lord by Deed Enrolled, bargains the Copyhold to A. in Fee, and
levies a Fine to him with Proclamations. A. dies seized, this discends to M.
his Son and Heir, who levies a Fine to Uses; Fine, when it shall bar or not.
after ten years B. enters; the Fine is no bar, for no Fine or Warranty shall
bar any Estate in Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, which is not divested
and put to a Right, and the Lords Bargain and Sale does not divest the Estates
of them in Remainder; for the Lord does that which he may do by Law, and A. was
in by force of the Statute of 27 H. 8. And an Act of Parliament shall do no
wrong.

Bicknal and Tucker's Case, Trin. 9 Jac. Rot. 3648. was, Whether a Fine with
five years will bind the Copyholder in Remainder? There was a Copyhold
granted to three for Lives, to have and to hold successively; the first accepts
a Bargain and Sale of the Freehold, Whether a Fine and non-Claim shall bar a
Copyholder in Remainder.
by the Lord of the Manor, and then he levied a Fine, with Proclamations, and
five years pass, Whether he in Remainder is barred or not? Those whose Estates
are turned to Rights, either present or future, are meant by the Statute to be
barred. If a Copyholder for years be put out of Possession, and a Fine levied,
and no entry by him, he is barred by the Statute: By the Bargain and Sale he in
Remainder is not put out of Possession. If a man makes a Lease to begin at
Easter next, and before Easter a Fine is levied, and five years pass, this Fine
will not bar, because at the levying of the Fine, he could not enter, for then
his his Right was future: If the Lease had been in possession, and the Lessee
had never entered, he had been barred, 1 Brownl. 181. This Fine shall not be a
bar to the Copyhold Estate in Remainder for Life, for it is not turned to a
right; the Estate is given by Custom, and is to have his beginning after the
death of the first Tenant, and if the first Tenant commit Forfeiture, he in
Remainder cannot enter; and by Coke, notwithstanding the acceptance of the
Bargain and Sale, the first Copyhold Estate for Life remains in esse, 2 Br.
153. mesme Case.

Custom that the Lord shall seize Copyhold, after three Proclamations, and
non-Claim by the Heir, shall not bind the Heir that is beyond the Sea, 8 Rep.
Sir Richard Lechford's Case.

Statute 37 H. 8. Of Dissolutions, 37 H. 8. Of Monasteries.
extends not to Copy-holds. A Copyholders Estate is not within the Statute of
Monasteries and Chanteries, to be avoided by any of the Statutes. So by Statute
1 Ed. 6. Cap. 14. it is expressly provided, That upon the dissolution of Abbeys
and Monasteries, Copy-holds should continue as they did before the Statutes,
and should fall into the Kings Hands. A Copyholder dissolved by the Statute of
Edw. 6. did between the Statute of 37 H. 8. and 1 Edw. 6. grant a Copyhold
Estate in Reversion; but the Statute 37 H. 8. extends not to them, 3 Bulstr. p.
15. Long and Baker, Vide 1 Leon. p. 4. mesme Case.

31 H. 8. Eccles. Leases.
Of making Leases of Copyhold Lands, belonging to Religious Houses, for years,
after Leases for Lives or Years in being, is within that Statute, 8 Rep. 7.
Heydon's Case.

32 H. 8. Of Conditions, Entries, Assignee.
Copyhold is not within the Statute of Entries for Conditions broken.
Surrendree of Reversion shall not enter for a Condition broken, its not within
the Statute of Conditions, Hob. p. 177, 178. Swinnerton and Miller.

Copyhold is not within the Statute of 32 H 8. Entries for Conditions.
Copyholder by License makes a Lease for 60 Acres, rendering Rent, and condition
of Re-entry: Copyholder Surrenders to J. S. and he demands Rent, and enters
for Non-payment. J. S. is not such an Assignee as the Statute intends, and
Custom does not trench to such collateral things; such Assignee being in only
by Custom, is not privy to the Lease made by the first Copyholder, nor in by
him, but he may plead his Estate immediately under the Lord, Yel. 222.
Brasier's Case. But Assignee of a Copyhold is within the Statute to have
Action of Covenant, 1 Keb. 356. Arrears of Rent.
Baker's Case. Quaere, if of Debt, Cro. Car. 21. Platt and Plummer.

Executors brought Action for Arrears of Rent of Copyhold, of which Manor the
Testator died seized, Per Cur. Action does not lie for Arrears of Copyhold
Rents, but only of Rents of Free Land, and Statute 32 H. 8. extends not to
them, Yelv. 135. Appleton and Doiley, 1 Brownl. 102.

Tenant in Tail of a Manor, wherein Copy-holds are demisable for Life, etc. for
a certain Rent. Copyholder for Life dies, and the Lord demiseth it for 21
years, 38 H. 8. Rents of Leases in Tail.
rendering the ancient Rent, etc. its good within the Statute 38 H. 8. for its
not any prejudice to the Issue as to the Rent, Noy, p. 106. The Lord Norris's
Case, Vide infra hoc capite.

If the Lord of a Copyholder for Life, demisable by 10 s. Rent, leaseth it by
Indenture to the Copyholder and two others, for their Lives, rendering 10 s.
Rent, by which it is within the Statute of 32 H. 8. and is not material though
the Harriot be lost, because it is merely casual, Noy p. 110. Banks and Brown,
Vide Montjoy's Case, 5 Rep. Et supra.

Copyhold is within the Statute 32 H. 8. 9. 32 H. 8. Cap. 9. Of maintenance.
Of Maintenance; for the Word is, Any Right or Title, 4 Rep. 26. a. Vide infra
hoc capite.

Copyhold is grantable for three Lives. 13 El. Cap. 10.
Dean and Chapter of London, grant this to H. G. for the Lives of J. R. and M.
reserving the ancient Rent, but no Harriot; the Rent was payable at four
Quarters, and by this Lease its payable half yearly; yet this is not void by
the Statute 13 El. Cap. 10. For the Occupant shall be punished for Waste, and
the Harriot is not annual, nor depends on the Rent; and as to the Rent its the
accustomed yearly Rent, but in Mountjoy's 5 Rep. (yearly) was wanting, 6 Rep.
37 Dean and Chapter of Worcesters Case.

Copy-holds are within all the Statutes of Bankrupts by express words, vide
supra. Statutes of Bankrupts. 1 El. and Jac.


A Copyhold is not within the Statute of Limitations.

Debt for the Fine of a Copyholder is not within the Statute of Limitations, 2
Keb. 536. Statute of Limitations.
Hodsden and Harris. Vide.

It is laid down for a Rule in Rowden and Malster's Case, Cro. Car. 44. When an
Act of Parliament alters the Service, Custom, Tenure, and Interest of the
Land, Rules when Acts of Parliament extend to Copy-holds or not.
or other thing in prejudice of the Lord or Tenant, there the general words of
such an Act shall not extend to Copy-holds. Therefore,

W. 2. Cap. 20. Elegit.
Statute W. 2. Cap. 20. which gives Elegit, extends not to Copyhold Lands,
because it would be prejudicial to the Lord, and a breach of the Custom, that
any stranger should have Interest there, without admittance and allowance of
the Lord.

27 H. 8.10. Stat. of Uses.
Statute 27 H. 8.10. of Uses, touches not Copy-holds, because the transmutation
of Possession, by the sole Operation of the Statute, without allowance of the
Lord, would be to the Lords prejudice.

31 H. 8. and 32 H. 8. Of Partition.
The Statute 31 H. 8. Cap. 1. and 32 H. 8. Cap. 2. whereby Joynt-tenants and
Tenants in common are compellable to make Prohibition extend not to Copy-holds.
And the

32 H. 8. Cap. 28. Leases by Tenant in Tail, or by Husband of the Wives Land.
Statute 32 H. 8. Cap. 28. Which confirms Leases for 21 years, made by Tenants
in Tail, or by the Husband and Wife of the Wives Land, touch not Copy-holds;
for that Statute warrants only such Leases of Lands which are grantable by
Deed; such are not Copyhold Lands, though by the Lords License they may be
granted by Indenture, yet in their own nature they are only demisable by Copy.

So Statute 32 H. 8. Cap. 34. And for the same reason which gives an Entry to
the Grantee of a Reversion, upon the breach of a condition, by the particular
Tenant, touches not Copyhold.

In all Statutes made for the good of the Commonwealth, and wherein no
prejudice accrues to the Lord or Tenants, by reason of the alteration of any
Interest, Service, Tenure, or Custom of the Manor, there the general words of
such acts of Parliament do extend to Copyhold Lands, as

Statute of Merton, Cap. 1. Merton, Cap. 1. Of Damages sur Recovery en Dower.
which gives Damages to a Feme Covert upon a Recovery in a Writ of Dower, where
the Baron dyed seized, extends to Copy-holds. And

Stat. W. 2. C. 3. W. 2. Cap. 3. Cui in vita.
And the three several branches of that Stat. the one which gives a cui in
vita, upon a discontinuance made by the Husband.

The second which gives the Receipt to the Wife upon her Husbands refusal to
defend the Wifes Title. Resceit.


And the third which gives a Quod ei deforceat to particular Tenants, extends
to Copy-holds, Quod ei deforceat.
And

The Statute 32 H. 8. Cap. 9. 32 H. 8. cap. 9. Champerty.
against Champerty and litigious Titles; which gives an Entry in lieu of a Cui
in vita, extends to Copy-holds, Cro. Car. 43. Rowden and Malster; Vide Plowd.
f. 371.

The Statute W. 2. which gives Elegits, Elegit.
extends not to Copy-holds, for that would be a prejudice, and the Common Law
would break the Custom, Savil's Reports, Heydon's Case, vide supra.

Copyhold Lands are liable to the Statutes of Recusants, 13 El. cap. 4. Of
Recusants.
and the King shall have the profits of the Lands only, but no Estate; and such
Statute does not make a Tenant to the Lord, and though the King has the
Copyhold Land, yet the Lord shall have the Rent during the possession of the
King, 1 Leon. p. 98. Saliard and Everat's Case. Owen, p. 37. mesme Case.

Copyhold Lands are not within the words of that Statute; but by Anderson, 34
H. 8.5. Of Wills.
the Equity of that Act does extend to Copy-holds, 1 Leon. 83. in Skipwith's
Case.

31 Eliz. cap. 7. Cottages.
Copyhold is not within that Stat. 1 Bulstr. 50. Brock's Case.

11 H. 7. cap. 10. Joyntresses.
Copyhold Lands are assured to the Wife for her Jointure, and she aliens them,
its no Forfeiture within Statute 11 H. 8. Cap. 10.

Copyhold Land is not within that Statute, 2 Siderfin, p. 41, 73. Harrington
and Smith.

CAP. XXVII.
Of Emblements, who shall have them, the Lord or the Copyholder.

A Woman who had her Widows Estate of Copyhold Land, and before severance,
took Husband, the Lord shall have the Corn, because the Estate of the Woman
determined by her own act; otherwise if her Estate had ended by Death, Divorce,
Determination of the Will, etc. Moor, n. 512. Oland and Burdwick, 5 Rep. 115.
mesme Case.

If a Copyholder Durante viduitate Lease for one year, and the Lessee sows the
Land, and after the Copyholder takes an Husband, yet the Lessee shall have the
Corn, for her act shall not prejudice a third person, Ibid. Oland's Case.

If the Husband seized of a Copyhold in Fee, sows the Land, and after
surrenders to the Use of his Wife, who is admitted accordingly; and after the
Husband dies before severance, it seems the Wife shall have the Corn, and not
the Executors or Administrators of the Husband, Annexed to the Land.
for that the Husband passed the Emblements with the Land to the Wife as
annexed to the Land, and by this the Privilege which the Law gives to him who
sows it, is taken away by the Surrender, and so it is all one as if the Wife
had sowed it, or purchased the Land sowed by a Stranger, 1 Rolls Abr. 727.

CAP. XXVIII.
What shall be said a Disseisin as to Copyhold Estates or not.

IF a Copyholder in Fee dies seized, and the Lord admit a Stranger to the
Land, who enters; he is but a Tenant at will, and not a Disseisor to the
Copyholder, who has the Land by Descent, because he comes in by the Assent
of the Lord, 3 Leon. 210.

If a Copyholder without License makes a Lease for years, the Lessee who
enters by color of that, is a Disseisor, and a Disseisor cannot maintain an
Ejectione Firmae, 2. Brownl. p. 40. Petty and Evans.

If a Copyholder Lease for years, by License of the Lord, and after enters
upon the Lessee and ousts him; this is a Disseisin to the Lord of the
Frank-Tenement, 1 Rolls Abr. 662. by Coke, Vide sparsim.

CAP. XXIX.
Actions and Suits. What Action may be brought by the Lords. What Actions
brought by Copyholders or their Executors, in respect to their Copyhold
Estates, shall be good or not, either against their Lords or others.

What Actions may be brought by the Lords.
THE Lord upon seizure of Copyholder may maintain Ejectment till the Heir
comes to be admitted (as in Harverights Case, Latch 511.) upon Entry of the
Feoffor (upon Rent reserved and Entry till satisfaction) he may upon such
Interest quousque, maintain an Ejectment, 1 Keb. 2^7. Lord Salisbury's Case.

As to the Lords Action for Rent, Distress Remedy for Forfeitures, Vide supra
and sparsim, per tout, and in Indice.

What Actions a Copyholder may bring against his Lord and what not.
Trespass upon Ejectment by the Lord.
Copyholder doing and paying the Customs and Services; if he be ejected by his
Lord, he shall have an Action of Trespass against him, Co. Lit. 60. b. 61. a. 4
Rep. 22. a. For though he is Tenens ad voluntatem Domini, yet it is
Secundumconsuetudinem Manerij.

For cutting Trees.
He shall have Trespass against his Lord, for cutting of Trees, or breaking his
House; in the Case of Stebbing and Gosnel, 1 Rolls Abr. 108.

The Custom was, That every Copyholder in Fee shall have the Loppings of the
Pollingers. The Lord cuts down two Oaks, and in his Plea to an Action sur Case,
says, he cut down two Oaks being Pollinger Timber Trees, and left the
Loppings there for the Plaintiff. On Demurrer it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff; for a Copyholder of Inheritance has interest in the Loppings and
Boughs, as well as the Lord in the Timber. And if the Lord shall cut down all
the Timber Trees, than the Copyholder shall lose the Profit, Cro. El. p. 629.
Moor, n. 727. mesme Case, 1 Rolls Rep. Ford and Hoskin's Case.

Nay the Action of Trespass by a Copyholder in Fee against his Lord for
cutting down the Trees, lies at Common Law, without any special Custom, for the
Copyholder has a special property therein, and the Lord a general property;
the Lord may as well subvert the Houses, as cut down the Trees, for without
them the Copyholder has no means to Repair it, 2 Brownl. 328. Heydon and
Smith, and in Doyle's Case, Mich. 25. and 26 El. it was adjudged, where it was
a Custom that the Copyholder might cut Maremium to Repair, if the Lord carry
it away, an Action of Trespass lies against him by the Tenant, in Taylor's
Case, Pasch. 36. Eliz.

A man was Tenant by Copy of Court Roll of Wood, and the Soil was excepted to
the Lord, and yet the Copyholder maintained an Action of Trespass against the
Lord for cutting his Wood, Moor, n. 480.

If a Stranger cut a Tree, Trespass by the Lord and the Copyholder for cutting
down Trees.
the Lord shall have one Action and the Copyholder another, and each one shall
recover Damages according to his Interest. Vide Leon. 1. 272.

Copyholder dies, Lord admits a Stranger, the Heir may enter, and upon a
re-entry, maintain Trespass without Admittance, Noy, p. 172. Simpson and
Gillion. Vide Admittance.

For non-Admittance, no Action by Surrendree.
Action on the Case against the Lord, lies not for non-Admittance.

A Copyholder in the Eye of the Law, is but Tenant at the Lords Will; and if
the Lord will not hold Court, he has no remedy to compel him but by order in
Chancery, Cro. Jac. p. 368. Ford and Hoskins: No Action on the Case by a named
Successor.

By Surrendror.
Surrendror may have an Action on the Case for not admitting, but not the
Surrendree, 2 Keb. 357. Quaere.

Remedy in faux Judgment.
The Demandant in a Pleint in nature of a real Action, recovereth the Land
erroneously, with remedy for the party grieved; for he cannot have the Kings
Writ of faux Judgment, in respect of the baseness of the Estate and Tenure,
being in the Eye of the Law but a Tenant at Will, and the Freehold being in
another; yet he shall have Petition to the Lord, in nature of a Writ of faux
Judgment, and therein assign Errors, and have remedy according to Law, Co. Lit.
60. And if there be cause, the Judgment may be reversed.

Assise.
Tenant by Copy shall not have Assise against his Lord (as Tenant in ancient
Demesne shall have) because he has no Frank-Tenement, 4 Rep. 21. but he shall
be relieved in Equity, Tothil, p. 108.

The Copyholders Actions and Remedies against Strangers, and where.
A man grants all the Coals and Coal-Mines within a Manor (and parcel was
Copyhold for Life) to J. S. Where Copyholder shall have Trover for Coals,
dug out of his Copyhold Land.
Lessee enters into the Copyhold and digs a new Pit in the Copyhold Land,
during the Life of the Copyholder, and takes the Coals and converts them, etc.
And Lessee of the Coal-Mine brought Trover against the Lessor; Per Curiam, he
may do it, for when the Lessor or Lessee of the Coals, or a Stranger enters and
digs the Coals out of the Pits, these belong to the Lessee, and if any one else
take the Coals, he shall have Trover, Jones Rep. 243. Player and Roberts.

Lessee of a Copyholder for a year, Ejectment.
shall maintain an Ejectione Firmae, for in as much as his Term is warranted by
Law, by force of the general Custom of the Realm, it is but reason if he be
ejected, that he shall have Ejectione Firmae; and it is a speedy course for a
Copyholder to have the possession of the Land against a Stranger, 4 Rep. 26.

As to the Declaration in Ejectment, Vide Tit. Declaration.

In Cro. El. p. 224. It is said to be adjudged, Ejectment.
Per tot. Cur. That an Ejectione Firmae does not lie of a Copyhold Estate: But
it was agreed, That an Ejectione Firmae does lie of a Lease made by a
Copyholder, but not of a Demise made by the Lord of a Copyhold, by Copy of
Court Roll, Cole and Wall's Case.

A Copyholder had License from his Lord to let his Land for 21 years; he lets
it to the Plaintiff for three years, who entered, and being Ejected, brought
Ejectione Firmae. Ejectment by Lessee upon a Lease, not warranted good against
a Stranger.
Per Cur. he may maintain this Action at Common Law, for it is a good Lease
between the Pa^^^s, and against all others but the Lord; and as this Case is,
it is good against him, because it is done by his License, and it is a good
Lease and well warranted by the License, Cro. El. 535. Goodwin and Longhurst.

A Copyholder made a Lease for one year excepting one day, which was warranted
by the Custom. Lessee being ousted by a Stranger, brings Ejectione Firmae, it
well lies; and if there were not any Custom, yet it shall be good against all
but him who had the Inheritance and Freehold. So if a Lessee for Will at the
Common Law had made a Lease for years; for the Tenant at Will is only a
Disseisor, and the Lease is good against him, Cro. Trin. 41 El. p. 676. Spark's
Case. So 717. Erish's Case, Moor, n. 709. Stoner and Gibson.

Ejectment by the Heir, without Admittance to presentment.
If customary Lands do descend to the younger Son by Custom, and he enters and
leaseth to another, who takes the Profits, and after is Ejected; he shall have
an Ejectione Firmae, without any Admittance of his Lessor, or Presentment that
he is Heir, 1 Leon. p. 100. Rumny and Eves, n. 128.

If a Copyholder had Common by Prescription in the Waste of the Lord, and the
Lord stores the Waste with Conies, every Copyholder may have Action on the
Case against the Lord, averring, That by this the Common is impaired, 1 Rolls
Abr. 106. Clayton and Sir Jerome Horsey.

Trespass for Beasts depasturing his Common by every Commoner.
Copyholder prescribes to have Common in the Waste of the Lord, and brings
Trespass on the Case against a Stranger, for his Beasts depasturing on the
Common there. The Question was, whether this Action lies? for 15 H. 7.12. its
agreed, a Commoner cannot maintain an Action of Trespass, nor no other, but the
Owner of the Soil, 12 H. 8.2. And the Commoner has no right till he has taken
it by the mouth of his Beasts, and the Damage is to the Tenant of the Land, and
then every other Commoner may have Action of Trespass, and so the Stranger
shall be infinitely punishable. Per Coke, If a Commoner may distrain Damage
feasant (doing Damage) which proves lie has wrong, then by the same reason, if
the Beasts are gone before his coming, he may have Action on the Case;
otherwise, one that has many Beasts may destroy the Common in a night: And its
not like a Nuisance, for that is Public, and may be punished in a Leet: But the
other is private to the Commoners, and cannot be punished in another course; he
cited one Whitehand's Case. Many Copyholders prescribe to have the Loppings
and Toppings of Pollards; the Lord cuts them; every Copyholder may have his
Action, and also Hill. 5. Jac. Rot. 1427. Geo. England's Case, and Warburton of
the same Opinion, 2 Brownl. p. 146. Crogate and Morris.

If a Copyholder by the Custom of a Manor had used to have Common for all his
Beasts, Action on the Case for digging Turffs on the Common.
Levant and Couchant upon his customary Tenements, in a certain parcel of the
Manor, and a Stranger digs Turffs there, and takes them away, by which his
Common, is impaired, Action on the Case lies, declaring, That the Defendant
dug so many Turffs there, and then with his Horses and Carts, Herbam tunc
and ibid crescen' predict. ambulando and conculcando, Declaration.
from the place aforesaid, minus rite ceperit and abcarriavit, per quod quer'
communiam suam predict. pro averiis suis, etc. in tam amplo and beneficiali
modo prout and antea habuit, etc. habere non potuit. This is a good
Declaration, though the Commoner cannot have any Damage for the taking and
carrying away the Turffs; yet the coming on the Land with Horse and Carts, is a
prejudice to the Common, and the per quod, the Common is impaired, is the cause
of Action, and the carrying away a means to impair it, 1 Rolls Abr. 89. Terry
and Goodier, and good, though Damages were entire.

Action shall be brought in a Copyholder Lunaticks name; for though the
custody of the Land was granted to one by the Lord, yet no Interest was gained
by this commitment, and the Lord has not power over the Lunaticks Lands,
without a Custom, Hobart, p. 215, 216. Cox and Darson.

Trespass, Quare clausum fregit.
Copyholder of Under-Wood without the Soil, shall have Trespass, Quare clausum
fregit, Moor, n. 480.

Account for Profits.
Account lies not for an Heir Copyholder for the Profits of his Copyhold
Lands, taken during his Nonage, where the Defendant has not entered and taken
the Profits, as Prochein Amy, but claims by Custom and Grant of the Lord, to
the Use of the Assignee (which Custom is good,) 1 Leon. p. 226. n. 356.
Anonymus.

Faux Judgment.
Writ of faux Judgment lies not for a Copyholder, Vide supra.

Writ of Right Close.
Writ of Right Close, lies not for a Copyholder, 4 Rep. 21.

Avowry for Rent by Lessee of a Copyholder.
Lessee for years of a Manor, distrains a Copyholder for Rent; he Replevins,
Lessee Avows, Per Curiam, Avowry may be made for the Rent of a Copyholder in
the King's Bench; and there is difference between an Ejectione Firmae and this
Case. For the Ejectione Firmae is brought for the Copyhold it self: But this
Avowry is for Rent due to the Lord, which is a duty at the Common Law, and
therefore an Avowry may well be for it, Cro. El. p. 524. Laughter and Humphry.

A Copyholder in Fee, by License, made a Lease for 21 years by Indenture,
rendering Rent, Covenant by Assignee of a Reversion.
wherein the Lessee Covenants for himself, his Executors and Assigns, That he
will erect a, etc. The Lessor surrendered to the Use of the Plaintiff and his
Heirs, who was admitted accordingly; and the Plaintiff, as Assignee, brings his
Action of Covenant. Whether the Assignee may maintain this Action by the Common
Law, or by the Statute 32 H. 8. Cap. 34. was the Question? for the Defendant
demurred upon the Declaration; it was adjourned in Cro. Car. 24. Plat and
Plummer. But it seems by 1 Keb. 356. Baker and Berisford's Case, That the
Assignee is not within this Statute to have a Covenant.

Action of Debt does not lie for Arrearages of Copy Rents; for the Stat. of 32
H. 8. Action of Debt for Rent.
does not extend to them, but to Rents out of Free Land, Yelv. p. 135. Appleton
and Doily. And so Executors shall not have Debt for Arreages of such Rents due
in the Lifetime of the Testator.

The Lord of a Manor is, and Fines; No Remedy for Fines, Rents, etc. after
vendition.
for Admittances and Copyhold Rents are Arrear, and then he sells the Manor;
he is without Remedy, both in Law and Equity: He has deprived himself of the
Remedy by his own act, viz. the vendition, 1 Rolls Abr. 374. Sergeant Hitcham
and Finch.

Copyholder for Life becomes Lunatic. A. Action of Trover to be brought in
the Lunaticks name, he being a Copyholder.
sows the Land. The Lord grants the custody of the Lunatic to B. A. takes the
Corn to the Use of the Lunatic. B. Brought Trover in his own name; its ill
brought. It ought to be brought in the Lunaticks name, and not in the name of
the Committee, Noy, p. 27. Cox and Dawson.

Covenant by Rent.
Custom is, when a Copyholder dies seized of Copyhold Lands or Rent, That his
Wife shall have the one moiety, and his Issues the other moiety. A. B. so
seized, takes Mary to Wife, and they have Issue John. A. B. dies, so that Mary
is seized of the moiety for her Life, and John of the other moiety in Fee, and
of the first moiety as his Reversion. Mary and John her Son make a Lease to J.
B. for twenty one years, rendering fifty pounds Rent to Mary, and fifty pounds
to John; and after the death of Mary, one hundred pounds to John. John marries
Margaret, they have Issue three Sons. John dies, so that a fourth part comes to
his Wife, and the other fourth part to his three Sons. Rent is behind. Margaret
brought Debt on Covenant for the Rent, Per Curiam, it was well brought by her
sole, Joynder in Action.
without joining Mary with her. Tenant in Commonn shall join in Action so long
as the privity of Contract remains, but when the privity is determined, as it
is here, they may sever, and such Contract shall ensue the nature of the Land;
and also there is a vesting by Custom, and express several Reservations, 2
Siderfin, p. 9. Baker and Berisford.

CAP. XXX.
Of Copyholders being Impleaded and Impleadable in the Lords Court, Vide
supra, Tit. Customs.

Copyhold Lands are as the Demesns of the Manor, and are the Lords Freehold,
and therefore are not impleadable, but in the Lords Court Croke Jac. 559.
Pymmock and Hilder.

One recovered certain Copyhold Lands in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, by
Plaint, in the nature of a Writ of Right. A Precept cannot be made and awarded
out of the Court, to execute the said Recovery, Posse Manerij.
and to put him who recovered into possession, with the Posse Manerij; for
force in such cases is not justifiable, but by command out of the Kings Courts,
3 Leon. 99.

A Woman recovered Dower of a Copyhold within the Manor, and 40 l. Damages, 40
l. Damages recovered, yet no Execution or remedy, but by Petition.
and she brought Debt for the Damages, in B.R. Per Cur. it lies not, because
the Court Baron cannot hold Plea, nor award Execution of 40 l. Damages, though
the Damages were there well assessed; and because no Writ of Error, or Faux
Judgment lies upon such a Recovery of a Copyhold, but only a Petition to the
Lord of a Manor; so that Copyhold Plaints are not within the Jurisdiction of
this Court of King's Bench, Moor, n. 559. Shaw and Tompson.

If an erroneous Judgment be given in a Copyhold Court of a common Lord, in an
Action in nature of a Formedon, a Bill may be exhibited in Chancery, Faux
Judgment, how relieved.
in nature of a Faux Judgment, to reverse this, Pateshall's Case in Scaccario,
1 Rolls Abr. 373. and Co. on Lit. p. 60. a. He cannot have the Kings Writ of
false Judgment in respect of the baseness of the Estate and Tenure, being in
the Eye of the Law but a Tnant at Will, and the Freehold being in another: But
he may have a Petition to the Lord, in the nature of a Faux Judgment, and
therein assign Errors, and have Remedy according to Law, 4 Rep. 21. Brown's
Case.

Fenner said he had seen a Record 36 H. 8. where the Lord by Petition to him,
had for certain Errors in the Proceedings, reversed such Judgment given in his
own Court.

Now real Pleints are in the Lords Court, are in this Form,

A. de B. queritur versus C. de D. de placito terrae, videlicet de uno
Messuagio quadraginta Acris terrae, etc. cum pertin. and fecit protestationem
sequi querelam istam in natura Brevis Domini Regis Assisae mortis Antecessoris
ad communem Legem (vel Brevis Domini Regis Assisae novae disseisinae ad
communem Legem) aut in natura Brevis de forma donationis in discendere ad
communem Legem, (and so in the nature of any other Writ, etc.) plegii de
prosequendo, F. G. etc.

CAP. XXXI.
Declaration of, for and concerning Copyhold Lands and Presidents.

IN Ejectione Firmae, it was doubted by the Court, whether the Plaintiff in his
Declaration ought to set forth the Custom of the Manor, That the Copyholder
may Lease, etc. and then to show that the Lease is warranted by the Custom,
Whether in Ejectment the Plaintiff need to show that the Lease was warranted by
the Custom.
in 1 Anderson Rep. Ewer and Astwick. But it is fully resolved and agreed in
Rumney and Eves's Case, 1 Leon p. 100. That the Plaintiff ought not to show
that the Lease is warranted by the Custom, but that shall come of the other
side. This was Pasch. 30 El. B. R. But in Hill. 38 El. Cro. p. 469. Wells and
Partridge, it was doubted; because otherwise being a general Court, it shall be
intended of a Lease at Common Law, which a Copyholder cannot make; as if the
Heir in Borough English brings a Mordancestor, he ought to show the Custom in
his Count, and declare according thereunto: This was the Opinion of Anderson in
the Case; and in Moor, n. 927. Gregory and Harrison. It is said to be resolved
an Ejectione Firmae does not lie of a Copyhold, if the Plaintiff does not
declare the Custom, Lease and Ejectment; but the Practice now is otherwise.

Upon Agreement, Whereas W. was seized of Copyhold Lands, That he should
surrender the same to the Use of Elkin, and that he was to give him for the
same 560 l. and if he sold the same over, the Plaintiff to have the moiety of
what he sold over and above: It is said in the Declaration, Declaration must
be, That he is seized in Dom. suam ut de feodo secundum, etc. and also may show
that they are customary Lands.
he was seized in Dominico ut de feodo secundum consuetudinem manerij, and he
does not show the same was customary Land Per Cur. he ought to show it, but he
need not show that he was admitted, 3 Bulstr. 230. Elkins and Wastel.

Declaration sur Assumpsit to make a Surrender of Copyhold Land, Placita genesis
and spec. p. 16.

Declaration in Case for a Copyholder for cutting down Trees upon his
customary Tenements, Brownl. 252.

Def. seisitus de terris custumar vendidit querentur statum suum inde ac omnia
bona and as^umpsit causare statum fieri quer in terris and deliberare bona,
Rast. Ent. 7.

Nar pro tenen customar versus Dom Manner qui succidit arbores super Tenementa
custumar per quod quer non habet suffeciens forale sepimentur and maremium
perro reparatione secundum consuetud Manerij, Hern 216, or 226. 1 Brown 252.

Pro ten custumar versus un Tanner de Tanpi^s erect. propre rivulum decurren ad
Messuagium querentis per quod aqua corrumpitur, Hern 254.

Ad exheredand quer de Tenementis custumar and impediend ipsum de
Administratione bonor ei committend, Co. Entr. 29.

Pro ten custumar molendini versus occupationem tenementorum qu^ per consuetur
debe^ molare grana ad dict' molend, Hern 83.

Narrat in Action sur Case per Copyhold que fuit le Tenant pur 3 vies
successive des terres d'un Manor deins quel fuit un Custom habere successive,
etc. and un auter Custom que prima persona in copiis rotulorum ejusdem Manerij
nominata poet surrender in manus Dom al son proper use and al use des deux
auters nominand Le Def. in consideratione quod le Plaintiff, pro 12 d. in
manibus and 50 quarter de brasis illi deliberand assumpsit sursum reddere ad
usu ipsius and duor alior ex nominatione Def. and procurare cur assumpsit and
promisit apparere apud Curiam and accipere statum ad usum ipsius and 2 aliorum
and deliberare les 50 quartur brasii pred, Winch. Ent. 65.

Narratur per Copyhold qui fuit Tenant pur 3 vies successive des terres tenus
d'un Manor, deins quel fuit un Custom habere successive, etc. and un auter
Custom que prima persona in Copiis rotulorum ejudem manerij nominat poec
surrender in manus Dom al son proper use and al use deux auters per ipsum
nominand Le Def. in consideratione que pro 12 d. in manibus and 50 quarters de
Malt a luy deliberand ad assume a Surrender al use de luy mesme and 2 auters
nominatione Def. and procurare curiam assumpsit and promisit d'appearer al
Court and d'accepter del Estate a luy and les deux auters and pur deliver les
50 quarters de Melt venditur, Winch Entr. p. 65. Chambers and Turner.

Cond del oblig^ a Surrender un Copyhold Estate al use del^quer al proche in
Court, Bar quod Def. al Court tenus tiel jour surrendroit accordant al effect
del condicon, Winch. Entr. 241, 222. and demur general al bar, Eldre and
Ll'uelling.

CAP. XXXII.
Of Pleadings. The general Rules of Pleading as to Copyhold Estates. Of
Pleading, Customs and Prescriptions, and the different Forms. Pleading in
reference to Common, and when to be pleaded by way of Custom, or by way of
Prescription. The manner of Pleading when a Lease is to be answered which is
set forth in the Avowry. Where in Pleading the Commencement of the Estate must
be shown, and by whom granted, or not. How a License must be pleaded by the
Lessee. Prescription for Copyholders to be discharged of Tithes. How to be
pleaded. Of Traverses, when and where to be taken. Forms of Pleading of
Surrenders, Admittances. Forms of Pleading Estates in Fee Tail for Lives or
Years. Pleading of Presentiments, Grants. Pleadings in respect of Commons,
Trees, Ways, Enclosures, Forfeiture, and all other Pleadings necessary for the
Copyholder to set forth his Title or to defend it.

Pleadings. General Rules of Pleading as to Copyhold Estates.
EVery Admittance of an Heir upon a Descent, amounts in Law to a Grant, and
after Admittance the Heir may in Pleading allege this as a Grant; How a
Copyholder shall plead in making Title to a Copyhold.
and this the Law allows for avoiding an inconvenience which will otherwise
happen; for if the Copyholder in Pleading shall be put to show the full Grant,
either it was before the time of memory, and then it is not pleadable, or
within time of memory, and then the Custom fails; Admittance pleaded as a Grant.
and for this cause the Law has allowed the Copyholder in Pleading to allege
any Admittance upon a Descent or upon a Surrender as a Grant, and yet he may if
he will, allege the Admittance of his Ancestor as a Grant, and show the
Descent to himself, and that he entered, and good without any Admittance of him;
but the Heir cannot plead, That his Father was seized in Fee at the Will of the
Lord, by Copy of Court Roll of such a Manor, according to the Custom of the
Manor, and that he died seized and that it descended to him, for in truth such
an Interest is but a particular Interest at Will, in judgment of Law, although
it is descendible by the Custom; for he is Tenant at Will of the Lord,
according to the Custom of the Manor, 4 Rep. 22. Brown's Case.

If one Surrender to the intent that the Lord shall grant it to another, and he
admitts him, it was adjuded good; yet he ought to plead it as a Grant, Lit.
Rep. 175.

Tenant in Dower may Grant a Copyhold in Reversion, which shall be good, Grant
of Copyhold Land in Reversion must be pleaded as a Grant in Reversion and not
as a Grant in possession, nor by a per nomen.
though not executed, in the Life of Tenant in Dower. But then it must be
pleaded as a Grant in Reversion, and not as a Grant in Possession; therefore in
Gray's Case, Cro. El. p. 661, 662. It was there pleaded, That he granted
Tenementa praedicta per nomen of a Message which A. P. held for Life; and Per
Cur. its an uncurable Fault, for it is not alleged that he granted the
Tenement in Reversion: and the per nomen will not help.

Averment del' v^e.
Tenant by courtesy of Copyhold, brings Ejectment or Action, it must appear
that he is in Life, or else he cannot have Judgment, 1 Anderson, p. 292. Ewer
and Astwick.

Where in Pleading the Commencement of the. Estate must be shown, or by whom
granted, or not.
In matter of Conveyance to a Title, need not show the Conveyance.
Replevin, the Plaintiff in bar to the Avowry shows that the Land was Copyhold
Land, grantable in possession or reversion for Life or in Fee, and that the
Lord granted the Reversion to him after the death of W. who was Tenant pur vie,
and shows the death of W. whereby he entered. And demurred, because he did not
show the beginning of W. his Estate, nor by whom W. had the Estate granted him.
Per. Cur. this is no cause of Demurrer, because it is not the Plaintiffs Title,
but matter of Conveyance thereunto, Cro. Jac. 52. Lodge and Fry.

Admittance of the last Heir to be showed instead of an ancient Grant.
If one pleads Seisin of a Copyholder in Fee, and claims under him; he ought to
show of whose Grant, as he ought to show of any other particular Estate; but
perhaps that is so ancient that it cannot be shown who was the first Grantee,
yet it was held sufficient to show the Admittance of the last Heir, which is in
nature of a Grant, and may be pleaded by way of Grant, Cro. Jac. 103. Pyster
and Hembling.

In Trespass the Defendant justifies he confesses the Close to be Copyhold
Land, but pleads, That long time before it was parcel of the Manor of, etc. and
that long before the supposed Trespass, one Pole and M. his Wife was Lord of
the Manor in right of his Wife for Life, remainder to Stephen in Tail, and he
made a Lease of this Land to the Defendant; its an ill Plea, because the
Defendant has not showed (as he ought) how Pole and his Wife came to this
Estate for Life, the remainder over; they ought to show how this particular
Estate has its commencement, they claiming a derivative Estate from Pole and
his Wife for years, 3 Bulstr. 281. Sandford and Stephens.

None may entitle himself to any Copyhold but he ought to show a Grant
thereof. In Trespass the Plaintiff in his Rejoinder intitles himself, because
the place where is customary Land, parcel of such a Manor, whereof J. S. is
seized in Fee, and demisable by Copy at Will in Fee; and that J. N. was seized
in Fee, by Copy, etc. and dyed seized, so as it descended to two Daughters, as
Heirs of J. N. and that at such a Court Dominus concessit eis extra manus suas,
etc. Habend. and tenend. Tenementa praedicta, to the said Daughters and their
Heirs, whereby they were seized in Fee, and afterward demised to the Plaintiff
for years. The Plaintiff has not made a good Title; and he showing such an one
was seized in Fee, without showing the Grant thereof, Per Cur. its not good,
Cro. Car. 190. Shepherd's Case; yet it was but default of form, and Issue, for
the Plaintiff being found, it is a Jeofail.

Pleading Custom or Prescription.
A Copyholder in Pleading need not allege a Custom to make a Surrender, for
that is the Custom of all England.

A Copyholder need not allege a Custom to make a Lease for a year.

It must be pleaded that he used to do it.
It is not sufficient to allege a Custom that one might do such an Act, but
that he used to do it; as to allege dimissibile and dimissum; therefore in
Brown and Foster's Case, the Defendant avows in Replevin for Damage feasant;
the Plaintiff makes Title as Copyholder, and shows, that within the Manor of
A. time whereof, etc. Talis habebatur and habetur consuetudo, etc. That any
Copyholder may surrender into the Hands of two Customary Tenants, etc. this is
not well pleaded; for it is pleaded by Usage and Custom, but he does not plead
that ever it was put in ure in that manner, which ought to be alleged, as in
Sir William Hatton's Case, where it was pleaded, Quod Talis habebatur
consuetudo within a Manor, Quod licebit Seneschall^ to impose a Fine, etc. But
in the principal Case, the not naming the Steward made the Avowry ill; and then
Per Cur. the Avowry being ill, although the bar to the Avowry were ill, Not
naming the Steward in the Avowry ill.
yet he cannot have return, Cro. p. 37. El. 392. Brown and Foster.

Copyholder pleads, Quod infra Manerium praed. talis habetur, nec non a toto
tempore cujus contrarij memoria hominum non existit habebatur consuetudo videl.
quod quilibet tenens custumar' praedict tenementa, etc. has used to have
Common in such a place, parcel of the Manor. Question was, if the Custom may be
alleged within the Manor, and applied but to a single Copyhold. Per Cur. such
Custom, as well for the form as the matter, is good; for a Copyholder cannot
prescribe in his own name for the exility of his Estate; Precribe for Common in
one Copyholder.
but he ought to prescribe in the Lords name, when he claims Common, etc. out
of the Land of a Stranger; but if he claim such profit in the Manor, he must
lay it by way of Custom, for then he cannot prescribe in the Lords Name, for
the Lord cannot prescribe to have Common in his own Soil, and one Copyholder
may have such Common, etc. It may have a lawful commencement, and all the other
Copyholds may be extinct, 4 Rep. 31, 32. Foyston's Case, vide for Prescription
devant.

In Trespass, the Defendant justifies as Copyholder for Common, he says these
are customary Lands, but does not say, ad voluntatem Dom. which is uncertain
whether Tenant-right Lands or Burrough-English, or Freehold: Judgment Pro
Quer. 3 Keb. 368. Walker and Wilson.

Customs must be pursued in Pleadings.
A man cannot plead a Prescription against a Prescription, A Prescription not
to be pleaded against Prescription.
but he ought to answer the Prescription alleged in the Count, when two
Customs repugne, Cro. Car. 432. Spooner and Day's Case, Carter's Rep. 88.

Custom alleged to be, That if any Copyholder seized of customary Lands of
the said Copyhold, die seized thereof, having many Sons, that the youngest
shall Inherit; and the Defendant in Replevin, makes his Title, That a customary
Estate was granted to the Father and Mother, and the Heirs of the Father, and
the Mother survived. This Estate is not within the Letter of the Custom, Per
Walmsly, and cited Sir John Savage's Case, Quod vide supra, sub Tit. Custom, 2
Leon. 208. Beal and Langly.

A particular Tenant at Will may not prescribe in his sole Tenancy,
Prescription by a particular Tenant at Will.
but when the Prescription and the Custom runs half through the Manor, he may
well lay it by Custom, Kelloway 76, 77. Tropnel's Case.

Tenant may plead a Custom to enjoy without interruption of the Lord.
Copyholder may plead a Custom, That every Tenant, after he has paid the Lord
his Fine, may enjoy his Lands and Tenements, granted by Copy, during their
Estates, Terms, or Interests, without interruption or expulsion of the Lord,
for the time being, they performing their Services, and doing nothing that may
Forfeit, Kelloway 76, 77. Ann Tropnel's Case.

Vide supra.

When the Copyholder claims any thing by Prescription in the Soil of another;
in Pleading he ought to prescribe in the name of the Lord; but if he claim any
thing in the Soil of the Lord, When it must be pleaded by way of Custom, and
when by way of Prescription.
within the Manor, then he shall plead the Custom of the Manor, for there he
cannot plead in the name of the Lord, in as much as the Lord cannot prescribe
in his own Soil, Foyston's Case, and 4 Rep. 31. Cooper's Case, 6 Rep. 60.
Gateward's Case.

Rule.
There is nothing more common, than for the Lord to prescribe for his Tenants by
Copy, in another man's Land; whereas if it be in his own it shall ever be laid
per Custom, Hob. p. 28, 61.

Of Pleading a Custom for Common by Prescription.
Defendant pleads in Trespass, That there are diverse Freehold Tenements, time
out of mind, in the said Manor, etc. and that there were and are, infra eand.
villan diverse. customary Tenements, parcel of the said Manor, grantable ad
voluntatem Dom. by Copy, That all the Tenants of the Free Tenements, time out
of mind Habuerunt and usi fuerunt, and all the Tenants of the customary
Tenements, per consuetudinem ejusdem manerij in eodem manerio a toto tempore
supra dict. usitat. and approbat. habuerunt and habere consueverunt solam and
separalem pasturam, etc. for all their Cattle (Hogs, Sheep and Steers excepted)
Levant and Couchant upon their respective Messuages and Tenements every year
for all times of the year, except, etc. as belonging and appertaining to their
several Tenements, and that at the time of the Trespass the Defendant put in
his own Cattle, Levant and Couchant, upon this said Message, prout ei been
licuit, etc. Exceptions to this Pleading, were, 1. That he was seized de
Antiquo Messuagio, and of no Land, is not proper, for in common intention
Cattle cannot be said to be Levant upon a Message only. 2. He says he put in
his own Levant and Couchant, but avers not as he ought, That none of them were
Porci, Oves, or Steers. 3. The Plea does not set forth the Custom of the Manor,
but implicitly, That the Freehold and customary Tenants have had and enjoyed
Per Consuetudinem Manerij solam and separalem Pasturam for all their Cattle,
which is a double Plea, both of the Custom of the Manor, and of the claim by
reason of the Custom, which ought to be several, and the Court shall judge, and
not the Jury, whether the claim be according to the Custom alleged; the Custom
may be different from the Claim, Per Consuetudinem Manerij, if particularly
alleged, Vaughan's Rep. 253. North and Cole.

In Replevin, Defendant makes Conuzance, as Bailiff to, etc. Damage Fesant. In
bar of this Cognizance the Plaintiff pleads, That H. Earl of H. was seized of
the Manor of A. whereof one Message, etc. is parcel, and demisable by Copy,
and that within the said Manor there is this Custom, That every customary
Tenant of the said Message, etc. have used to have Pasture, etc. in the said
place called Land-Mead, The Form how to apply the Custom of a Manor to a
particular Message in pleading.
and so derives his Title by Grant by Copy: the Issue was upon the Traverse,
Absque hoc quod infra manerium praed. talis habetur consuetudo quod quilibet
tenens custumarius, etc. have used to have Common, etc. prout, etc. Here is no
Custom alleged, because it did not appear in Pleading, That the place where
the taking was supposed to be, was within the said Manor, and no Custom of the
Manor can extend out of the Manor, but he ought to prescribe in the Manor.
Note, he ought to have pleaded, That the place in which, etc. was parcel of the
Manor, and then the Plea had been good, Hob. p. 286. 1 Brownl. 172. Roberts and
Young.

Plaintiff in Replevin rejoyns by Custom of all the Copyholders of Blackacre,
in the Manor of D. used to have Common in A. to which the Avowant demurred,
because he should have prescribed in the Lords name, A. being out of the Manor;
but the truth being that A. was anciently parcel, and lately severed by the
Lord, this destroys not the Common, Per Cur. But the Copyholder ought to
prescribe specially, That Talis consuetudo suit, till such a day, Special
Prescription in Case of severance.
and that after the Lord granted over, etc. as on change of a Corporation in
Lutterell's Case. 1 Keeble 652. Davy and Watts.

The Case was, The King was seized of a Manor, Common appendant.
where there were diverse Copyholders for Life, and was also seized of 8 Acres
of Land in another Manor, in which the Copyholders have used, time out of
mind, etc. to have Common; and after the King grants the Manor to one, and the
8 Acres to another; and a Copyholder puts in his Beasts into the 8 Acres: And
in Trespass brought against him by the Patentee of the 8 Acres, he prescribes,
That the Lord of the Manor, and all those whose Estates he has in the Manor,
have used, time out of mind, etc. for them selves and their Copyholders, to
have Common in the said Acres of Land. And he farther pleads, That he was
Copyholder for Life by Grant (after the said unity of possession in the King)
and so demanded Judgment si actio. Against which the unity of possession was
pleaded: The Defendant demurs: Per Cur. as this Prescription was pleaded the
Common was extinct; but by special pleading he might have been helped, and save
his Common, for this was Common appendant, 2 Brownl. 47. Vide James and Read,
Tirringhams Case, 4 Rep. 38.

Custom was alleged, Sola and separalis pastura.
That all the customary Tenements, Habuerunt and habuere consuever. separalem
pasturam, etc. it was excepted to this Plea, That the Copyholders have not
showed what Estate they have in their customary Tenements. And 2dly. Its not
alleged that they have solam pasturam for their Beasts Levant and Couchant:
Per Cur. its not material, for be their Estates what they will, in Fee, or
Life, or Years, Custom has annexed this sole feeding as a profit apprender to
their Estates; and this they claim by the Custom of the Manor, and not by
Prescription. As to the other Exception, True it is, if one claim only Common
appurtenant to his Land, he ought to say for his Beasts Levant and Couchant;
for in such case he claims but part of the Herbage, and the residue the Lord is
to have; and therefore if he put in any Beasts that are not Levant and
Couchant, he does a wrong to his Lord, and the Lord shall have Trespass: But
here the Commoners claim all the Herbage, and so exclude the Lord totally, and
so its no mischief to the Lord, 2 Sanders 326, 327. Hoskins and Robins.

Estovers.
If a Copyholder for Life had used to have Common in the Waste of the Lord, or
certain Estovers in his Wood, and the Lord alien the Waste and the Wood to a
Stranger; and after grants certain Copyhold Lands and Houses for Lives, such
Grantees shall have Common and Estovers in the Lands and Woods which were
aliened, notwithstanding the Severance: But after such severance, the
Copyholder shall not plead generally, Quod infra manerium praed. talis habetur
consuetudo, for after such severance, the Waste or Wood is not parcel of the
Manor, but he may plead, That before and until such time of the severance,
Talis habebatur and a toto tempore, etc. consuetudo, etc. and then show the
severance, as in Murrel's Case, where the Lord severs the Freehold and
Inheritance from the Copyhold, Co. 8 Rep. Swain's Case.

Where a Copyholder prescribes for Estovers in the Soil of another, and he
says, That all Copyholders Ejusdem tenementi usi sunt, etc. where he ought to
have said Ejusdem manerij, etc. This Prescription was adjudged void, 21 Ed.
4.36. b. 63. b.

Prescription Pro ligno combustibili, is good, 2 Brownl. 330.

Trees.
A Prescription for a Copyholder to cut Boughs of Trees, is well laid by way of
a Custom, 2 Brownl. 329.

The manner of Pleading when a Lease is to be answered, which is set forth in
the Avowry.
In Replevin, B. avowed for Damage feasant, and sets forth, That the Lady J.
was seized of such a Manor, whereof the place where, etc. and leased the same
to the Defendant for years, etc. The Plaintiff says, That long time before,
King H. 8. was seized of the said Manor, and that the place where, etc. is
parcel of the said. Manor, demised and demisable by Copy, etc. and that the
said King, by such an one his Steward, demised and granted the said parcel unto
the Ancestor of the Plaintiff, whose Heir he is by Copy in Fee; and upon this
there was a Demurrer, because by that bar to the Avowry the Lease set forth in
the Avowry is not answered; for the Plaintiff in bar to the Avowry ought to
have concluded, And so he was seized by the Custom, until the Avowant pretextu
of the said Term for years entered: And so it was adjudged, 1 Leon. p. 81.
Herring and Badcock.

In Ejectment the Defendant pleads, Ejectment.
That the Lessor of the Plaintiff was Copyholder in Fee of that Land, parcel
of the Manor of H. which is in the Queens possession, by reason of a Ward, and
that the Lessor surrendered to the Use of the Defendant in Fee, who was
admitted, and that afterward the Lessor entered upon him, and expelled him, and
let to the Plaintiff, prout in the Declaration, and the Defendant reentred, as
he lawfully might. Lease as at Common Law, and plead Lease of Copyhold Land,
Custom or License must specially be showed.
The Plaintiff dedemurs; Per Cur. the Plea is naught, for there is no
confession and avoydance of the Lease let by the Plaintiff; for the Action is
brought as of a Lease of Land at Common Law, and this proves, that the Land was
Copyhold Land, and a Copyholder cannot make a Lease for years, unless by
Custom or by License of the Lord, which ought specially to be showed, Cro. El.
728. Kensey and Richardson.

In Ejectione Firmae brought by the Lessee of a Copyholder, Lessee pleading a
License, how.
it is sufficient that the Count be general, without any mention of the
License, and if the Defendant plead not Guilty, then the Plaintiff ought to
show the License in Evidence; but if the Defendant plead specially, then the
Plaintiff ought to plead the License certainly in his Replication, and the time
and place when it was made: And if the Plaintiff replies, That the Copyholder
by License first then had of the Lord, did demise, and did not show what Estate
the Lord had, nor the place and time when it was made, its not good, Per tot.
Cur. For the License is traversable; for if the Copyholder without License
make a Lease for years, the Lessee which enters by color of that is a
disseisor, and a disseisor cannot maintain an Ejectione Firmae; and the
Defendant cannot plead, That the Plaintiff by License did not demise, for this
is a negative pregnant; also it ought to appear what Estate the Lord had, for
he cannot Lease for a longer time than he had in the Seigniory; as suppose he
is only for Life, and he licenseth for 21 years, and dies, its determined, 2
Brownl. 40. Petty and Evans.

In Ejectment, The Defendant pleaded a Surrender of a Copyhold by the Hand of
F. then Steward of the Manor; Issue was joined absque hoc, that he was Steward.
Per tot. Cur. its no Issue; Pleading a Surrender, how.
for the Traverse ought to be general, that he did not surrender, for if he
were not Steward, the Surrender is void: So of a Surrender pleaded into the
Hands of the Tenants of the Manor, Cro. El. p. 260. Wood and Butts.

Pleads Prescription to be discharged of Tithes.
Copyholders of Inheritance, who held of a Bishop as of his Manor, may
prescribe, That the Bishop and his Predecessors, seized of the said Manor, for
themselves, their Tenants for Lives, Years, and Tenants by Copy of Court Roll
of the said Manor, time out of memory, etc. have been discharged from payment
of Tithes for their Lands, parcel of the said Manor; for this is a good
Prescription, for their Tenements are parcel of the Demesns of the Manor and
this may commence upon a real composition of all the Manor, 1 Rolls Abr. 652.
The Case was thus,

A Parson sues a Copyholder in the Spiritual Court for Tithes arising upon the
Copyhold Land; he brought his Prohibition, and suggests that the Bishop of
Winchester, Lord of the Manor, whereof his Copyhold is parcel, and his
Predecessors, etc. time out of memory, etc. for them, their Tenants and
Farmers, have been discharged of Tithes arising upon the Manor; and shows that
he had been Copyholder of the said Manor, time out of memory, etc. and
prescribes in his Lord the Bishop of Winchester's Name (the Spiritual Court
would not allow this Plea) but Per Cur. a Prohibition was granted although here
be a Prescription upon a Prescription, Prescription upon a Prescription.
one in the Copyholder to make his Estate good, the other in the Bishop to
make his Discharge good, yet it was allowed; for all Copy-holds are derived out
of the Manor; and it shall be intended, That this Prescription had its
commencement at such time when all was in the Lords Hands, and the one
Prescription is not contrariant to the other, although both were from time
whereof, etc. Prescription in the Lord ought of necessity to precede the
Prescription in the Estate of the Copyhold, and the discharge of Tithes in the
Lord (which may well be in this case, because he is a Spiritual person)
trenches to the benefit of the Tenant, who is a Copyholder; for by this means
it may be presumed that the Lord had greater Fines and Rents, Yelv. 2. Croucher
and Friar, which case is more largely Reported by Cro. El. 784. Otherwise a
Copyholder which is a Temporal person cannot prescribe in non decimando.

Prohibition granted out of B. C. against the Ordinary of G. and one Branch;
the surmise was, That the Land out of which the Tithes were demanded, is
Copyhold, parcel of a Manor, of which a Prior was seized in Fee, and was also
Parson imparsonee, Union.
by which Union the Tithes were extinct. Per Cur. the surmise is not good, and
a Consultation was awarded; it was no good Prescription to discharge the
Tithes, Moor Rep. n. 356. Branches Case.

A Prohibition prayed, upon a surmise that the Dean and Chapter of C. seized of
the Manor and Rectory of M. and one G. a customary Tenant prescribes, That
every Tenant of his Tenement has used to pay 3 s. 4 d. to the Lord, who is
also a Parson, in discharge of his Rent and a fourth part of the Tithe of B.
Per Cur. its no good Prescription, for the Parson cannot libel for the Rent,
nor the Lord for the Tithe, Uncertain.
and non constat what each should have, and the Parson must have a
satisfaction, or else there can be no discharge, 1 Keb. 886, 906. Wilkinson and
Richardson.

Traverses.
Traversing the day of the Grant.
In Ejectment, The Defendant entitles himself by Copy, granted 44 Eliz. The
Plaintiff by Replication intitles himself by Grant, 1 June, 43 Eliz. The
Defendant maintains his bar, and traverseth absque hoc, that the Queen 1 June,
43 regni sui, granted the Land by Copy, modo and forma prout, etc. This
Replication is not good, for the day and year of granting the Copy is not
material, but only whether it were granted before the Copy made to the
Defendant; therefore he ought to have traversed absque hoc, That the Queen
granted modo and forma prout, etc. and this is matter of substance, and not
aided; the traversing of the day where it ought not, is matter of substance,
for thereby he makes it parcel of the Issue, which ought not to be, Cro. Jac.
202. Lane and Alexander, 1 Brownl. 140. mesme Case.

In Ejectment, The Defendant pleads the Land is Copyhold, parcel of the Manor
of S. whereof the King was and is seized, who by his Steward granted the same
such a day to him in Fee, Habend. etc. by virtue whereof he was admitted,
entered and was seized, and so justifies. The Plaintiff replies, That long
before the King had any thing in the Manor, Queen Elizabeth was seized in Fee,
in Jure Coronae, who by her Steward at such a Court, granted the Land in
question by Copy, to him in Fee, Habend. etc. secundum consuet. etc. who was
admitted and entered; Confessing and avoiding.
Per Cur. the Replication is good, and the Plaintiff need not Traverse the
Grant alleged in the Bar, by the Defendant; for the Plaintiff has confessed
and avoided the Defendants Title by a former Copy granted by Queen Elizabeth,
and so need not traverse, and as no man can have a Lease for years without
assignment, no more can a man have a Copy without a Grant made in Court, Cro.
Jac. p. 299. Rice and Harrison, 1 Brownl. p. 147. mesme Case. The Plaintiffs
Replication is good without any Traverse, for how can the Defendant have this,
when as the Plaintiff had it before, as by his Replication appears? for that
his Lease being first in time, avoids the Defendants Lease, being the latter;
and therefore the Defendant in this case, ought to have rejoyned, and so to
have traversed the first Lease; but by his Demurrer to the Replication, he has
confessed the Lease under which the Plaintiff claims; mesme Case 2 Bulstrode,
p. 1. 6 Rep. Helliar's Case.

A man pleads a descent of a Copyhold in Fee; the Defendant to take away the
descent, pleaded, That the Ancestor did Surrender to the Use of another,
Traversing the dying seized.
absque hoc, That the Copyholder died seized. Per Cur. the Traverse is ill,
because that he traversed that which needed not to be traversed; for being
Copyhold, and having pleaded a Surrender of it, Difference between that and at
Common Law.
the Party cannot have it again, if not by Surrender: But if a man plead a
descent of Inheritance at Common Law, there the Defendant may plead a Feoffment
made by the Ancestor, absque hoc, that he died seized, because he may have an
Estate by disseisin after the Feoffment. Traverse of the descent and not of the
dying seized, is not good, March, p. 21. Anonymus.

Copyhold Land was granted by the Lord of a Manor, 10 May, 3 Car. to the Wife
of Tho. Kett; and in the Replication the Defendant justifies as Bailiff to Tho.
Kett; the Plaintiff confesses the Land is Copyhold Land, but that the Lord
granted it 1 Jac. to N. S. in Fee, who had two Daughters, the Wife of the
Plaintiff, and the Wife, of Tho. Kett, and died seized, and that the Lands
descended to them, upon which it was demurred. By Berkley, the Grant of the
whole ought to be traversed, Coparceners.
or confessed and avoided; for the first Grant shows that the Defendant was in
of all, and the descent to the Wife is but for a moity, Dyer 171. pl. 8. Per
Cur. upon the whole matter disclosed, Quaere if a Coparcener cannot distrain
upon the Land of another, Matter of Form.
damage fesant; and the matter of form in the pleading, ought not to be
regarded by the Judges, upon Statute, 23 El. Cap. 5. Judgment was pro Quer.
Hutton said, The descent which was pleaded makes the second Grant void; but by
Richardson, Though it be avoided, yet it is not confessed, Hetly, p. 114. Port
and Yates.

In Replevin, the Defendant avows for damage fesant, by reason of a Copy
granted to him of the place where, etc. by the Lord of the Manor, Cooper Bishop
of Winchester. The Plaintiff says, That before Cooper, Horn was Bishop, by
whose death the Temporalties came into the Queens Hands, and this Copyhold,
during the time that the Temporalties were in the Queens Hands, Escheated; and
the Queen granted it to the Plaintiff in Fee, by force whereof he put in his
Beasts, If there is not confessing and avoiding, there must be a Traverse.
and traverseth the Grant by Cooper. Per. Cur. this Traverse is good, and ought
to be, for there is not any confessing and avoiding, because he does not
confess the Seisin and grant by Copy; but if he had confessed, That the Bishop
had entered and granted it by Copy, Where needs no Travers.
then there needed not any Traverse: So where one justifies by Lease from J. S.
the Plaintiff says, That J. S. enfeoffed himself, it is not good without a
Traverse, Cro. El. p. 754. Covert's Case.

In Ejectment, Ancient Demesne pleaded. Replication, That they are Copyhold and
Traverse.
The Defendant pleaded that the Lands were ancient Demesne, and pleadable by a
Writ of Right Close, etc. The Plaintiff shows, That they were Copyhold Lands,
and parcel of the Manor, and entitles himself by Lease under the Copyholder,
and traverseth, That they were impleadable by a Writ of Right Close; the
Traverse is well enough taken, Cro. Jac. 559. Pimmock and Helder.

The Avowant has Election to Traverse any part of the Plea which goes to the
end of the Action, or justifies the Action.

Traverse the consequence.
In Ejectment, the Defendant pleaded, That the Lands were ancient Demesne, and
pleadable by a Writ of Right Close, etc. the Plaintiff shows they were
Copyhold Lands, parcel of the Manor, and intitles himself by Lease under the
Copyholder, and traverseth that they are impleadable by a Writ of Right Close.
Demurrer, because this Traverse, that they were impleadable, is but the
consequence of ancient Demesne, and therefore not traversable; but Per Curiam,
that the Traverse is well enough taken.

Where a particular Custom is confessed in the Rejoinder he ought to Traverse
the general Custom.
If the Plaintiff in his Rejoinder confesses a particular Custom, he ought to
Traverse the general Custom alleged by the Defendant; as in Replication the
Defendant alleges a general Custom, Quod quaelibet femina cooperta viro,
joining with her Husband in a Surrender of Copyhold Lands; and being privately
examined by the Steward, that this by the Custom is a good Surrender; the
Plaintiff replies, That there is a Custom in the Manor, quod quaelibet, etc.
who is of full Age may Surrender; but the Wife who surrendered here was of full
Age, and does not traverse the other Custom, And Per Curiam, it was ill, Lit.
Rep. 174. Anonymus.

Presidents and Forms of Pleading as to Copyhold Estates.
The Form of Pleading that a Message is parcel of a Manor, and dimissibil and
dimiss. per Copiam, 1 Sanders 146. Wade and Batch.

That the Lands are Copyhold Lands, etc. 2 Sanders 321.

Pleading of a Surrender made in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, to the Use
of J. W. in Fee, and of the Grant of the Lord to the said J. W. accordingly, 1
Sanders 146.

Pleading of the Surrender of a Remainder of a Copyhold Estate, to one for
Life, to another for Life, to another in Fee, and admission of them
accordingly, 1 Sanders 147.

Pleading the Admittance of two Tenants in the Remainder for Life, the
Remainder in Fee, 1 Sanders 147. Wade and Batch.

The Form of Pleading Copyhold in Fee-simple, in Tail, for term of Life or
Years.
In Fee-simple, Hern p. 80. Co. Entr. 10. 647. Estate*
3 Br. 463. Hern 227.607.

In feod simplici, Tail, Life or Years, Ra. Ent. 627. Co. Ent. 206. U. B. 128,
157. Co. Ent. 657, 123. Hern 679.

Ad terminum vite vel vitarum, Hern 653.

Ad terminum 2 vitarum successive, Hern 72.

Ad terminum 1, 2 vel 3 vitarum successive, Hern 83, 123.

Simile in possessione, Hern 711.

Ad terminum vite vel vitarum tam in possessione quam in Reversione, Co. Ent.
373, 672.

Ad terminum 1 vel 2 vitarum in possessione and 1 vite in Reversione, Hern 724.

Ad Terminum 1 vite in possessione, and 1 vel 2 vitarum in Reversione, Hern 254.

Ad terminum 1, 2 vel 3 vitarum in possessione vel 2 vitarum in reversione
unius vite in possessione, Coke Ent. p. 184, 3 Br. 745.

Pleading Surrender.
Surrender in Cur ad usum in feod. Ra. Entr. 627. Co. Entr. 206. 3 Br. 465.

Extra Curiam in manus 2 Tenentur ad usum in feod, Co. Entr. 575, 645.

Usi.
Extra Curiam ad usum W. pur vie Remainder al Baron and Feme and Heirs de Feme,
Co. Entr. 207.

In manus Dom, Co. Entr. 575.

Per Tenant pur vie, de moiety al use des Fitz, Hern 255.

Per 2 Tenants pur vie al intent de regrant, Hern 656.

Per Feme Covert secretur examinatur, Co. Entr. 576. 3 Br. 465.

Per Attorn secundum consuetudinem Manerij, Co. Entr. 657.

Per literam Attoruatur, Co. Entr. 576.

Presentment per l' homage de surrender extra Curiam, Co. Entr. 206.

Simile per tenentur jacen in extremis, Co. Ent. 206.

Admissio secundum sursum redditionem, Co. Entr. 207, 575, bis 577, 645, 657.

Admissio heredis super descensu, Cro. Entr. 575, 657.

Dom concessit querenti terras custumar que ei descend, restituend eum ad jus,
ubi terre fuer prius concesse alij, qui obiit, Ra. Ent. 628.

Dominus ob certas causas seiseivit terras custom and concessit eas in feod al
W. cui Vir et Vxor propretarij unde relaxaverunt jus, 3 Br. 464.

Dominus ex traditione propria grant al un pur vie per Copy, 1 Coke 117.

Grants.
Grant per Copy in Fee, Rast. Entr. 627. Limitation dea Estate.
Co. Ent. 9, 10, 123, 274, 645, 611, 657. 3 Br. 97, 464. Hern 81, 226, 707.

Simile al Baron and Feme, Ra. Entr. 627.

Simile al Baron and Feme and Heirs del Feme, Cro. Encr. 575.

Al un pur vie ove several Remainders in Tail, and in defectu exitus quod terre
venderentur, and deuar inde provenien disponerentur juxta Testamentum, Co. Ent.
207.

Al un pur vie, Co. Ent. 576, 662.

Al 2 pur vies, Co. Ent. 273. Hern 73.

Al 3 pur vies successive, Hern 83, 711.

Al un pur vie en Reversion, Hern 255.

Grant al un pur vie in Reversion apres mort de Tenant pur vie per primer
grant, Hern 724.

Simile al 2 pur vies in Reversion; Co. Ent. 114. bis 662.

Per Senescallum Regis, ratione Temporal Episcopatus in manu Regis duran vacac.
Co. Entr. 645.

Grant reddend and faciend redditus consuetudines and servitia consueta, Co.
Ent. 662.

Terres grant per nosmes, Co. Entr. 662. Hern 254, 255.

Pleading a Manor held by another Manor, 11 Rep. p. 17. Sir Henry Nevil's Case.

Cur tentur coram Deptur Senescallo, Co. Entr. 570.

Forms of Pleadings of Lords and Copyholders in reference to Common.
Per Dom Manerij habere communiam pro tenentibus Custumariis, Hern 117, 124.

Rex Seisitus de Manerio habuit communiam Pasture in bosco pro se and liberis
tenentur and custumar manerij pro omnibus averijs per totur Annum, Co. Entr.
656.

Rector Ecclesie seisitus de Manerio Rectorie habuit communiam pro se and tenen
custumar Messuag^ and Terrarum in loco in quo, etc. pro omnibus magnis averiis
per totur Annum, Co. Entr. 574.

Un seisitus de Manerio habuit communiam pro se and tenen suis in terris tentur
de manerio, quando non seminantur, Co. Entr. 118,

Quer seisitus de manerio habuit communiam pastur pro tenen custumariis
Messuag^ and Terrarum in 10 Acres Pasture pro omnibus averiis per totur Annum,
Co. Entr. 9. 9 Co. 112. Hern 117.

Domini separalium Maneriorum habuer communiam pasture pro tenen custumariis
causa vicinagij, Co. Entr. 10. vetur intur 191. de injur propr and traverse
prescriptur.

Prior seisitus de manerio habuit communiam pro se and tenementis suis ad
voluntatem, in terra, post blada asportata usque reseminationem, and quando
facet frisca per totur annum, Et in prato post foenu asportur usque Purit',
Rast. Entr. 622. 1 Brownl. 66.

Trans^ bar' per prescription de communia in clauso parcel Manerij.

Repl protestando quod clausum non est parcel Manerij, pro placito de injur
propria, and travers prescription, 3 Browl. 418.

Iustificatur in Trans^ pro common per Custom infra Manerium pro defectu
sufficien fensur Def. existen. Lessee p^ ans d'un Widdw que tenuit terras per
Custom quamdiu casta and innupta viveret, Tomps. 331.

Trans. Iustificatur pro common and prescribe in in Dom Manerij, Tomps. 371,
379, 392, 418.

Pled que customarij Tenants debent habere solam and separalem pasturam cum
liberis tenentibus pro omnibus averiis (barbits except.) Levant and Couchant, 1
Sanders 347. 2 Sanders 321.

Pled que custumary Tenants usi sunt habere separalem pasturam come appurtenant
Tenementis suis, 2 Sanders 351.

Per Lessee del Copyholder, de Turbis fossis in communia pasture, Hern 80.
Simile pro, Hern 116.

Bar in Repleg^, That he is Copyholder of another Manor of Copyhold, called P.
and prescribes for Common in loco quo, etc. omni tempore Anni pro omnibus
averiis communicalibus Levant and Couchant, sur le Cohy-hold appell. P. and que
posuit averia sua utendo communia, Repl per Traverse que barbits la fuer Levant
and Couchant, etc. Demur special, the Traverse not being good, Winch Entr. p.
970. By four Judges the Traverse was good; its an essential part of the Plea,
and the Avowant has election to Traverse any, part of the Plea which goes to
the end of the Action or Justification.

Pled Custom aver common in loco in quo, etc. Repl de son Tort Demesne and
traverse que les avers fuer Levant and Couchant sur le Copyhold Tempore quo,
etc. Rej. and issue sur le Traverse, Winch. 1068. ad 1071.

Def. in Trespass plead severally pro def^^ sufficien' fensur and monstre lour
Title al Copyhold Estates, Tomps. 410.

Iustificatur p^ Common per Custom per un Copyholder, Toms. 410.

Custom pleaded, quod tenen custumarii habeant communiam pasture per totur
Annum in terris parcel Manerij, Hern 81.

Simile in terris non allegatur fore parcel Manerij, Hern 708.

Simile pro averiis vocatur Horse-Beasts, Neat-Beasts, Levant, etc. per totum
Annum, Coke Etr. 10.

Simile pro bobus levan a festo ad festum in pastura, 3 Br. 61.

Simile in 7 acris terre post blada messa and asportatur ex eisdem and resid
camporum usque Annunciac^ nisi interim seminatur, 3 Br. 96.

De Arboribus.
Bar to the Avowry, That Sir R. D. was seized of the Manor of R. Vnde, etc.
locus in quo, contains 14 Acres, and are customary Lands, held of the said
Manor, Sir Robert granted this by Copy to T. who dyed, and the Premises
descended to T. his Son, etc. who demised for a year to the Plaintiff.
Replication, The Defendant confesses the seisin of Sir Robert, but said the 20
Acres of Land, and 30 Acres of Meadow (of which the 4 Acres are parcel) are
custumary Lands of the said Manor, which Lands Sir Robert granted by Copy to T.
T. the Father. T. the Father forfeits his Copyhold Land for Waste, and Sir
Robert enters for the Forfeiture, etc. Rejoinder, the Plaintiff confesses the
matter in the Replication to the seisin of T. T. the Father: And farther the
Plaintiff shows, the Custom of the Manor was for every Copyholder d'amputer
and decapiter tam touts arbores que devant ustoient estre amputes, and
decapitates quam touts juveniles arbores n'esteant pluis que 12 Inches square
al stubb. The Trees supposed to be decapitated by the Father, were decapitable
by the Custom, etc. Demur. Winch Ent. 1022. etc: Drury's Case.

Bar al cognizance, Dean and Cap. West. seisitur de Manor de T. a quel certain
custumary Tenants appertain, etc. S. H. fermor del Dean and Cap. and Senesc del
Manor al Court tenus 28 March grants al Plaintiff in Fee, secundum
consuetudinem le lieu in Question parcel del Manor. Custom del Manor fuit pro
chesun Tenant aver common en le lieu in Question, per que le Plaintiff mit sa
vache pur user sa common jesque, etc. Repl. per confession vel grant des
custumarie Terres al Plaintiff, mes ouster il reply que D. and Cap. 7 May 8
Jac. demised al H. H. le dit Manor pur vies del A. sa feme H. son fitz. and J.
sa file, and que un auter Close de Pasture nosme L. estreant custumarij terres
28 March 18 Jac. fuer grant per H. al Green in Fee, and Green 10 June, fist
Waste per succision de Timber (Ash) in le man 21 April 15 Jac. le Plaintiff ove
auters del Homage fuit jure d'enquirer des chooses enquirables deins le Manor,
le Plaintiff refuse a presenter le Waste pur que il forfeitur son Copyhold, le
Seignior 12 July, 15 Jac. enter and le Def. come Bailiff a luy distreine pur
damage fesant. Rej. Quod protestand que Senescal ne done luy un charge de
presenter le Waste and que il nemy refuse a presenter ceo pro placito dic quoth D.
and Cap. demise al H. prout devant and que il grant al Green en Fee, and
monstre Custom del Manor que chesun Ten poet crop and lop arbores crescents
sur leur customary Terres (except Fruit Trees,) and traverse le succision del
Ash in le man la. Demur gen^al al Rejoinder, Winch Entr. 931. al 934. Adjudged
pro Quer sur gross default in Pleading; the Forfeiture is alleged to be in
May, and the Court was holden in April before, which was impossible, Vide mesme
Case Winch Rep. p. 63. Webb and Barlow.

Vide Winch Ent. 125. al 129.

Custom that every Tenant had used to take Woods and Underwoods, 2 Brown 350,
251. 1 Brown 273, 274.

De Aquae cursu.
Prescriptur per seperales Dominos Manerii de aqua pro tenen custumariis, Hern
255.

De Chimin. Way.
Pro domino Manerii habere viam, etc. per tenen custumariis trans diversa
clausa, etc. Hern 72, 711. 1 Brown 368.

Prescription to have an Horse and Foot-way appertaining to a customary
Message and Close, over the Close newly assigned, and the Lord of the Manor
grants to Tenant for Life, by Copy. Defendant justifies as Servant to Tenant
for Life, for to use the way. Replication de son Tort Demesne, with a Traverse
of the Prescription. Rejoinder, by maintenance of the Prescription, and Issue
upon this, Winch 1093. Lock and Troublefield.

Bar in Trespass, That every Copyholder had an Horse and a Foot-way, etc. 2
Brown 248, 249.

De Enclosures.
Facere sepes and fensuras clausi versus venellam, ne averia tenen custumar
ibidem evadant pasturam, Hern p. 708.

De Forisfacturis.
Trns^ Bar quod P. seisitus de manner grant custumar terres all Def. pur vie,
Repl Def. forisfecit terras per non residence per custom. Rejoynd Def. fuit
residens apud manerium and non extra. V. B. 157.

Trns^ Bar per Franktenement, Repl Terres sunt custumar and grant al Def. in
Fee. Rejoynd quer forisfecit terras per succissonem arborum Sur maintenance de
Replic. Demur inde, Co. Ent. 277, 280.

Similis Bar and Replic. Rej. quod quer forisfecit terras per decasum horrei.
Surrej. Dominus expulsit quer and dimisit aliis. Horreum cecidit. Quer
reintravit. Et travers quod quer fecit voluntarium vastum permittend horreu
cadere, Co. Entr. 280.

Similes Bar and Repl Rej. quer forisfecit terras per sectam Curie infactam.
Surrej. Dominus expulit quer and dimisit alij Cur tentur. quer reintravit, Et
postea Curia tentur ad quam quer fecit defaltur Demur inde, Co. Entr. 289.

Des terres devises pur Cond broken and Heir enter, 1 Rep. 21.

In Replevin, the Defendant makes conizance as Bailiff to Sir Robert
Chichester, by Damage fesant. Bar to the Conisance, Sir John Chichester, Father
to the said Sir Robert, seized of the Manor of D. unde locus in quo est parcel,
and customary Lands in Fee, granted by Copy to Geo. Allen in Reversion for
Life: Tenant in possession dies, Geo. Allen enters, and the Manor descended to
Sir Robert. Geo. Allen espoused the Plaintiff, and dies. The Custom of the
Manor was, That the Wife of every customary Tenant pur vie, dying in possession
shall have her Widows Estate, by which her Husband being dead, the Plaintiff
enters and was seized for Life, and put in her Beasts till the Defendant took
them, etc. Replication, the Defendant confesses the bar, as far as the entry
of the Husband of the Plaintiff, and the descent of the Manor to Sir R. But
says the Plaintiffs Husband such a day committed Felony, by stealing a Mare,
and was Executed for this; for which the Lord entered as forfeited. Demur
general, and Joynder, Winch Ent. 968. to to 970. Allen and Branch. By Winch,
the Woman shall not have her Widows Estate without special Custom, as in
Gavelkind, The Father to the Bough, the Son to the Plough.

Similes Bar and Repi^.

Rejoynd. maintenance de franktenement and traverse le grant per Copy, Co.
Entr. 280.

Similes Bar and Repl. Rej. quod quer forisfecit terras per Forgery del Roll de
Customs. Surrej. Quer and alij tenentes agreaverunt ponere consuetud manerij
in scriptur, and traverse Forgery, Co. Entr. 280.

Forisfacttur (pleaded) pur fine insolutur Surrej. quod finis non fuit
rationabilis. Demur ind. Co. Entr. 645, 647.

Forfeiture de term per tenant pur ans and demise pur vie, Plo. 188.

Simile by Fine levied, Co. Entr. 691. 1 Rep. 71. Hern 25.

De term pur felo de se, Plo. 254. Rast. Entr. 609.

De Estate de tenant pur vie per alienation in Fee, Ra. Ent. 65, 208, 398, 647.
1 Rep. 107. Vet. Intr. 30, 121.

Per Recovery per fraud en Formedon, Ra. Ent. 643. 1 Rep. 82.

Bars per franktenement. Repl. quod terre sunt cust. bars que sunt customary
terres, etc.
Trns^. Bar quod C. seisitus de manner grant customar terres al D. de quo
descend al Def. Repl quod manner descend quer qui fuit seisitus quousque trans^
and travers quod terres sunt customar V.B. 153.

Dower. Dower.
Bar quod terres sunt Copyhold and grant per copy, and issint non-tenure
Repl. Tenens est Tenens ut de libero tenemento, Ra Ent. 231.

Repl Bar quod F. seisitus in see prist al baron Def. qui est Tenant per le
Courtesy. Repl terres sunt customarie, and travers quod F. fuit seisitus in
Fee, Hern 681.

Trns^. Bar quod terre sunt Liberum Tenementur. Def. Rej. quod terre sunt
custumar and fuer dimiss. quer per copiam. Repl. per maintenance de
frank-tenement and traverse grant per Copy, Co. Ent. 180. per Title Surrender
and Admittance, Fine.

Repl Bar per Title al custumarie terres al J. Feme de H. in Fee, and descent
al Def. Repl H. and J. ad talem curiam ( ead J. existen sola examinatur per
seneseal) surrender al use de quer Rej. maintenance de descent, and travers
quod J. fuit sola examinatur, 3 Brownl. 270.

Trns^ Bar quod J. seisitus de terris custumar surrender al use de S. qui fuit
admit, and descent. Def. reply quoth I. surrender sur condicon de payment. Et
quod obtulit denar quos def. recusavit. Rej. non obtulit denar, Co. Ent. 657.

Repl Bar quod D. seisitus de manner grants custumar terres al Def. pur vie.
Replic S. prius seisitus de Manner grant al Plaintiff pur vie. Rej. Plaintiff
surrender al use del J. etc. Surrej. maintenance del Avowry and Traverse le
surrend, Hern 653. and 753. Vide.

Surrender and Descent.
Avowre que W. Roy seize de Manor grant in Fee al M. qui surrend al use de Def.
Repl^ W. prius seisitus de manerio grant al J. de quo descend al P. qui surrend
al use de M. pur vie, qui demise al querenti. Rej. W. devant grant al J. grant
al B. de quo descend al M. qui surrend al Def. Et Traverse grant al J. Co. Ent.
575.

Trns^ Bar quod E. seisitus de Manor pur vie grant al Def. in Fee. Repl^ H.
seisitus de rever de Manor puis mort de E. grant terres al quer and Traverse
grant al Def. Co. Ent. 660.

Trns^ Bar quod Abbas seize de Manor grant custumar terres al J. and H. in Fee.
H. surrend al use de R. qui fuit admitur and de luy descend al Def. Replic quod
Terres descendebant juniori filio per consuetur manerij. Abbot granted al dit
R. contra consuetur qui mor seize. Abbas restituend grant al quer junior. filio
and traverse que Abbas granted al J. and H. Rast. Ent. 627.

Trn^s Bar quod dominus manerij ob certas causas seisivit terras custumarias
unde E. fuit seisitus pur vie and grant al M. in Foe. E. Release. M. Surrend al
use de Def. qui fuit admissus. Repl^ E. mor seisie, and descent querentur and
Traverse le Release, 3 Browl. 463.

Trns^ Bar quod T. seisitus de Manor grant per Copy al Def. pur vie. Repl^
Abbot prius seisitus grant al R. pur vie, and puis grant le Revereon al
Plaintiff pur vie. Rej. Abbot devant grant in reversion demise Manor pur ans al
J. le Roy seize per surrend del Abbot grant Manor al dit T. Surrej. Maintenance
de grant in Reversion per Copy and Traverse demise de Manor, Co. Entr. 662.

Trans^ Bar per frank-tenement. Repl^ que terre fuit customar and fuit grant
per Copy pur vies. Et per Custom Feme Plaintiff est seize p^ son free Bench,
3 Brownl. 474.

Trns^ Bar per frank-tenement. Replic R. seisitus de Manor grant per Copy en
Fee al J. qui surrender al use de Plaintiff qui est admit. Rej. per consuetud
manner Dominus habere debet finem pro admissione. Et quer forisfecit ter^as per
finem insolutur. Sur^ej. finis non fuit rationabilis Demur inde, Co. Ent. 657.

Quod J. seisitus de manner unde ter^e custumar descend fun filio per consuetur
concessit ter^as viro and Vx. and her^d viri Vxor super vixit, and reversio
descend fratri and de eo dese. juniori filio, Hern 679.

Bar in Repl quod T. W. was seized of the Manor of H. (unde locus in quo est
parcel and custumar ter^es) in Fee. Custom of the Manor was for every Tenant to
hold successive, as they are named in the Copy. W. grants to John Podger and E.
and M. his Daughters, for their Lives. John enters and was seized for Life, he
dies, and E. enters and was seized for Life; she afterward marries the
Plaintiff, by which he was seized in right of his Wife and put in his Beasts,
until, etc. and avers the Life of the Wife. Repl Def. protestando the place in
Question is not parcel of the Manor of H. etc. pro placito, he confesses the
seisin of W. of the said Manor, unde, etc. and that there was such a Custom as
the Plaintiff has alleged; and that W. granted to Podger and his Daughter for
Lives, and shows the entry and seisin of the Father: But farther says, That W.
by Indenture Enrolled, bargained and sold the place in Question to John Podger
in Fee, and the Act of 27 H. 8. De uses and proclamatur upon a Fine, according
to the 4 H. 7. and the Fine levied to the Use of John Podger in Fee; he dies
and the Premises descend to Marmaduke his Son, who levies another Fine of the
Premises to the Use of him and M. his Wife, and the Heirs of the Husband: The
Husband dies, his Wife survives, and enters into the Premises; and after the
Plaintiff enters and puts in Beasts, etc. upon whose possession the Wife
reenters, and the Defendant takes the Beasts of the Plaintiff. E. did not
claim within five years, and that the Plaintiff and his Wife were barred. Upon
Demurrer general to the Replication and Rejoinder, the Judgment of the Court
was, That the Fine was not a bar, Winch Ent. p. 926 ad 929. Vide the Argument
of this Case, 9 Rep. Margaret Podgers Case.

Avowry per Lessee p^ ans del Evesque p^ Damage Fezant, and aver le vie del
Evesque Bar que le lieu est parcel d'un Manor and demisable per Copy, and
entitle luy mesme per Copy grante per pdecessor del Evesque. Defend maintain
son Avowry and Traverse le Prescription del Copyhold, placita Gen and Spec,
579.

Bar to the Conisance in Replevin, That the 10 Acres are Copyhold, parcel of
the Manor of W. And King H. 8 seized of this Manor, grants by Copy the said 10
Acres to R. D. he dies, and a descent to Grace and Alice his Daughters and
Coheirs. Grace dies, a descent to S. E. her Son, who demiseth his part for a
year. Keep the Defendant protestur that the 10 Acres are not Copyhold, and
that King H. 8. had not granted to R. pro plto, That King H. 8. was seized of
those 10 Acres in Fee, and in jur corone, and died seized, and descent to King
Edw. 6. who grants them to K. F. and W. F. in Fee. R. releaseth to W. W. dies
sole seized, descent to W. his Son and Heir. W. the Son dies without Issue,
descent to K. Father of W. in the Conisance; Fine with Proclamation to the Use
of R. F. Father of the said W. (in the Conisance named) seisin in Fee. R. dies,
descent to W. (named in the Conisance) who entered and was seized in Fee, and
because the Beasts were Damage fesant he maintains his Conisance. Demurs, and
Judgment pro Quer, for that the Replication does not confess or avoid, nor deny
the bar to the Avowry, Winch Entur. p, 997, 998, 999. Foster and Woodcock.

Eject. Bar que W. seisitus de Manor grants custumar ter^es in Reversion al
Def. and auters pur vies. Repl que W. demised ceo Manor al C. and R.
determinable pur vie del M. ils^ assign al M. qui grant Reversion de ter^es al
H. pur vie. Rej. que D. fuit prius seisitus de Manor que descend al 3 Coheirs
quas W. disseise, etc. Surrej per maintenance de Replic and Traverse le
disseisin, Demur inde Co. Ent. 184.

Replev. Quod Reg. Eliz. seisita de manerio unde, etc. concessit ter^as
custumar R. and M. Vxori ejus and hered Vxoris qui sursum reddider ad usum Def.
Bar quod W. prius seisitus de manner concessit terras al J. de quo descend al P.
qut sursum reddidit al A. qui sursum reddidit al M. pur vie qui dimisit quer
Repl quod W. ante concession al J. concessit ter^as al B. de quo descend al M.
qui sursum reddidit Def. and travers grant al J. and issue inde, Co. Ent. 575.

Quod J. seisitus de manner unde, etc. concessit Def. pro vita in Reversion
ter^as custumar dimissibil pro 2 vitis tam in Possessione quam in Reversione,
Hern 724.

Trns^ quod C. seisitus de manerio concessit ter^as customar in feod al B. de
quo descend Def. Repl C. fuit sisitus de manerio unde, etc. quod descend quer
and traverse quod ter^e sunt custum, U. B. 153.

Trns^ Def. justif. sub tenentur custum and monstroit le Estate de Copyhold
durante viduitate, Tomps. 395.

Trn^s and novel assignmtur Def. dicit quod pmissa tempore, etc. parcel and
custmaria and dimissibilia per cop. cuicunque person ill capere volent in
Talliatur seu pro vita. Et quod F. G. pd fuit seisitus ad cur tentur 26 Martij,
dimisit cuidam W. in feodo qui dimisit Def. pro Anno virtute cujus, etc. and
done Color. Repl quod pmissa sunt liberum tenementum quer and sic manutenet
nar^ationem and traverse que pmisse fuer parcel manerij de L. Rej. and exitus
sur traverse. Keb. 465, 467.

In Repl Copyhold in Reversion per copiam tenentur in possessione advocat
captionem pur Damage fesant and custom del Manor granter Estates en possession
ou reversion, Hern 777.

CAP. XXXIII.
Evidence, Trial, Issue. What shall be a good Evidence to prove the Custom
alleged or not. Presumptive Evidence. Where Copy of a Lease is good Evidence.
What shall be tried by the Jury, and what by the Court-Rolls. Substance found
in special Verdict. Who may be admitted to give Evidence. When Issue is taken
upon a Surrender, where to be Tried. Venue.

What shall be a good Evidence to prove the Custom or not.
THE Custom of a Manor was laid to be, That if a Copyholder has two Sons and
a Wife, and dies, and the eldest Son has Issue and dies in the Life of the
Wife, that the younger Son shall have the Land, the Issue being upon the
Custom; the Jury found the Custom to be, That the younger Son shall have the
Land, unless the eldest was admitted in his Life, and paid the Lords Fine. Per
Curiam, the Verdict is not sufficient to prove the Issue, Moor, n. 566.

In Replevin, If the Defendant justifies the taking as Damage fesant. The
Plaintiff in bar pleads by reason of a Common to such a Copyhold, for all
Beasts Levant and Couchant, and avers that these Beasts were Levant and
Couchant, etc. upon which the Parties were at Issue; and it is found that part
of the Beasts were Levant and Couchant, Part found for the whole.
and part not; this is found for the Defendant, for the Issue is upon the
whole, and the contrary to it is found, Trin. 17 Jac. B. Sloper and Allen.

The Issue was in Kemp and Carters Case, 1 Leon. Case 70. p. 55. If the Lord of
the Manor granted the Lands in question, Per copiam rotulorum curiae Manerij
praed. secundum consuetud. Manerij praed. It was given in Evidence, That within
the said Manor were diverse custumary Lands, and that the Lord, now of late, at
the Court of the said Manor, granted the Land per Copiam Rotulorum curiae,
where it was never granted by Copy before: Per Cur. the Jury are bound to find
Dominus non concessit, for notwithstanding de facto Dominus concessit per
Copiam Rotulorum curiae, Non concessit.
yet non concessit secundum consuetudinem manerij predict. for the said Land
was not custumary, nor had the Custom taken hold of it. Several Customs within
several limits ought to be specially showed.
It was showed then, That within the said Manor some customary Lands are
demisable for Life only, and some in Fee. By Anderson Chief Justice, He who
will give in Evidence these several Customs, ought to show the several Limits
wherein the several Customs are severally running; as that the Manor extends
into two Towns, and that the Lands in one of the said Towns are grantable for
Lives only, and the Lands in the other in Fee, and he ought not to show the
several Customs promiscue valere, through the whole Manor.

In an Action brought, The Defendant alleges a Custom of a Copyhold to be
demised in Fee, Tail, or for Life, and made Title by a demise in Fee to
himself. The Plaintiff traversed the Custom, and the Custom was found to be,
Substance found.
to demise in Fee, or for Life, but not in Tail: Per Cur. the Issue was found
for the Defendant, because the substance was found for him, and the Tail was
but inducement, Moor, n. 490. Dorley and Wood.

Wadsworth's Case before Judge Crawley at York Assizes, was upon an Intail of a
Copyhold within the Manor of W. and several ancient Intails showed in
Evidence, in Edward III. time, and remainders limited over upon such Intails,
and Plaints in nature of Formedons, brought there for such Remainders, and
Recoveries thereupon, and several Issues after had taken their Admittances, as
of Fee simple Land, as Heirs in Fee; and for this cause Purchasers look at the
Copies, Presumptive Evidence.
and seeing Fee-simple in Admittances, are secure the Estate is so, and apply
their Assurances accordingly; the Jury found for the Plaintiff against this
Intail, and it shall be presumed the Intail has been cut off some way, when
many Admittances have been in Fee simple.

The Custom of a Manor is, Less Estate than the Custom.
That the Wife shall have it during her Life, and on Evidence it appears that
she shall have it, durante viduitate, this Evidence does not maintain the
Custom, 4 Rep. 30.

If the Parties be at Issue upon the time of the Surrender made, or the Court
holden, The time of the Surrender or of the Court holden, to be tried by the
Jury and not by the Rolls.
the same shall not be tried by the Rolls of the Manor, but by the Country, and
the Party may give in Evidence the truth of the matter, and shall not be bound
by this mis-entry of time upon the Rolls, for this Entry is not matter of
Record, 1 Leon. 189. Burgess and Foster.

The Issue was upon separalis pastura, Evidence to prove separalis pastura.
upon the Traverse of the sole Feeding; the Defendants Evidence was, That the
Plaintiff used to Mow, and provide Fodder for Winter, which Per Curiam they
cannot, Common being to be taken per Bouch, In North and Holland's Case, 2 Keb.
577.

If in Ejectment a Lease is pleaded of a Manor, etc. whereof the Tenements in
which were parcel, and upon this Issue is joined, Quod non dimisit manerium;
and the Jury upon this give a special Verdict (viz.) That there were not any
Freeholders, but diverse Copyholders of the Manor, and that this was known by
the name of a Manor, although that this was not a Manor in Law for default of
Freeholders; and although this was alleged in pleading to be a Manor, which
pleading is made by learned Men; Substance found on special Verdict.
and although this was in an Action Adversary and not Amicable, yet for as much
as an Issue is tryable by the Lay Gents, and in truth the Tenements in which,
etc. pass by the Lease, this Verdict is found for him which pleads the Lease of
the Manor; for the substance of the Issue is, whether it was demised or not, M.
22 and 23 Eliz. B. R. Vines and Durham, cited in 6 Rep. 77. Sir Moyle Finch's
Case.

The Custom of neighboring Manors good Evidence.
The Issue was, whether Fines (called Gresham Fines, ab ingressu) are due to the
Lord till full Age; and Evidence for the Defendant was, That other Manors
adjoining had the same Custom not to pay till full Age, and allowed, 3 Keb.
Champion's Case.

In Ejectment, The Plaintiff declares of a demise made for three years, and it
was confessed by the Plaintiff, That the Lands were Copyhold Lands, and that
the Plaintiff had not License to demise them for three years, neither could he
prove by any Custom, that he could demise them for three years; so the
Plaintiff was Nonsuit, and the Lessor taken for a disseisor, Per tot. Cur. 1
Brownl. p. 133. P. 8 Jac. Cramporn and Freshwal.

By Rolls, When proof by Court Rolls are good.
if Copy of Court Rolls are showed to prove a custumary Estate, the enjoyment
of such Estate must also be proved, otherwise the proof is not good, Styles p.
450. in Pilkington and Bagshaw's Case.

Copy of a Lease which the Lord had in his Hands, Copy of a Lease good
Evidence. Special Verdict or admission on former pleading good Evidence.

Copy of the Roll, where good Evidence.


whereby the Tenant had power to make Leases, is good Evidence, without
swearing it a true Copy; also the finding by special Verdict or Admission on
former pleading is good Evidence, unless the contrary appear, 1 Keb. 720. Lee
and Boothby.

Copy of Roll under the Stewards Hand, who was Council for the Lord, Plaintiff,
was admitted good for the Copyholder; but contra of short Notes by way of
Breviat, 1 Keb. 720. Lee and Boothby.

The Copyholder moved the Court, Order to bring in the Rolls for his defense,
not granted.
That the Steward might be ordered to bring in the Court Rolls to enable him to
defend his Title, but the Court denied it, Styles 128.

Who may be admitted to give Evidence.
The Steward, Steward.
though he had a Fee for Admittance may be a Witness, 3 Keb. Champion's Case.

To prove a Custom, Copyholder.
That a Copyholder may cut Trees, a Copyholder that had not but a Kettle may
be a Witness, 2 Siderfin p. 7.

The Lord may be admitted to give Evidence for the Lessee or Copyholder, The
Lord.
though the Court would have spared him, had there been other, 1 Keb. 15.
Gerrard and Lister.

Court Leet Books.
Proof of the Plaintiff Tenant of the Manor, was by Court Leet Books, by
presentment of the Homage, and not per Juratores, of any certain place, and so
it was supplied by Witness; this was in a Case of Fishing.

Copy of Court Roll.
By consent, the Jury had a Copy of Court Roll given by the Plaintiff in
Evidence, 1. Keb. 22. in Trowel's Case.

In Ejectment the Defendant pleaded a Surrender of a Copyhold, by the Hands of
F. then Steward of the Manor. Issue was joined absque hoc, Traverse, that he
was Steward, ill.
That he was Steward: Per Curiam, this is no Issue, for the Traverse ought to
be general, That he did not Surrender, for if he were not Steward, the
Surrender is void; Repleader was awarded, Cro. Eliz. 160. Wood and Butts.

Venue.
Where Issue is taken upon a Surrender, it shall be tried where it was alleged
to be done, Note, when Issue is to be taken upon a Surrender where to be Tried.
and not where the Manor is, of which the Copyhold is holden, Cro. Eliz. 260.
Wood and Butts.

The Custom was alleged to be in Warfield, in the Manor of Wargrave, and the
Venire facias was de Wargrave tantum, a good Venue, and need not be from both,
2. Bulstr. 135. Good-groom and Moor. For the Issue being whether within the
Manor there be such a Custom, the Venue shall be only of the Manor, and
Warfield being parcel of the Manor shall be intended to be within it, Cro. Jac.
327.

Custom for Common was alleged to be as to half an Acre of Land Copyhold,
parcel of the Manor of Buckland in Buckland, and the Venire was de vicineto
Manerij, its ill; for the Manor being alleged to be the Manor of Buckland in
Buckland, the Venire facias ought to have been from Buckland, and a Venire de
novo awarded, Cro. Jac. p. 302. Mortimer and Pettyfer.

The Issue was whether the Copyholder in one Town had Common in Land lying in
another Town. Exception was to the Trial, because the Venire was not of both
Villages, 1 Brownl. 41.

CAP. XXXIV.
Of Special Verdict. Imperfect Custom not well found. Failure of Prescription.
Finding directly, not argumentatively. How the Custom must be found by the
Jury. Substance found. Verdict aided. Presidents of special Verdict.

THE Jury find quoad parcel tenementorum, Quoad parcel, and show not what, and
nothing for the residue.
the special matter, and they did not show what parcel, and they found nothing
for the residue, and the Verdict was held to be ill for both, and a Venire
facias de novo awarded, Cro. Jac. 31. Anselm's Case.

Special Verdict upon the Custom of the Manor of Toddington, That any
Copyholder might Surrender out of Court into the Hands of two Tenants,
Copyholders of the Manor, etc. The Copy of the Surrender found in haec verba.
Toddington in the Margent. At the Court Baron of the Honor of Hampton J. S.
and J. D. Tenants of the Honor of Hampton, do present, An Honor.
That J. R. did Surrender into the Hands of two Tenants of the Honor. Per
Jones, This being a Court of the Honor, and into the Hands of the Tenants of
the Honor, its not good; but by the other three Justices its good enough. For
Toddington being in the Margent it shall be said a distinct Court by it self:
For an Honor consists of many Manors; yet all the Courts for the Manors are
distinguished, and have several Copyholders. Cro. Car. 366. Seagood and Hone.

Special Verdict was, That Copyholder of Inheritance bargained and sold his
Copyhold Land, etc. to the Lessee of the Manor, and this was by Indenture, and
the Indenture was to this effect, Verdict found not according to the Indenture.
That he bargained and sold all his Lands and Tenements, as well Copy-holds as
other Lands, bought of John Culpepper, in such a Town; but it is not found by
the Verdict nor averred by the Party, That the Land was bought of John
Culpepper, and so ill. Winch Rep. p. 67. Hasset and Hanson.

Custom not well found.
A Copyholder of Inheritance made a Letter of Attorney to two Jointly and
severally, to Surrender his Copyhold Lands in Fee to certain Uses, after his
death; but the Verdict does not find that the two Attorneys were custumary
Tenants, nor does it appear that they were customary Tenants at the time of the
Admittance (and the primier possession will make a disseisin by the Defendant,
if the Custom be not well found; It is not found that the two Attorneys were
customary Tenants.
) but it was objected, here is so much found as shall make it to be presumed
that they were Tenants of the Manor, for it is found that the party is admitted
secundum consuetud. Manerij, which cannot be a good Admittance if they were not
Tenants. But Rolls answered, to be admitted secundum consuetudinem goes to the
Admittance, not to the Letter of Attorney (the Custom is not good) neither is it
found that the Land is demisable at the will of the Lord, etc. and so it may be
free Land. and the Custom reaches it not, Styles p. 311. Wallis and Bucknal.

The Plaintiff entitles himself to have Common of Pasture, etc. to his
Copyhold, and the Custom was traversed; it was found he ought to have the same
Common, but that every Copyholder used to pay, time out of mind, etc. pro ead.
communia unam gallinam, and quinque ova annuatim; upon this Verdict the
Plaintiff shall have Judgment; Failure of Custom found
this is not a common sub modo, for the Ter-Tenant had remedy for the Hen and
Eggs by distress, and it is not parcel of the Issue; but had the Jury found
that the Plaintiff shall have Common, paying so many Hens and Eggs, the Issue
had been against him, and it had been parcel of the Custom; its not Modus
Communiae, but collateral recompense. One prescribes to carry Water out of the
River, the Jury find he ought to have this paying 6 d. yearly. Failure of
Prsecription found.
Per Cur. he has failed of his Prescription, for he had prescribed absolutely,
and the Jury found it conditionally, or sub modo, and the Ter-Tenant in this
Case has no remedy but by disturbance, 5 Rep. 68. Gray's Case.

If the Issue be, whether, Jury must find directly and not argumentatively.
where a Copyhold is granted to three for the Lives of two, he who dies
seized, etc. ought to pay an Harriot Custom, and the Jury find there never was
a Grant of such Estate within the said Manor; This is not well found, for this
is but an argument that no Harriot ought to be paid, but they ought to have
found it directly, M. 15 Jac. B. R. Ven and Howel.

If the Issue be, whether by the Custom of the Manor a Copyhold may be granted
to three for the Life of two, and they find that by the Custom, it may be
granted for three Lives; this is not well found, because it is only by
Argument, because if a greater Estate may be granted, a lesser may be. So if
the Issue be whether a Copyhold may be granted in Tail, and they find it may
be granted in Fee, mesme Case.

What shall be intended by the Juries finding, if, etc. then for the Plaintiff.
Special Verdict upon a Patent from King H. 8. (which Patent was adjudged void
to pass the Estate) the Jury find if it were a good Patent then for the
Defendant, if otherwise, they find for the Plaintiff. It is intended there is a
sufficient Title found for the Plaintiff, unless by this Patent it be defeated;
If Jury be satisfied the Plaintiff has Title, the Court ought not to doubt
thereof.
so that if the Jury be satisfied that the Plaintiff has any good Right by any
other manner of Title, the Court ought not to doubt thereof, and so is Goodal's
Case, 5 Rep. 97. Cro. Car. 21. Castle and Hobbs.

Custom was pleaded by the Defendant, That if a Copyholder in Fee has a Wife
at the time of his death, and two Sons or more, that the Wife shall have her
Free-Bench, during her Life, and that if the eldest Son dye, living the Wife,
though he has Issue, his Issue shall not have it, Custom must be found in the
manner that he pleads it.
but the second Son. The Jury found the Custom that the youngest Son should
have it, unless the eldest Son was admitted thereto, as to the Reversion, or
made a Fine for it with the Lord in his Lifetime: Per Cur. The Custom is not
found in that manner that he pleaded it, therefore it is found against him that
pleaded it; for he pleaded a general Custom, without exception, and the Custom
found is with an exception, and special, as the Case is in Dyer 192. Where a
Custom was pleaded, That a Feme should have it, and it was found she should
have it, Verdict not aptly concluded.
durante viduitate, but in this Case there was not any Verdict upon this Issue,
for they concluded their Verdict, Si, etc. they found the Defendant guilty, if
otherwise, not guilty, and so there is not any conclusion of the point in
Issue. Per Cur. a gross fault, and a Venire Facias de novo was awarded, Cro.
El. 415. Boraston and Hay.

In Trespass, the Plaintiff in his Replication makes Title, That this Land is
parcel of the Manor of D. and demisable, etc. by Copy in Fee, in Tail, for Life
or years, etc. and the Land was let to him by Copy in Fee; Substance found.
the Prescription was traversed, and found that it was demisable, etc. in Fee,
but never in Tail, and that it was granted to the Plaintiff in Fee, this was
found for the Plaintiff; for the Allegation, That the Land was demisable in
Fee, or in Tail, etc. is but a Conveyance to his Title; and for that it was
found, that it was demisable in Fee, and that it was demised unto him in Fee,
this is the substance of his Title, and so sufficient, Cro. Eliz. p. 431. Doyle
and Wood.

In Eject. Fir. If the Jury find a special Verdict, That J. S. was seized of
the Manor of D. in his Demesne, as of Fee, in which Manor was a Copyholder of
the place where, etc. and commits Waste, by cutting down an Oak, and that after
J. S. dies, and the Lessor of the Plaintiff, being his Cousin and Heir, enters
in the Manor, in the place where, etc. for the said Forfeiture, and was of this
seized in his Demesne, as of Fee, and concludes si super totam materiam, etc.
This is not a good Verdict, because it is not found that J. S. died seized of
the Manor, and that this descends to the Lessor, Seisin and descent as Cousin
and Heir.
as his Cousin and Heir, for it may be that J. S. aliened the Land and that the
Father of the Lessor, or the Lessor himself re-purchased this, and that he was
also Cousin and Heir to J. S. and although it be in a Verdict, it shall not be
intended, that the Fee continued in J. S. at the time of his death, and that he
died thereof seized, without finding it, 2 Rolls Abr. 699. Cornwallis and
Hammond.

Part found, the Issue upon the whole, not good.
In Replevin. The Defendant justifies by reason of Common to such a Copyhold,
for all Beasts Levant and Couchant, and avers that these Beasts were Levant and
Couchant, etc. upon which the Parties are at issue, and it is found that part
of the Beasts were Levant and Couchant, and part not; this is found for the
Defendant for the whole, for the issue was upon the whole, and the contrary is
found, 2 Rolls Abr. 707. Sloper and Allen.

Presidents in Special Verdicts.
Quod Tenementa sunt custumaria and dimissibilia per Copiam and dimissio per
Dominum ex traditione propria, 1 Rep. 117. Chudleigh 's Case.

Sursum redditio and admissio in feodo, Co. Entr. 207.

Simile in Tallio and communis recuperatio inde, Co. Entr. 206.

Tenementa concessa per copiam la A. and B. super vixit, Co. Ent. 273.

Consuetudo infra manerium de devisatione, and devisatio in haec verba, Co.
Ent. 124.

Littera Attornat' ad sursum reddend' tenementa custumaria, sursum redditio and
admissio superinde, Coke Entr. 576, 577. Et si sit sufficiens in Lege.

Manerium and Tenementa ab antiquo discendebant 2 percenariis, qui fecer'
partitionem de terris dominicalibus, ac Tenementa Custumaria and servitia
remanser' in communi, Coke Entr. 711.

Officium Seneschalli manerij execut' per deput' and contentio inter 2
Seneschallos, de Cur. Baron Tenend. 9 Rep. 45.

In Ejectment, Jury find that the Lands are demisable by Lives, in possession
or reversion, and that the Widow in possession held the Lands so long as she
remained sole and chaste, and that M. C. Widow was seized for Life, durante
viduitate; the Lord grants the Reversion of the said Lands by Copy, to R. C.
the Son of M. for Life, to commence after the death, forfeiture or surrender of
M. M. surrenders one moiety of the Premises to R. The Lord dies, descent of
the Manor to C. S. his Cousin and Heir. R. Tenant for Life of one moiety, and
M. Tenant in Free-Bench of the other moiety; the Lord by Indenture demiseth to
the Lessor of the Plaintiff for 99 years, (if he and J. and B. his Sons shall
so long live) to commence after the death and determination of the Estates of
the said M. and R. and of the viduity of such person as shall be his Wife at
the time of his death. M. surrenders her moiety to R. R. dies seized of both
moieties. P. C. (the Defendant) his Wife is admitted; she commits Fornication
and had a Bastard. Jury find the entry of the Lessor. If the Lease shall
commence before P. dies was the Question, Winch Ent. 455.

Jury found that the Message and Lands tempore quo, etc. and tempore horse
memory, were custumary, part of the Manor of B. a Prebend of S. demisable by
Copy of Court Roll, for one, two or three Lives, and that by the Custom of the
Manor, every Tenant for Life sole seized of any customary Estate for Life in
possession, may nominate one to succeed him to be Tenant to the Lord for Life,
and that the party nominated used to require his Admittance, and pay such Fines
as were taxed by the Homage. Another Custom was, That every customary Tenant
sole seized in possession, may cut Timber Trees, etc. and that Mason the
Defendant being Copyholder for Life, 1 May 40 Eliz. named R. P. to be his
succeeding Tenant. They also find that Robert P. being Prebendary of the said
Prebend, and seized in Fee of the said Manor, 20 March 40 Eliz. demised by
Indenture, the Manor of B. to Peter Hoskins, for three Lives, and by the said
Indenture Bargains and Sells to him all the Timber Trees, etc. by which
Indenture is a Letter of Attorney to make Livery; and they find the Indorsement
on the Indenture to this effect, Midd. That J. B. one of the Attorneys entered
into part, and made Livery. Midd. That J. G. the other Attorney entered into
part, and made Livery. The Livery made in the House of the Lord was Endorsed,
but it is not mentioned to be part of the Manor: The Jury find the entry of
Peter Hoskins, and seisin for three Lives, according to the Lease (which aids
the other Imperfections. Verdict aided.
) 1 Jan. 43 Eliz. Peter Hoskins demiseth to J. Hoskins, Masons Tenement and
Lands for 99 years, March 3 Jac. Mason continuing customary Tenant for Life,
after his nomination aforesaid, cut down 20 Trees off his Copyhold; upon which
J. Hoskins 6 Jac. entered upon the Land, and demised to the Plaintiff, who
enters upon Mason, who reenters, and if his re-entry be lawful, they find for
Mason, After nonsuit one of the Defendants was dead, this suggestion must be
entered on the Roll.
and if not lawful, they find for the Defendant, Winch Ent. 440. Rowls and
Mason.

In Ejectment to try the Custom of E. of Copies for three Lives, the Plaintiff
was nonsuit, and one of the Defendants being dead, Hales Chief Justice advised
to enter a Suggestion on the Roll, That one was dead, or else the Judgment for
the Defendant on the nonsuit will be erroneous as to all, 2 Keb. 832. Hawthorn
versus Bawden.

CAP. XXXV.
Copyholders relieved in Chancery, or what things in respect of Copyhold
Estates are relievable in Chancery, or not.

NOW I conceive it will not be impertinent (but rather a thing well approved
of) to cite some Cases, Resolutions and Decrees, wherein Copyholders have been
relieved, and what remedy the Chancellor will give in respect of Lords,
Copyholders, Fines, Forfeitures, Surrenders, Admittances, Trusts, etc. and
what is proper to be brought and examined in that Court.

Alteration of a Custom by consent of Lord and Tenants allowed in Chancery,
Custom altered.
and decreed accordingly, Dyer contra Dyer, 10 July. 44 El.

If any particular Copyholders complain in Chancery of the grievousness of a
Fine, Outrageous Fines as to particular Copyholders relieved, but not upon a
Petition by all the Copyholders.
where the Fine is arbitrable, at the will of the Lord; if such Fine be
outrageous my Lord will mitigate it, and lessen it according to the time: But
if the whole company of Copyholders do exhibit a Bill, praying a mitigation of
their unreasonable Fines, where they are arbitrable at the will of the Lord; in
this Case my Lord will reject the Bill, for, said he, I can make no Act of
Parliament for them, 24 Nov. 44 Eliz.

The Defendant being Lord of a Manor, had 150 l. as a Fine upon the Plaintiffs
admission to the Lands in question: The Court of Chancery directed to an Issue,
whether the 150 l. were a reasonable Fine, or not? and the Defendant got a
Verdict, and the Damages were given by the Jury, being to the Value. This Court
declared, Reasonableness of a Fine how to be determined and properly recovered.
That the Fine was proper to be recovered at Law, and that the reasonableness
or unreasonableness of a Fine to be paid by a Copyholder, is a question of
Law, and not to be determined by a Jury, Hill contra Jacobs, 3 Jac. 2. f. 2.

One improved years value decreed to be a moderate Fine.
In the case of Popham and Lancastar, 12 Car. 1. The Court seeing there has
been a variation of the Fines, and not certain, decreed, That one improved
years value, is a moderate Fine between Lord and Tenant; so was Middleton and
Jackson's Case, 5 Car. 1.

Forfeitures wilful, not relieved.
In the Case of Ackland Pope and my Lady Wentworth, the Lord Chancellor said, he
would not relieve any Copyholder, who through wilful Forfeiture has given
cause of seizure to the Lord; for he said, The Lord had as good a right to a
seizure for a Forfeiture, as a Copyholder to his Copyhold Estate; but a
wilful Forfeiture he would not relieve, but for negligence he might.

Copyholder conceals the Land of the Lord.
If a Copyholder conceal the Land of the Copyhold to the disherison of the
Lord, and say to the Lord, Lay out of my Land, and I will pay you your Rent for
it. My Lord Chancellor Elsemere said, He is worthy to return to his ancient
villainous Tenure again.

Commons for Copyholders.
Commons for Copyholders and Terminors to be relieved in Chancery, Tothil 108.
Colcot and Lee.

A Copyholder can have no assise of Common against his Lord, Copyholder can
have no Assise against his Lord, but relievable in Equity.

Copyholder to sue at Law sans forfeiture.


but is to be relieved in Equity The Tenants of Petsworth and the Earl of
Northumberlands Case, Tothil 108.

The Court will compel the Lord to admit a Tenant Copyholder, to sue at Law,
without any forfeiture of his Copyhold, Tothil 65.

Tenant by Copy shall not have Assise against his Lord, because he has a
Frank-tenement, 4 Rep. 21. but he shall be relieved in Equity, Tothil p. 108.

A Suit was to compel a Lord to Grant a License to let a Copyhold; License*
Forfeiture to be examined before a License be decreed.
but because the Defendant said in his Answer, That the Copyhold was
forfeited, the Court would not enforce him to grant a License till the
forfeiture was examined, Tothil 107, 108.

A Court of Equity shall compel a Lord to admit a Copyholder; Admittances.
for before Admittance he cannot have an Action (upon Surrender) and he has no
remedy at Common Law, Hetly Rep. p. 2.

A Bill in Chancery to admit a Copyholder against Lord and Steward, Plaintiff
admitted to try a Title upon a Mortgage.
and this was only to try a Title, to enable a Mortgagee to try a Custom, That
if money be paid after the day, so it be before Entry of the Surrender made by
Mortgagee, that its a sufficient Redemptition; and also where the Wife
Inheretrix dies sans Issue, the Husband shall have the Fee at Taunton Dean. Per
Cur. the Plaintiff shall be admitted, though the Steward need not have been
made one of the Defendants, 2 Keb. 357. Towel versus Cornish.

Chancery will design the Bounds of a Copyhold, but not whether parcel or not
parcel.
If a Copyholder removes or defaceth the bounds of a Copyhold, it is proper
for such a Court to design them; but parcel or not parcel of a Copyhold
belongs to the Common Law to try, Hetly p. 2. Blackhal and Thursby.

Possession after 43 years.
Lyford contra Coward, 35 Car. 2. Richard Lyford Senior, the Plaintiffs Father,
being seized in Fee, of Freehold and Copyhold Lands, and having had Issue
Richard, Thomas and John, now Plaintiff, by Will gave the Plaintiff all his
Copyhold Lands, and to his Heirs Males, and for default of such Issue to his
Heirs general, and made a Surrender to the Use of his Will; That the Surrender
was presented, and the Plaintiff admited Tenant, and has ever since been of
the Homage, and enjoyed the Copyhold Lands. That Richard the Son died 1637.
leaving only one Daughter, the Defendant Mary: That the Court Rolls are lost,
and the Defendant insists, That he in right of his Wife, the Defendant Mary, as
Heir at Law to the said Richard Lyford, Senior, is entitled to the Premises,
there being no such Surrender or Admittance to be found, and that no such Will
was made, or any thing that will make out the Defendants Title. The Court
declared they would see Presidents; but then declared, That after 43 years
possession they thought it hard that the Plaintiff should be evicted, and
Ordered, That the Defendant should admit of a Surrender and Admittance upon
payment of Costs, and bring an Ejectment, and the Plaintiff not to insist on
his possession to hinder the Trial. The Court Decreed, to the Plaintiff and his
Heirs to enjoy the Land, according to the said Will, and Custom of the Manor.

Relief as to Surrenders, Purchases, Agreements, Trusts, Rolls lost, and Rents
Arrear.
It is Decreed, in the Case of Greenwood cont. Hare, 18 Car. 2. That where one
was a Copyholder for the Lives of himself and his two Sons, and he paid the
Fine, Defendant decreed to surrender according to an Agreement.
and afterward covenanted and agreed with the Plaintiffs Father to Surrender
his Title and Interest in the Premises, to the Plaintiffs Father, and his
Heirs. Copyholder dies before any Surrender. The Plaintiffs Father dies; he
Exhibits his Bill to have the Premises surrendered according to the Agreement,
the Purchase-mony having been paid by the Plaintiffs Father. The Court
considering, That by the Custom the Defendants Father could have surrendered all
the three Lives; and though it was not a Copyhold in Fee, yet it was decreed,
That the Agreement should be performed, and that the Defendant do Surrender to
the Plaintiffs Use, and an Injunction for quiet enjoyment.

A Woman Copyholder for Life, took an Husband, and the Reversion of the said
Copyhold was granted to three, viz. A. B. C. cum acciderit, by Surrender or
Forfeiture, for their Lives successive, according to the Custom. The Husband
does Surrender to the Use of A. for Life, to whom the Lord does grant a Copy
accordingly. A. and B. dye, and the Opinion of the Court was, That C. has no
right to be admitted by the Law, nor in Conscience; for that after the death of
the Husband, the Wife may enter, and have a Plaint in nature of a Cui in vita
contradicere non potest; and during the Husbands Life, the Lord may have it in
the nature of an Occupancy. But the Case did proceed farther (viz.) That the
Husband and Wife were willing to release all the Right of the Wife to the
surviving Reversioner, The Lord Decreed to hold a Court.
and the Lord would not receive it, nor hold a Court. But it was decreed, That
the Lord should hold his Court, and accept their Conveyance, or else avoid the
Possession thereof, Dyer 246. a.

Copyhold Estate in some cases not to be passed but by Decree.
Where the Lord grants the Reversion of the Copy-holds, the Tenant cannot
Surrender, there being no Dominus servitiorum as the Custom will warrant, and
he cannot pass his Estate any way, but by a Decree in Chancery, and this will
bind the person only, 4 Rep. p. 25. in Murrel's Case, vide supra.

Fines and Rents arrear not relieved after Sale of the Manor.
Copyhold Tenant in Fee surrenders to the Use of one for Life, Remainder to B.
in Fee. Tenant for Life dies, and B. pays no Fine for his Admittance, but after
dies, and this descends to his Son; and after his Son surrenders to the Use of
J. S. in Fee, and no Fine paid for it, and also the Rents for diverse years are
behind; and after the Lord grants the Manor in Fee to J. B. and after sues in a
Court of Equity for the Fines and Rents due before the Sale of the Manor, and
alleges in his Bill, That the Copyholder had Free Land intermixed with the
Copyhold Land, so that he could not know where to Distrain for it; yet he
shall not be relieved in Equity for this, for it is against a Maxim in Law, for
as much as by his own Act he had destroyed his Remedy, P. 10 Car. B. R.
Sergeant Hicham Plaintiff, and Finch and Block Defendants, and a Prohibition
was granted to the Court of Requests, where the Suit was.

Gold versus Door, Martis 23. Oct. 2 Jac. The Plaintiff delivered to the
Defendant an 100 l. to buy a Copyhold in the Defendants Name, but to the
Plaintiffs Use, because there were differences between the Lord of the Manor,
and the Plaintiff, so as the Plaintiff had no hopes to prevail for himself; and
when the Copyhold should be obtained, then the Trust was, That the Defendant
should Surrender the same to the Use of the Plaintiff. The Defendant
accordingly bought the Copyhold, Trustee refusing to surrender according to
his Trust, not relieved.
and took it in his own name, and his Childrens, but afterward would not
surrender it to the Use of the Plaintiff, notwithstanding the same was bought
with the Plaintiffs money; for this the Plaintiff Exhibited his Bill in
Chancery, and this appearing to be the true state of the Case, my Lord would
not relieve the Plaintiff, because he said he would never ground a Decree upon
a Lie, a Falsity, it appearing to him that this packing was used to thrust a
Tenant upon the Lord, whom he liked not; and so dismissed the Cause.

Tracy versus Noel, M. 2 Jac. Copyholder in Fee takes a Lease, the Manor is
sold. Copyholder not relieved, though the Purchaser had notice.
A Copyholder of Inheritance took a Lease for years of his Copyhold from the
Lord of the Manor; the Lord sold his Manor to J. S. who had notice of this
Copyhold of Inheritance; yet would not this Court relieve the Copyholder, his
Lease being ended, for by Law his Copyhold Estate is determined.

Robes Purchased the Inheritance of a Copyhold in the Name of B. and another
in Trust. B. surrendered his moiety to the Use of his own Son, and the other
died seized. The Son of B. and the Heir of the other for money sold the
Copyhold to C. for 50 l. being of the value of 80 l. Robes sued the Son of B.
and the Heir of the other, and C. in Chancery, for the 80 l. It was decreed,
That A. should recover this 50 l. only from B. and the Heir of the other, No
Recompense for the overvalue of an Estate, because no Fraud.
and C. should be discharged of it, and hold it in peace. But if notice had
been proved in C. Robes shall have the Land, and no recompense for the
overvalue was given against the Vendors, because no Fraud, Moor Rep. n. 745.
Kobes, Bent and Cock's Case.

Copyhold devised without Surrender, executed by Decree in Chancery.
A Copyhold devised without Surrender, it cannot be executed in point of
Interest, but only by Decree in Chancery, by a Concessum, in 2 Keb. 837.
Harrison's Case.

A Copyhold granted out of a Manor, confirmed.

Court Rolls produced.


A Copyhold granted at a Court kept out of the Manor, confirmed against the
Lord who made it, Tothil 107. Mark contra Suliard.

In Corbet and Peshal's Case, 12 Jac. it was Ordered, That Court Rolls should
be brought and showed to Council, to show which is Copyhold and which is
Freehold.

Composition Decreed.
Sterling's Case, a Composition formerly made between Lords and Tenants,
Decreed to bind a Purchasor or an Heir, 9 Car.

Bill in Chancery to reverse a Faux Judgment in the Lords Court.
If an erroneous Judgment be given in a Copyhold Court of a common Lord, in a
Formedon, a Bill may be exhibited in Chancery, in nature of a Faux Judgment, to
reverse it, Pateshull's Case in Scaccario, 1 Rolls Abridgment 373.

Admission by Letter of Attorney.
Copyholder ought not to be admitted to a Copyhold Estate by Letter of
Attorney, for he ought to do Fealty at the time of his Admittance, which must be
done in person, 21 Car. 2. Flyer and Hedgingham.

Fines certain, or not having been tried at Law, no farther Relief here.
Smith contra Sallet, 24 Car. 2. Fines of Copyholders whether certain or
arbitrary, it having been tried at Law, and in two Trials Verdict for Fines
certain; This Court would not relieve the Plaintiff, other than for the
preservation of Witnesses, and so dismissed the Plaintiffs Bill; it being to have
an Issue directed to try whether certain or not.

Morgan versus Scudamore, 29 Car. 2. The Lord limited to a two years full
value for a Fine.
The Lord was limited to a two years value for a Fine, though the Fines were
Arbitrary; and the Custom was to renew but every 99 years; but the Copyholders
decreed to renew their Estates within one year after the Term.

Barker contra Hill. 33 Car. 2. Heir Decreed to surrender upon a Contract with
the Ancestor.

Surrender by Infant of five years old.


Upon a Contract for Copyhold Estate, and Purchase-mony paid, the bargainor
dies before Surrender; his Heir decreed to Surrender.

Nayler contra Strode, The Surrender of a Copyhold Estate, by an Infant of 5
years old allowed by this Court.

Precedents in Chancery.
A Bill for the quieting the possession of a Copyholder, where the Copies and
Court Rolls are lost, and to have Witnesses examined, Conveyancers Light, 258.

A Bill for entering and detaining Copyhold Lands, by reason of the detaining
the Writings thereof, Wests Presidents, Edit. 1647.

PRESIDENTS, etc.
A Settlement before Marriage of a Copyhold Estate, where, according to the
Custom of the Manor, there is a dead Year after the death of every Tenant,
grantable by the Tenant in his Lifetime, and his Widow enjoys the Estate,
durante castitate, if he surrender or alien it not in his Lifetime, with
permission, That the Goods of the Wife shall remain at her disposal, and that
her Husbands Name may be made use of to sue for her Debts, but the Moneys to be
secured by the Trustees to her Use.

THIS Indenture Tripartite made, etc. between M. F. of, etc. Widow, late Wife
and Relict of E. F. late of, etc. Gentleman, deceased, on the first Party, and
T. S. of, etc. Gentleman, on the second Party, and E. L. of, etc. Gentleman, T.
B. of, etc. J. B. of, etc. Gentleman, on the third Part. Whereas the said M. is
now possessed in a personal Estate of Money, Debts owing by Bond, and
Securities, and otherwise, above the value of 300 l. and of Goods, Chattels and
Utensils of Household Stuff, according to the Inventory or Note of particulars
hereof, hereunto annexed, expressed. And whereas the said T. S. is now seized
in possession of a Copyhold Estate of Lands and Tenements, for term of his
Life, lying and being in S. within the Manor of W. in the said County of, etc.
of the yearly value of 40 l. or thereabouts, by virtue of a Copy of Court-Roll,
and Grant of the said Copyhold Premises, by R. B. then Sergeant at Law, at a
Court of the said Manor, of him the said R. B. holden the (...) day (...) in
the year, (...) as by the said Copy, under the Hand and Seal of him the said R.
B. and subscribed by S. F. his then Steward, appears, unto which Copyhold
Premises there is a dead year belonging, according to the Custom of the said
Manor, after the death of the Tenant thereof dying seized in possession,
disposable by such Tenant in his Lifetime, or else to be enjoyed by his
Executors or Administrators. And whereas also by the Custom of the said Manor,
the Wife of such Tenant, if she survive him, is to hold and enjoy the said
Copyhold Estate during the time of her Widowhood, keeping her self chaste. And
whereas a Marriage is intended to be had and solemnised between the said T. S.
and the said M. F. It is agreed between all the said Parties to these presents,
and the said T. S. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administratrators,
does Covenant, Promise and Grant, to and with the said E. L. T. B. J. B. and J.
P. and to and with every of their Executors and Administrators, That he the
said T. S. shall not and will not surrender, yield up or make void the said
Copyhold Estate, whereby she the said M. may be defeated of her Widows Estate,
in the same Copyhold Premises, after the death of him the said T. S. if the
said Marriage take effect, and in case she shall him survive. And also the said
T. B. does hereby Grant to the said E. L. T. B. J. B. and J. P. and the
survivor of them, the dead year of the said Copyhold Premises, to hold to
them and the survivor of them, immediately from and after the death of him the
said T. S. in Trust for her the said M. in case the said Marriage take effect,
and she survive him the said T. S. And the said T. S. does also Covenant, Grant
and agree, to and with the said E. L. T. B. J. B. and J. P. and to and with
every of them, their and every of their Executors and Administrators, That he
the said T. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall not intermeddle
with, claim, That he will intermeddle with no more of the Wives Estate then 300
l.
take or dispose of any other the aforesaid Estate Personal, Money, Goods or
Chattels of the said M. saving only the sum of 300 l. in money, and no more; but
that the said T. S. shall be contented and satisfied with the aforesaid sum of
300 l. in money, and no no more, as a full Marriage Portion to him, with the
said M. if the said Marriage shall take effect. That she may dispose of it by
Will, etc.
And that the said M. shall have full power by her last Will, or otherwise to
dispose of all, or any the rest of her Estate, to any other person or persons,
other than the said T. S. without any contradiction of him the said T. S. to
hinder or let the same. And the said M. F. by and with the consent of the said
T. S. as well in consideration of, etc. to her paid, by the said E. D. T. B. J.
B. and J. B. or one of them; as also to preserve the Interest and Property of
all and singular the Goods, Chattels and Implements of Household, now of her the
said M. in the Schedule or Note of particulars thereof, hereunto annexed,
specified; so that he the said T. S. may not have any power or disposal of
them. She the said M. has given, granted, bargained and sold, and does hereby
give, grant, bargain, sell and deliver unto the said E. L. T. D. J. B. and J.
P. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all and singular the said Goods,
Chattels and Implements of Household, To have and to hold to them, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for ever. And the said T. S. for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, Promise and
Grant, to and with the said E. L. J. B. T. B. and J. P. and to and with every
of them, their Executors and Administrators, That whereas she the said M. has
diverse sums of Money owing unto her upon Bonds, Specialties, and otherwise,
above the sum of 300 l. That for recovery of the said Debts (if need require)
he the said T. S. shall permit and suffer the Trustees aforesaid, The Husband
to permit Trustees to make use of his name to sue for his Wives Debt.
or any Attorney or Attorneys, by their appointment, in the Name or Names of
them the said T. S. and M. in case the same Marriage take effect, to commence
Suit against, sue and prosecute all and every the person or persons, as
occasion shall require, for all every of any the said moneys that are now owing
to the said M. And that he the said T. S. shall justify all and every such
Actions and Suits, That he shall not release the Action.
and shall not Release or discharge the same, or any Judgment or Judgments, or
Execution thereupon to be had, without the consent of the said Trustees, but
shall suffer the said Trustees to receive the same moneys, and every Sum
thereof, That what is received shall be at her disposal.
and all and other the Sum and Sums, above the Sum of 300 l. and to preserve
and dispose of the same according to the Trust in them reposed, by the
aforeseid M. And that the said M. shall have full power of the disposal
thereof, to any person or persons, other than the said T. S. without any
contradiction of him the said T. S. or any threats or uncivil carriage to deter
her thereunto. That neither of the Estates be charged with the others Debts due
before Marriage.
And it is farther agreed by and between the said T. S. and M. F. That neither
of them nor their Estates shall be charged with the Debts or Engagements of
either of the other of them, due or payable before the date of these presents.
And to that end the said T. S. does covenant, promise and grant, to and with
the said Trustees before named, and to and with every of them, That he will pay
and discharge all his own particular Debts, or which he is bound for or stands
chargable to pay, to any person or persons, out of his own particular Estate,
without having or craving any of the now personal Estate of her the said M.
other than the aforesaid 300 l. before mentioned. If there appear any Debts on
her part, Trustees to pay them out of her personal Estate in their Hands.
And also the said M. F. does hereby agree, That in case the said T. S. after
the said intended Marriage shall take effect and be solemnized, shall be
questioned or molested for any the proper Debts of her the said M. contracted
or owing by her, before the solemnization of the said intended Marriage, or for
any Legacy or Legacies which she is any ways chargable to pay to any person or
person, That the Trustees shall have power and authority hereby to pay and
discharge the said Debts and Legacies, which she the said M. is so chargable to
pay, and that out of any her now proper Estate, other than the aforesaid 300 l.
and in so doing the Trustees shall be discharged of any other account thereof
unto the said M. or to the said T. S. after the solemnization of the said
intended Marriage. And the said Trustees and every of them do hereby declare,
That they will perform the Trust in them reposed by these presents, according
to the true intent and meaning thereof. And do hereby Covenant every one of
them one with the other respectively, not to act or do any thing touching the
Premises, without the consent of them all. In Witness whereof to the first
part of these presents, remaining with the said T. S. the said M. F. and the
said Trustees have put their Hands and Seals; to the second part of these
Indentures, remaining with the said Trustees, the said M. F. and T. S. have put
their Hands and Seals, to the third part of these Indentures, remaining with
the said M. F. the said T. S. and the said Trustees have put their Hands and
Seals, the day and year first above written.

Covenant to Surrender Copyhold Land, after a Bargain and Sale of Freehold.
And whereas the said I. W. holds to him and his Heirs, by Copy of Court
Roll, at the Will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the Manor of S.
aforesaid, the said Parcel of Land in S. aforesaid, before excepted. It is
Covenanted and agreed, by and between the said Parties to these presents, and
the said I. W. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for the
Considerations aforesaid, does Covenant to and with the said H. A. RG. and I.
A. their Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That he the said I. W. shall and
will before the Feast of St. John Baptist, now next ensuing, surrender
according to the Custom of the said Manor, the said Parcels of customary Lands,
before excepted, unto the use and behoof of the said H. A. R. G. and I. A. and
their Heirs for ever, and procure them to be admitted unto the same
accordingly, To hold according to the Custom of the said Manor, freed and
discharged of all Forferfeitures, Charges and Encumbrances, done or suffered by
him the said J. W. or F. W. his Father, or either of them, In Witness, etc.

Covenant that he is rightfully seized of Copyhold Land.
And the said A. B. (for the Considerations aforesaid) does for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said I. G. his Heirs and Assigns by these
presents, that he the said A. B. now at the sealing and delivery of this, etc.
is solely, lawfully and rightfully seized of and in all and singular the said
Copyhold Lands and Premises, herein before mentioned to be granted, with
their, etc. Appurtenances, of a good Estate in Fee-simple, according to the
Custom of the Manor, of which the same Premises are holden. If the Copy-holds
belong to two Manors, then thus -- of a good Estate in Fee-simple, according to
the Custom of the several Manors, of which the said Premises are respectively
holden.

Covenant to Surrender Copyhold Lands.
And also that he the said A. B. or his Heirs, shall and will at the next
Court Baron to be held for the Manor of W. in the said County, etc. or at any
other time or times, upon the request of the said I. G. his Heirs or Assigns,
but at the proper Costs and Charges of the said A. B. or his Heirs, surrender
into the Hands of the Lord of the Manor, or to the Steward thereof, or
otherwise, according to the Custom of the said Manor, to the use of the said
I.G. his Heirs and Assigns, all those Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
herein after mentioned, which he the said A. B. does hold of the said Manor
aforesaid, by Copy of Court Roll, according to the Custom of the said Manor,
viz. one piece of Land, called, etc. And all other the Copyhold or customary
Lands of the said A. B. held of the said Manor of W.

And the said A. B. for himself, etc. does farther Covenant, etc. to and with
the said I. G. his Heirs and Assigns, etc. that he the said A. B. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, shall and will pay the Fines due for Admittances
of the said I. G. or his Heirs, into the said Copyhold Lands, unto the Lords
of the said Manors respectively.

And that he the said A. B. and his Heirs from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, within the space of seven years next ensuing the date hereof, etc.
at and upon the reasonable Request, and proper Costs and Charges in the Law, of
the said I. G. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will make and do all and every
such farther and other lawful and reasonable acts and things, for the farther,
better and more perfect assuring and conveying all and singular the said
Copyhold Lands and Tenements, and all other the Copyhold Lands of the said A.
B. in the County of S. to, or to the Use of the said I. G. his Heirs or
Assigns, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised or advised and required. And that at the time of such Surrender or
Surrenders, or other Assurance or Assurances to be made of the same Copyhold
Lands and Premises, all and singular the said Copyhold Lands and Premises,
so to be surrendered or otherwise conveyed as aforesaid, shall be free and
clear, and freely and clearly and absolutely acquitted, freed and discharged of
and from all former Surrenders and Forfeitures, and other Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, done, or wittingly and willingly suffered by him the
said A. B. or by any other person and persons whatsoever, one Lease made by the
License of the Lord of the Manor aforesaid, to K. F. etc. of etc. of one
Copyhold Message, etc. excepted.

A Covenant (in nature of a Mortgage) upon a Surrender of Copyhold Land, to
pay money at a certain time.
This Indenture made, etc. between Sir T. D. of P. etc. of the one part, and I.
H. of, etc. of the other part, Witneseth, That whereas the said Sir T. D. has
now lately surrendered into the Hands of the Lord or Lords of the Manor of W. in
the said County of S. by the Rod, according to the Custom of the said Manor, by
the Hands and acceptanc of R. C. and E. M. two of the customary Tenants of the
said Manor, all that Message, etc. To the Use of the said I. H. his Heirs and
Assigns, to hold according to the Custom of the said Manor, with a proviso, and
upon condition, That if the said Sir T. D. his, etc. shall and do well and
truly pay or cause to be paid, etc. at, etc. then the said Surrender to be void
and of none effect, as by a Note or Memorandum of the said Surrender taken out
of the Court, the day of the date hereof, (relation, etc.) more plainly
appears.

Now the said Sir T. D. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, Covenant, etc. to and with the said I. H. his Executors and
Administrators, by these presents (to pay the Money) at the day and place, and
in manner and form in the said Proviso or Condition of the said Surrender
before recited, limited and appointed for the payment thereof.

And farther also, That the said Sir T. D. at the time of the making of the
said Surrender before recited, had a good Estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple,
according to the Custom of the said Manor of W. of and in all and singular the
said Messuages, etc. before mentioned to be surrendered; and had good right, and
lawful and absolute power and authority in himself to surrender the same, and
every part thereof, unto the said I. H. and his Heirs in manner and form
aforesaid; and that the same are free from all former Surrenders and
Incumbranses whatsoever.

In default of payment, I. H. and his Heirs to enjoy the Premises for ever.

After default in payment, Sir T. D. covenants for farther Assurance -- be it
by Fine or Recovery, according to the Custom of the said Manor, Surrender,
Release or Confirmation, or all or any of the said ways or means in the Law
whatsoever, as by the said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or required.

Till default of payment I. H. to permit and suffer Sir T. D. to enjoy, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of Copyhold Lands, by Commissioners of Bankrupts.
This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. etc. the Commissioners of the one part, and
C. D. etc. (Assignees) of the other part. Whereas the King and Queens Majesty's
Commission under the Great Seal of England, grounded upon the several Statutes
made concerning Bankrupts, bearing date at Westminster, the day of, etc. last
past, has been awarded against E. F. of, etc. and directed to the said
Commissioners thereby giving full power and authority unto the said
Commissioners, four or three of them, whereof the said A. B. and P. B. to be
one to execute the same, as by the said Commission more at large appears. And
whereas the Commissioners, parties to these presents, or the major part of
them, or the major part of the Commissioners, by the said Commission
authorized, having begun to put the said Commission in Execution, upon due
examination of Witnesses and other good proof, and upon Oath before them taken,
do find, That the said E. D. has for the space of six years last past, or
thereabouts, used and exercised the Trade and profession of a, etc. in buying
and selling of, etc. at his House and Shop in S. aforesaid, and sought and
endeavored to get his living by buying and selling. And that the said E. F. so
seeking and endeavoring to get his living by buying and selling during the
time of his said Trading, did become justly and truly indebted, and still does
owe and stand indebted unto the abovenamed C. D. and other his Creditors, in
the sum of, etc. and being so indebted, he the said E. F. did in the judgment
of the said Commissioners, parties to these presents, become Bankrupt to all
intents and purposes, within the compass, true intent and meaning of several
Statutes made concerning Bankrupts, or within some or one of them, before the
date and suing forth the said Commission. And whereas also the said
Commissioners, parties to these presents, or the major part of the
Commissioners by the said Commission authorized, having also found out and
discovered that he the said E. F. at the time and since he became Bankrupt, was
and stood seized to him and his Heirs, according to the Custom of the Manor of
L. in the County of L. of and in, etc. All which Copyhold or customary
Premises, the greater part of the abovenamed Commissioners by the said
Commission authorized, have caused to be viewed and rented, and the same to be
appraised to the best value they can or may, and accordingly the same have been
viewed, rented and appraised by R. S. and T. V. men of sufficient skill and
ability for the doing thereof* in manner and form following (that is to say)
etc. as by the particular appraisment sent to the said Commissioners, it may
appear, the value whereof in the total amounts to the sum of, etc.

Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said Commissioners, parties to these
presents, by force and virtue of the said Commission, and of the several Acts
of Parliament therein mentioned and evpressed, for and with the consent, and at
the request of the Creditors of the said E. F. that have sued forth and
prosecuted the said Commission against the said E. F. for and in consideration
of the sum of, etc. unto the said Commissioners, by the said C. D. etc. to the
use, benefit and behoof, as well of themselves, as also of all other the
Creditors of the said E. F. that have sued forth and joined, and that shall
hereafter in due time join in the prosecution of the said Commission, according
to the Statutes in that behalf made and provided, well and truly contented and
paid, have by force and virtue of the said Commission, as much as in them the
said Commissioners lies, and they lawfully may, granted bargained and sold,
and by these presents do as much as in them lies, and they lawfully may,
grant, bargain and sell unto the said C. D. etc. all the aforesaid Copyhold or
customary Message, etc. now in the occupation of, etc. holden by Copy of Court
Roll of the aforesaid Manor of W. together with all Woods, Under-woods,
Commons, Pastures, etc. and Appurtenances whatsoever, unto all and every the
said Copyhold or other customary Premises thereby granted, and every part and
parcel thereof belonging or in any wise appertaining, and all the Estate,
Right, Title, Interest, Use, Possession, Reversion and Reversions, Remainder
and Remainders, Claim and Demand whatsoever, of the said E. F. of, in and to
all and singular the Premises hereby granted, and every part and parcel
thereof, To have and to hold all the said Copyhold or customary Message or
Tenement, etc. with their and every of their Appurtenances, to their proper use
and behoof, for ever, according to the Custom of the said Manor of L. Yiedling,
paying, performing and doing unto the said Lord of the aforesaid Manor, of whom
the Copyhold or customary Premises, hereby granted, are holden, all and every
the Fines, Rents, Duties and Services, of right used and accustomed to be
yielded, paid, performed and done for the same, etc. In Witness, etc.

A Surrender in Trust, and the Trust declared: Trustees, Covenant not to
commit, etc. any thing that may amount to a Forfeiture.
Whereas the said A. B. has with his own proper Moneys bought and purchased of
C. D. of, etc. Lord of the Manor of Belton, in the County of, etc. (amongst
other Lands and Tenements, in certain Articles indented and made between the
said C. D. of the one part, and the said A. B. of the other part, and bearing
date the, etc.) the customary Message, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
hereafter mentioned, that is to say, etc.. And whereas also the said E. F. G.
H. and I. K. customary Tenants of the said Manor, of and in the customary
Message, Lands and Premises, did by Surrender bearing date, etc. according to
the Custom of the said Manor, surrender into the Hands of the said C. D. Lord
of the Manor aforesaid, all and singular the customary Message, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments before mentioned, to the use and behoof of them the
said I. S. and P. S. their Heirs and Assigns, to the intent and purpose that
the said C. D. or other the Lord or Lords of the said Manor of, etc. or the
Steward or Stewards of the said Manor for the time being, at the next Court to
be holden for the said Manor, should admit or cause to be admitted them the
said I. S. and P. S. Tenants of and to all and singular the said, etc. as by
the said Surrender, relation being thereto had, may more at large appear. Now
this Indenture farther Witnesses, That the said I. S. and P. S. for the
avoiding and clearing all doubts, questions and ambiguities which may hereafter
arise or grow, touching or concerning the said Surrender taken in their Names,
as aforesaid, do, and either of them does by these presents voluntarily and
spontaneously acknowledge, express and declare, That the said Surrender so had
and taken as aforesaid, was had, taken, passed and done by the special
direction and appointment of the said A. B. in trust to and for the only use,
benefit and behoof of him the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to
and for none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. And farther the said J.
S. and P. S. do for themselves, their Heirs and Assigns, freely and absolutely
disclaim any other Estate, Right, Title, Interest, Claim or Demand, of, in, to,
or out of the said customary Message, Lands and Tenements, and Premises, or
any part thereof, but such only as they have by virtue of the Surrender
aforesaid, in and upon the Trust aforesaid. And the said I. S. and P. S. for
themselves, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, do covenant and grant, to and
with the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, that they the said I.S.
and P. S. their Heirs or Assigns, shall not and will not at any time or times
hereafter, act, do, permit, or willingly or wittingly suffer any act, matter or
thing whatsoever, that may amount to or cause a Forfeiture of the said
Premises, or any part thereof, or whereby the said Premises or any part
thereof may be destroyed, extinguished, impeached or encumbered. In Witness, etc.

An Infranchisement of Copyhold Lands made by a Lord of a Manor to his
Copyholder.
This Indenture made, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. Esquire, and E. B. of, etc.
Gentleman, Son and Heir apparent of the said A. B. Lord of the Manor of H. in
the County of Norfolk, of the one part, and T. P. of, etc. R. S. of, etc. and
T. P. of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. and E. B. as
well for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. of lawful money to them the
said A. B. and E. B. or one of them in hand paid, by the said T. P. R. S. and
T. P. at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, the receipt
whereof they the said A. B. and E. B. do by these presents acknowledge, and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, do acquit, exonerate and
discharge the said T. P. R. S. and T. P. and every of them, their and every of
their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for ever by these presents, as also
for diverse other good Causes and Considerations, them, and either of them
hereunto especially moving, Have granted, bargained, sold, enfeoffed,
delivered, aliened and confirmed, and by these presents do grant, bargain,
sell, enfeoff, deliver, alien and confirm unto the said T. P. R. S. and T. P.
their Heirs and Assigns, all those Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements,
Pastures, Feedings and Hereditaments whatsoever, situate, lying and being in K.
and S. or any other Town, in the said County of Norfolk, which are Copyhold or
customary Lands, holden of the Manor of H. within the said County of Norfolk,
and which the said T. P. holds by Copy of Court-Roll of the Manor aforesaid,
or of right ought to hold as Copyhold, or of some customary Tenure of the said
Manor of H. or of the Lord or Lords thereof, or of any other Manor or Lordship,
now or late of the said A. B. and E. B. or either of them; and the Freehold of
all and singular the said Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, Pastures,
Feedings and Hereditaments whatsoever, with the Appurtenances; and also all the
Freehold of the Inheritance of all those Copyhold and customary Messuages,
Cottages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, which were surrendered
lately by J. G. unto the use of the said T. P. and his Heirs; and also all such
Rents and Arrearages of Rents, Services, Suits, and other Demands whatsoever,
which now or at any time heretofore have been due or payable, or that shall or
ought to be hereafter due, payable or done, for all or any of the said
Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, Pastures, Feedings and Hereditaments
whatsoever; all which said Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, Pastures,
Feedings and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, were late in the occupation
of, etc. and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of all and
singular the Premises; all Rents and Reservations reserved or payable, by or
upon any Demises, Leases or Grants heretofore made or granted of the said
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof. To have and to hold all and singular
the said Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Pastures, Feedings and Hereditaments, and
all and singular the abovementioned or intended to be hereby granted and
bargained Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenances, unto the said
T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper and absolute
use and behoof of them the said T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs and Assigns
for ever; and the said A. B. and E. B. for themselves and every of them, their
and either of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do
covenant and grant to and with the said T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, and every of them, by these presents, in manner and form
following, That is to say, that they the said A. B. and E. B. or one of them,
are or is at the time of the sealing and delivery of these presents, lawfully,
jointly or solely seized in their or one of their Demesns, as of Fee, of and in
the said Manor of H. and of and in all and singular the said bargained
Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with the Appurtenances, of a
good, perfect and absolute Estate of Inheritance, in Fee-simple, without, etc.
and unto the use of them, or one of their Heirs and Assigns, without any manner
of Condition, power of Revocation, Limitation of Use or Uses, Trust, or other
matter or thing whatsoever, to alter, change, charge, incumber, impeach,
determine or make void the same. And that they the said A. B. and E. B. or one
of them, have or has at the time of the sealing and delivery of these
presents, and at the time of the execution of the first Estate hereby to be
made and granted, shall have full Power, good Right, and lawful Authority, to
Grant, Bargain and Sell all and every the said Messuages, Cottages, Lands,
Tenements, Pastures, Feedings, Hereditaments and Premises beforementioned, to
be hereby granted, bargained and sold, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, unto the said T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs and Assigns, in
manner and form aforesaid and according to the effect of these presents. And
also that all and every the said aforementioned to be hereby granted and
bargained Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements, Pastures, Feedings,
Hereditaments and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, now are, and at
all times hereafter shall and may be remain and continue unto the said T. P. R.
S. and T. P. their Heirs and Assigns, and every or any of them, free and clear,
and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise upon
reasonable request, well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless and
indemnified, by the said A. B. and E. B. their Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators, or some or one of them, of and from all and all manner of
former and other Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Estates, Wills, Entails,
Alienations, Joyntures, Right and Title of Dower, Statutes, Merchant, and of
the Staple, Judgments, Executions, Rents, arrearages of Rents, Mortgages, and
of and from all other Charges, Titles, Claims and Encumbrances whatsoever. And
farther the said A. B. and E. B. for themselves, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, do covenant and grant to and
with the said T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them by these presents, That they the said A. B. and E. B. and
either of them, their and either of their Heirs and Assigns, lawfully having,
claiming or pretending to have, or which hereafter shall or may lawfully claim,
or pretend to have any Estate Right, Title, Interest, Claim or Demand, of, in
or to the said bargained Premises, or of, in or to any part or parcel thereof,
by, from or under them the said A. B. and E. B. or either of them, their or
either of their Heirs and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, at the reasonable request, costs and charges in the Law of the
said T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs and Assigns, make, do, acknowledge or
cause to be made, done, executed, acknowledged and suffered, all and every such
farther act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises, assurances and
conveyances in the Law whatsoever of the said Premises, as by the said T. P.
R. S. and T. P. their Heirs or Assigns, their or any of their Council Learned
in the Law, shall be reasonably advised or required, be it by Fine or
Feoffment, Deed, or Deeds Enrolled or not Enrolled, Recovery or Recoveries with
single, double, or more Voucher or Vouchers, or by any other lawful ways or
means whatsoever, for the better assurance and sure making of the said
bargained Premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of
their Appurtenances, unto the said T. P. R. S. and T. P. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to deliver seisin.

A Lease of Copyhold Land, with the Lords License recited.
This Indenture, etc. Between A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. by virtue of a License,
before the sealing and delivery of these presents, by him procured and obtained
of and from E. F. Lord of the Manor of W. in the County of S. for the granting
and letting to Farm, the Tenements, etc. hereafter in and by these presents
demised to the said C. D. according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, Has demised leased and to farm let, and by these presents does
demise, lease, and to farm let, unto the said C. D. etc. all, etc. To have and
to hold the said, etc. with their and every of their Apputenances unto the said
C. D. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the, etc. for and during
the term, and unto the full end and term of, etc. from thenceforth next ensuing
and fully to be complete and ended, Yielding and paying therefore yearly and
every year, during the said term, unto the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns,
the yearly Rent or Sum of 3 s. of, etc. at, etc. (with clause of Distress,
etc.) and usual Covenants to repair, etc. And also the said C. D. for himself,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant,
promise and grant to and with the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns,
That he the said C. D. his Executors nor Assigns, nor any of them shall do, or
wittingly or willingly permit or suffer any act, matter or thing whatsoever,
which may forfeit, lose, or impair the Estate or Interest of the said A. B. of,
in or to the said hereby demised Premises, or of, in or to any part or parcel
thereof, or which may be otherwise hurtful or prejudicial to the said A. B. his
Heirs or Assigns, for or concerning the having, holding or enjoying of the
same, or any part thereof. And the said A. B. for himself, his, etc. does
covenant and grant, to and with the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns, that
he the said C. D. his Executors and Assigns, under the payment of the said
yearly Rent, and performance of the Covenants and Agreements aforesaid, which
on his and their parts and behalfs are and ought to be performed, shall and may
quietly and peaceably have, hold and enjoy all and singular the
beforementioned to be hereby demised Premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, during the term hereby demised, without any interruption, molestation
or eviction of him the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, or of any person or
persons whatsoever, now lawfully claiming, or that shall or may hereafter
lawfully claim any Estate, Right, Title or Interest, of, in or to the same, or
any part thereof, by, from or under him, them, or any of them. And also that he
the said A. B. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, or some or one of them, shall
and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter discharge, or upon
reasonable request save harmless and keep indemnified the said C. D. his
Executors and Assigns, of, for and from all Quit-Rents, payments, Duties and
Services to be had, paid, made or done, for or out of the said hereby demised
Premises, or any part thereof, to the said E. F. Lord of the Manor aforesaid,
his Heirs and Assigns.

A Release of a Copy hold Estate.
To all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, A. B. of, etc. and
C. B. of, etc. Brother of the said A. B. send Greeting, Whereas the said A. B.
is or was seized for and during the term of his natural Life, according to the
Custom of the Manor of W. in the, etc. of and in one Copyhold Message, or
Tenement, with the Appurtenances in W. aforesaid, being parcel of the said
Manor, late in the Tenure or Occupation of, etc. deceased, and of and in
several parcels of Land, Meadow and Pasture, to the same belonging, or reputed
part thereof. And whereas the said C. B. has a Copyhold Estate for the term
of his Life, in the said Message and Premises, in Reversion, after the death
of the said A. B. as by the Court Rolls of the said Manor of W. more at large
appears. Now know ye therefore, That the said A. B. and C. B. for and in
pursuance of an Agreement heretofore made and concluded, between the said A. B.
E. F. Esquire Lord of the said Manor of W. of and for the said Copyhold Estate,
and for and in consideration of the Sum of, etc. of lawful money of England, by
him the said E. F. in hand paid, to the said A. B. and C. B. or one of them,
before the sealing and delivery hereof, the receipt whereof they do hereby
acknowledge, and for other good causes and considerations them hereunto moving,
have granted, yielded up, surrendered, remised, released and quit claimed, and
by these presents they the said A. B. and C. B. do, and either of them does
grant, yield up, surrender, remise, release and for ever quit claim unto the
said E. F. and unto F. C. of, etc. and to their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators for ever (which said E. F. and F. C. are, or one of them now is,
Lord of the said Manor of W. and are, or one of them now is in the actual
possession of the said Premises) their said several and respective Copyhold
Estates in the said Message, Lands and Premises, and in any part or parcel of
the same, and all their and either of their Estate, as well Freehold as
Copyhold, Right, Title, Interest, Possession, Claim and Demand whatsoever,
either in Law or Equity, or according to the Custom of the said Manor, or
otherwise howsoever. And the said A. B. and C. B. do for themselves, their
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, covenant and grant to and with the said E.
F. and F. C. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these presents, that
they the said A. B. and C. B. shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, upon request, and at the Costs and Charges in the Law of the
said E. F. and F. C. or either of them, do and perfect, or cause to be done and
perfected, all such lawful and reasonable acts and things in the Law, for the
surrendering, barring, and extinguishing of their or either of their Right and
Estate, as well Freehold as Customary, and all their or either of their Claim
or Demand, in or to the said Message or Tenement and Premises, or any of
them, as by them the said E. F. or either of them, their or either Heirs or
Assigns, of the said Manor, shall be reasonably advised and required, In
Witness, etc.

Copy of a Court Roll, or an Extract of a Surrender out of the Rolls of the
Court.
Ad curiam Baron F. R. Mil and Baronet, Dom manerij pred ibid tentur die Lune
videlicet secundo die Junij Anno Domini millesimo sextentesimo nonagesimo
Annoque Regni Domini (...) Gulielmi and Mariae, Dei gratia Anglie, Scotie,
Francie and Hibernie Regis and Regine fidei defensor, etc. primo coram S. C.
Arm Senescallo ibid Irrotulatur sic.

Ad hanc curiam venit A. B. unus custum tenen Manerij pred in propria persona
sua and sursum reddidit in manus Domini per manus Senescalli sui pred secundum
consuetud Manerij pred unum messuag^ sive tenementum and december acras pasture
cum pertin in A. pred infra Manerium pred ad opus and usum C. D. hered and
assignatur suorum imperpetuum. Cui Dominus per senescallu pd concessit inde
seisinam, per virg^ Habend sibi and heredibus suis Tenend de Domino per virgam
ad voluntatem Domini secundum consuetudinem manerij pd per redditus and
servitia inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur. Et dat Domino de fine pro
ingressu suo inde habend quadragintur solid fecit fidelitatem and admissus est
tenens.

Another form according to Littleton.
Ad hanc curiam venit A. de B. and sursum reddidit in ead curia unum
messuagium, etc. in manus Domini ad usum C. de D. and heredum suorum (vel hered
de corpore suo exeuntium vel pro termino vite, etc.) Et super hoc venit
predictus C. de D. and cepit de Domino in ead curia messuag^ pdictur, etc.
Habendum and tenendum, sibi and heredibus suis (vel sibi and hered de corpore
suo exeuntibus vel sibi ad terminum vite, etc. Ad voluntatem Domini secundum
consuetud manerij faciendo and reddendo inde redditus servitia and
consuetudines inde prius debita and consueta, etc. Et dat Domino pro fine, etc.
Et fecit Domino fidelitatem, etc.

Ad hanc curiam H. H. filius and here is W. H. defunct' sursum reddidit in manus
Dom Manerij pdictur per Senescallum pdictur totum, etc. ad usum pdictur H. pro
termino vite sue, and post ejus decessum ad usum W. H. and heredibus sui^s per
se e corpore Mariae tunc Vxoris sue legitime procreatur sive procreand. Et pro
defectu talis exitus ad usum rectorum heredum, etc. Et superinde ad istam
eandem curiam vener pdictur H. H. and W. H. in propriis personis suis et petunt
se inde admitti tenentes, unde Dominus pdictur per Seescalluu suu pdictur
secundum consuetudinem Manerij pdictur concessit eisdem H. H. and W. H. ead
tenementa cum pertinentiis Habend and tenend ead tenementa cum pertinentiis eid
H. pro and durante vita sua naturali. Et post ejus decessum eid W. and
heredibus suis per se e corpore Mariae tunc Vxoris suis legitime procreatur
sive procreand and pro defectu talis exitus rectis, etc. imperpetuum secundum
consuetud Manerij p^dictur and redditur Herriot sectur curie consuetur and
servitia inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur and sic iidem H. and W.
admissi sunt inde tenentes and dedere Domino de fine pro tali ingressu suo sic
inde habend quatuor libras and fecerunt Domino fidelitatem Datur sub Sigillo
Senescalli pdictur die and Anno supradicto. Per me S. E. Senescal

Surrender of Copyhold Lands for Life, the Remainder in Fee, taken by the
Steward out of Court.
Ad hant Curiam Testatum est per A. H. Seneschallum Cu^ie pdictur quod primo
die Maij Anno Regni dicti Dom Regis nunc tricesimo A. B. geu jacens in extremis
sursum reddidit in manus Domini, per manus dicti Senescall extra curiam in
presentia E. F. G. H. and J. K. secundum consetudinem manerij pdictur unum,
etc. infra manner pdictur vocatur Nocks Farm, ad opus and usum E. Vxoris ejusdem
E. remanere inde S. T. and U. W. filiis natu minoribus pdictur A. B. and hered
suis proviso tamen semper and sub hac condition quoth si contingat aliqm pdictor
S. and V. obire sine heredibus de corpore suo exeun quod tunc ipse qui
supervixerit habebit and gaudebit pdictur, etc. Et cetera premissa perdicta cum
pertin sibi and heredibus suis imperpetuum and super hoc venit hic in cur
pdictur E. in propria persona sua and petit se admitti ad, etc. Et cetera
premissa pdictur cum pertin cui Dominus per Senescallum suum concessit inde per
virgam seisinam habend sibi in forma pdictur ad voluntatem Domini secundum
consuetud manerij pdictur. Et dat Domino de fine pro ingressu suo inde habend
vigintur solid fecit fidelitatem and admissus est inde tenens.

A Surrender out of Court of a Reversion to the use of a Man and his Wife, and
the Heirs of the Body of the Husband, the Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of
the Wife, the Remainder to the Husband of the present Tenant for Life in Tail,
the Remainder to the present Tenant for Life in Tail, the Remainder to another
in Fee, with the Lords acknowledgment of a satisfaction of a Fine; the
Surrenderor surrendreth all his Right, etc. to the Husband and Wife, the
present Tenant for Life, to the Uses aforesaid.
Ad hanc curiam Testatum est per predictur T. P. Senescallum ibid quod, etc.
die, etc. Anno, etc. T. J. venit coram prefato Senescallo in propria persona
sua and sursum reddidit in manus Domini per manus dicti Seneschalli extra cur
in presentia L. D. C. K. and J. T. secundum consuetud manerij pdictur
reversionem unius Messuagij sive Tenementi sexdecim acras prati, etc. ac
reversionem duorum Cottagiorum, etc. cum pertin in, etc. infra manerium
pdictur. Ad opus and usum D. T. and K. Vxor ejus and heredibus de corpore
pdictur D. legitime procreatur cum post mortem cujusdam A. modo Vxor H. J.
acciderint. Et pro defectu talis exitus de corpore pdictur D. T. legitime
procreatur remanere inde prefatur K. Vxori prefatur D. et heredibus de corpore
ejusdem K. legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere inde
prefatur H. J. and hered de corpore suo Legitime procreatur and pro defectu
talis exitus remanere inde prefato A. Vxori pdictur J. H. and heredibus de
corpore ejusdem A. Legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere
inde V. S. and heredibus suis imperpetuu Quibus, quidem D. T. and K. Vxor ejus
Dominus per Senescallu suum pdictur Dom ad hanc curiam concessit inde per
virgam seisinam Habend and Tenend pdictur Messuagium Cotta-and cetera premissa
pdictur cum pertin in reversione secundum consuetud Manerii pdicti cum post
mortem pdictur A. Vxoris pdictur H. J. acciderint prefatur D. and K. Vxori ejus
and heredibus de corpore pdictur D. Legitime procretur and pro defectu talis
exitus remanere inde prefato K. Vxori prefatur D. and heredibus de corpore
ejusdem K. Legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere inde
prefatur H. J. and heredibus de corpore suo Legitime procreatur and pro defectu
talis exitus remanere inde prefatur A. Vxori pdictur H. J. and heredibus de
corpore ejusdem A. Legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere
inde pfatur V. S. and heredibus suis imperpetuum ad voluntatem Domini secundum
consuetudinem Manerii pdictur per redditur and servitia inde prius debitur and
de jure consuetur Et pdictur D. and K. Vx. ejus dant Domino de fine pro tali
statu suo inde habend centum solid and admissi sunt inde tenentes modo and
forma predictur etc predictur Dominus concessit se satisfactur de predicto fine
inde habend pro Messuagio Cottagiis and ceteris premissis predictur cum pertin
de predictur* D. and K. Vxore ejus cum predictur Messuagiu Cottagia and cetera
premissa pdictur cum pertin post mortem predictur A. Vxoris predictur J. H. ad
manus sua devenerint Et postea ad hanc curiam venit predictur F. J. in propria
persona sua and hic in plena curia sursum reddidit in manus Domini tota jus
titulu clameu and interesse sua in omnibus predic Messuagio Cottagiis* and
ceteris premissis cum pertin ad usus predictur and ulteris remisit relaxavit
and omnino pro se and heredibus suis quietur clamavit prefatur H. J. and A.
Vxori ejus totum jus titulum clameum interesse and demand sua que ipse T^^.
unquam habuit in predictur Messuagio Cottagiis and ceteris premissis predictur
cum pertin habend and tenend omnia and singula pdictur Messuagium and Cottagia
and cetera premissa pdictur cum pertin pfatur H. and J. Vxori ejus pro termino
vite pdictur A. and post decessum ejusdem A. remanere omniu pdictur terraru and
tenementor cum pertin pfatur D. T. and K. Vxori ejus and heredibus de corpore
pdictur D. Legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere inde
pfatur K. Vxori pdictur D. and heredebus de corpore ejusdem K. Legitime
procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere inde pfatur H. J. and
heredibus de corpore pdictur H. J. Legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis
exitus remanere inde pfatur A. Vxor perdictur H. J. and heredibus de corpore
ejusdem A. Legitime procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere inde
pdfatur V. S. and heredibus suis imperpetuu ad voluntatem Domini secundu
consuetud manerii pdictur, etc.

After abatement and intrusion the Lord seizes the Lands, and grants them to
the Abator for term of Life, Remainder to the next Heir of the Disseisee and in
Tail, Remainder in Fee.
Compertu est per homagiu ibid quod quidam O. B. Miles defunctur tenuit de
Domino hujus Manerii die quo obiit sibi and heredibus suis ad voluntatem Domini
secundum consuetudinem Manerii pdictur unum Messuag^, etc. cum pertin in A.
pdictur infra Manner pdictur and quod pdictur O. obiit de tali statu suo inde
seisitur per sex annos ^am ultimo elapsos and amplius and quod quida H. R. in
jure Vxoris sue quonda uxoris L. B. Arm filii pdictur O. B. immediate post
decessu pdictur O. B. in pdictur Messuag^, etc. and cetera premissa pdicta cum
pertin abatavit intravit and intrusit super possession Dn^i Manerii pdictur in
exheredetation dicti Dom Manerii pdictur successor suor and contra consuetud
Manerii sui pdictur a tempore cujus contrarii meomria hominu non existit in eod
Manerio usitatur and approbatur and exitus and proficua inde a tempore mortis
pdictur O. B. ad suu propriu usu hucusque habuit and percepit nor capiend
pdictur Messuag^ etc. and cetera pmissa pdictur cum pertin extra manus Dom
Manerii predictur nec fecit inde Dn^o fine pro eisdem secundum consuetud
Manerii sui pdictur and sic pdictur H. R. tenuit and occupavit pdictur
Messuag^. and per pdictur sex annos ultur elapsos and amplius contra consuetud
Manerii pdictur. Ideo pceptu est ballivo Manerii pdictur seisire in manus
Domini pdictur Messuag^, etc. and cetera premissa pdictur cum pertin quousque,
etc. Et Dominus modo habens inde seisinam ad humilem petitionem pdictur H. R.
ex gratia sua speciali ad hanc curiam concessit extra manus suas pdictur
Messuag^, etc. pfatur R. H. and A. Vxori ejus ad terminum vite ipsius A. and
liberata est eis seisina per virgam Habend and tenend pdictur Messuag^, etc.
pfatur R. and A. ad terminum vite ipsius A. ad voluntatem Domini secundum
consuetud Manerii pdictur and post decessum ipsius A. remanere inde quibusdam
D. T. and K. Vxori ejus consanguin and proxime heredibus pdictur O. B.
videlicet filie pdictur L. B. filij O. B. and heredibus de corpore pdictur D.
T. Legitime pdictur procreatur and pro defectu talis exitus remanere inde
pfatur K. etc. (with Remainder over in Fee to V. S.) tenend de Domino per
virgam ad voluntatem Domini secundum consuetudinem Manerii pdictur per redditur
and servitia inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur Et tam pdictur H. R. and
A. Vxor ejus quam pdictur D. T. and K. Vxor ejus dant Domino de fine pro tali
ingressu suo inde habend de and in premissis 5 libras fecer Dom fidelitatem and
admissi sunt inde tenentes modo and forma pdictis, etc.

Surrender out of Court to several Uses upon a Marriage Settlement.
Compertum est per Homagium ibid quod A. B. qui tenuit (ut supra) unu Messuag^
sive Tenementum vocatur, etc. in A. infra Manerium pdictur citra ultur Curia
and extra Curia sursu reddidit in manus Dn^i per manus H. K. and J. W. duor
custum tenen Manerii pdictur secund consuetud Manerij illius pdictur Messuagiu
seu Tenementu and cetera premissa pdictur cum pertin ad opus and usu pdictur A.
B. and Hered and Assign suor usque ad solempnization cujusda intensi marritag^
(permissione Divina) cito habitur and solempnizatur inter quenda C. D. filium
and heredem apparen pdictur A. B. ex una part and quandam A. D. de A. pdictur
Spinster ex altera part and ab and immediate post solempnization ejusd
Maritag^ tunc ad opus and usu pdictur A. B. pro and durante termino vite sue
naturalis, and ab and immediate post ejus decessum tunc ad opus and usum S.
Vxoris ejus pro and durante termino vite sue naturalis and ab and immediate
post decessus (Anglice) deceases ipsorum A. B. and S. Vxoris ejus and decessum
eor superviventis tunc ad opus and usum pdictur C. D. pro and durante termino
vite sue naturalis and ab and immediate post decessus ipsor pdictur A. B. and
S. Vxor ejus C. D. and decessum eoru superviventis tunc ad opus and usu pdictur
A. Vroris sue intense pdictur C. D. pro and durante termino vite sue naturalis
and ab and immediate post decessus ipsoru pdictur J. B. and S. Vxor ejus C. D.
and A. Vxoris sue intense and decessum eorum superviventes tunc ad opus and
usum heredu de corpore pdictur C. D. super corpus pdictur A. legitime
procreatur vel fore procreand Et pro defectu talis exitus tunc ad opus and usum
Hered and Assign pdictur C. D. imperpetuu Tenend de Dn^o per virgam ad
voluntatem Dn^i secundi consuetud Manner pdictur Qui quidem A. B. and S. Vxor
ejus citra ultur Curiam obierunt Et modo ad hanc Curiam venit C. D. in propria
psona sua and petit se admitti ad pdictur Messuagiu sive tenementu and cetera
premissa pdicta rum pertiu Cui Dn^s per Senescalu suu concessit inde per virgam
seisinam Habend and Tenend eid C. D. and Assign suis pro termino vite sue
naturalis remanere inde prout superius Limitatur ac tenend de Dn^o per redditur
per annum 50 s. and alia servitia inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur Et
dat Domino de fine, etc. fecit fidelitatur and admissus est inde tenens.

Presentment of a Surrender made in Court, with the Admittance of the Tenant
next Heir.
Iuratores pdictur psentant super sacramentum suum quod J. S. custumarius
tenens Manerii pdictur qui tenuit sibi and heredibus suis de Dn^o hujus Manerii
secundum consuetud Manerii pdictur unum Messuagium sive tenementum, etc. cum
pertin in A. ante hanc curiam obiit inde seisitus and quod H. S. est unicus
frater and here is proxim pdictur T. S. and plene etatis qui presens hic in Curia
petit se admitti tenentem ad omnia terras and tenementa custumaria de quibus
ipse pdictur T. S. obiit inde seisitus videl ad pdictur Messuag^, etc. and
cetera premissa pdictur cum pertin in A. pdictur infra Manner pdictur cui quidem
H. S. Dominus per Senescallum pdictur concessit inde per virgam seisinam Habend
and Tenend Domino per virgam ad voluntatem Dom secundum consuetud Manerii
pdictur per redditus and servitia inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur and
dat Domino de fine pro ingressu suo inde habend december in libras and fecit Dom
fidelitatem and admissus est inde tenens.

The finding of the death of a Tenant and of the Lands and Heir with the
admission of the Tenant, and a Presentment made in Court between the Heir and
his Mother touching her Dower, and the Mothers Release of her Dower.
Iuratores etc. presentant quod R. B. unus custumar tenen manerii pdictur obiit
post ultur Curiam solus seisitus de and in diversis custumariis terris and
Tenementis tentur de manerio pdictur in Dominico suo ut de feodo secundum
consuetud manerii pdictur and quod N. B. est unicus filius and here is proximus
pdictur R. secundum consuetud manerii pdictur and plene etatis vigintur and
unius annor and ultra qui presens hic in Curia petit se admitti tenentem ad
omnia and singula pmissa predicta videltur ad unum tenementu, etc. tentur per
redditum quinque solidorum 9 d. and ad unum clausum, etc. tentur per redditum 3
s. 4 d. per annum and ad, etc. and sectam curie omnia que quidem pmissa cum
pertin pdictur R. B. nuper cepit in curia manerii pdictur de sursum redditione
J. B. jun prout apud Curiam hic tentur die Martii 8 die Octobris Anno, etc.
apparet ac etiam ad unam aliam peciam terre custumar, etc. continen 12 acras,
etc. pdictur R. B. super hic in Curia manerii pdictur cepit sibi and heredibus
suis post sursum redditionem inde factur per pdictur J. W. prout apud Curiam,
etc. before liquet and apparet que quidem 12 acre fuere tentur de Domino
Manerii pdictur per redditum 14 s. and sectam Cur and admissus est inde tenens
cui quidem N. seisina tradita est sibi and heredibus suis per virgam ad
voluntatem Domini secundum consuetud manerii pdictur per servitia and annuales
redditus pdictur salvo jure, etc. and dat Dn^o de fine, etc. and fecit
fidelitatem, Et postea ad eandem Curiam vener pdictur N. B. and E. vid relictur
pdictur R. B. and dant curie hic intelligi quod ipsi sunt agreati inter semet
ipsos de and concernen dote pdictur E. in pmissis secundn consuetudinem manerii
pdictur super quo pdictur E. presens hic in curia remisit and relaxavit in
manus Dom pdictur totam dotem and titulum dotis sue and demand quodcunque illi
pertin secundum consuetudinem manerii pdictur de and in omnibus and singular
custumariis terris and tenementis tentur de manerio pdictur que nuper fuere
pdictur R. B. nuper viri sui ad opus and usum pdictur N. B. in (plena and
pacifica sua possessione inde existen) and Hered and Assign suorum imperpetuum
ita quod pdictur E. abhinc in posterum nullo modo requiret clamaret sive
demandaret aliquam dotem de in sive ad pmissa vel aliquam parcellam inde
secundum consuetud manerii pdictur sed inde and de and absqe omnibus actionibus
and demandis talis dotis concernen pmissa erit preclusa and exclusa imperpetuu
per hoc presens Irrotulamentu and pro hac remis^ and relaxatione pdictur E. N.
dedit pdictur E. 104 l. 3 s. 4 d. legalis monete Anglie and dedit Dom de fine
etc. pro relaxatione pdictur, etc.

Presidents of Copies of Court Rolls, Presentment by the Homage of the
Copyhold Customs. Several sorts of Surrenders, Absolute, Conditional.
Surrenders to the use of ones last Will. Presentment that Copyhold Lands are
Enfranchised. Admittances. Admittance by Guardian. License to demise for years.
Releases. Proclamations for not coming in and taking up the Estate, and Seizure
by the Lord, etc.
Manner. de L.
VIc Franc Plig^ cum Cur Baron A. B. Arm and C. D. Gen Dominor Manerii pdictur
ibidem tentur die Martis Scilicet decimo septimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis
Iacobi secundi quarto Annoque Dn^i 1688. cora S. C. Ar Senescalo ibid per Paten.

F. E. Jur. T. S. Jur. Inquisitio Magna.
I. C. Jur. T. S. Jur. I. S. Jur. T. W. Jur. I. R. Jur. R. P. Jur. R. A. Jur. E.
K. Jur. M. D. Jur. I. H. Jur. R. S. Jur. D. A. Jur. I. E. Jur. I. S. Jur. A. C.
Jur. C. E. Jur. S. W. Jur. R. S. Jur. B. M. Jur.
Communis Finis sol in Cur.

Communis Finis vjs.
Iuratores pdictur super Sacram suu pdictur dicunt quod dant Dn^o Communem Finem
semper ad hunc diem vj s.

Iuratores pdictur dicunt and presentant quod E. F. incroachavit super Vastu
hujus Manerii prope T. Lane and M. Lane duce n erga W. and E. B. and cum
sepibus and fossis partem vasti pdictur inclusit Ideo Ordinatur est per Cur hic
quod E. vastum pdictur sic ut pfertur Inclusu patifaciat infra december dies nunc
prox' sequen Subpena vj. s. vij d.

Iuratores pdictur super sacram suu pdictur ulterius dicunt and psentant quoth T.
S. inchochavit super vastu pdictur and cum postib longuriis and palis altam
viam regiam in W. pdictur ducen ad villam, etc. de C. B. pdictur obstruxit Ideo
consideratur est per Cur hic quoth pdictur T. obstructionem pdictur sic ut pfertur
per ipsn M. factam removeat infra tempus pdictur Subpena xx d.

Iuratores pdictur super Sacram suum pdictur ulter presentant quoth N. D un
Constabular Parochie de, etc. pdictur pro Anno preterito infra Iurisdictionem
hujus let Officium suum Constabnlar negligentur exercuit Ideo ipse in
misericordia x s.

Iuratores pdictur super Sacram pdictur ulterius dicunt quoth ipsi in omnib
concernen inclusion magni vasti vocatur, etc. concordant cum presentamento
homagii ad hanc Cur factur.

Iuratores pdict super Sacram suu pdictur ulterius dicunt quod L. W. etc. and
I. S. de S. M. sunt and quilibet eor est resien and Commoran infra
jurisdictionem hujus Let and licet debito modosummonitur and exactur fuer and
quilibet eorum summonitur and exactus fuit non Comperuer nec eoum alter
comperuit sed defaltur fecer and quilibet eor defaltur fecit ideo in
misericordia sunt and quilibet eor in misericordia est xij d.

Amerciamenta pdictur afferatur fuer per S. S. T. S.
Iur qui ad inde Iur fuer.

Nomina Officiar' pro Anno Sequente.
Eligerunt L. P. and R. W. fore Constabular Parochie de, etc. per anno futuro
qui quidem R. W. Iuratur fuit ad Officium illud been and fidel performand and
exequend eliger I. S. and H. fore subc^on stabular Parochie predictur pro Anno
pdictur qui quidem I. S. Iuratus fuit.

Eligerunt T. S. and I. S. fore cervicie gustatores pro Anno futuro.

Eliger H. B. and T. B. fore Sigillatores pro Anno futuro.

Eliger W. E. fore corij Custod Com^nis pro Anno futuro.

Homage and Presentment of Custom of the Manor.
Homag. S. H. Gen S. T. I. H. W. A. W. H. I. H. Jur. I. C. Jur. C. H. Jur. I.
R. Jur. I. F. Jur. C. N. Jur. R. C. Jur. T. S. Jur.


Homag^. pdictur sup Sacram suu pdictur dic quod R. N. Arm I. H. and I. K. sunt
tenentes Dn^or and debent sectur Cur hic and ad hunc diem defaltur fecer and
quilibet eor defaltur fecit Ideo quilibet in misericordia 1 s.

Presentment of Copyhold Custom.
Item presentant pro Cusiumis hujus Manerii prout sequitur (viz.)

Imprimis quoth Cur Letur and Cur Baron teneri debentur infra Maneriu super diem
Martis in qualibet septimana Pasche Annuatim.

Item quod ad hujus Cur tempore in eujus contrarin memoria hominum non existit
Constab and sub Constab electur fuer pro illa perte Parochie de S. M. que jacet
infra maneriu pdictur nec non duo Constab and sub Constab C. B. and unu
utriusque pro E. B. alia Villa.

Item quoth quilibet Tenens Custumar maerem and al Arbores super Tenementur sun
crescen desecare possit absque licentia Dn^or.

Item quod Homagium Iur ad quamlibet Cur super eor visu alicujus Nocumentur vel
inchrochiament inter Tenen Custumar per mulcta sive pena redigere valiant.

Item quod super visum et presentamentur per homag^ quod aliqu. Customar
Tenementur, etc. fit in decasu si Tenens hujusmodi Tenementi illud infra tal
tempus convenien qual homagin propterea appunctuavit non reparabit Tenementur
suu sic in decasu Domino forisfacit.

Item quod duo Tenentes Custumar Iuratur vel alter edrum unacu Balliva Manerij
pdictur fursum redditiones in extremis tantur capere possunt Quodque nullus al
preter Senescalll Dominorum per paten vel ejus deputatur sursum redditiones
extra Cur cape possit.

Item quod omnes Admissiones per Dominos datur extra Cur necnon omnes sursum
redditiones per ipsos sic captur homagio ad prox Cur communicari debeant.

Item quoth omnes sursu redditiones per Senescal vel ejus Deputatur seu per
Tenentes Iur captur ad Cur prox sequen Capcon hum^odi sursu redditionis
presentari debeant.

Item quoth feoda Cur sunt prout sequitur (viz.) pro qualibet singul sursu
redditione secreta examinatione femine nuptur ac admissione in Cur.

s. d. Senescallo 6 8 Clerico 2 8 Homagio 0 4 Ballivo 0 4 10

Quodque Omnes duplices sursum redditiones and Admissiones solvant feoda duplic
Ac sil^iter omnes sursu redditiones Examinationes and Admisssiones ad Curias
Speciales Necnon Omnes sursu redditiones captur per Senescallum extra Cur.

Item quoth omnes inhabitants infra Paroch^ etc. fodere valiant ac a tempore quo
Hom memoria in contrar non existit fod erunt Arenam. Anglice Loam infra infra
magnu vastum sive Communiam ibidem vocatur B. C. pro reparatione altaru viar
Parochie illius necnon pro emendation and reparation tenementor suor infra
dict' Parochiam absque solutione aliq' Dominis hujus Manerii proinde.

Item presentant quoth propositiones ad Cur prior per Dominos proposiit in ordinem
ad includend Communiam in novem separalib^ Paragraphiis contentur sunt in
Opinionib Iur nullo modo ad advantag^ Tenentiu hujus Manerii ac pro inde
propositiones illas idon non putant.

1. Pro eo quod proportio perinde per Dominos clamatur existens integra tertia
pars valde irrationabilis videtur.

2. Pro eo quod tenura precipue in relatione ad liberos tenentes nec non
redditus proinde reservatur est in eorum opinione per magna and irrationabilis.

3. Pro eo quod super totam materiam opinio est Iuratorum quod si vetus
Communis Restrictio renovatur and confirmatur esset multo plus foret pro
beneficio Parochie de, etc. predictur quam aliter esse potest per includend
Communiam pdictur quodque quedam particularis Curia capiatur pro prevention
nimie Onerationis Communie pdict pro futuro. Ac ad intentionem ill hoc homagium
Senescall pdictur desiderant quod certum numerum Customar and liberorum
Tenentium nominare placebit ad adjudicand certum numerum Catallorum Ovium, etc.
que dehinc super Communiam pdictur depascentur conservabuntur quodque cuncta
hujusmodi catalla cum quodam Communi signo signentur.

Surrender by Baron and Feme.
Nunc de rebus ad Cur Baron spectan.

Ad hanc Curiam vener T. W. gen Custom Tenens hujus Manerii and P. Vx' ejus and
(ipse P. pdictur existens prius sola and secreta examinatur per Senesc pd prout
mos est) sursu redd in manus Dominorum per manus Senesc pd per virgam secundum
consuetud Manerii pdictur totur illu Customar Messuag^ sive Tenementur
communiter vocatur sive cognitur per nomen de, etc. cum Curtilagio and omnibus
aliis ptinen ad inde spectan sive pertin scituatur jacen and existen in C.
pdictur Ad opus and usum W. S. de, etc. pdictur pistoris hered and Assignatur
suorum imperpetuum Qui quidem W. psen hic in Cur petit se admitti ad pmissa
pdicta cui Dn^i per Senescallum suum pdictur concesser inde seisinam per virgam
Habend sibi and heredibus suis Tenend de Dominis per virgam in villenagio ad
voluntatem Dominorum secundum consuetud Manerij pdictur per redditur servic and
consuetur inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur Et dat Dominis jure fecit
fidelitatem Et admissus est inde tenens, Finis xvj l. Redd.
etc.

Surrender ad usum ultimae voluntatis.
W. ad usum ult. voluntat.
Ad hanc Curiam ven T. R. Gen Customar Tenens hujus Manerii and in plena Curia
sursum redd in manus Dominorum per manus Seneschalli sui pdictur per virgam
secundum consuetud Manerii pdictur totur illud Customar Claus^ sive parcella
prati communiter vocatur sive cognitur per nomen de, etc. jacen and existen in
C. predictur continen per Estimationem sexdecim Acr sive plus sive minus ad
opus and usum talis person sive personar and pro tali statu sive statibus qual
perdictur T. R. per ultima voluntatem sua aut per aliquod aliud scriptur sub
manu and sigillo suis limitabit declarabit sive appunctuabit.

Grant of Wardship of a Tenant.
Custod. S. and Commiss. H.
Cum ad Cur Baron hic tentam die Mercurij scil^t vicesimo nono die Februarii
nunc ultimo preterito Custod tam Corporis quam Tenementorum S. M. Infantis
Custom Tenen hujus Manerii concess. fuit I. M. Ballivo Manerii pdictur durante
Minori etate sua, etc. Modo ad hanc Cur Domin Manerii pdictur receperunt custod
Ward sue pdictur extra manus Balli pdictur and in plena Cur concesser
custodiam tam corporis quam Tentur pdictur S. M. W. H. de etc. durante minori
etate dicte S. inveniend, etc. and Reddend, etc.

Surrender of Right, Title and Interest to two by moieties.
Ad hanc Cur ven C. N. and A. N. and Uxor. ad N. and C.
Vxor ejus Et pdictur A. ( eristen prius sola and secretur examinata per
Senescallum pdictur prout mos est) sursum reddider in manus Dominorum Manerii
pdictur per manus Senescalli sui pdictur per virgam secund consuetud Manerii
pdictur totur jus pdictur C. A. Statur Titul Clam Interesse and demand sua que
unquam habuer vel eorum alter habuit habent seu quovismodo in futuro habere
poterint de and in uno Clauso terre continen per estimationem novem Acr jacen
prope, etc. Copia Facta.
cum omnibus suis pertinentiis ad opus and usum I. N. Iun and E. N. sororis
p^dictur I and modo Vxor I. C. de Villa S. A. in Com H. pistor Qui quidem I.
and E. sunt in plena possessione and seisina Clausi pdictur and hered dic I.
and E. imperpetuum Tenend unam medietatem Clausi pdictur pdictur I. N. and
heredibus suis and tenend alteram medietatem Clausi pdictur cum pertin pdictur
E. D. and heredibus suis Qui quidem I. and E. presen hic in Cur petur se
admitti ad premissa pdictur quibus Domini per Senescallum suu perdictur
concesser inde seisinam per virgam habend ipsis and hered suis in forma pdictur
Tenend de Dominis per virgam ad voluntatur Dominorum secundum consuetud Manerii
pdictur per redditur servic and consuetur inde prius debitur and de jure
consuetur Et dant Dominis de fine Et pd^ctur I. N. fecit fidelitatem suam sed
fidelitas dictur E. respectuatur, etc. Et admissi sunt inde Tenentes.

Admittance of a next Heir.
Cum ad Curiam Baron hic tentam xxix. die Feb. ultur preterito compertur fuit
per Homag^ quod W. M. Sen Arm citra tunc ultur Curiam and ante Curia illam
obiit seisitur de diversis terris and tenementis Custom tentur de Manerio
pdictur Et quod E. M. fuit neptis and prox' here is Domini W. M. sen Cumque etiam
ad Cur Baron hic tenta vicesimo tertio die martii silitur nunc ultur preteritur
comptur fuit per homag^ quod pdictur E. M. citra tunc ultur Curiam and ante
Curiam ill de terris customar predictur inter all obiit seisita Et quod M. Vxor
I. K. de, etc. gen Amita pdictur E. and filia unica pdictur W. M. fuit prox'
here is dicte defuncte Modo ad hanc Curiam ven pdicta M. Et petit se Admitti ad
totur illud Customarium Messuagium sive Tenementm in L. pdictur communiter
vocatur sive cognitur per nomen de, etc. cum Areis Gardinis and pertinentiis
adinde spectantibus ac etiam ad totos illos separales Compos vel Clausa pasture
and prati vocatur le, etc. continen insimul per estimationem triginta Acr sive
plus sive minus Que discendebant eid M. per mortem dicte E. cui Domini per
Senescallum suum pdictur concesser inde seisinam per virgam Habend sibi and
heredibus suis Tenend de Dominis per virgam ad voluntatem Dominorum secundum
consuetudinem Manerii predictur per redditur servic and consuetud inde prius
debitur and de jure consuetur and dat Dominis de fine and admissa est inde
tenens sed fidelitas respectuatur, etc.

A Surrender by one in extremis by the hands of two customary Tenants, to the
Use of his last Will, which is recited, To one for Life, the Remainder over,
Tenant for Life surrenders to him in Remainder, on condition in the Will
contained.
Ad hanc Curiam Homag^ pdictur super Sacramentum suum pdictur psentant quod
nono die Iunii nunc ultimo preterito I. C. unus customar Tenen Manerii pdictur
jacen in extremis infra Parochiam de, etc. infra Manner p^dictur extra Curiam
sursum redd in manus Dominoru Manerii pd per virgam secundum consuetud ejusdem
Manerii per manus F. E. and S. S. custumar' Tenen pdictur Manerii Et juratur ad
capiend sursum redditur in extremis tantum totur illud custumar Messuagiu sive
Tenementum suum cum pertin adinde spectan scituatur jacen and existen, etc.
infra Parochia and cognitur per nomen de, etc. tunc in tenura sive occupatione
T. N. ad opus and usum ultur voluntatur sue in scriptis sub manu and sigillo
suis and usus in ead declaratur Quodque pdictur I. C. post confectionem sursum
redd pdictur obiit seitur Modo ad hanc Curiam ven A. C. vid matter pdictur I. C.
and protulit hic in Curiam ultur voluntatem sive Testamentur dic I. C. deb^to
modo factur and probatur in Curiam, etc. geren datur decimo sexto die Iunii
ultimo sciltur pterito tenor cujus quoad Messuagium sive Tenementum pdictur cum
pertinen sequitur in his verbis sciltur, Whereas I have surrendered into the
hands of the Lord of the Manor of, etc. by the hands of, etc. two customomary
Tenants of the said Manor, all that my customary Tenement in, etc. commonly
known by the sign of the, etc. with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of
my last Will and Testament. Now therefore my Will and meaning is, and I do
hereby give, devise and bequeath the said Tenement with the Appurtenances
lying, etc. aforesaid to my loving Mother A. C. for and during her natural
Life, and after her death I do give and devise the same to my Kinsman I. C. Son
of I. C. and his heirs for ever, upon this condition, That he pay unto his
Brother T. five pounds, and to his Brother S. five pounds, being the youngest
Son of the said I. C. to be paid to them or their Heirs within one year next
after the decease of my said Mother A. C. Et super hoc pdictur A. C. petit se
admitti ad pmissa pdictur secundum formam and effectum Testam pdictur pro
termino vite sue naturalis Cui Dn^i per Seneschallum suum pdictur concesser
inde seisinam per virgam habend sibi and Assign suis pro termino vite sue
naturalis remanere inde in forma pdictur Tenend de Dominis per virgam ad
voluntatem Dominorum secundum consuetudinem Manerii pdictur per redditur servic
and consuetud inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur Et dat Dominis de fine
fecit fidelitatur and admissa est inde tenens Et postea sedente Curia predictur
A. C. sursum redd in manus Dominorum per manus Seneschalli sui pdictur per
virgam secundum consuetud Manerii pdictur totur illud Messuagium sive
Tenementum pdictur cum pertin vocatur sive cognitur per nomen etc. and totum
Statu jus titul and interesse sua de and in eod ad opus and usum pdictur I. C.
filii I. C. hered and assign suorum imperpetuum cui quidem I. fill psen hic in
Cur Dn^i per Senescallu suum pdictur concesser inde seisinam per virgam habend
sibi and heredibus suis sub conditionibus in ultur voluntate sive Testamento
pdictur I. C. defuncti mentionatur and contentis Tenend de Dominis per virgam
ad voluntat Dominorum secundum consuetudinem Manerii predictur per redditur
servitur and consuetud inde prius debitur and de jure consuetur and dat Dominis
de fine fecic fidelitatur and admissus est inde tenens.

License to demise for years not exceeding one and thirty.
Ad hanc Cur Licentia conceditur M. O. vid ad dimittend etc. tria cl^a terre
in, etc. pditur alicui person vel aliquibus personis pro aliquo termino
annorum non Excendentur Termin trigentur and unius annorum a festo sui Mich^is
tunc prox. sequence.

Presentment that the customary Tenant died seized, and that the Heir came not
to take up the Land, and Proclamation made.
Ad hanc Curiam psentatur est per homag^ quod E. H. vid un Customar Tenen hujus
Manerii citra ultur Cur and ante hanc Cur obiit seisitur de uno Customar
Messuagio vocat sive cognitur, etc. tentur per Copiam Rotulorum Curie hujus
Manerii and quod W. E. est filius and prox. here is dicte E. and quia pdictur W.
non venit ad Capiend premissa pdictur extra manus Dominorum Ideo prima
Proclamatio facta est.

Presentment that the Money mentioned in a Surrender was not paid at the time,
ideo proclamatio prima.
Ad hanc Curiam Homag^ pdictur super Sacramentur suum pdictur dicunt and
presentant quod summa Centur and triu librarum mentionatur in sursum redd
conditional factur per R. F. and S. Vxor ejus cuidam E. L. ad ult. general Cur
tentur pro Manerio pdictur die martis in prima septimana Pasche and solub^
super decim Octavum diem Septembris ultur pteritur non fuit solutur secundum
dictam conditionem in dicta sursum redd specificatur Et quia nullus venit, etc.
Ideo prima proclamatio facta est.

A Fine respited at last Court, now taxed.
Ad hanc Curiam finis pro Admissione I. N. Iun and E. I. C. qui admiss^ fuer ad
ultimam generalem Curiam ad un Cl^m terre continen per estimationem novem Acr
jacen prope, etc. super sursum redd C. N. and A. Vxor' ejus nunc taxatur ad
december libras solvend Senescallo Manerii pdictur apud Cameram sua scituatur in,
and super festum sci T. A. nunc prox. sequen inter hor decima and duodecim
ejusdem diei.

Presentment, That whereas a Surrender precedent was chargable with payment of
100 l. to M. when he should attain the age of 21 years or day of Marriage,
which should first happen, and with a like Sum to A. payable in the same
manner. M. upon receipt of the 100 l. releaseth, and the Surrendree secures the
payment of the other 100 l. to A. by Lease.
Ad hanc Cur comptur est per Homag^ quod premissa in sursum redd superius ultur
mentionatur and sursum redd per super nominatur I. D. ad T. B. and heredibus
suis inter alia oneratur fuer cum solutione sum Centur librarum legalis
monete Anglie cuidam M. D. soror' pdictur I. solvend cum attingerit ad etatem
vigintur and unius annorum vel ad diem maritagii primo contingen and cum summa
al Centur librarum consimilis monete Anglie cuidam A. D. alteri sorori dic I.
solvend in eodem modo prout per ultimam voluntatem G. D. eorum Avi geren datur
decimo quinto die Augusti Anno Domini 1670. before apparet quodque pdicta M.
etatur suam vigintur and unius annorum pimplevit Et per quoddam scriptum suum
sub manu and sigillo suis debito modo factur and delibatur geren datur primo
die instantis Octobris cognovisse habuisse and recipisse de pdict L. B. pdictur
summam Centur librarum and ips' deinde and de omni inde part and parcella per
scriptum suum pdictur acquietasset and exoneravisset prout per eundem scriptum
hic in Curiam prolatur and ostensum before apparet quodque etiam pdictur T. B.
per securitate dicte sum Centur librarum pdictur A. cum contingeret fore
debitur per Indentur suam dimission geren datur quarto die instantis Octobris
and factur inter pdictur C. B. de una part and pdictur I. D. and A. D. ex
altera part barganisasset and vendidisset pdictur I. D. diversas parcellas
terre in, etc. in ead Indentura perticul mentionatur pro terminononagintur and
novem Annorum a die datur Indenture pdictur reddend and solvend prout inde
Annuatur unum granum piperis si requisitur foret cum proviso pro solutione
sum Centur libr pdictur A. secundum veram intentionem ultur volutatur dic G.
D. prout per Indentur pdictur silitur hic in Cur prout before liquet and
apparet.

Presentment that several Copyhold Lands were Infranchised by the Lord.
Ad hanc Curiam Homagium pdictur super Sacramentum suum pdictur presentant quod
separalia Messuag^ terre and Tenementa custumar cum pertin separaliter in
quindecim separalibus paragraphiis sequen fuer' separaliter infranchizatur per
I. S. Arm nuper Dominum hujus Manerii Et feoda liberaque and Tenementa inde
concessa fuer respectivis personis sequentibus and heredibus suis.

Un Messuagium, etc. cum pertin vocatur, etc. in etc. concessn T. B. etc. and
hered suis ad usum R. M. and al per Indenturas dimissionis and relaxationis
geren datur decimo sexto and decimo septimo diebus Octobris Anno Regni dict
Domini Regis nunc, etc. primo.

Vnum clausum terre adjungen atrio pdictur Messuagii vocatur, etc. continen
duas Acras vel eo circiter concess^ eisdem personis and hered suis ad usus
pdictur per consimiles factas Dimissiones and Relax. dat. etc.

Surrender on Condition.
Ad hanc Curiam testatur est per Senescallu pdictur ac comptu est per Homagium
quod decimo quarto die Febr ult preterito I. M. un custumar tenen hujus Manerii
ven coram S. C. Arm Senescallo per Paten Manerij pdictur and extra Curiam viz.
apud Cam^am dicti Seneschalli scituatur in interiori Templo London sursum redd
in manus Dominorum pdictur Manerii per manus Senescalli sui pdictur per virgam
secundum consuetudinem pdictur Manerii Omnia ill quatuor Messuagia sive
Tenementa sua cum Curtilagio and pertin adinde spectan scituatur and existen in
etc. infra Parochiam de C. B. and Manerium pdictur Ad opus and usum R. H. de
Parochia, etc. ac hered and assign suoru imperpetuum sub condition tamen quod
si pdictur I. M. Hered Executores Administratores vel Assign sui vel eorum
aliquis been and fidelitur solvant seu solvi faciant pdicto R. H. Executoribus
Administratoribus vel Assign suis plenam and justa summa 53 l. bone and legalis
monete Anglie ad vel super 15 die Febr qui erit in Anno Domini 1691. ad vel in
nunc Domo Mansional dicti R. H. scituatur in, etc. pdictur absque aliqua
deductione vel detractione ex eadem pro vel in respectu alicujus taxationis
Assessmentati soluconis vel alicujus al matter vel rei cujuscunque Quod tunc
ista sursumredd erit vacua alitur in plena vi remanere.

Surrender to the Use of a youngest Son, conditional for payment of Money at
several days.
Ad hanc Curiam testatur est per Seneschallum pdict ac comptur and psentatur
est per Homagium Quod 28 die Febr ultur preteritur I. R. un customar Tenen
pdictur Manerii Anna and Vxor ejus vener coram S. C. Arm Senescallo per Paten
pdictur Manerii and extra Curiam videl^t apud Cam^am dicti Seneschalli
scituatur in, etc. (and pdictur Anna existen prius sola and secret examinata
per pdictur Senescallum secundu consuetud pdictur Manerii) sursum redd in manus
Dominorum* pdictur Manerii per manus Senescalli sui pdictur per virgam Totur
ill customar Messuagium sive Tentur and sex Acras pasture adinde spectan (sit
plus sive minus) cum omnibus Horreis Stabul Domibus extran Pomariis Gardinis
adinde simul cum Curtilagio and omnibus aliis pertin scituatur jacen and
existen etc. and nunc in occupatione pdictur I. R. vel subtenen suorum nec non
omnia alia custumar Messuag^ terre tenementa and hereditamenta sua cum eorum
pertin parcel pdictur Manerii ad opus and usum I. H. filii natu minimi nuper
de, etc. pdictur defuncti ac hered and Assign suorum imperpetuum proviso semper
and sub condition tamen quod si pdictur I. R. and A. Vxor ejus vel eorum altur
Hered Executor Administratoru and Assign eorum vel eorum alterius solvant seu
solvi faciant pdictur M. H. Executoribus Administratoribus vel Assign suis
summam 261 l. and 5 s. bone and legalis monete Anglie absque aliqua deductione
taxation vel aliis publicis oneribus quibuscunque modo and forma sequen (viz.)
5 l. 12 s. 6 d. partem inde super octavum diem Septembris tunc prox. sequen and
255 l. 12 s. 6 d. resid. inde super octavn diem Martii qui erit in Anno Domini,
1693. quod tunc ista sursumredd erit vacua alit. in plena vi and virtute
remanere.

A Surrender and Release for consideration of 400 l.
Ad hanc Curiam testatur est per Senescallum pdictur ac compertu and
presentatur est per homagium quod 28 die Febr ultur preteritur S. D. unus
customar tenen pdictur Manerii ven coram A. B. Arm Senescallo per paten pdictur
Manerii and extra Cur (viz.) apud Cameram dicti Seneschalli scituatur in, etc.
in consideratione 400 l. bone and legalis monete Angl sibi in manibus solutur
ad et ante Execution hujus sursu Redd and Relaxationis per S. B. de London vid
Recepc^on cujus ipse perinde cognovit and exoneravit pdictur S. B. Hered
Executur and Administr suis imperpetun per presents ipse pdictur S. D. per
virgam secundum consuetudinem Manerii pdictur sursum redd remittebat relaxabat
and imperpetuum quiet clamabat pdictur S. B. totur il customar messuagium sive
tenementum scituatur and existen in, etc. infra Maneriu pdictur cu omnibus
areis horreis and curtilag^ adinde spectan vel pertin ac etiam omnia illa
quatuor separal clausa pastur jacen pone pdictur Messuagium continen per
estimation octodecim Acra (sint plus sive minus) coi^ter vocatur sive cognitur
per nomen de, etc. and nunc vel nuper in tenura sive occupatione N. T. Hered
vel Assign suorum simul cum omnibus coi^is proficuis com^oditatibus and
advantagiis adinde spectan and totu statu rectu titulu interesse usu
possessionem proprietatur clamiu and demand quecunque pdictur S. D. tam in lege
quam in equitate de in and ad pdictur Messuag^ vel Tenementa clausa and pmissa
cu suis ptin habend pd S. B. Hered, and Assign suis ad usu ipsius Hered and
Assign suor imperpetuu secundu consuetud Manerii pd per redditur consuetud and
servic deinde de jure debitur and accustomatur que quidem S. B. presens hic in
Cur petit se admitti ad pmissa pdictur cui Dominus per Seneschallu suu pdictur
concessit inde seisinam per virgam habend sibi and hered suis tenend de Dominis
per virgam in Villenagio ad voluntur Dominoru secundum consuetudinem Manerii
pdictur per redditur servic and consuetud inde prius debitur and de jure
consuetur and nil sol pro fine quia remittitur fecit fidelitatur and admissa
and inde tenens.

Surrender to the Use of ones last Will, to which a Codicil is annexed, and
which is presented by the Jury, and Admittance to Tenant for Life.
Hanc ad Curia Baron hic tenta 15 die Febr Anno Dn^i 1689. compertu and
psentatur fuit per tunc Homagiu quoth vicesimo quarto die Augusti tunc ultur
preteritur W: H. un custom Tenen pdictur Manerii secundum consuetur ejusdem
Manerii sursu redd totur Messuagiu sive Tenementu suu communitur cognitur per
nomen de, etc. infra Man pdictur simul cum curtilagiis and pertin adinde
spectan ad usum ultime vol sive Testamenti sui sub manu and Sigillo suo in
scriptis modo ad hanc Cur presentur est per homagium quoth pdictur W. H. obiit
seitur de Messuagio predictur cum pertin and in plen and aperta Cur C. H. ^id
and relicta Dn^i W. in propria persona sua ven and protulic hic in Cur ultur
vol sive Testamentum dicti W. nuper viri sui defunctur debito modo factur and
probatur in Cur Prerogativa Cantuargeren datur 26 die Augusti Anno Domini 1689.
cujus tenor quoad pmissa pdictur sequitur in his verbis sequen (viz.) Item, I
give and bequeath the said Message or Tenement with the Appurtenances unto,
etc. my now Wife, for and during the term of her natural Life, together with
all the Rents, Issues and Profits arising or coming from the same, and after
her decease, etc. Et per Codicilla dicto testam annex' and cum eadem probatur
continentem sic (viz.) Whereas I have bequeathed unto my loving Cousin, etc.
prout per eandem volunctatur and codicil intur alia before liquet and apparet
Et super inde pdictur C. petit se admitti ad Messuagin sive tenementu and
curtilag^ pdictur cu pertin pro termino vite sue naturalis secundum formam and
effectu testamenti pdictur cui Domini per Seneschallu suu pdictur concesser
inde seisinam per virgam habendu sibi and Assign suis pro termino vite sue
naturalis remanere in forma pdictur tenend de Dn^is pro virgam ad vol Dominoru
secundu consuetud and dat Dominis de fine prout patet in margin fecit
fidelitur and admiss. est inde tenens.

Second Proclamation for not coming in and taking up the Estate.
Ad hanc Curia quia A. B. non ven ad capiend unu custom Tenementur cum pertin
in, etc. pdictur vocatur, and. extra manus Dominoru ad usu ejusdem I. sursu
redd per T. B. vicesimo sexto die Novembris Anno Domini 1689. Ideo secunda
Proclam facta est.

Acknowledgment by the Lord that the Copyhold is Infranchised.
Ad hanc Curia (ad special Instanc and requisic C. P. Arm filii and Heredis
nuper de E. in Com H. Militis defunctur Domini Manerii pdictur per Senescaiu
suu pdictur Recognover quod unu Messuagiu sive Tenementum olim Cottagiu necnon
duo Campi prati sive pasture adinde spectan un eoru voc etc. and alter eoru
vocatur, etc. continen insimul per estimac^on quatuordecim Acras sive plus sive
minus ac nunc divis in quatuor cla in occupatione C. M. Gen vel Assign suor
scituatur jacen and existen in E. pdictur ac aliquando Terre sive possession B.
M. defunctur and per ipsu tentur de tunc Domino hujus Manerii per Copiam
Rotulor Cur ac per virgam in villenagio ad voluntatur Domini secundum consuetud
Manerii pdictur per redditur octo solidor per annu Et al servic postea per
Dominu Manerii pdictur infranchisatur fuer ac and reverc^o inde deb. concess.
fuer' T. B. Arm tunc filio and heredi appren R. B. Mil and heredibus and
Assign. pdictur T. imperpetuu.

Admittance by Guardian.
Compertu est per Homagiu quod vicesimo die Novembris ultur pterito Domini
hujus Manerii extra Curia Administur T. H. per Guardian suu ad, etc. ut filiu
and hered I. H. Gen nuper Pr^is sui defunctur.

Tertia Proclamatio quia tenens non venit* ad capiend, etc. and seisin per
Ballivum.
Ad hanc Cur quia I. V. non ven ad capiend Un Custum Tentu extra manus Dominoru
ad usu ejusdem I. per T. B. sursu redd 26 Novembris 1689. Ideo tertia
Proclamatio facta est Et super hoc pceptur est Ball quod seisiri fac in manus
Dominoru Tenementur pdictur cu pertin, etc.

License to demise and fine pro Licencia.
Ad hanc Cur Domini Manerii pdictur concesser Licencc I. R. Arm ad dimittend
omnia and singula customar Messuag^ terras and Tenementa sua infra Maneriu
pdictur alic person vel personis per aliq^ termino Annoru non exceden terminu
21 Annor a Festo die Nativitatis Sancti Iohannis Baptiste ull^ pterito
computand Et prefatur I. R. datur Dn^is de fine pro hac licenc prout patet in
Margin.

THE INDEX.
A.
ADmittance. The nature and effect of Admittance upon a Surrender 143 Of what
force the Surrender is till admission ibid. Where the Lords Admittance of a
Copyholder in other manner then agrees with the Surrender shall be good, and
how it shall enure. 142 Admittances that differ from the Limitations alter not
the Estate Surrendered 145 The Lord compellable to make Admittance, though not a
Grant 157 The Law vests the Estate in a Woman that is to hold durante viduitate
before Admittance 146 By whom Admittances may be ibid. What amounts to an
Admittance 147 In what cases the Admittance of one shall be the Admittance of
another 148 Admittance by Attorney may not be 149 The time of being admitted 151
Admittance upon Descent 150 What things the Heir may do or not do before
Admittance 151 Admittance where to be made 150 In what Cases and to what
purposes the Copyhold Estate shall be in the Tenant before Admittance, and to
what purposes not 155 Where there need no Admittance 154 In what cases the Lord
shall be compelled to make Admittances 157 Actions, Suits. What Actions may be
brought by the Lord 256 What Actions may be brought by the Copyholder 256,
257, 258 What Actions the Copyholder shall have against Strangers 258 Action
on the Case by a Copyholder for digging Turfs on the Common, and Narr' 261 No
Actions or Remedies for Fines, Rents, Amerciament after Sale of the Manor 263
Of Copyholders being impleaded and impleadable in the Lords Courts, and the
remedy there, and how to be relieved against faux Judgment there 265
Copyholder shall not have Assise against his Lord ibid. Copyhold Inheritance
shall not be Assets in the Heirs hands 267 Where Attornment is necessary to the
passing of a Manor, and where not 9 Attornment not necessary in the Grant of a
Reversion of a Copyhold Authority must be strictly persued Avowry for Rent by
Lessee of a Copyholder 262 Action must be brought in the name of a Copyholder
Lunatic, and not in the name of the Committees 263 Acceptance of a Lease by
the Tenant destroys the Copyhold 225 Action on the Case lies against the Lord
for non-Admittance by the Surrendror, but not by Cesty que use Chancery will
compel the Lord to admit a Tenant 321 Admittance, where it shall be pleaded as
a Grant 271
B.
Baron and Feme. Custom, That the Wife Feme Covert may devise, good 55 Where
the severance of the customary Tenants from the Manor shall not prejudice the
Wife in her customary Estate 5 If the Lord enfeoff the Copyholder, this
destroys the Widows Free-Bench 56 Of the transferring and assigning the
Copyhold Estate of a Bankrupts, by Commissioners 251 Where and what acts of
the Husband shall forfeit the Wives Estate or not 211 Copy-holds within the
Statutes of Bankrupts 201 Of customary Bylaws 48
C.
Original and nature of Copy-holds 1 Copyhold created and guided by Custom 28
How a Copy Copyholder and bare Tenant at Will differ 14 Three sorts of
Copyholders 70 Who may be said to be customary Tenants, and in what respects
What Evidence Copyholders have for their Estates Copyholders may have Sola
and separalis pastura in the Lords Soil, and exclude the Lord* 66 Where a
Copyholder shall hold his Land charged by the Lord or the Copyholder as to
Dower, Rents Charge and Statutes and how and where they shall be avoided 233
Custom. The Nature of it 25 To be taken strictly, and in many cases Cases
Secundum vulgarem conceptum cannot extend out of the Manor 29 What is a good
Custom or not, and what things are required to the making a good Custom 30 How
Customs ought to be certain 32 Of the reasonableness of Customs, and when they
are said to be unreasonable or not 33 Several Customs in several places 35
Three supporters of Copyhold Custom 36 Of Customs enabling or disabling 36, 37
Where a Custom shall be said to be pursued or not 43 Where one shall be Tenant
by the Courtesy of a Copyhold without Admittance of the Wife 86 Where
Copyhold is extinct, Common is lost 62 Severance by the Lord shall not
prejudice the Commoner 41, 62 The nature of a Court Baron 73 Courts may be held
out of the Manor by Custom, and where 75 Of warning of Courts being holden at
what place Relief for a Copyholder in Chancery in many Cases where none is at
Law 319 Chancery will design the bounds of Fines and of a Copyhold, but not
whether parcel or not parcel 321 The Lord Decreed to hold a Court 324 Fines and
Rents arrear not relieved after the Sale of the Manor 324 Composition decreed
Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 7. against Champertry, extends to Copyhold 251 Copyhold
is not within Statute 31 Eliz. of Cottages 254 Copyhold is not within the
Stat. 32 H. 8. Of Entrys for Conditions broken 150
D.
Demesns, what 3 Dimis. and dimissib. how to be understood Custom extends not
to collateral Discents Descent of a Copyhold Tolls not an Entry 68 Where the
Heir shall be in by Descent or Purchase Copyhold Estates how discontinued or
not Surrender makes not a Discontinuance 175* 176 What shall amount to a
Discontinuance 69 Distress, Avowry for Rent of a Copyhold 236 Copyholders
Beasts distrainable or not, for a Rent Charge 236 What shall be said a
Disseisin as to Copyhold Estates or not 255 Whether in Declaration in
Ejectment the Plaintiff need to show that the Lease was warranted by the Custom
257 Declaration by a Copyholder, That he is seized in Dominico suo ut de feodo
secundum consuetud. Manerii, and also must show that they are customary Lands
268 Presidents of Declarations ibid.
E.
Exposition of words. Dimiss. and Dimissibile 16 Solum modo 44 Cum pertin. 92,
94 Ejectment brought by Copyholder, and how to declare 257, 259 Emblements,
who shall have them upon a Ferfeiture 219, 220, 254 Evidence. What shall be
good Evidence to prove a Custom 305 Special Customs within several Limits ought
to be showed 306 Custom found 306, 307 Evidence of Prescription 307, 308 Where
proof by Court Rolls are good Evidence 309 Copy of a Lease, where good Evidence
ibid. Who and what may be admitted to give Evidence Steward, Court Books, etc.
ibid. Extingushment. A Copyhold may be extinct as to the Services, and remain
as to the Customary Estate Copyhold though severed from the Manor by the Lords
act, is not destroyed 222 Acceptance of a Lease by the Tenant destroys the
Copyhold 225 Copyhold extinct by the Copyholders Release to the Lord, and
where or how a Right to a Copyhold shall shall be exinct by a Release 226, 228
Copyhold suspended and revived 230, 231 After Escheat of a Copyhold, the Wife
shall not be endowed 233 The Statute of VV. 2. that gives Elegits, extends not
to Copyhold 253
F.
Copyhold Estates are within the words and intention of the Statute of Fines
and non-claim 247, 248 Of Copyholder compounding for a Fine Fine on
Admittance, when to be paid 159 Of Fines certain 159 What Evidence shall prove
the uncertainty of Fines 160 Excessive Fines, how to be determined 160 What
Customs are good as to payment of Fines, and what not 161 Fine, by whom to be
Assessed 162 For every several Tenure, several Fines 163 How the Lord shall
recover his Fine 164 Difference as to what may pass by a Fine, or be barred by
a Fine at Common Law 176 Outrageous Fines relieved in Chancery Forfeiture. 319
Notice must be given if the Fines be uncertain, before there can be a
Forfeiture 198 Refusal to pay an excessive Fine, no Forfeiture 198 What shall
amount to a Forfeiture of a Copyhold Estate 69, 194, 195 Refusal to pay Rent,
perform Services, or Suit of Court, when they shall be cause of Forfeitures 195
What words of denial amount to a Forfeiture 197 Demand must be made of the
person of a Tenant for a Fine, or else non-payment is not a Forfeiture 198
Surrender by a Copyholder for Life to one in Fee, is no Forfeiture What is a
present Forfeiture without presentment 199 Heir beyond Sea shall not forfeit
for not coming in upon Proclamation in Court 202 Wilful Forfeitures not
relieved in Chancery 320 Where the Wife shall suffer for the Forfeiture of her
Husband or not 211 Forfeiture as to cutting of Trees by Tenant for Life 207,
208 Where Admittance is a Dispensation of a Forfeiture 217 Where Amerciament is
a Dispensation of a Forfeiture ibid. Forfeiture purged by Release ibid. Where,
and what Acceptance is a Dispensation of a Forfeiture, and where and what not
218 Where the Heir shall not take advantage of a Forfeiture in the Life of the
Ancestor 219 The Lords Remedy for a Forfeiture 220 Bill in Chancery to reverse
a Faux Judgment given in the Lords Court 326 What alienations shall be a
Forfeiture 206 Forfeiture in Waste 207 By Rescous 216 By Enclosure 210 After a
Copyhold is dismembered from the Manor, of what Forfeitures the Feoffee or
Grantee shall take advantage 212 Where the Forfeiture of one Copyholder is the
Forfeiture of another; where Forfeiture of part shall be of the whole 214, 215
G.
By the Kings Grant of all his Demesne Lands, Copyhold shall not pass, aliter
in the case of another What things may be granted by Copy 78 Of voluntary
Grants by the Lord 79, 80 Disability of the Lords person no hindrance of the
Grant 80 What Estate the Lord must have to enable him to make Grants 81, 82
Voluntary Estates granted during the time of the Lords Interest shall be good,
though the Lords Estate be avoided, ab initio 84 Grants by Tenant at
sufferance, or one that has a tortious Title, not good 86, 87 Copyhold not to
be granted by parcels 89 What amounts to a Grant 90 How Grants of a Copyhold
to be expounded 90, 91, 92 What shall pass in a Grant by the words cum
pertinentiis 92, 94 By what words in Grants Copy-holds shall pass or not 92, 93
H.
Honor, what 311 Where the Heir shall be in by descent or Purchase 123 Heir
before Admittance is not a complete Tenant to all purposes Hariot Service and
Hariot Custom, the difference 237, 238 What Custom for Hariots* shall be good
or not 239 Where and how Hariots shall be apportioned, or not 240 Who shall pay
an Hariot, and when and when not Who shall have an Hariot 241 Pleading as to
Hariot, vide Tit. Pleading. What shall be a good Avowry in conuzance for an
Harriot in Replevin, or a good justification in Trespass or not, and how to be
pleaded 244
I.
Infant not bound by many Customs 21 If Infant Surrender, he may enter at full
Age 21 Infant may make a Lease without License, and not forfeit 21 Surrender by
Infant at five years old Custom to assign one to take the profits of a
Copyhold Infant Interruption in the Possession and in the Right 32, 42 Faux
Jugdment given in the Lords Court, where relievable Copyhold Lands are not
within the Statute 11 H. 7. cap. 20. Of Joyntresses 254 The Lord to have the
custody of an Idiot 17
K.
Kings Grants favorably construed 32 King need not recite in his Grant, that
it is Copyhold 23 Surrender to the King without other matter of Record, where
good 24
L.
Lease 108, 181 Custom to Lease without License may be good 51, 52 Lease made
before Admittance in what case good 54 What Leases made by a Copyholder for
years are a Forfeiture or not 203 When a Lease shall begin in point of
eomputation and not in point of Interest 184 Lease of Copy-holds made by Tenant
in Tail ibid. Lease of Copy-holds made by Ecclesiastical Persons 186 Lease
affirmed by acceptance 187 Lease of Freehold and Copyhold, the Rent issues
out of beth 187 In what respect a Lease not warranted by License or Custom, is
yet good in Law 189 Lease void in Interest, and good by way of Estoppel 192
What shall be said a Covenant and no Lease, and so shall not be a Forfeiture
206 Lease for years not warranted, is no disseisin to the Lord 182 License.
Once a License to make a Lease and always a License What License, and by whom
granted shall be good or not 191 License taken as a confirmation 193 License
pleaded, vide Pleadings. Copyhold not within the Statute of Limitations 251
M.
Manor, the Original and Nature of it 6 Customary Manor, what 7 What shall be
said parcel of a Manor, and what shall be said a severance 2 Manor not to be
created at this day 4 A Manor in reputation 5 A Manor in gross 7 How the Lord
may create a customary Manor 8 Severance of Copyhold from the Manor, what it
operates What shall be said time out of memory 30 Copyhold is within the
Statute 32 H. 2. cap. 9. of Maintenance Manor by reputation, how it will pass 7
How Copyhold may be severed from the Manor, and how not 11
N.
Notice. There must be notice of the Alteration of the Use and Estate, or else
there can be no Forfeiture for denial of Rent 197 No notice need where a Fine
is certain, aliter where it is uncertain 191
P.
Privileges of the Lord 17 Privileges of the Copyholder 17, 18 Difference
between Privileges annexed to the Seigniory, and Privileges annexed to the
Tenancy 19 Pleading, vide Traverse. Uncertainy in Pleading, vide sparsim.
Pleading by an usitatum fuit, where good or not 64 How a Copyholder shall
plead in making Title to a Copyhold 271, 272 Whether in Pleading the
reasonableness of the Fine must be avered When and where a License is to be
pleaded specially, and when and where not 193 Grant of Copyhold Land in
Reversion must be pleaded as a Grant in Reversion, and not as a Grant in
possession, nor by a per nomen 271 The Manor of a Copyholders pleading Custom
or Prescription 275 How a Prescription must be made by a particular Tenant at
will ibid. The manner of a Copyholders pleading Custom or Prescription for
Common 32 Special Prescription to be pleaded in case of severance of the
Copyhold Tenement from the Lord 278 The manner of pleading when a Lease is to
be answered, which is set forth in the Avowry 280 Where the Action is brought
as of a Lease at Common Law, and one pleads a Lease of Copyhold Land 281
Custom or License must be showed specially ibid. How Lessee is to plead a
License ib. How a Surrender is to be pleaded Pleading of Prescription by a
Copyholder to be discharged of Tithes 282 The Forms of pleading a Surrender,
vide Surrender 290 Grant 291 Common 292 Trees ibid. Way 296 Forfeiture 297
Pleading Custom or Prescription 273 Bar that the Lands are customary Lands 299
Pleading as to Harriots 242 Presentment 136 When to be made 137 If Surrendror
or Cesty que use, or customary Tenants dye before Presentment, yet Presentment
and Admittance may be afterward 138 The nature and effect of a Presentment 139
Two Surrender, and the second Surrender is first presented 140 What will make a
possessio fratris so as to inherit a Copyhold Privileges of Copyhold 18, 19,
20
R.
Popish Recusant shall forfeit all his Copyhold Land, within 25 El. c. 10. 253
Copyhold Rents apportioned 188 Action of Debt lies not for Arrears of Rent
within the Statute 32 H. 8. 250 One Lease of Freehold and Copyhold, the Rent
issues out of both 187 Avowry for Rent by Lessee of a Copyholder 262
S.
Steward 75 Deputy, acts done by him or his Servant shall be good so by a
reputed Steward 76, 77 Infant cannot be a Steward 77 Surrender 95 The nature of
a Surrender ib. Where and in what respects Estates may pass otherwise than by
Surrender 99 The Lord not compellable to make a Surrender 49 Where Surrender is
sufficient without Admittance 102 Where Admittance is sufficient without
Surrender 102 103 Of Surrenderss out of Court, who may take them, and what are
good or not 105 In whom the Reversion after a particular Estate remains 104
Surrender by Attorney, and form of the Entry 107, 108 What shall pass, and by
what words in a Surrender 109 Construction of a Surrender where no use is
limited 110 Surrender passes no Estate by Implicacition Where an Use is
limited in a Surrender, how far the construction shall be according to the
Rule of the Common Law 113 Surrender to an Use upon an Use ibid. Surrender to
the Use of ones Wife 13, 125 Where a Surrender is void for uncertainty 113
Surrender to the Use of a person not in esse 115 to the Use of one in ventre sa
mere 116 Of a Surrender to take effect in futuro ibid. Construction of
Surrenders and limitations in Remainder or Reversion 118, 119 If a Surrender
makes a discontinuance 217 Surrender to the Use of a Man's last Will and how to
be construed 124 Surrenders upon condition or contingency 120, 221, 122, 129
Where a Surrender before Admittance shall be good, and where not 130 Surrender
by Husband of the Wifes Land Surrender by Joynt-Tenants 127, 131 Surrender by a
Feme Covert 133 Surrender of the Wives Land 134 Surrender to the Steward to the
Use of the Steward is good ibid. Countermand of a Surrender 135 What remedy to
force a Trustee to surrender 135 Surrender not good till presented 136 Heir
decreed to Surrender on Contract with the Ancestor 327 Relief in equity as to
Surrender 323 Defendant decreed to Surrender according to Agreement ibid. hold
shall not be extended 237 If the Copyholder bind himself in a Statute, the
Copy- Within what Statutes of Parliament Copyhold Lands are contained, and
within what not 247, etc. Services not to be performed by Attorney.
T.
How Copy-holds are Entayl'd, and how dockt and barred 165, 166, etc. How the
Statute VV. 2. creates an Estate Tail 166 167 In what cases Trespass may be
brought by the Copyholder against his Lord 257 Trespass by a Copyholder for
Beasts depasturing on the Common 260 Trial. The time of the Surrender or of the
Courts being held to be tried by the Jury, and not by the Court-Rolls 307 When
Issue is taken upon a Surrender, where to be tried 310 Traversing the day of
the Grant. Traversing the dying* seized of the Copyhold 246, 205 Where a
particular Custom is confessed in the Rejoinder, he ought to Traverse the
general Custom 228
V.
Copyhold not determined or forfeited by Utlawry Special Verdict 311 Custom
not well found 312 Failer of Prescription 313 Jury must find directly, and not
argumentatively ib. Custom must be found in the manner that he pleads it 314
Verdict aided 318 Statute 27 H. 8. of Uses extends not to Copyhold 252 Venue
310
VV.
Surrender to the Use of a Man's last Will 115 Copyhold devised without
Surrender executed by decree in Chancery 326 Customs as to Woods, Underwoods 58
What Copyholders may cut Trees, and in what cases, and to what purposes Custom
to sell Trees 58 Copyhold Lands are not within the Words of the Statute 34 H.
8.5. of Wills. Quaere, If within the Equity 253
A TABLE OF THE Precedents.
A Settlement before Marriage of a Copyhold Estate, where according to the
Custom of the Manor there is a dead Year after the death of every Tenant,
grantable by the Tenant in his Lifetime, and his Widow enjoys the Estate,
durante castitate, if he surrender or alien it not in his Lifetime, with
permission, That the Goods of the Wife shall remain at her disposal, and that
her Husbands name may be made use of to sue for her Debts, but the Moneys to be
secured by the Trustees to her use 329 Covenant to Surrender Copyhold Land
after bargain and sale of Freehold 334 Covenant that he is rightfully seized
of Copyhold Land 335 A Covenant to surrender Copyhold Lands ibid. A Covenant
(in nature of a Mortgage) upon a Surrender of Copyhold Land to pay money at a
certain time 337 A Bargain and Sale of Copyhold Lands by Commissioners of
Bankrupts 339 A Surrender in Trust, and the Trust declared. Trustees covenant
not to commit, etc. any thing that may amount to a Forfeiture 342 An
Infranchisement of Copyhold Lands made by a Lord of a Manor to his Copyholder
344 A Lease of Copyhold Land, with the Lords License 348 A Release of
Copyhold Estate 350
Precedents of Copies of Court Rolls, Presentiments, Surrenders, Admittances,
Releases, Proclamations for not coming in, etc.
A Surrender 253 A Surrender of Copyhold Lands for Life, the Remainder in Fee
taken by the Steward out of Court 355 A Surrender out of Court of a Reversion
to the use of a Man and his Wife, and the Heirs of the Body of the Husband, the
Remainder to the Heirs of the Body of the Wife, the Remainder to the Husband of
the present Tenant for Life in Tail, the Remainder to the present Tenant for
Life in Tail, the Remainder to another in Fee, with the Lords acknowledgment of
satisfaction of a Fine. The Surrendror surrenders all his Right, etc. to the
Husband and Wife the present Tenant for Life, to the Uses aforesaid 356 After
abatement and intrusion, the Lord seiseth the Lands, and grants them to the
Abator for term of Life, the Remainder to the next Heir of the Disseisee in
Tail, remainder in Fee 358 Surrender out of Court to several Uses upon a
Marriage Settlement 360 Presentment of a Surrender made in Court, with the
Admittance of the Tenant next Heir 361 The finding the death of a Tenant, and
of the Lands and Heir, with the Admission of the Tenant, and a Presentment made
in Court between the Heir and his Mother, touching her Dower, and the Mothers
Release of her Dower 362 Presentment of the Copyhold Customs of a Manor 376,
367 Surrender by Baron and Feme 369 Surrender to the Use of ones last Will 370
Grant of the wardship of a Tenant ibid. Surrender of right Title and Interest
to two by Moieties 371 Admittance of a next Heir 372 A surrender by one in
extremis, by the Hands of two customary Tenants to the Use of his last Will,
which is recited to one for Life, the Remainder over, Tenant for Life
surrenders to him in Remainder, on condition in the Will 373 License to demise
for Years not exceeding 31 375 Presentment that the customary Tenant died
seized, and that the Heir came not to take up the Land, and Proclamation made
ibid. Presentment that the money mentioned in a Surrender was not paid at the
time ideo proclamatio prima ibid. A Fine respiteed at last Court taxed at the
next 376 Presentment, That a Surrender precedent was chargable with the payment
of 100 l. to M. when he should attain the Age of 21 years, or day of Marriage,
which should first happen, and with a like Sum to A. payable in the same
manner. M. upon receipt of the 100 l. releaseth, and the Surrendree secures the
payment of the other 100 l. to A. by Lease 376 Presentment, That several
Copyhold Lands were infranchised by the Lord 377 Surrender on condition 378
Surrender to the use of a youngest Son, conditional for payment of money at
several days 379 A Surrender and Release in consideration of 400 l. 380
Surrender to the Use of ones last Will, to which a Codicil is annexed, and
which is presented by the Jury, and admittance to Tenant for Life 381 Second
Proclamation for not coming in and taking up the said Estate 382 Acknowledgment
by the Lord that the Copyhold is infranchised 383 Admittance by the Guardian
ibid. The third Proclamation because the Tenant came not in to take up the
Estate, and seizure by the Bailiff ibid. License to Demise and Fine, pro
Licentia 384
From Page 256 to 273. you are desired to amend the Folio's.

BOOKS lately Printed for, and sold by John Walthoe, at his Shop in Vine Court,
Middle Temple, adjoining to the Cloisters.
Trials Per Pais: Or, The Laws of England concerning Juries by Nisi Prius, etc.
Newly Revised and much Enlarged, with an Addition of Precedents and Forms of
Challenges, Demurrers upon Evidence, Bills of Exception, Pleas, Puis le Darrein
Continuance, etc. The third Edition corrected and amended. To which is now
added, A farther Treatise of Evidence. Together with a new and exact Table to
the whole matter. Very useful and necessary for all Lawyers, Attorneys, and
other Practisers, especially at the Assise. By G. D. of the Inner Temple, Esquire

The Modern Conveyancer; Or, Conveyancing Improved: being a choice Collection
of PRESIDENTS on most Occasions. Drawn after the manner of Conveyancing now in
Use. By the greatest Hands of the present Age; of which some are still living.
Consisting of Settlements of Estates upon Marriages, Mortgages, Assignments,
etc. With an Introduction concerning Conveyancing in General, in large 8 vo.

The Practick part of the Law, showing the Office of an Attorney, and a Guide
for Solicitors in all the Courts of Westminster, Viz. The Courts of Chancery,
King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer; with the manner of their Proceedings
in any Action Real, Personal and Mixed, from the Original to the Execution. As
also the Practice of the Courts in the City of London, Court of Admiralty,
Ecclesiastical Courts, and other Inferior Courts in the Country.

An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes of King William and Queen Mary, now in
force and use. By John Washington, Esquire

A Compendious and Accurate Treatise of Fines upon Writs of Covenant; and
Recoveries upon Writs of Entry in the Post. With ample and copious Instructions
how to draw, acknowledge and levy the same in all Cases. Being a Work performed
with great exactness, and full of variety of Clerkship. The third Edition;
Wherein the former are reviewed, corrected and enlarged. With an Addition of
several Precedents, and many Observations, Rules and Cases concerning the
Effect and Operation of Fines and Recoveries.

A Catalogue of the Common and Statute Law Books of this Realm; with some
others relating thereunto. Alphabettically digested under proper Heads. With
an Account of the best Editions, Volumes and common Prices they are now sold
at. The third Edition, with Additions.

The Law of Obligations and Conditions; Or an accurate Treatise wherein is
contained the whole Learning of the Law concerning Bills, Bonds, Conditions,
Statutes, Recognizances and Defazances; as also Declarations on special
Conditions, and the Pleadings thereon, Issues, Judgments and Executions, with
many other useful matters relating thereunto. Digested under their proper
Titles. To which is added a Table of Declarations and Pleadings upon Bonds now
Extant. 8vo.

Observations Historical and Genealogical, wherein the Originals of the
Emperor, Kings, Electors, and other Sovereign Princes of Europe* with a Series
of their Births, Matches, more Remarkable Actions, and Deaths; as also the
Augmentations Decreasings and Pretensions of each Family, are drawn down to the
Year 1690. in 8vo.

Blunts Law Dictionary interpreting such difficult and obscure Words and Terms
as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern Laws, with
References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books, Charters,
ancient Deeds and Manuscripts, wherein the words are used, and Etymologies
where they properly occur. The second Edition, with the Addition of above 600
words, Fol. 10 s.

The Life of the Famous Cardinal Duke de Richlieu, Principal Minister of State
to Lewis the XIII. King of France and Navar, in 2 Vol. 8vo. Price 10 s.

A New Voyage to Italy, with a Description of the chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statutes and Antiquities of that Country. Together with
useful Instructions for those who shall Travel thither. By Maximilian Misson,
Gent. Done into English, and Adorned with Figures, in 2 Vol. 8vo. 10 s.

The Life of the Famous John Baptist Colbert, late Minister and Secretary of
State to Lewis the XIV. the present French King. Done into English in 8vo. 3 s.

All the Statutes now in force and use concerning Bankrupts are here
methodically digested; Together with the Judges Resolutions thereupon. To which
are annexed the late Acts against Fraudulent Devises and Clandestine Mortgages,
in 12 ves. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Reports of Cases taken and adjudged in the Court of Chancery from the first
year of the Reign of King Charles I. to the beginning of the Reign of his
present Majesty King William the III. in 2 Vol. 8vo. Price 10 s.

FINIS.

