Gospel-Holinesse: OR, The saving Sight of GOD. Laid open from Isa. 6. 5.

Together with The glorious Privilege of the Saints. From Romans 8.4, 5.

Both worthily opened and applied.

By that Faithful Dispenser of the Mysteries of Christ, WALTER CRADOCK, late
Preacher at Alhallowes the Great in London.

2 Cor. 3.18. But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

Romans 10.3. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God.

Published and allowed by the Author's consent.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by Joseph Blaik-lock, at his
House in Ivie-lane. 1651.

To the Reader.
THESE Sermons being exactly penned from the Authors own mouth, are now brought
to public view, though when he preached them, had not the least thought to
suffer them to be Printed: but since they were thus prepared to come abroad
into the world, the Pious Author finding so much of the sweetness of Christ in
viewing of them, could not turn his back upon them.

As for this godly Author, his worth and excellency is so eminently known, it
would be vanity in me to speak any thing in relation to his praise: let this,
and other of his own works praise him. Yet thus much I shall say, that I do
verily believe, that he preached these Choice Lectures from the bosom of Jesus
Christ, that these things were the very experiments of his own soul, and the
lively actings of the spirit of God within him. What he has seen and heard,
he has declared, that we might have fellowship with him, whose fellowship is
with the Father and the 1 John 1. 3.
Son, and therein shall our joy be full.

These Sermons are not clothed with humane* Art, quaint expressions, eloquent
speculations; but choose rather to come forth in the nakedness of truth, not
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the
spirit, and of power: here is nothing to fill thy head with barren notions,
fruitless opinions, or mere speculations; but here is that to fill thy heart
with the glory of God, the life of Christ, and light of his spirit.

I shall in a few words hint out what thou shall find in these ensuing
discourses.

First, a glorious discovery of a saving sight of God in Christ. When Moses
desired to see Gods face, the Lord himself tells him, that no man can see his
face, and live: Yet the Lord proclaimed his mercy, his patience, his
goodness, his truth, and his justice before him. Now where was Moses all this
while? he was in the clift of the rock: Now verily that Rock was Christ; we see
the glory of God in Christ, per speculum, as it were in a glass. Christ is
that glass, in which we see the image of the Fathers glory, and that as with
open face. Christ is called the 2 Cor. 3. 18. Heb. 1. 3.
brightness of his Father's glory: so that the brightness of Gods glory is
manifested by Christ, as the Sun is manifested by it is boames: we cannot see
the Sun in Rota, in his Charret, or circumvolution, but by it is beams: so
the Fathers glory is revealed. Tanquam per radios ac splendorem, as it were by
beams and brightness, shining most excellently in Christ. The Apostle says,
God, who has commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. God is known by Christ, as a man is known by his face; it is only
he that came from the bosom of the Father, that can open the secrets of his
bosom, and reveal the glory and brightness of Gods face unto us.

Secondly, this glorious sight of God is that, that humbles the soul: Because
mine eye has seen thee (says Job) I abhor my self in dust and ashes.

The greatest piece of self-denial is to discard our own righteousness and
formality.

1. Man's fleshly righteousness is the great idol of the world, every one is
ready to fall down unto it, and call it blessed. This is Antichrist coming
forth in the habit of Christ, being arrayed and decked with gold, precious
stones, and pearls, whereby the Nations are deceived: but when we know the
righteousness of the Lord, we shall cast away our own righteousness, and
(as the Prophet speaks) say unto it, get ye Isa. 30. 22.
hence.

2. Formality is in no less esteem among us then the former: what is the
Religion of most people but a mere form, without any life or power at all.
Astronomers tell us, that the upper Planets have their Stations, and
Retrogradations, as well as their direct Motions. So it is with most in their
Religion, sometimes they move forwards, sometimes backward, sometimes stand at
a stay, and thus they tread always in one circle or round, turning like a door
upon the hinges, but never from off the place where they were. As for most men's
hearing, praying, fasting, what is it, but as a task, performed so coldly,
that there is no principle of divine life in it? and thus they go on, but are
never at their journeys end. Men commonly use what they should enjoy, and enjoy
that they should use: they will use the Lord whom they should enjoy, and they
will enjoy their duties and performances, that they should only use: and thus
they starve their souls by formality in religion.

The third thing we may take notice of, is the righteousness of Christ
commended to us, before the righteousness of Adam. Most of the worlds
righteousness proceeds from the principles of the old Adam, which is corrupt
and fleshly; what is this but to be born of Ishmael the son of the bondwoman,
to come unto Mount Sinai in Arabia, viz. the Covenant of works: but Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the mother of all the firstborn of God, viz.
the Covenant of grace. Vain man thinks to climb to Heaven by his own
righteousness, when alas! it is but of the first Adam, natural, weak, and
fleshly. All the wisdom, knowledge, invention of man, as Tongues, Arts, and
Sciences; as Philosophy, Logic, Rhetoric, etc. All these are but to repair
those relics of the first Adam's corrupted principles of reason and
understanding: therefore if we go to patch up a righteousness of these, we
do but build what the Lord will have destroyed. But that which is able to
restore us, is an establishment of the righteousness of Christ upon our
hearts, by the participation of the divine nature. Christ performs all
righteousness for his Saints, and then works all righteousness in them: The
divine will of God is righteousness, now Christ is that divine will, brought
forth in a Saint, working after the Lords own pleasure. The Civil law does
account Elephants and Camels to have the nature of wild beasts, though they do
the work of tame beasts: So Adam's righteousness commends not to God, we are
only accepted in the beloved, (...) or ingratiated through that beloved. The
divine, treasures of righteousness are first in Christ, and by our union with
him we come to enjoy them by way of participation.

Fourthly, Substantial and real holiness set out to be far more excellent
then all empty forms, or mere professions. Holiness is God, stamped and
printed upon the soul: it is Christ formed in the heart: it is the very image,
frame, and disposition of the holy spirit within us.

The Philosopher could say, (...), that God was but an empty name, without
virtue: so are all our professions of Christ without holiness, that being the
very marrow and quintessence of all religion. Holiness is something of God in
us, it proceed from him, it lives in him; God can no more be separated from it,
then the beams from the Sun. Holiness is happiness, and the more of it we
have, the more we have of the life and image of God upon us. Holiness is
nothing but our conformity to God, and our being like him, to be as he is:
Holiness is the new frame, the new creation, the workmanship of the Lord in
our hearts: it is the Lord building and setting up his own Temple, Tabernacle,
and new Jerusalem within us, filling of us with his own glory, writing his
name in our fore heads, by imprinting his own divine image upon us. Oh what
happiness, what sweet delight, and harmony of heart, what soule-musicke, and
spiritual joy is there in having our soul wrapped up in the divine life, light,
and beauty of the Lords holiness.

Fifthly, Thou have a discovery of the inability of man's carnal principles or
reason to judge of spiritual things, or the things of God: every truth is
discovered by principles of light suitable to it self.

Hence it is, that the Apostle tells us of, (...), an animate, sensual, or
natural man: and of (...) a spiritual man, one enlightened by the spirit of
God. Now the natural man is not able to judge of things above the principles
of nature.

The Apostle tells us, no man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of man
which is in him. 1 Cor. 2. 11.


The things of man are all created things, man is therefore said to be, as it
were (...), a little world, or an Epitome or Compendium wherein all created
things are described, as in a map or short abridgement. Now the principle of
reason in man's heart is able to search out the hidden things of nature. But
this large principle of man is too narrow to search into the things of the
spirit: so says the Apostle, The things of God knows 1 Cor. 2. 11. 12. 14,
15.
no man, but the spirit of God. The spirit searches the deep things of God.
And again he says, The wisdom of the spirit is but foolishness to the
natural man. And why so, because says he, spiritual things are spiritually
discerned. That is, they are to be understood in a spiritual sense, to which,
man's carnal reason cannot reach. But now says he, the spiritual man
discerns all things, so that divine things are only known by the spirit; it is
the spirit of all truth that leads into all truth.

Then it is not all Maxims and rules, it is not syllogisticall reasonings and
disputes, it is not Books and Treatises, it is not all Systems and Bodies of
Divinity that can reveal the secret mysteries of truth; but it is the work of
the spirit: for the mystery of Christ is not merely letter and form without
us, but a quickening spirit within us. Yet

Sixthly, We are taught, that there is a most profound, spiritual reasoning
in godliness; and that it is the highest act of the mind, which is the
highest faculty of the soul. The mind of a Saint is Gods Throne, and the
motions of the mind, or the reasonings thereof is nothing but Christ, swaying
the soul according to his good pleasure.

It Is true, that reason as it is in man, is a most imperfect and weak light, and
falls short of the light of God, being depraved, and mixed with much darkness,
and so is unsuitable to judge divine things: but reason considered in it is
height and excellency is no other then Jesus Christ, and the spirit: then so
much as reason has of the light of God, so much it has of Jesus Christ.

Then the most excellent, the most supreme, and the sublimest reason is in
godliness, because in it is the greatest clearenesse, certainety, and light.
The Apostle calls it demonstration; now divine reason is demonstration, which
is an evidencing of things by the clearest, surest, and most irresistible light
that can be. Now Christ is this spiritual reason, for says the Apostle, that
which manifests is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. And what is that light but Christ and his
Spirit.

Thus I have given thee a taste of things, to set an edge to thy appetite, that
thou may make a fuller meal of Divine Dainties by reading the ensuing
Treatise, where thou have a Table richly spread. Now if thou art one of CHRIST'S
Friends, then come and eat of this honey, and drink of this wine, yea eat
and drink abundantly, O beloved. Here thou may eat and not surfeit; here
thou may drink, and not be drunken: the more thou eatest, the stronger will
thy appetite be; and the more thou drinkest, the more thou will thirst, and yet
with the greatest saturation and consent.

To conclude, Thou may find much of CHRIST in this Book; but see also
whether thou can find much of him also in thine own heart. Now that these
things, which are here written with Paper and Ink, may be written upon the
Table of thy soul by the finger of the Spirit, is the prayer of him, who is

Thine in the service of Christ, John Robotham.
October. 24. 1650.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Former Nine SERMONS.
Sermon. I.
Doct. 1. THE peculiar privilege of the Saints to see God. page 3 Several
ways of seeing God. 4 Peculiar sight of God, what. 8 The manner of the Saints
seeing God. 15 Use I. To show the happy estate of saints in this World. 17 Use
2. The sight of God should humble Saints. 21 Use 3. Highly to prize the
Preaching of the Gospel. 24
Sermon. II.
Saving sight of God known, first by the apprehensions of God, which are,
First, clear. 31 Secondly, precious. 34 Thirdly, joyful. 38 Fourthly,
perpetual. 40 Secondly, the sight of God known by the impressions. 41 First,
they are real. 43 Secondly, through. 44 Thirdly, universal. 45
Sermon. III.
Thirdly, the saving sight of God known by the expressions of it. 47 First,
purity of heart. 48 Secondly, changing us into Gods image. 54 Thirdly, love to
the Brethren. 56 Fourthly, Fellowshipp with Saints. 57 Fifthly, desire to bring
others to the light. 59 Sixthly, it enableth to suffering. 60 In what order
Saints come to see God. 1. All means in the world cannot make God known. 62 2.
Men must be borne again ibid. 3. They must be delivered from Satan's Kingdom.
64 4. They must have pure hearts. 66 Use 1. They that have seen God should
walk holily. 67
Sermon. IV.
Use 2. The reason of the difference between the godly and the wicked. 72 Use
3. Not to envy the prosperity of the wicked. 74 Doct. 2. The sight of God in
Christ, the way to true humiliation. 75 Reas. 1. All graces are wrought by
seeing of God. 87 Reas. 2. All that is in God is of humbling nature. 90 Use 1.
Unregenerate men cannot be truly humbled. 93
Sermon. V.
Trial whether we have seen God aright. 100 By our humiliation. 1. By our
carriage to God. ibid. 2. In Justification. 101 1. To take the righteousness
of another. 102 2. Upon Christ's bare word. 104 3. Upon a general word. 107 4.
To renounce our own righteousness. 108 5. Notwithstanding our sins, and want
of preparation. 109 2. By our carriage toward Gods truths revealed. 2. To be
willing to know all. 111 Wicked men's carriage toward Gods truths. 112 3. By
our carriage toward Gods commands. 116 Carriage of proud hearts toward Gods
commands. 118
Sermon. VI.
4. By our carriage toward God in afflictions. 124 1. A humble heart sees God
in affliction 126 2. He bath high thoughts of God. 128 3. He humbly submits
in affliction. 133 4. Envies not the prosperity of others. 135 5. Repents not
of receiving Christ. 137 6. Is more careful of his carriage then for
deliverance. 140 7. Is more careful of benefit then comfort in affliction. 142
8. Neglects not Gods commands in affliction. ibid. 9. Sticks close to Gods
Covenant in affliction. 143 10. Is apt to pray in affliction. 144 11. Is not
weary of waiting on God. 145
Sermon. VII.
The carriage of a humble heart to God for mercies. 148 1 He is content to be
denied any mercy. 150 2. That God should take away any mercy. 154 3. He will
wait for mercies. 156 4. He is content with the least mercy. 158 5. He is
thankful for a heart to receive mercies. 159 6. He is content that GOD should
make Laws for his mercies. 160 7. New mercies add to his thankfulness. 161
Sermon. VIII.
True humiliation known by our carriage toward men. 166 1. Toward sinners. 1.
With meekness. ibid. Cautions in meekness to sinners. 169 Why Saints should
be meek to Sinners. 173 1. They consider what they once were. ibid. 2. They
think themselves bad still. 174 3. It is God makes them differ. ibid. 4.
Others may come to be as good as they. ibid.
Sermon. IX.
The carriage of a humble heart toward Saints. 180 1. He thinks himself the
least of Saints. 181 2. He condiscends to the weakest Saints. 186 3. He is
jealous of those truths he knows. 187 4. Me^ke to Saints of another mind. 188
5. Yields to the reproof, or instruction of others. 189 6. Vndervalues not
grace in others. 191 7. He is readier to learn then teach. 192 8. He is not
discouraged by greater grace in others. 194 9. There is a sweetness to all
Saints. 194. 10. He will not offend other Saints. 196 11. Gentle to other
Saints infirmities. 197 12. Glad to do service for the Saints. ibid. 13.
Rejoices at the growth of grace in others. 198 14. He can love though he be
not loved. 199 15. He measures not himself, by himself. ibid.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Ten latter SERMONS.
Sermon. I.
Doct. 1. THe Law requires a perfect righteousness. page 209 Reas. 1. From
Gods Soveraignties. ibid. Reas. 2. From man's Covenant. ibid. Reas. 3. Nothing
can exempt from the Law. 210 Three ways to fulfill the Law. 211 Use 1. Vanity
of those that think to fulfill the Law. ibid. Use 2. Motive to come to Christ.
214 Doct. 2. The righteousness of the Law fulfilled in all Beleives. 217 Use
To see upon what our justification is buylt. 219
Sermon. II.
The Law fulfilled in us by our unyon with Christ. 224 Reas. 1. Christ a
public person. 226 Reas. 2. Union betwixt Christ and Beleivers. 227 Reas. 3.
God the Father satisfied. ibid. Use 1. To learn the ground of our
justification. 229 Use 2. The glorious condition of Saints in Christ. 235 Use.
3. Ta conform our selves to the will of God. 240 Three rules that all conform
to. ibid.
Sermon. III.
True believers, no Antinomians. 248 Doct. 3. Those that Christ satisfied the
Law for, walk according to the spirit. 250 To walk, what. 251 To walk
according to the spirit, what. 255 Three things meant by walking according to
the flesh. ibid. Use. Few shall be saved. 267 How to judge who are Saints. 270
Sermon. IV.
Use 1. How to judge who are Saints. 274 Use. 2. How to know we walk
according to the spirit. ibid. Use 3. Trial of our actions. 283
Sermon. V.
Use 4. Exhortation to those that have the spirit. 298 Use. 5. How men may come
to walk spiritually. 305 Use. 6. Ground of persecution and division. 313
Sermon. VI.
Doct. 4. They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh. 319
Reas. 1. Every thing works according to its principles. ibid. Reas. 2. Carnal
men know not spiritual things. 320 Quest. 1. What meant by being after the
flesh. 321 Quest. 2. What meant by the things of the flesh. 324 Quest. 3. What
meant by minding the things of the flesh. 334 Use. 1. Why most people
understand not spiritual things. 338
Sermon. VII.
Use 2. The misery of a carnal Man, what. 345 Use 3. The mind cannot be good,
if the life be naught. 352 Use 4. Christ dyed not for all alike. ibid. Use 5.
To see whether we be fleshly minded. 354
Sermon. VIII.
Doct. 5. Those that are after the flesh are swayed by fleshly reasonings. 360
Three sorts of minds. ibid. Three sorts of reasonings. 361 Godliness has the
best reason. 368 Use 1. Not to reject all reason in godliness. 380 Use 2.
Invitation to come to Christ. 381 Use 3. Godly men the wisest. 384
Sermon. IX.
The reasonings of the mind, the highest act of it. 388 Use. The most rational
men without grace, the worst. 38 The reasoning of the mind, the chief
distinguishing character. 390 How a good man may be moved with natural, and
carnal reasoning. 393 Use. 1. To try what grace, or corruption is in us. 394
Use 2. Why good men miss the will of God. 395
Sermon. X.
How Saints come to be led by spiritual reasoning. 402 1. The spirit-workes by
creation. 403 2. By spiritual illumination. 407 3. By suggestion. ibid. 4. By
conviction 408 5. By commemoration. 409 6. By consolation. ibid. 7. By
sanctification. 410 8. By exercising. ibid. Use 1. To see the fountain of all
good, and evil in the soul. 411 Use 2. To labor to be swayed by spiritual
reasoning.
A saving sight of God.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
IN this verse we have a description of true Gospel humiliation, (the most
that Isaiah wrote was Gospel, he was an Evangelicall Prophet) and in that
description there are these things.

First the occasion of this great humiliation God humbles his Ministers ere he
send them.
of the Prophet; and that was that God was now setting him forth in the
Gospel, to preach the will of God to the People. God when he sends Ministers
to his work, he does first humble them.



They can never do any thing to purpose for God till they be undone, Woe is me
I am undone (says the Prophet) in this verse, and then in the verses following
God sends him to preach; So that the maine cause why you have not Ministers,
according to God, that he does not bless their work, according to your heart
and desire, it is not for want of parts or understanding, or for want of Parts
or degrees, or the like: but the general, the maine cause is, because they are
not humbled, God has not undone them.

Secondly, there is the humiliation it self, which consists,

First, of an Act of the Understanding, whereby the Prophet saw some thing more
then he knew before, and cries out I am undone; he thought he was in a good
condition before; but now he does not merely say I am undone, but woe is me,
woe is me I am undone.

Thirdly, there is the Causes of it and the causes are twofold.

One is material (as you call it) that is sin, woe is me I am undone, Why?
Because I am a man, says the Septuagint. Indeed, a man as a man will be undone
if Sin, a cause of humiliation.
he see the glory of God, if he were not a Sinner: But says he, because I am a
man of unclean lips, and because I dwell among a People of unclean lips.
Because I see I have many sins, and because I see them; now the least sin is
exceeding sinful, even to dwell among wicked people, a man cannot choose but
be tainted with them: Therefore woe is me I am undone.

The other cause is in these words, I have seen the King the Lord of Hosts.
For a man may have sinenough and yet never be humbled or undone; as you know,
wicked men now have, and men, and Devils, The sight of God a humbling sight.
for ever will have hereafter in Hell, and yet they will never be humbled, they
will never be undone in this sense: but there was this thing to make it up,
mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, as we see in the verse
before in the Vision, how he had seen the Lord. So now we come to these words.
For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.



From which words you are to observe two things. The first is this, that

It is the peculiar privilege of the Saints and ever was, and ever will be, to
see God, to see the King, the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, that A true saving sight of the Lord of Hosts, of God in Christ
Jesus, is that principally, that undoes men, or truly and savingly humbles men.



I shall speak more particulerly of the latter, but we cannot well understand
the latter, without we have a little understanding in the former. For if you
would know how the sight of God humbles men, you must understand a little what
this sight, what this seeing of God is.

I shall speak briefly of the former Lesson which is this, that Doct. 1. The
peculiar privilege of the Saints, to see God.
It is a peculiar privilege of a Saint, and ever was, and ever will he, to see
God, to see the King of Glory the Lord of Hosts.



We do not now speak of the sight of God, that we call the beatificall
Vision, that sight of God we shall have in Heaven: for every one of you know
that wicked men shall never see God that way, But I say there is a sight of God
in this world, that every A sight of God in this world.
Saint in all Ages has had, and no other Son or Daughter of man from the
beginning to the end ever had, or shall have but those that are real Sts.
Concerning this sight, or seeing of God, we mean to speak, if God will, And
that you may understand it, you must Men are said to see God. (...) 1,
Corporeally.
know that there are diverse sorts of sights of God: Men are said many ways to
see God. As

First, there is a corporeal sight, a bodily sight of God, a seeing of God
with bodily eyes: and so the Scripture does often speak negatively, that No
man has seen God at any time that way; no man has seen his shape; that is
no man in this world with bodily eyes did ever see God, as though he were a
body, or a corporeal substance. Indeed men have seen Jesus Christ who was God;
and Christ Jesus says, Joh. 6, 36. Ye have seen me and heard me, and yet you
believe not in me. So that the Pharisees, the proud Pharisees that never were
humbled saw Jesus Christ, that was God. But yet that is not the sight here
spoken of, that peculiar sight which none but Saints have: For the former no
man ever had; and the latter, wicked men have as well as good; that is, wicked
men saw Christ bodily as well as good men.

Secondly, there is an other sight of God; that is, we 2. In works of creation
or providence.
may be said to see God in his works of creation, or providence; or rather to
speak more properly, we see the things of God; as the Apostle says, Romans 1.
they saw the invisible things of God, in the things that were made; that is, a
natural man may see a great power in that finger which made the Moon, and
great Wisdom in him that contrived the Sun, Moon, Stars, and all creatures
from the beginning. Now I say this may be said to be a seeing, or a knowing of
God: for in Romans 1. as it is said in one place, they saw the invisible things
of God; so afterward it is said, they knew God, who, because they knew God,
and glorified him not as God, God gave them up etc. There was some thing, some
fashion that they did see God in the creation, in the creatures, but this sight
of God is not that I mean to speak of, that glorious and blessed sight of
which Christ speaks Math. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see
God.

Thirdly, (besides the corporeal seeing, and the natural 3. By common
illumination.
seeing) there is a sight of God by the illumination of Gods spirit. I say,
Gods spirit may raise a man up to see things, which no man naturally ever did,
or could; yet it is not this sight. Now indeed, that more properly (as I said
of the former) is to see the things of God: Only the former is a seeing of the
things of God in the creature; and this is a seeing the things of God in the
Gospel. So in Heb. 6. 6. where mention is made of Hypocrites, that fall away
and are damned; it is said, they tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
enlightened: for there is the very word. Compare that with 2 Pet. 2. 20. In the
one, we read they were enlightened, and after fell off. In the other, we read
that by the knowledge of Christ, they were cleansed, and after fell, with the
Dog to his Vomit. I say, there is a Gospel sight of God, that has some
resemblance of this peculier privilege, but is not it. Men may have a sight to
know abundance of things, of the Kingdom of God; and so in a sort be said to
know, and to see God, yet this is not the peculiar sight I am to speak of.

Fourthly, there is a sight of God, which is not peculiar 4. At the day of
Judgment.
to the Saints; and that is at the day of Judgment; there, wicked people shall
see God. Only, they shall see him clothed with wrath, they shall see the Lord
coming out to judgment against them; they shall see that Man, that they
thought to be but a man, and no more, whom they crucified; they shall then see
him, God, coming to judge the world; they shall see him whom they have pierced:
And this is not that sight, that is the privilege of Saints. It is not a
corporeal sight, as the Jews had; nor it is not a common sight as the Heathens
have by the creation, or as Hypocrites have in the Gospel by illumination; or
as Reprobates shall have one day to their condemnation. It is none of these
sights. But

Fifthly, and lastly, there is a seeing of God in the A peculiar Gospel sight
only to Saints.
Gospel, by the Spirit of God, which is peculiar only to the People of God.
There was no Saint that ever was in the world, but had this sight, more or
less. There were few Saints in the old Testament, but somwhere or other it is
mentioned, and said of them, that they saw God; either directly, or by
consequence. As In the old Testament.
for instance in the old Testament, in the beginning of it (though in a
different manner) you read of diverse men that are said to be walkers with God,
As Noah Noah. Henoch. Abraham.
walked with God, and Henoch walked with God, and Abraham walked with God. Now
it is impossible, in a spiritual, right sense, that you can conceive of men to
walk with God, hand in hand, but it must necessarily imply, that they did see
God, how shall two walk together unless they be agreed? much less, unless
they see one another; for a man will not walk with one which he sees not.
Therefore it is said of Abraham, Joh. 8. 58. Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced..
He did not only see the time, (for that is not all) but he saw the glory of God
in Jesus Christ, though he were not yet manifested. Moses
So Moses also had this sight, as we read, Heb. 11. 27. It is said, by faith he
forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for he endured, as seeing
him who is invisible. Moses saw him, who is invisible: God is said to be
invisible, two ways; he is invisible in respect of any corporeal shape: And
God is said to be invisible, in respect of all mankind, besides the Saints: he
saw him who is invisible, he saw him whom never man saw, or shall see, but only
those that are in Christ, as Moses was. Of Solomon it is said, Solomon.
God appeared twice to him; God appeared often to Saul: therefore Saul thought
it strange, when the Lord appeared not unto him; But God did not appear to
Saul in all his days, with such an apparition, Isaiah.
and in that fashion as he did to Solomon. So Isaiah in the Text, he had a
peculiar sight that made him cry out, Woe is me, I am undone: for mine eyes
have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. It was common in the old Testament; and
in the new Testament, it is every where spoken of; you shall read of it more
fully in the New Testament, than in the Old. In Isaiah 52. 8. it was prophesied
concerning the new Testament; In the new Testament.
Thy watchmen shall lift up their voice; for they shall see eye to eye, when
the Lord shall bring again Zion. as the Apostle says 2 Cor. 3. We all behold
with open face. There was a kind of veil, over the best of them in the old;
though it were a peculiar thing to the Sts. Paul.
then to see God, yet now in the new Testament (though the sight be the same,)
yet it is a great deal clearer, and brighter, and nearer, and more glorious.
As to give you a few instances; as that of Paul 2 Cor. 12. He was wrapped up
into the third heaven, into Paradise, where he heard wonders that were not to
be uttered. What were those glorious things that he saw, that he could not
utter? Without controversy, the same that Stephen saw, Act. 7. The Heavens
were opened, Stephen.
and he saw Christ at the right hand of God, the glory of God in Jesus Christ.
And least you should think it was a thing peculiar to Paul, or Stephen, it is a
thing commonly spoken of in the new testament, of all the Saints; and when
Christ on the Mount says, And all the Saints,
blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God Mat. 5. without holiness
none shall see God. Heb. 12. As if he should say, any man that is holy shall
see God. In 1. Joh. 3. A man that lives in sin, has not seen God. And he that
loves not his Brother, has not seen God. It is a common thing, it is, it has
been, and it shall be, the Saints, and all the Saints have a peculiar sight of
God that the world knows not of.

To open it a little further, (that hearing that there is such a glorious
thing, you may look after it, and set your minds to consider it,) I shall
endeavor it as far as I may, according to Scripture, because there is nothing
but the light of the word, and Spirit that can discover this.

You will say, what is this sight? Or how is it? Or how shall we understand it?
This sight of God which only Saints have, is


I will lay before you these 4 or 5 propositions in general, that you may have
a little light of it out of the scriptures.

The first is this; that the sight of God, which the S^^ 1 Imperfect.
have in this world, it is but imperfect, it is but in part it is not full, and
complete, until they be in heaven. Not that I mean that they see some part of
God in this world, and they shall see him all in the other world. No, a Saint
sees God wholly here; he sees all that is in God; he sees his love, he sees
his power, he sees his strength, he sees his righteousness, he sees his mercy;
he sees his all Attributes far otherwise then a carnal man can; and that with
redundancie, with some thing more then a mere, or bare knowing of his
Attributes, though he see and know every one of those, and every particle of
those, otherwise then the world sees them; (so my meaning is,) yet he sees in
part, that is, he knows not any of these things perfectly. Therefore says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 9. We know in part, but hereafter we shall know as we are
known. Which words, (as I conceive) point not out principally Spiritual
things, that we know the will of God in part here, but we shall know his will
perfectly in Heaven, (though that be true;) for (it may be) it is not
necessary, that we should know the will of God so here: For then (it may be)
we should have more glorious Principles. But the meaning is, here we know
little of God; we know him in part; but he knows us wholly: But when we shall
come to Heaven, we shall know God, as he kows us, therefore that brake the
Apostles heart, and made him sigh Phil. 3. that he would have given all the
world if he had had it, that he might apprehend him, that comprehended him. As
if he had said, God sees me clearly, and groundedly, all the thoughts of my
heart, but I cannot apprehend God, as he does me. Therefore, because this
seeing of God is but in part in this World, because we see but little, it is
often in Scripture called, a not seeing. As in 1 John 3. 1. Now we are the Sons
of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be: but when he shall appear
we shall see him as he is. As if he had said, that sight that we have of him
now, it is scarce worth the calling a sight, So in 1 Pet. 1. Whom having not
seen, yet ye love. And in Romans 8. If we did see, why do we yet hope for it?
for hope is of that which is not seen. There is no Saint that can love God,
but he must see God: But the meaning of those phrases is, not that Saints see
not God, but they see so little, in comparison of what they shall see
afterward, that it may well be called not seeing; they love God, though they
have not gotten that perfect sight of God, that one day they shall have. Indeed
they shall have a perfect sight, not only in respect of the degrees of seeing,
but they shall have this addition also to it, that then they shall see God in
Christ with their bodily eyes; as Job says, I know that my redeemer lives,
and that I shall see God in my flesh, And what Job. 19. 1 Cor. 15.
that shall be, (when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to his Father) I
know not. That is one proposition to help us to understand this glorious
privilege, our seeing of God in this world is but in part.

Secondly, that seeing him in part, whatsoever it is, 2 unspeakable.
it is an unspeakable sight; a sight that no man is able to utter. As Paul
says, he was taken up into the third Heaven, and heard words that could not be
spoken; so doubtless the Saints see things that cannot be revealed; Therefore
says Paul, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man to conceive, those things that God has laid up for them that love
him. Now if they were speakable, demonstrable things, a man might give some
notions in writing; he might see, or speak, or hear, or give some knowledge,
he might consider of it: but the tongue, ear, and eye, and heart of man, is
not able to comprehend the glorious privilege, of the seeing the glory of God
in Jesus Christ, it is unspeakable; Therefore as the Apostle speaks of the love
of God, it passes knowledge, not only of a carnal, worldly man, but of that
man that has it, it passes his knowledge to comprehend it before God gives
it, but if God do but eclipse it a little, he cannot comprehend what it was
when he had it, though it were but yesterday; and when he has it, and has
most of it, he is not able to utter and express it. That is a second
proposition concerning this glorious privilege, it is imperfect, and it is
unutterable.

A third thing is this, that this glorious privilege 3. Only in Christ.
that the Saints have of seeing God, whatsoever that is, let it be more or
less, it is only in the face of Jesus Christ. For take any other sight of God;
take the corporeal sight, the seeing of the man Christ, that the Wicked may
do as well as the Saints. Or take the sight of God in the creatures, in his
providence, or the like; carnal men so see the things of God as the Saints do,
though not altogether so well; yet that is no peculiar thing. But this sight of
God that I speak of, it is only in the face of Jesus Christ, as it is in 2
Cor. 4. 4. 6. In whom the God of this world, has blinded the minds of them
that believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
image of God, should shine unto them. For God who commanded light to shine out
of Christ the face of God.
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is the face of God: and as we see
nothing of a man's body, but by his Face, so we see nothing of God but in Jesus
Christ: Therefore when Philip said to Christ, show us the Father and it is
sufficient; says Christ he that has seen me, has seen the Father: that is,
all in this glorious privilege of seeing God, must be through the man Jesus
Christ. Therefore that is the reason that the Saints heretofore, always when
they were at a loss, and could not see God, they still called for his face, O
show me thy face, that is, Lord show thy self to me in thy face, which is Jesus
Christ. Therefore if any man will see God, he need not go up to Heaven, or
descend down into the Deep, but he must look for it in the face of Jesus
Christ,

Fourthly, all this sight of God whatsoever it is, it is 4. It is by the word.
by the word and by the spirit: For as one godly man says, the face of Christ
Jesus is as the looking-glass wherein we see God; and the word of God is the
looking glass wherein we see Christ. Therefore in 2 Cor. 4. God has sent us,
to make known the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And then says he,
we have this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellency of power might be
of God, and not of us. He had said before that by the preaching of the Gospel,
he had made known the glory of God, in the face of Christ. Now in this poor
despicable thing; a man that has a world of infirmities and many weaknesses in
him; yet in these poor earthen shells, (as the word is in the original) God
has put this treasure. As we find in natural things, Pearls are in the shells
of little fishes, and the shell is worth nothing: So, though we be little
worth, God has made the preaching of the Gospel by us, the way to bestow
these glorious privileges. He will make known himself in Christ, the same that
shall be for ever hereafter, which only the Saints enjoy; and this is by the
word,

And it is by the Spirit, as it is in 2 Cor. 3. Where And by the Spirit.
the spirit is, there is liberty; where it is not, there is a veil over the
heart, and mind that none can take aaway, but the spirit of God. Where the
spirit is, there is liliberty. What is that? When a man has the Spirit he is
freed from that Veil; his eyes are opened; as he says after, we that are Sts.
we have no veil, but we behold with pen face, the glory of God. Through the
Gospel, we see Christ; and through Christ; the Father; the glory of the Lord:
but how? By the spirit of the Lord; that is, the Spirit of the Lord uncovers
the face, and annoints the eyes. Therefore the Spirit is called Ointment;
because he annoints the eyes; and he is called Eye Salve, Revel. 3. he helps us
to see. So thus you have a little, for it is an unspeakable thing, and
therefore we can only speak a little, aloof, afarr off, that you may know that
there is such a thing; but it is God himself that must bestow it on you and me.

I will add one more particular, because I find it in the Scripture, concerning
this seeing of God. I find it is spoken of 3 ways, or (as it were) in 3
paths.

First the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ when The Father shows us Christ.
we were dead in sins, and when we saw nothing at all, the Father shows us
Christ. Before we have any thing to do with Christ actively, the Father has
many things to do on us passively, as Christ says Joh. 17. Father, all that
were thine, thou gave them to me. Before Christ comes the Father is making
the match, and commending his Son to us, when we are merely passive in it.
For that is a general rule, a man never acts, but by Jesus Christ; therefore
let men talk what they will, God may do what he will passively on me, but I
am, not to acts at all till Jesus Christ come, but I say, passively, the Father
was woing us to his Son, and no man (says Christ) comes to me except the
Father draw him; and those that have learned, and are taught of the Father come
to me. Joh. 6. 45. That (I say) is one sight that a poor sinner has, a sight
of the Excellency of Jesus Christ. Now it may be if thou look back, and
consider how God did deal with thee at the first, thou can remember when
many times Jesus Christ was presented to thee in his excellency, sometimes
more, sometimes less, and thou saw him an excellent person, and would
have given a world for him; and did account it a heaven, and happiness to
enjoy him. Now whence was this, but that the Father was willing to make the
match between his Son, and thee, and showed this excellency of him?

Secondly, I find, on the other side, in Scripture, Christ shows us the Father
that the Son Christ gives us to see the Father: for the Father is not seen
all this while; thou see not who shows thee that Excellency: thou see
Christ before, and would give a world for him; but thou know not who
opened the Window; it is the Father; and then Christ only shows the Father;
that is, after thou art married to Christ, and Christ will show thee thy
Friends. When Christ has married the Soul, he will show it what riches is in
him; what grace, righteousness, and goodness: and says Christ, I have a
Father, and I am willing that you should be acquainted with him, and know him:
so Christ leads us to the Father; that is that Christ speaks Joh. 14. Ye know
me, and ye know the Father. And says he, have thou seen me, and not known the
Father? he that has seen me has seen the Father: for we see the Father
through Christ, that is all the knowledge we have of the Father. for the Father
is another person, just like Christ; he is invisible, no eye ever saw him but
through Christ; that is, I see, what pity, and love, and grace, and goodness
is in Christ, and such is in the Father. There are no two things in all the
creation of God, that are so like one another, as the Father is to Jesus
Christ: so that as though I know one Egg, I may know another; and yet two Eggs
are not comparable, or to be mentioned for likeness, as the Father is to
Christ. So that if a man have perfect understanding of Christ, he will have
also of the Father.

Thirdly, both these, though the one be passive, and Both done by the Spirit.
the other active; that now I must look with mine own eyes that Christ has
put in my head to see the Father: though the Father showed Christ to me when I
was blind, and dead; I say both are done by the Spirit of God, who is called
sometimes the spirit of God, and sometimes the spirit of Christ; and Christ
says, the spirit shall take of my things, and show them to you. So the Spirit
from the one, and the other makes manifestations. So you have seen a little
toward the opening of this glorious privilege that the Saints have, of seeing
God in this world. The manner how the Saints see God.


There are 4 or 5. things more which the Scripture speaks of our seeing of God,
and which the Saints find by experience. I shall but briefly touch them.

I have told you that a Saint sees God but in part, 1 They see but a part.
and yet a Saint sees but a part of God (as it were) at any time. He sees not
God fully in any thing, and yet he sees but a part (as it were) of God almost
at any time; that is, the Lord does not discover al his glory to any Saint at
once: but sometimes the Lord reveals to his child, and lets him see his
glorious power, in such a way as no carnal man ever shall. Another while he,
lets him see the glory of his Justice, and that, it may be ravisheth him for a
time. Another while God sheds his love into his heart, and sets that before
him, God might show himself at once, he might show himself fully if he
pleased: but this is his manner, and dealing as we see in the Scriptures, and
as the Saints find generally in Experience. That is one thing.

Then secondly, in this sight of God, though the 2. What they see is amiable.
Lord show but part of himself at once, sometimes it may be a greater part
then at an other time; yet that part, be it what it will, and be it little or
much, yet it is all amiable in the eye of a Saint, and operative in his soul;
my meaning is this, you are not to conceive as though it were the glorious
privilege of a Saint, to see one side of God as it were, and not another: but
that that is most terrible in God to wicked men, that is also I say amiable,
and lovely in the eye of a Saint. As the power of God, the greatness of God,
the Justice of God. Even these things that the wicked abhor and hate, the
Lord uses to reveal them to his Saints, in Excellent Glory. That is an other
thing. 3. God shows himself variously.


Then thirdly, God does show himself to his children by various
manifestations. My meaning is this, God does not always show himself in the
same manner, and fashion to his child; God (as it were) comes in a new dress,
every day to the Soul of his Child, all the days of his life in this world,
and for ought he knows, for ever in the world to come. As it is unspeakable to
say how God appears to the soul of a Saint: so the manifestations are
innumerable, the strange ways that God comes to the soul: he shows himself to
day this way, to morrow after another, and the third day after another. The
Lord manifests himself variously. That is another thing

Then fourthly it is by various means also that God 4 By various means.
comes in by. You must understand he comes always through Jesus Christ: but
then for other lower means, he chooses what means he pleases; he comes in,
sometimes by afflictions, and corrections; sometimes by common providence,
sometimes in the word preached, sometimes in meditation, sometimes in prayer;
some times one way, sometimes another. The Lord can take any way, any creature,
any providence, any thing to convey himself by, to the Soul of his Child, in
a saving way. 5 It is not constant.


Then lastly, this sight of God which is the privilege of the Saints, it is
not constant, (for ought I know) to any Saint, no, not under the New Testament,
much less, under the Old: but the Saints have their desertions in the new
Testament, God hides his face, though not as often as he did in the old. Now let
me desire you to lay up these things: because they will be necessary when we
come to speak of the other doctrine. So much concerning the manner, how God
reveals himself to his children.

I shall now come to the Uses of this, and then way will be made for the other
point, to show how this sight of God does truly, and kindly, and savingly
humble us.

For the Use of this. First this shows the happy estate Use. 1. The happy
estate of a Saint in this world.
of a Saint in this world, that he has (as it were) a heaven upon earth,
because he sees God. If thou would consider seriously, that there is such a
glorious privilege as this; thou would say, blessed is the man that has
it, and cursed and unhappy is the man that has it not; it is our Saviors word
in the beginning of his Sermon Math. 5. Blessed are the pure in heart; for they
shall see God. Now purity of heart is not the blessing properly, but the seeing
of God. He that is pure in heart is a blessed man says Christ, for he shall
see God. So that if thou will believe Christ Jesus, If thou be a Saint, and see
God, and can say, the Lord has revealed his glory to my soul in Jesus
Christ; then oppose that to any misery that can be in this world. Put any
misery that makes a man unhappy in this world, in the one scale, and that
privilege of seeing God in Christ in the other scale; and surely thou will see
that thou art a blessed, and happy man. As, suppose thou art a poor man, a
plundered man, a persecuted man, or a sick man or woman; be it what it will, if
thou can see God in the face of Jesus Christ, if thou will believe Christ who
is the truth thou art a blessed man, a blessed woman. Suppose a man were sick,
and should never see health; suppose he were weak, and should never see
strength, suppose he were poor, and should never see wealth; suppose he were
banished, and should never see his Country, or his Friends. Nay, suppose a man
were stark blind, and should never see the natural Sun; yet if he have a pure
heart, he shall see God, and if thou will believe Christ Jesus, thou art a
blessed man or woman. All the blessedness in this world put together; all that
mankind ever enjoyed from the creation, is not worthy to be compared, with one
glance of that sight that a Saint has thousands of in his life, of the glory
of God in Jesus Christ.

We are wont to say that there is this difference The beatifical vision in this
life.
and only this difference, between heaven, and earth, that glory differs from
grace, but only in degrees; that glory, and grace are the same, and that glory
is the perfection of grace. That is very true, I deny it not: for we shall be
clothed upon with glory. But some conceive that the beatificall vision, that
blessed sight is not in this world, we shall not have it till we come to
Heaven, It is true, we shall not fully, and perfectly: but it is not true any
otherwise, then as the part differs from the whole: For here, even in this
world, a Saint in some measure has it, he sees God as truly, and rightly as
ever he shall hereafter in Heaven; therefore you may see what it is to be a
Saint. If God should take a poor Drunkard, or Swearer, and but show his Soul,
(as it were) through his fingers, or through a gold ring, one glance of this
sight, he would never be a Drunkard or Swearer, he would never be a Railer, and
live as a Sott again, all the days of his life, No, it is a glorious
condition that a Saint is in.

Therefore meet God, and labor to know his glory in Christ. And for shame be
not discouraged for every trifle in the world. When you hear that wicked men
prosper, that they have wealth, and they see their children before their eyes,
and their Bull gendereth, and their Cow calveth, as it is in Job, envy not
their quality, one glance of this blessed sight is worth more then all that
ever they had, or shall have; therefore pity them. Nay, if thou were in prison
to night, and should dye to morrow the most cruel death that ever was, yet
if the face of God shine on thee, thou art a blessed man, it is a glorious
condition; thou may say with David, My lot is fallen in a good ground, I
have a goodly heritage. The Lord has denied me worldly things, wit, and
wealth, and honor, and credit, but God has been pleased to bestow this, the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ. Therefore never look
dejected or sad more; envy others no more; but pity them, and weep for them,
thou have infinitely a greater treasure, as the Apostle says, we have this
treasure in earthen Vessels. What is that treasure? Nothing in the world, but
the manifestation of God in Christ; therefore bring thy soul to the resolution
of that Disciple, Lord show us the Father, and we are satisfied: So say to God,
Lord show me thy glory in Jesus Christ, and I have enough, though I have not
wealth, nor glory, nor money, nor any thing, let the world have all, I have a
good bargain I will bless, and praise thee world without end.

And if this be the privilege, and blessedness of a St. The misery of wicked
men.
to see God. Then see also what a miserable condition thou art in, that art a
poor carnal man, that though it may be thou see thy wealth increase, and
thy Children playing in the streets, yet thou never saw God, thou never
had one glimpse of this glorious privilege that I now speak of. Therefore as
it is the chief thing in Heaven to see God; so doubtless it must be the chief
thing in Hell to be thrown away from Gods presence, not to see God. Therefore
in 2 Thessalonians. 1. it is said that wicked people shall be punished from his
presence; that is the maine thing in Hell to be thrown from the presence of
God, never to see his face more, so a carnal man has a Hell upon Earth; thou
that art not a new creature thou art in Hell as it were already: because the
main thing to be had in this world, and in the world to come, thou do wholly
want. That is the first thing.

Secondly, if this be so, that there is such a glorious Use 2. The fight of God
should humble Saints.
prerogative of the Saints to see God; then this above al things in the world
should most humble thy soul for thy sins (as hereafter I shall show more
fully) this should move thee to mourn for thy sins. Why so? You all know it is
not properly, at least, not merely the knowing of sin, and of the wrath, and
curse that will melt the heart: that, of it self hardens the heart; but you
know by your own experience, that when you come to the vein, where those
sweet tears of repentance lie, it is the seeing of the kindness of God, of
the goodness of God, of the mercy of God; and then to think that I should be
such a wretch, as to abuse his goodness; to grieve, and provoke him that is my
Father, and to crucify him again, and again, that is my Savior. Mercies, even
common mercies Common mercies abused humble a Saint.
melt the heart; when a man considers, I was the other day sick, and God
restored me; and that I should be such a wretch since! this grates upon the
heart; as in 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. Where God by the Prophet tells David of his sin;
and as a motive to humble him, says he, I made thee King of Israel, and Judah;
and if that were too little, I gave thee wealth, I gave thee thy Masters house,
and thy Masters wives into thy bosom. I took thee when thou were a little lad
following the sheep, and I made thee King of Israel, and if this had been too
little, I would have given thee more; but that thou should play the
villain, that thou should go and take an honest man's wife, he that had but
one sheep, and play the Beast, and do folly in Israel; this was that that
wounded the heart of David, and thereupon he went and penned 7. penitential
Psalms, and goes, and cries, have mercy upon me O God according to the
multitude of thy mercies. These mercies that are ordinary, when we walk
unworthily they grate the heart.

But if a man can come, and say, God has bestowed Spiritual mercies abused
cause greatest humbling.
that on me, that he has not upon any reprobate; the knowing, or the enjoyment
of the knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, O, as it is a mercy
unutterable, and invaluable, that the soul is not able to express it when it
has it: (Indeed the soul can say, it never found the creature, but it left
the Soul unsatisfied, or worse then it was: but says the soul, if Gods face
shine but a quarter of an hour, if it be but in a bush, or in a Garret, I am
satisfied, I desire no more, if this might but continue. As a man prizeth this
more then any thing in this world;) so if a man do but consider, that I should
be so base, as to anger that God that bestowed this, as I do when I sin; and
have knowledge enough to know it to be sin; when I look through the door, and
know it is a Thief, and might keep him out, yet that I should be so proud, and
so vain, and so idle; that I should let go so many glorious opportunities in
such, and such places, and times, O, this is that that troubles a Saint.
Therefore we see in 1 King 11. When the Lord would humble Solomon the Son of
David for his sins, and bring him to repentance. It is said there, he went not
fully after the Lord, as David his Father did (the more too blame he) he built
high places for Chemosh, and Molech; Solomon built Altars and offered sacrifice
to Idols; and likewise he did it for all his strange wives; And the Lord was
angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel,
which had appeared to him twice. which had appeared twice to him; there is the
motive to aggravate it. The Lord was angry, not so much because he had so many
sins, and had built so many Altars, but this was the aggravation, because the
Lord had appeared twice to Solomon, so as he had never done to any other from
the beginning of the world; the Lord appeared savingly, and spiritually to him,
and yet he sinned against him.

Now if God appeared to Solomon but twice, and his sin is aggravated by that;
how great is my sin in the Gospel, where things are more clearly presented,
then ever they were in those times, and God has appeared two hundred times,
two thousand times to my soul: I have seen him one while in the Sacrament, I
have seen him among the Saints, I have seen him in such a country, in such a
condition, in such a place, in such a meadow, in such a wood, when I read his
word, and called upon his name, and yet that I should be such a Villain, that
I should be thus proud, and thus froward, and love the world so much, and so
easily provoke God, and lie so sottishly in it when I have done; it is one of
the greatest motives in the World, to move a spiritual heart to be abased, and
humbled for sins past.

And likewise to preserve it from sin for the time Sight of God a preservation
from sin.
to come, I have set God (says David) at my right hand that I might not sin
against him; that is, I will keep God in my eye.

The Eye of God is a means to keep a man from sin: for who will sin in the eye
of God? therefore says God to Abraham, walk before me, and be perfect. The
Servant may do ill behind his Masters back, but walk before me, and then thou will be upright, therefore when men sin they are said to leave God: but says
David I have set God at my right hand, that I might not sin against him, I
will always see God, as I see a man that walks at my right hand.

Thirdly, if there be such a sight of God to be Use; 3. Highly to prise the
preaching of the Gospel.
enjoyed in this world, and that by his word and Spirit; me thinks this might
teach you highly to prize, and esteem the preaching of the Gospel, the word
of Christ. Truly, (beloved) if you do not look on the Gospel with a
spiritual consideration; to a carnal eye it is the poorest, and driest, and
most beggarly thing in the world; for, there are none that have more
weaknesses, then the dispensers of it. It is a thing that should fill men with
admiration to consider what it is to have poor creatures to do the work of
God that have a world of weaknesses more then other men, who are more exact in
their ways as Lawyers, and Tradesmen, etc. To a carnal eye the preaching of
the Gospel is a dead, drousie thing; a man shall hear many things that he
heard before, and be taught till he sleep, and be tired out, unless he look on
it with a spiritual eye. As the East India Merchant when he sees such a shell
he considers what is in it; there is a glorious Pearl in it, and for that he
goes many a Mile. So do you consider that the preaching of the Gospel by
poor and weak means, it is that shell, that Cabinet, wherein these glorious
treasures are found; therefore esteem it, and prise it highly, look on it with
reverence, look for the Pearl in it; prise it, and praise God for it.

It may be some of you, that are sleepy Why men see not the excellency in the
Gospel.
creatures, may say, I cannot tell that there is any such thing in it; and
others are so sottish to this day, that they no more know nor understand, what
we have bin doing in the preaching of the word these 12. months, then a Post.

It is not because the treasure is not here, but you shall see the reason, 2
Cor. 4. 4. the reason why you see it not; is because, The God of this world
has blinded your eyes, that the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,
should not shine upon your Souls. God shines upon one man's Soul, and not upon
another, another sees nothing but a poor Preacher, full of weaknesses, and so
he gos away, and remembers little or nothing, or it may be sleeps all the
while. Beloved for the Lord Jesus sake trifle not: It makes me tremble to
consider seriously how those decrees, that are infinite, and innumerable that
were before the beginning of the world, are to be opened, when we preach the
word; yonder man, and yonder woman, we know not whether of them belong to God,
or the Devil; but when we preach the decree is opened; there is a poor man, or
a poor woman that belongs to life, it makes him a new creature; another is as
very a Sot at the years end, as at the beginning; who would not tremble, when
God threatens to seal up your condition by it! O! it is a glorious thing, the
Gospel. Look to it you sottish people, that are like the Fool in the
Proverbs, that tell him a tale, and when you have done he will ask, what is
the matter; or as, a man asleep, that knows nothing what he has been doing.
For the Lords sake consider what we are doing, and what the Gospel is; and
what it is to have one day of the Son of man; it is a very strange word in Luke
17. 32. consider of it thou poor sottish creature: When Christ was demanded of
the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God should come, he answered them, The
Kingdom of God comes not with observation. Neither shall they say, lo here,
or lo there, for behold the Kingdom of God is within you, or among you; And he
said unto his Disciples, the days will come when ye shall desire to see one of
the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it. And yet he says after,
they shall see the day of the Son of man. We are to consider, the son of Man,
the Lord Jesus Christ has two sorts of days: He has one 2 Sorts of days of
the Sons of man.
day that every wicked man shall see, when they shall be eating and drinking as
in the days of Noah; When the Son of man shall come to judge according to my
Gospel, as Paul preaches; and according to the Gospel The day of judgment.
that you have here preached; That is, one day of the Son of man. And thou that
wilt not receive Christ, thou shall have thy belly full of that day, it will be
a terribble day, a day of blacknes and darkness when the earth shall reele as a
drunkard, and the heavens shall be gathered together as a scrowle, and the
world shall be on fire, and thou shall be at thy wits end, it will be a
terrible day: the Lord deliver thee from that day.

But the Son of Man has another day, that is, The day of grace.
the day of grace, the day wherein the Son of man in the preaching of the
Gospel would bestow grace upon thy Soul. Why does he call that the day of the
Son of man more then the other? He delights more in it; he delights not in the
death of a sinner. This is that sweet day that Jesus Christ delights in, to
offer himself to thee, and to lay before thee, life and salvation by his death.
These things were not written for them only, but for us also. Remember, the day
will come when thou shall desire to see one day of the son of Man, but shall
not see it. Thou will say, O that I had one such day, as we have now in this
place; when the Preacher told me of seeing God, and Christ; O that I had but
one day, but one motion in my heart, by the Spirit that I had then, and yet I
sotted it out and did forget it; O that God would smile as he did then, but it
shall not be. Therefore the Lord help you that you do not trifle out your
salvation, as abundance in this Nation, and in this City do, between
sottishnes and formalitie. Abundance of People hear the word, but here is
abundance of formalitie; few men consider with whom they have to do, when they
hear the word of God, and what the business is, but in a trifling manner pass
it by: Therefore consider what treasure there is in the Gospel; there are
unsearchable treasures in the Gospel; but of all, this is the Jewel of all,
the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. I shall leave
other things for the next opportunity.

SERMON 2.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
YOu remember the Lesson that God taught us from these words the last day;
that, The Saints have a peculiar privilege above all others, that they can
even in this world see God. They can see God in Jesus Christ.



I did open this, as far as I could dive into the scriptures unto you, and
proved it, and made some Uses of it. There is somewhat yet remains of it,
which I shall endeavor briefly to go through, and then we shall come to the
next point, which is, that, A right saving sight of God, of the glory of God in
Jesus Christ, is the way to true Gospel humiliation.



We have made 3. uses of the former point.

First, to show the privilege of the Saints, that they, and they only can see
God.

Secondly, that the sight of God should humble the Saints for their sins.

Thirdly, it should teach us to prise the preaching of the word, whereby this
glorious privilege is discovered, and wherein this excellent treasure is
contained.

There are two things that I shall endeavor this day, as the Lord shall help
me in this great mystery, to make out to you.

The one is, seeing there is such a glorious privilege to be had, and blessed
is the man that has it, as I told you; Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God. Purity of heart is the qualification, and seeing of God is the
reward, the highest step of it. And seeing there is such a Curse to a man that
sees not God, how shall we know whether ever we had this privilege? whether
God has vouchsafed to us this peculiar sight of him? I have seen the King,
the Lord of Hosts.

Then secondly, if I have it not, what course I shall take to attain it? I
shall speak of these two things only this day.

Concerning the former; I need not give you This peculiar fight of God known.
signs, or marks, to know whether a Drunkard, or a Whoremonger, or a blind
carnal creature, that knows nothing of the will of God; whether any of these
see God.

But the business comes to this: Seeing there is a Gospel enlightening, or
illumination; seeing there is a kind of sight of God in Christ, that an
Hypocrite has, and yet it is not the glorious sight that the Saints have; the
question will be, how we shall know the one from the other? And then there will
be a light whereby a sinner, a carnal man may know his estate; that will flow
from the other: For, if we discover the one, it will be easy by that light to
discover the other.

For your information in the former (according as I understand by considering
of the Scripture, and seeking the Lord, and searching mine own heart) I shall
reduce all to these 3 heads: You may know it 3 ways.

First, by your apprehensions of it.

Secondly, by the impressions that this has upon you.

Thirdly, by the Expressions or Effects that it works.

I shall endeavor to clear these three things to you.

First, I say by your apprehensions. That is, by 1 By our apprehension of God
which are.
the manner of your apprehending God in Christ. Because (that I may speak
punctually in the language of the Scriptures) though another man may be said to
see God, and to know God, yet he apprehends not God, or Christ, or any thing
that belongs to either in that way and manner that an Elect Saint does.

Now there are these 3 things in the apprehensions of a Saint that sees God
aright.

The first is this, these apprehensions of him, they 1 Clear apprehensions.
are clear apprehensions of him; the Hypocrites apprehensions, they are dark
and doubtful, they are mysty; I say the apprehensions of a Saint they are
clear. I do not mean by clear, that they are full: For, I told you before,
as the Apostle says, why do What meant by it.
we yet hope, if we seen that is, if we did fully see. Neither do I mean by
clear, that they are always constant, that we have them without any doubts,
or darkness, or mists: especially in the old Testament, the Saints were many
times eclipsed, and God hid his face, and they were at a loss, they knew not
where to see him; in the morning he was seen, and he was gone at night; and so
for a little moment (as it is said) he would come, and then be gone again,
that is not the meaning. But when I say they are clear, as it is, 2 Cor. 3. We
all with open face, behold the glory of God. With open face; that is, we do
not see God, as a man sees through a handkerchiefe, or through a Sieve, or
through a Skarfe, or a Cloud; but with open face; we see him clearly, our
apprehensions are clear; that is, there is an assurance going Assurance in the
Saints apprehensions.
along with your apprehensions, that does certify your Souls, and assure your
souls, that it is God that you see, it is a sight of God. For as in natural
things, you know, that by the same light whereby I see the Sun, by the same
light I know that I see him: So there is in the very manifestation of God to
the soul, it carries a witness in it self, it is so clear, that when I have
it, though I never had it before, and I cannot demonstratively speak a word
what it is, yet I know as it is Gods sight, so I know I see him. A Saint knows
so surely, and certainly, as that there is not the least doubt to his soul of
that sight. As in 1 Cor. 2. (which is worth observing) you shall find that
there is a great mystery that Paul says that a Saint sees, that a carnal,
natural man cannot perceive; there be the deep things of God; and one of them
he says is Christ Jesus: for the Pharisees, the Princes of the world did not
know him, they did not know, him and the Father to be one, as it is Joh. 14:
Now in that mystical knowledge in that 1. Cor. 2. observe two things.

First, you shall see that there is a mystery in knowing A mystery in the
manner of the Saints knowledge.
these things: Not in the knowing of the things for the matter, I told you they
are not mystical in the matter; for they are nothing but the death of Christ,
and the power of his resurrection, and the like, that he calls, the deep
things of God, that Christ dyed for us, etc. But the depth is in the manner of
the knowing of them; they that are Hypocrites know them for the matter; they
know Christ from top to toe, they see him dead and buried, and put in the
Grave, and the like, but they do not spiritually know them.

So also, the other mystery of that spiritual knowledge The Saints know that
they know the things of God.
is in the knowing that they did know: It is one thing to believe, and another
thing to know that I do believe; and it is one thing to know spiritual
mysteries, and another thing to know that I do know them.

Now when the Apostle had done with the former, he comes to the latter, and
tells them that they had a light, whereby they knew the things that were freely
given them of God: As he says, no man knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of a man that is in him. So I have the Spirit of God, that I know the
things, and I know that I know them. So the mystery of spiritual knowledge is
to know heavenly things in a spiritual manner, and then to know that I know
them. It is one thing to know spiritual things, and it is another to know that
I know them. It is one thing for God to give heavenly things, and it is another
to know that God has given them. This is the meaing of it, when I say that the
people of God have a sight of God, and it is a clear sight; that is, it
carries such a kind of evidence to the soul, that thou know assuredly, as
thou know any thing in the world, that thou see God in Jesus Christ.

Therefore it was a known case among them in the old Testament (and much more
must it be in the new) it was so certain, that if God were away but for a
moment, they presently missed him, and they cried, Thou have hid thy face, and
when will thou come again? and over night he would be gone, and they were
troubled, and they knew him as soon as he came, and they missed him when ever
he went. Now when thou have but a blind confused apprehension of God, and it is
but thinking, and hoping, and thou missest God, and thou know not what is
become of him, nor thou look not after him, suspect thy apprehension of him,
that it is not right: for if it be a right knowledge, it is as clear as the
Sun, though it be not fully clear, yet it is so clear, that thou know that
thou have God; and thou do miss him if he be gone but for a time: That is
one thing.

Secondly, these apprehensions, as they are clear, 2 Precious apprehensions.
so they are precious; they are sweet apprehensions to thy soul. Thou
accountest one thought of God, one right apprehension of God, in Jesus Christ,
worth a whole world; therefore we see in Psalm. 137. 17. The Prophet David, (who
was well acquainted with God; says he, how precious also are the thoughts of
thee O God! how great is the sum of them; if I account them they are more in
number then the sands: when I awake, I am still with thee. They are many then;
and that is a shame for us in the New Testament, that they had such
apprehensions, and we should have so few. And how precious are they! says he.
As if he had said, I love my Wife well, and my Husband well, and I love to have
things about me; and to have health after sickness: But Lord, how precious are
the thoughts of thee O God! how rich is one thought of God! What a rich man am
I, when I have one thought of God: Now these apprehensions are precious in
these 3 respects.

First, they are precious, because every one of those 1 They satisfy the Soul.
thoughts fully satisfy the soul. Take any thing in this world, as it may be
thou have an estate, or thou have such friends, or thou have such comforts:
Take any thing whatever thou can, there is an emptines left still in some
corner of the soul, it is not filled. A man may say when he is highest in the
comforts of the world, I am not fully satisfied, there is some disquiet in my
Spirit; there is somewhat, whatsoever it is, behind the back of that comfort
that I look for. But when a man has thoughts and apprehensions of God aright,
they satisfy the soul, and fill it with such contentedness, that a man can
say, I have enough; and he can say with Peter, when he saw the glory of God. It
is good to be here; though he had neither meat nor drink, but were upon a
mountain; only he saw the glory of God; and says he, It is good to be here.
Therefore we might see, in diverse places that I could reckon in Scripture, as
in Psalm. 17. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, (I will
behold thee in Christ) and when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thine Image:
I shall be satisfied says he. So also in Psalm. 63. 3, 4, 5. I shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and that is a choice thing in this
world, though it come far short of this. And so Paul, Phil. 3. I account all
Dung for the precious and excellent knowledge of Christ: As if he had said, I
would be satisfied with this, though I had not a penny in the world. Now it is
not so with an Hypocrite (therefore examine your heart, and look upon
Apprehensions of Hypocrites satisfy not.
it) an Hypocrite, when he is enlightened, he may have some sweetness, and there
is some pleasure; as when his gifts are enlarged; or when spiritual things
especially when new notions come in his mind for ever the knowledge of new
things is pleasant, both natural, and spiritual: Yet notwithstanding an
Hypocrite is not satisfied, with the sight of God in Christ, he cannot say I
desire no more; but he says, I will be Rich for all this, I will cozen, and
cheat for all this: Therefore I have always observed, that the best of wicked
men, those that we have reason to suspect, that they are not right, and they
may have a great deal of joy, and such like; yet they are as greedy and
griping after the world, and as proud and vain as others, and that is an
argument that they are not satisfied. Another poor Christian, though he make
not such a blaze with gifts, and expressions, yet he sees God, now and then,
and he can tread and trample upon the world, he can despise pleasures, and
friends, and honors, and riches, and can look on them as crucified things, as
Paul did, and can say, I remember, in such a Country, in such a Chamber, in
such a place, where God showed himself to me, and I was satisfied; I saw every
thing vanish before me, and I desired nothing but that, and I could desire to
change, my wealth, and all for that, so that might be continued, and enlarged:
That is one thing.

Secondly, they are precious, because he is not satisfied. 2 There is a desire
of more.
This is no contradiction though it seem to be one. My meaning is this, that
wherever there is this apprehension of God, though it satisfy in respect of
lust, and sin, and the world, and the Devil; yet it creates, and begets in the
soul a greater thirst for more of that apprehension. Therefore we see
clearly, Phil. 3. where Paul runs a race (as it were) after the knowledge of
God in Christ: See what the Apostle says. I account all as Dung, and Dross,
for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and account them Dung; I have lost all, and I
am not sorry for it: And why is all this? That I may know him, and the power of
his resurrection. Now Paul was a Preacher, and did he not know Christ? there
had been a blind Preacher. He was an Apostle, and Doctor of the Gentiles; and
did he not know the resurrection? Yes, but the meaning is this, He forgate that
which was behind, as we see after; that is, all that apprehension he had of God
in Christ, he forgate it, in regard of the affection to desire more, he did not
eye what he had: Therefore says he, I say, not as though I apprehended; but I
desire to apprehend him, by whom I am comprehended, to see the glory of God,
that comprehends me in Jesus Christ. I speak not (says he) as though I had
attained; as if he had said, I know nothing in comparison of the insatiable
desire I have to know more.

And that is the reason why Hypocrites are very loath to dye, when danger and
death approaches; Hypocrites loath to dye, Why?
whereas a right Saint is wondrous desirous to dye; Why so? Says the Apostle,
That I may be with Christ. Phil. 1. Whereto compare that in Joh. 17. that I may
see God, and have the same glory with Jesus Christ.

Therefore thou may try thy self by this: if thou have something that is
like the apprehension of God (I speak not to dull creatures that are altogether
in the world, all the year long) but if God work on thee in his word, and
there is some light come in, and some sweetness, yet if thou be glutted with
this, and when thou come home thou throwest God away, and thou look after
thy lust, and after thy sin, thou never yet had a right appresion of God:
For, if thou see God aright, thou will look for more, and more, and for ought
I know, thou will have more, and more, world without end.

Thirdly, and lastly; these apprehensions are precious, 3 They are accompanied
with transcendent joy.
because there is a transcendent super-excellent, exceeding joy and delight, in
the enjoyment of them, Abraham saw my day, and rejoiced, says Christ: He did
not see his day as an animate creature; but he saw the mystery of God that
should be fulfilled in those days, that is the meaning; so Araham saw my day,
and rejoiced. So there is a very pregnant word concerning this, in Isa. 35. The
Desert shall rejoice, and the Wilderness shall be glad. By the Wilderness and
Solitary place, is meant the barren Soul, the Wilderness of thy heart, where
God will dwell. The Wilderness shall be glad, and the Desert shall rejoice. O!
that God would make it so to us. It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice with
singing, The glory Lebanon shall be given unto it, etc. Why is all this? They
shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. This makes, the
sad Soul rejoice, and makes the barren heart, blossom as a Rose, when they
see the glory of the Lord, and the Excellency of our God. Nay, it is such a
joy, as he says after, that, The Eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the
Ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; then the lame Man shall leap, and the
Tongue of the dumb shall sing. It is such joy as will make a dumb man sing; it
will make a mellancholy, heavy, mopish creature, that naturally never smiled;
God manifested in Christ, will make him sing, and the lame man to leap for joy;
it is a transcendent, exceeding high joy, and this joy, it will be the same joy
Joy of Heaven, What?
in Heaven, that we had on Earth. It is not Eating, and Drinking, and Marrying,
and Buying, and Selling, that will be the joy in Heaven, but the great joy will
be, the beholding the Glory of God in Christ; that will be the great Joy.

Therefore, thou may know by this; it may be thou have a little joy: Thou
rejoycest in the hearing of the Word; but is there not some other Joy that thou
preferrest? Art thou not more glad when thou have a good bargain; or when thy
affairs Psalm. 137.
go on in the World? What is thy chief joy? As David says; If I prefer not
Jerusalem to my chief joy. If this apprehension work in thee a joy,
transcending all the joy in the world, and make all other joys to vanish, it
is a right apprehension. So you see these apprehensions are: First, clear
Apprehensions. Secondly, precious Apprehensions.


Thirdly, they are Perpetual; they are lasting Apprehensions* 3 Perpetual
apprehensions.
By that, I do not mean that they are lasting always, but that they may be
sometimes dim and sometimes dark; but I mean they go not utterly out; as it
is said, Job 21. How often is the Candle of the wicked put out? The Candle of the
Hypocrite goes out, it may be he has a little apprehension of God, and then
it is out, it may be for half a year, and in time it infallibly goes quite and
clean out: Therefore in Heb. 6. the Hypocrite (for the Apostle lays down there
the estate of Hypocrites) after they were enlightened, etc. they fell away. The
light was gone, it only blazed a while, and there was an end of it: But it is
not so with a Saint, though God may for a moment hide his face; yet as Mr.
Calvin says, that light that came first into the soul of a Saint, that that
came first, it leaves such a sent, and a savor, that a man can never forget
it; it is never quite out. He may forget that he has done natural things: We
may forget what we did twenty or thirty years agone; we may forget where we
were, and may forget our Friends, etc. But when God reveals himself first to
the Soul: If a man could live in this World a thousand years, the
apprehension that he had of God at the first, it would be as fresh as ever it
was; because it is an eternal thing, it is a thing that we shall have more,
and more in Heaven, it is not crruptible; Trial of apprehensions. by their
lasting.
and therefore it goes not out.

Now it may be thou have been a Professor before, and God has stamped a great
deal of joy on thee, and now it is gone, and thou art poor wretch, a poor
dry creature; as dry as a Chipp, and a man can scarce see any thing in thee,
to distinguish thee from a carnal man; try thy self by this: These
apprehensions if they be right, they are perpetual, and constant in a sense;
Therefore it is said, Joh. 14. 21. If you keep my Commandments (says Christ)
I will manifest my self to you,. Says Judas, not Iscariot, Lord how is it that
thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the World? Says he, I, and
my Father will come, and will dwell with you, and abide with you. As for the
world, God passes by, as a wayfairing man that tarries but for a night, but I,
and my Father, will come and dwell with you. Therefore in 1. Joh. 4. Seeing of
God, and dwelling in God are Sinonomies, one, and the same thing; God dwelling
in us, or we in God, or seeing of God, they are the same: Because, wheresoever
God is seen rightly, and truly, it brings God by his Spirit to dwell in the
Soul. That is one thing you may know it by, by your apprehensions.

Secondly, you may know it by the impressions 2 By the impressions these
apprehensions work.
that those apprehensions have upon your hearts; there will be a twofold
impression upon thy soul, when thou do see God aright.

First, as I told you before, when a Saint sees 1 Suitable to that they see in
God.
God, you are to understand, that he sees al in God with redundance; he sees
his love, his goodness, his power, his faithfulness, his mercy, his justice.
Now the same apprehension of these things, have such impressions upon thy
heart, that thou may clearly discern, if thy sight be right; that is, if
every one of these do work upon thy heart, a proportionable fitness, or
suitableness, to that that is in God. As for instance, when thou look on
God, and thou see his goodness; there is a sweet impression of love: Thou
see the Justice, and Righteousness of God, it works an impression, not a
blaze that goes out; but an habitual impression, of pleasing God, and of
fearing God. And so when thou see his faithfulness, it works an impression
of trust; that thou will trust him though he kill thee: and so all that is in
God will sinck into thy heart, and work suitable to that that is in God.

As to give you one instance (for as it will do by one, so it will do by all)
In Heb. 11. 27. It is said, By faith Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the
wrath of the King: For he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Moses had a
sight of him who is invisible: Therefore he forsook Egypt, and feared not the
wrath of the King. What is the meaning of that? The meaning of it, is this; he
saw the King of Egypt to be a great King, a powerful King: But because he had
seen God, who is invisible; that is, he had seen the Power of God, and the
Greatness of God, and that put such an impression on him, that he did not
fear Pharaoh. And God had promised to do him good, and having seen the
faithfulness of God, he forsook Egypt.

So it will be with thee, if thou see the Grace of God in Christ, there will be
an impression of love upon thy Soul: If thou see the Greatness of God, there
will be Reverence imprinted upon thy heart: or if thou see the Faithfulness of
God, there will be an impression of Trust upon thy heart. But now if thou see
God in Christ; and see his goodness and mercy, and grace, and there be no such
impression; no love to God; no delight in God; no care to please him, or to
attend upon him; thou have not seen God aright.

Beloved, these impressions, you shall know them by these things; in three
words, from any thing that is like the impressions of God upon you.

First, they are real. Secondly, they are through. Impressions of seeing God
upon Saints are,
Thirdly, they are universal.
First, they are real: By real, I mean this; they 1. Real.
are not idle speculations of God, as a bare seeing of God, and no more, but
only a mere contemplation; but they are such real impressions upon the heart,
as that they can bare up the Soul in any outward real misery: As for
instance, you know the miseries of the world are real: When a man comes to
Prison, there is real trouble, and real loss, and Miseries of this life
real.
real hunger, and he is a Real man, that is the Keeper of the Prison. Now an
Hypocrite with all his speculations, when he comes to a real night of misery
for God, all his knowledge of God proves a mere speculation, and vanishes
into Air, and there is no reality in it. Now the other which is a true Saint,
let him be put into the worst condition, let it be Real; put Bolts on his
heels; let there be VVounds, and Sores, and Hunger, and Thirst, that he
feels, and beholds with his eyes; yet he has a thing in his Soul, that is as
real as the things that he feels: Therefore it is said, in 1. John. 1. where
he speaks of Fellowship with God, and walking in the light, and seeing of God;
says he, Those things that we have seen, and heard, and felt. He makes the
apprehension of God in Christ, as real as things that are subject to sense, as
the things that we see, and hear, and smell, and feel.

Therefore see whether these impressions of God on thy soul be real, or no?
Do thou find when thou come to real misery, that there is real
comfort to hold thee up; and not only imagination, and vain Speculations: As
you may observe, many brave glorious Professors in the time of Peace, that out
strip all their Brethren, and their expressions Why many Professors shrink in
Trouble.
are better then others, and they carry it gloriously, and yet you shall have
some poor creatures that can hardly speak to God in Prayer, and can hardly
remember any thing of the Word, and yet when they come to suffer, there is a
real thing that holds them up, though it may be it be but a poor little Boy,
or a VVench, when you shall see those Brave glorious Professors, that because
they have no Reality, they flee away, and turn to the World.

Therefore pray to the Lord that these impressions may be real: That as the
miseries we meet withal, are real; so the impressions of his blessed Majesty
may be be real: Says God to the Hypocrites, Mal. 1. If I be a Father, where
is my Honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear? You talk that I am your
Father, and your Master; but there is no deep impression of it upon your
Souls.

Secondly, as they are real; So they are through, 2 They are through.
they fall not upon the heart of a Saint, as they do upon an Hypocrite. The
apprehensions of God fall upon an Hypocrite, just like a little shower of
rain, upon the sandy ground; there is some little impression, but in two or
three hours all is gone, it never soaks to the root of the grass: An
Hypocrite has a root of bitterness in his heart, and all the Dew of Heaven,
never sinks so deep as to come to that root. Therefore as it is said, in 1.
Joh. 3. A man that is borne of God cannot sin, Why? Because the Seed of God
abides in him; he has a root in him: So on the other side, an Hypocrite, he
can do nothing to purpose, because there is a seed of sin in him, there is a
root, there is a Coare at the heart, that the Dew of Heaven never touches:
Therefore it is a sign that thou see God aright, when the impressions of it
in thy Soul, go through, and through, that they soak into thy very soul (as
I may say) and fetch out thy inward lusts.

Thirdly, and lastly; (and there I shall leave at 3 They are universal.
this time) these impressions are universal: An Hypocrite, or a wicked man in
time may have some impressions upon his soul, of some one thing of God, or
some few things. As for instance, Judas had an impression upon his heart, and a
sad one too, of the Justice of God, it made him go and hang himself: And so
Saul, and Pharaoh, and others; but that was but of one thing. But now a Saint,
he has impressions of all that is in God; that is, there is nothing in God,
but he has a heart to answer it, he has (as it were, to speak with reverence)
a Copy of God written on his soul; he has an impression of the love of God,
as well as of the fear of God; of delight, and trust in God, and the like.
This is the difference between a Saint of God and an Hypocrite: Therefore in
Exodus 34. When Moses was so desirous to see God; O Lord (says he) let me see
thy glory. God revealed his glory; and told him his name: The Lord God, the
Lord, merciful, gracious, long suffering, abundant in mercy, keeping mercy for
thousands: Forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; and that will not clear
the guilty; visiting the sins of the Fathers upon the Children. God tells him
of visiting of wicked People; What was this to Moses? God would not tell him
half his name, but all: Therefore he tells him, what he was to the Saints, The
Lord, gracious, and merciful, long suffering, abundant in goodness, and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands. And then he tells him, what he would be to
the wicked; he would have the impression of the whole name of God upon Moses.
It is a sign thy apprehensions of God are true, though they be weak, and
small; when they be real, and through, and universal. The third thing is;

The Expressions, or Effects of it: but that I must leave till another time.

SERMON 3.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
YOu remember the Lesson (I doubt not) that we are upon; that, The Saints have
a peculiar privilege above all others, that they can even in this world see
God: They can see God, in Jesus Christ.



I did open this, and proved it, and showed you the last time, how by the Word
of God, you might know whether ye have ever seen God in this manner; whether
God have ever bestowed this glorious privilege upon any of you: Three way, I
took to show it to you.

The first, was by your apprehensions of God.

The second, was by the impressions that those apprehensions of God have upon
you.

The third thing (which I am now to come to) is by the Expressions of them, or
by their Effects. If you would know whether you have seen God aright 3 By the
expressions of them, which are:
or no: I say you may know it by the expressions of it: How does it set it
self forth in thee? It works something upon thee; and that vents, and shows
it self some way in thy heart, and life: Therefore I find in Scripture,
especially in the Epistles of John, where much is said of seeing God; he brings
the Saints usually to know the sight of God by outward expressions: Because,
though it be clear (as I said) yet it is so small, that a St. cannot always see
it, unless he consider the workings of it also upon his heart, and life, as
well as his single apprehension: Therefore says he in one place, by this, you
shall know that you have seen God, if ye confess Christ: And in another
place, If ye love the Brethren, etc.

Now there are these four or five clear things in Scripture, that demonstrate
a man to be one that has seen God. The first is this:

If thou have seen God, certainly the Lord has purified thy heart; the Lord
has given thee a pure 1 Purity of heart.
heart: For, says Christ, in his first Sermon, Blessed are the pure in heart:
For they shall see God. And in Heb. 12. Without holiness, it is impossible to
see God; Matthew 5.
that is a clear general rule: And therefore I say, thou may then read, if
thou, or I, be a Man, or a Woman, to whom God has not given a pure heart; if
God have not purified thy heart, certainly, as yet thou have not seen God:
For, if any man says he, has seen God, or that he walk in the light, and
yet live in sin, he is a Liar, and there is no truth in him at all; you are to
give no credit to him at all; al his apprehensions, are but fancies.

Now, the question will be; what is the purifying of the heart? Or how may I
know that?

BELOVED, according to the language of the What meant by a pure heart.
Scripture,: I find that by a pure heart, is meant two things.

First, by a pure heart is not ordinarily meant as 1 The conscience purified
from guilt of sin.
you take it, for the killing of sin in the soul; I say not ordinarily: But
the chief meaning of the purifying of the heart is to have the conscience (for
the heart is taken for the conscience, to have the conscience) purified, and
washed from the guilt of sin: Therefore in Act. 15. say the Apostles, and
Elders, Why should we do thus, and thus with them, Seeing their hearts, are
purified by faith, as well as ours? That is, seeing they believe in Jesus
Christ, and thereby have peace of conscience settled in their hearts.

To clear, and open this a little to you: There Conscience purified, What?
are three expressions that the holy Ghost uses in Heb. 10. that open this,
Heb. 10. 2. A pure heart in this sense is a man that has no conscience of
sin; that is the Scripture language; one that has no conscience of sin:
Not as it is commonly in your sense, one that makes no conscience of sinning,
one that continues in sin: But one that has no conscience of sin: That is,
one whose conscience is not stained with the guilt of sin, but by the blood
of Christ, there is a perfect peace settled within him; Peace and joy in
believing: For, that it is to have conscience of sin, when always upon the
least infirmity, there is guilt heaped upon the conscience of a man: Now this
is an impure heart, an impure conscience. And to the pure every thing is pure,
but to the impure, every thing is defiled: That is, when a man has an impure
conscience, that is not washed effectually by the blood of Christ, through the
power of the holy Ghost; then his meat, and his drink, and his bed, and his
recreations, every thing defiles him; every lawful thing defiles him, as well
as unlawful. Now then thou may reason thus; if I have seen God, I have a
pure heart? What is that? I have no more conscience of sin: That is, I find
an exceeding great power of the Spirit, that makes my conscience clean, that
notwithstanding my frailties, there is no guilt lying, or soaking in my
Conscence. That is one thing.

The second expression, there you shall see, afterward verse 10. that they are
said to be sanctified; sanctification in this place, is not meant, as you
usually take sanctification; that is, for mortification, and vivification (as
we say) the killing of sin, and the quickening of grace, though that may be
called sanctification too: But sanctification in this place is in the same
sense, as I said before, when the conscience is washed and cleansed from the
guilt of sin, as it is interpreted in the third expression in verse 2^. Let us
draw near with a true heart, in the full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled; that is, our consciences sprinkled; having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: An evil
Conscience, is an unbelieving Conscience; for, evil in the New Testament is
ordinarily taken for unbelief. Take heed (says the Apostle) least there be in
any of you, an evil heart of unbelief, to draw back from the living God: That
evil conscience Judas had, and Saul had; For, sin did lie on their
consciences, and was not washed: Now says he, Let us draw near with full
assurance: Full assurance is opposed to an evil Conscience, and that cannot
be, if you take sanctification in that sense, that you use to take it. Now that
is one thing; wherever God manifests himself, and reveals his glory in his Son
to the Soul, he gives that man a pure heart, a good conscience; he washes
that man's conscience, by the blood of his Son; that is, his Spirit applies the
virtue of the blood of his Son to our Souls, and Consciences, to make them
pure and peaceable.

2ly, a pure heart (for there are but two ways in 2 Aheart cleansed from the
power of sin.
general, that it is taken in Scripture, a pure heart) is a heart cleansed
also from the power of sin; that is a pure heart: And indeed, both are
comprehended here in one word; because wheresoever the one is, the other is
also: For, it is impossible for a man to have his Conscience made truly
peaceable by the blood of Christ, but it will be made pure, and holy also:
Therefore in that place, in Heb. 12. Without holiness, it is impossible to
see God. I suppose it is meant of Personal holiness, of Reformation, and
amendment of life, and not of the imputed holiness of Christ, and the washing
of the conscience, as I said before.

But you will say, if it be so, then no man can see

It is ture, there is sin, and corruption left in the Saints, yet they are
said to be a pure People, People Saints pure notwithstanding the remainder of
corruptions 1 They grow purer every day. Simile.
of a pure language; to have pure hearts; Why? Because they are growing every
day purer, and purer; that is the reason they are purified. As a godly man
compares them to a Well; when you throw dirt or any thing into a standing
poole, it makes it fouler, and fouler; but throw it into a Well, and it works
it out, it bubbles, and is never quiet till all be out: So the Saints have pure
hearts, because, however foul things are working and stirring in them, yet
they are still stirring against them, and get ground of them; though they be
not pure, that is, quite free from sin, yet they are purer every day then
other.

Then some say, and they say truly, that a man 2 The stream of the heart is
pure.
has a pure heart, though there be corruption there, when the stream of the
heart, the very stream of the heart is pure, and holy: Some conceive, and
those godly men (as I told you before) that there is a coare in the heart of a
godly man, that is pure, and holy without sin: Which godly men take to be,
that that is meant by Spirit, so frequently in Scripture; says the Apostle, I
serve God in my Spirit, Romans 1. And, I pray God to preserve your soul, and
body, and spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5. And that Spirit they take to be the quintessence
of the soul; something more inward then the Soul: There is something in a pure
heart that opposes sin, and opposes temptation; there is some non ultra in
the heart of a godly man: Sin gets the advantage over his eyes, and over his
hand, and over his tongue; but there is a baracado in his heart that it can go
no farther.

As you see between two Women, chiding, and striving who shall have the last
word, and one replies, and the other replies, and at last one has the last
word: So there is something in the heart of a godly man, that will have the last
word, As in a natural man, sin has the last word; says an Hypocrite, I
have a mind to over reach my Neighbor in such a bargain; thou were not best
to do it, says enlightened conscience, thou hear the Preacher, and hear
the Scripture say the contrary: But I am resolved to do it, says the
Hypocrite; then I will trouble thee, says the conscience. Now, there is no
sin that a Saint does fall into, but there is a coare in him that goes
beyond: As you see in an Onion, you may pull off one scale, and then another,
and another; and at last you may come to the coare, and can go no farther:
Such a thing there is in a Saint, this is that that is called the spirit; the
stream, and quintessence of the Soul is holy: and though there be corruption
there, yet there is something that is pure, and holy, and that coare, will eat
out the rest in time: As to give you but one instance more, (look upon your
hearts as I speak and see how they agree with it) take any corruption that a
Saint falls into throughout the year; there are many chidings, and brawlings,
between grace and corruption; I will have my will says corruption, I will be
vain, and fine, and finer, then my Neighbors; says grace, I will not have it
so; But I will, says corruption, I will have my will; but if you do, says
grace, you shall mourn bitterly when you have done; grace is at the heels of
it, and grace overtakes it some way or other: And in case he fall into the sin,
grace calls over him, and cries out of the heart, and when he has done the
sin, grace mournes; it follows it, oppsing, till it be done, and when it is
done, grace weeps over it.

It is not so with a wicked man, that has an enlightened Difference between
Saints and Hypocrites.
conscience; he may have a word or two, and if that be not heard, then farewell;
and then the Devil works effectually; that is the difference between sin
working in a Saint, and in a wicked man: The Devil works effectually in a
wicked man; that is, he finisheth his work; the Devil finisheth his work in a
Sinner, but he does not in a Saint: The Devil never works in a Saint, but
grace overthrows it one way or other, either before it be done, or it
overthrowes it when it is done: The Devil sifted poor Peter, and foiled him
at the first, but afterward he wept it out; there is much in this: This is
enough to discover an impure heart; if you be a Drunkard, or a VVhoremonger, or
a Backslider, or a worldly Professor, thou art a man that has never seen God,
for thou have an impure heart.

There is one thing briefly, that I desire you to think on. 2 It changes them
to the same image.


Again, whosoever has seen God, a second expression of it is this; he is
translated into the same image with God, to that which he sees; As you have
it, 2 Cor. 3. ult. Says the Apostle, All we with open face (that is) all the
Saints, we behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and are changed into
the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. We
behold the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image, from glory
to glory; I was going to tell you the last time, how the sight of God has a
twofold impression upon us. I forgot the last, and it will not be unseasonable
to mind you of it now.

The first was, I told you, it works in us a disposition snitable to what we
see in God, if God be great, it makes me little; if he be just, it makes me
fear; if he be faithful, it makes me trust; if he be good, it makes me love
him; and the like.

Now the Second is this;

Whatsoever a Saint sees in God, it works some resemblance in him of what he
sees, not a proportionablenesse; for greatness in God, and fear in me, that
suits; God is great and I fear him. But here I say, it works a resemblance in
a kind: As when I see the greatness of God, it works and raises my Spirit to
a holy greatness; if I see holiness in God, it makes me holy; there is
nothing in God that is seen, but it works a Resemblance, except it be
humility, of which I shall show the reason after. All the Attributes in God,
become graces in you; goodness in God, makes you good; but your goodness, is
a grace; and his, is an Attribute: But only I say humility, the glory of God
makes me humble; the glory of God makes me not proud, and high, but low, and
humble: But every other thing in God makes me frame my heart, and life, just
like God. Creatures, resemblances of spiritual things.


And there is no wonder in this, we see in the Creatures (for the Creatures are
a resemblance of spiritual things:) The Creatures are so cast by God, as that
they might be fit resemblances, and expressions of spiritual things in his
word. Jacobs sheep only by the working of fancy, by looking upon the rods it
made them conceive: If fancy work so, as that looking upon any thing, it could
make such an impression; much more faith looking upon such a glorious object as
God, that has such fullness in him, shall make the soul like that it sees.
Therefore in Joh. 1. 14. Says the Apostle, We have seen his glory, as the
glory of the only begotten son of God, full of grace, and truth, and of his
fullness, we all receive grace for grace. We saw his glory, and of that
fulness of glory, we receive grace for grace, as the Wax receives letter for
letter from the Seal; or as the child receives lymb for lymb from the Parent;
so we receive grace for grace from Christ: There is never a grace that we see
in Christ, but the seeing it with a spiritual eye, works and creates such a
grace in our Souls.

Therefore I pray consider of this, whether you Trial of a right sight of God.
have had such a sight of God, that when you see this, it has framed your
souls according to God, that you are like him: If you say, you see God, and it
is only a dry speculation, that leaves you proud, and carnal, and malicious,
and high minded, and froward, and the like, without working on you, what you
see in God, you may justly suspect it not to be right.

A third expression, I find in 1 John 4. 12. Whosoever 3 A right sight of God
works love to our Brethren.
has seen God, loves his Brother. No man has seen God at any time, if we
love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us. I told
you before, that to see God, and to dwell in God, are taken for one another: As
he says after, verse 15. Whosoever shall confess, that Jesus is the Son of
God, God dwells in him, and he in God: and verse 16. He that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him: No man has seen God at any time, but he
that loves his brother, God dwells in him. What is that? That is; he has
seen God: For, as I said they are all one, dwelling in God, and seeing of God.

Therefore look to that, whether God have wrought in you, a heart Spiritually
and purely to How Saints should be loved.
love the Saints, as Saints; not to love them, that they may love me; or to
love them, because they have a great deal of credit, that they may report well
of me, or to love them carnally; but whether I frame my heart to love the
Saints, as Saints, as elect persons, chosen of God, and Members of Christ, and
as he bears the image of Christ on his soul: if I love not my Brother, surely
I have never seen God; therefore it is said, 1 John 2. 11. He that hateh his
Brother is in darkness, he walks in darkness, and knows not whether he
goes. What darkness? Compare it with the first chap. verse 6, 7. that
darkness is opposite to Fellowship in light with God, and Christ: If a man
love not his Brother, let him be a wise man, let him be a Scholar, let him
repeat Sermons, etc. he is in darkness, and goes he knows not whether; for a
man goes he knows not whether, that has not seen God, he goes in darkness,
and must wander for ever more: Look a little on your hearts, and ask the
question concerning your conversation, whether you love the people of God or
no, That is the third thing.

Then fourthly (which depends upon this) whosoever 4 Fellowship with the Saints.
has seen God rightly; as he loves the Saints, so he has Gospel fellowship
with the Saints; I say, he has Fellowship with the Saints, 1 John 1. 7. For
there is a discourse concerning this seeing of God, Truly says John verse 3.
Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and these
things we write unto you, that your joy may be full. But if we say we have
Fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth: If
we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in sin; But if we walk in the
light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Whence the Fellowship of Saints is.
Son, cleanses us from all sin. Understand me, I mean not here by
fellowship, and I suppose it is not meant here, fellowship of neighborhood, or
fellowship of the family, or fellowship of the same City; no, nor being of the
same outward visible Church, I think that is not meant, though that be not
contrary. But, We have fellowship one with another. What is that? That is when
I have seen God, and have had fellowship with God, and his son Jesus Christ,
I have a spiritual fellowship with all that have seen God with me; that is,
the ground of the fellowship and communion I have with others, is in that they
have seen God as well as I; and the impression of God is clear on their
spirits, and manifested in their lives.

Therefore for People to have fellowship with Fellowship on wrong grounds.
others in this, or that respect, because they jump with them in this, or that
opinion, or in this or that way; this is not the Fellowship spoken of by John
and by Paul, Philip. 1. 4, 5. But this Fellowship is a higher thing; the
spiritual communion, we have one with another, upon spiritual grounds, because
of the Spirit of God dwelling in us. Therefore examine your selves by this;
Have you any fellowship with the Saints? Is not the Fellowship of diverse of you
(why should I ask the question, I know it is so) with Drunkards, and
Malignants, those that rail against godliness, those that blaspheme God, and
his People, this is the Fellowship of many. And it may be others of you have
fellowship with Professors, but it is carnal; that is, it is grounded on
carnal respects, it is not, because they have seen God, and you have seen
him also, and therefore you have Fellowship together. That is another thing.

A fifth thing I find, that I will but touch; That whosoever has seen God,
they are very desirous 5 Desire to bring others to the light.
to bring all others into the same light that they have seen: O! how often does
Paul upon every occasion, concerning his vision, how often does he repeat it at
large in the acts of the Apostles, how he had seen God! And so here John, when
he had seen the glory of God, he writes to them, he delivers the message to
them, and he would bring them also to the light, to walk in the light as he
did. Beloved, a man that has seen God once truly, he looks upon all the
world, as People walking in Hell, in a hell of darkness; the course of mankind
in this world, is but as a Hell to him: Therefore to see People walk in such
gross darkness, and God having broken in a little Window into his soul, he
cannot choose but bring others to the light.

Therefore I never believed, nor do believe, Christians should be ready to
teach others.
when People among us (it may be they are godly, I leave them to the Lord) that
profess they see a great deal of light, and they see God more then others;
and yet for the expression of it, we see they withdraw and go aside, and they
think it not fit to teach carnal men; it may be they will teach one another,
three or four, or five; Not as though I blamed teaching, let us teach one
another any how, so we may edify one another in the Lord publicly, or
privately; but when there is a spirit in People, that they will not communicate
the light as much as they can, that other poor sinners may see it, I suspect
that light, that it is not from God; for whosoever sees the Light rightly, he
will do his utmost Endeavor to bring others into the Light. 6 It enableth to
suffering, as in


But lastly, I find, that whosoever has seen God truly, that sight of God
will make him able to go through any hardship, any suffering, any affliction
whatsoever, in the service of God. As in Heb. 11. 27. Moses forsook Egypt,
and regarded not the wrath Moses
of the King: but endured, says the text. Why did he? Did he not know what the
wrath of the King was? No doubt, but he saw what a Tyrant he was, and he saw
much cruelty, living in the House, but he endured, as seeing him who is
invisible; he saw God, and so he was able to go through all. And so Stephen,
that blessed man, that was full of the Stephen.
holy Ghost Acts 7: When he had preached unto them, says the text, they were
cut to their hearts and gnashed on him with their teeth, and he being full of
the holy Ghost, looked steadfastly to Heaven, and saw the glory of God, and
Jesus Christ, standing on the right hand of God. When they gnashed their teeth,
he looked up to heaven, and saw God, and Christ at his right hand. It may be
there was something that was extraordinary, but it is a work that is ordinary.
Behold (says he) I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on
the right hand of God. Then they cried out, and stopped their ears, and stoned
him; and he called on God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and kneeled
down, and cried, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. See how Stephen was
calling on God, and praying for his enemies, and giving up his Spirit to God,
when they were gnashing with their teeth, and stoning him as if they had been
mad, yet he goes through it quietly.

Whatsoever pretenses men have, this is the Why some Professors avoid suffeing.
reason why many Professors are so wise, that they will never suffer
persecution, let the world turn which way it will, they will not want
distinctions to wave persecution; the truth is they wave it, because they have
not seen God, if they had, they would carry themselves innocently, and
prudently, and then let what would come.

Thus briefly, I have showed you, how you may know whether you have seen God
aright, or no.

Now lastly, in a few words, because you have partly heard it before, therefore
I will be the briefer.

The Question will be, in case that any by

Beloved, when I speak to you of means, how The order how Saints come to see
God.
to come to any thing, you must understand one thing? we prescribe not means,
as Physicians do to a sick man, as Rue, or Camomite, or Orgaine, and the like,
that are in his power, he can go to a Neighbors, or to an Apothicaries shopp,
and buy them: So when I speak of means, it is not in your power to have them,
as a Ladder to get up, and see God by; but when I say the means, I lay down
the series, and order whereby God is manifested to the Soul, though all be
his free grace.

Now that order, or Series you have in Scripture. If thou want this sight of
God, thou must first be 1 To be convinced that all means in the world will not
make known God. Simile.
convinced, that all the means in the World will not make known God to thee,
unless he manifest himself. That is one thing: As the Sun when it is under a
cloud, all the Candles, and Torches in the world cannot discover it, till it
come out it self, and then you may see it, if it hide it self you cannot. So
says Christ, Joh. ^4. I, and my Father will manifest our selves to him. As if
he had said, it is our prerogative, we do it when, and where we please, all the
world cannot help to it, when we do it not; therefore say, Lord, it is thy
privilege, I have not eyes to see thee; it is not all that I can do, and that
all the World can do, I cannot reach thee, Lord manifest thy self to me. That
is the first thing.

A second thing that I find in this series, or order 2 A man must be borne
again.
that God takes to manifest himself is, that he usually begets men again, or
causes them to be borne again, before they can see him: These Phrases are often
joined in Scripture, of being borne again, and seeing of God, Joh. 3. Verily,
verily, except a man be borne from above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God:
And in the Kingdom of God, God, and Christ is the chief thing; without this
thou can not see it. So in Joh. 6. 45. It is written, they shall all be
taught of God, every man therefore that has heard, and learned of the Father
comes to me. Not that any man has seen the Father (except, or) save he that
is of God, he has seen the Father. To be of God, and to be borne of God are
promiscuous in the Epistle of John, sometimes a man is said to be of God, and
sometimes to be borne of God. No man has seen God, but he that is of God, or
that is born of God; compare that with 1 John 3. Whosoever commits sin, he
has not seen God, nor known him, little children, let no man deceive you,
whosoever is borne of God, commits not sin: Therefore whosoever sees God
must needs be born of God.

What is that to be borne of God?

Briefly (for I cannot now open it at large) to To be borne of God, what.
be borne of God is, when there are other pronciples put in you by the Spirit
of God that are not in flesh and blood. When there is a new creature put in
you. That is, when there is a heavenly wisdom, and knowledge, heavenly
faculties, heavenly principles; when there is a new creature in the soul of a
man, by which he sees, and knows, and apprehends, and loves, and does things
utterly beyond flesh and blood. Therefore to be borne of God, and to be borne
of flesh and blood are contrary one to another.

Therefore if thou will see God, thou must not think to do it, as to find
out a controversy in Divinity; or to to know a mystery in a Trade; it is not
thy study, and straining of thy wit, thou may do that if thou will: But
desire of God, to frame the new creature in thee; thou must not only have other
things presented before these eyes, but thou must have another pair of eyes to
see things, another understanding, other principles, a new creature framed in
thy heart; that is the force of the argument of Christ to Nicodemus Joh. 3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. As if he had
said, I know thou art a great student, and thou take pains to go to Heaven;
but I will deal plainly with thee, thou must be borne of God, thou must be a
new creature, or else thou may study all thy life, thou may study thy heart
out, and it will not do; therefore beg of God to make thee a new creature: He
is the Sun of righteousness, that can shine where he pleases; the blessed
Spirit is that wind that blows where it lists: He must make thee a new
creature, or else thou have no faculty to behold him. For, if God should shine
upon the old creature, thou have no more eyes to see him, then a blind man to
behold the light.

Thirdly, in this order of seeing God, (which is 3 God must deliver us from
Satan's Kingdom.
all of his free grace to do this, I only show you the author of it, it is
none of it in thy power) get the Lord to deliver thee from the Kingdom of
Satan, or else thou can never see him. The Kingdom of the Devil, is a
Kingdom of darkness; so dark, that as long as a man lives in that Kingdom,
Satan's Kingdom darkness.
he is never like to see any thing of God. Therefore if thou will see God, or
spiritual things, labor to come into that Kingdom where light shines. There
are some Nations in the North, that they have half the year night, it is
almost a Kingdom of darkness, a man though he have eyes, cannot see there: So
the Devils Kingdom, is a Kingdom of darkness, and mark it, as far as
there is darkness in any soul, so far the Devils Kingdom is there. For,
the Devil has no bodily, outward Kingdom, of Lands, and estates, and
revenues; but darkness is his Kingdom, and so much darkness, so much
inheritance the Devil has: That is the reason, that where there is none of
the Gospel, the Devil has a great Kingdom; he has a great Kingdom in
Wales, and in the north of England, and in Ireland, because there is a great
deal of darkness there: therefore do thou desire the Lord to translate thee
out of the Kingdom of darkness, to the Kingdom of his dear Son. See this
in 2. Cor. 4. says the Apostle, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost: He speaks of unfruitful hearing of the word, there is no fault in
the Gospel; but it is a sign that they are a People that must perish, that
the Gospel can do them no good, In whom the God of this world has blinded
the minds of them that believe not; least the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine upon them.

How came it to pass that the Gospel that Paul preached, did the Souls of
the People no more good? Paul says, the fault was not in the Gospel, the
Gospel was pleasing to God however: but the God of this world; that is, the
Devil, the Devil of Why the Devil is called the God of this world.
Hell as you call him: God calls him, the God of this world; not because he is
absolute, and may do what he will: but he is under Gods power, and God gives
him such a stroke, and power, as if he were a God in the world; he has so
many Subjects, and such policy, and spirits; The God of this world has
blinded the minds of them that believe not: that is, they were blind before,
but he has made them more blind.

O consider this! thou were blind, before thou did hear the Gospel: but
when a man hears the Gospel, that Prince of darkness; that is, the Devil,
the God of the world, he blinds thy mind more, and more; he draws a new veil
over thy eyes, Why so? That the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the image of God should not shine on them. He draws the Curtain, that the Sun
may not come on them; that the light of the knowledge of God in Christ may not
come on them: Therefore consider what a Monarch the Devil is, and how great
the Kingdom of the Devil is in thee. And if ever thou come to the light,
desire God to translate thee into the Kingdom of his dear son, that
Kingdom is all light. As far as there is a clear light in my Soul, so far
Christ has his Kingdom in me.

Then, if thou will see God, thou must labor 4 Purity of heart.
to be pure in heart, as I told you: for, without holiness no man shall see
God, Let a profane man use all the means in the world, as long as he is so,
he shall never see God.

Lastly, thou must look for the shining of this Sun, through the Word, and by
the spirit. It must come through the Word; and expect the Spirit to bring it,
or else it will never shine upon thy Soul. This, in few words, is the series,
or order, in which God manifests himself to his people.

I will now conclude only with this word, It may be thou will say, I hope I
have seen God, and I remember the Lord did manifest himself to me; but truly
it is but a little.

I will speak but a word to you that have seen Use Those that have seen God
should walk holily.
God. I beseech you walk like People that are before God; Gods eye is upon you,
and you have seen him; walk uprightly, walk not like the people of the world;
for ye are liars if you do: if you say that you have seen God, and walk in
darkness, and walk in sin, you are liars, and there is no truth in you. O!
walk holily; and labor more, and more to see God, as Paul did; he forgate
that which was behind, and would see more of God; more of his glory: that is
the meaning of that word in Joh. 14. says Christ to his Disciples: for, he
spoke not to wicked People at that time. He that has my Commandments, and
keeps them, loves me, and he shall be loved of my Father, and I will love
him, and manifest my self to him. Without doubt, God had manifested himself
to these before, they were Saints before: but he means, I will manifest my
self more, and more; but they must love him, and keep his commandments. The
meaning is not that you shall find the Commandments of God, and the things of
God, are as a bottom of Thread, that is all shufled together, that you can
find no end of it, you think to have an end, and yet you cannot, and you
think to find a place where to get all grace; whereas notwithstanding, if you
had all the gifts in this world, you cannot keep the Commandments: but the
meaning is, you shall find in the things of God, that God has made one thing
the condition of another, if you love God, you will keep his Commandments,
and if you keep his Commandments you love God. I say, God has made one thing
the condition of another, to whet us on, if you keep my Commandments, you love
me, and if you love me, I will manifest my self to you.

So I know by experience, though all be by free grace, yet the People of God,
by making one thing the condition of another, it has made their Journey, that
they have not been weary. Though Heaven be the reward of all, yet God has made
little baits for us. The great reward is, He that holds out to the end shall be
saved: but that is a great way off, and we are weak, and cannot see a far
off; therefore God has made little baits, and little rewards; He that loves
me, I will manifest my self to him. A weak Saint may do that: so that is the
meaning, though God does all by his free grace, yet God does use means to get
us on. Therefore that God may manifest himself more, and more to thee; labor
to keep his commandments; labor to be more holy this week, then the last:
Add to faith, virtue; to virtue, patience; to patience, temperance, etc. God
teaches us, as we teach our Children, one letter after another, add such a
grace, and such a grace, If these things be in you, and abound, ye shall not be
barren, and unfruitful: but shall be able to see a far off. What a far
off? Things that are far off, are hardly seen; and of all things, the glory
of God in Christ, is the hardest.

Now if you add one grace to another, by the assistance of God, and
endeavoring to keep his Commandments, and to walk in your callings, as you
are Husband, or Wife, or Master, or Servant, or Tradesman, etc. if you
endeavor to do that which is pleasing in Gods eye, God will reveal himself
more and more clearly and fully to your souls.

SERMON 4.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
TWo lessons I observed from these words.

The first was, that Every true Saint has a peculiar sight of God, even in
this World.



Secondly, that A true saving sight of God, is the way to true Humiliation.



Concerning the first, I opened it, and proved it to you, and have already made
several uses of it. The last use was, to examine your selves, whether God have
bestowed this privilege upon you, or no. And that I showed you is to be known.

By your apprehensions of it.

By the impressions it has on you.

By the expressions of it, as it shows it self in your lives.

I have but two words of uses farther of that Doctrine, and so I shall proceed
to the other.

First, you may learn hence the reason of that great difference of temper, and
life that is between 1 Reason of the difference between godly and wicked.
godly men, and wicked men. Godly men, and wicked men use often to wonder one
at another, as if they were Monsters; Godly men do wonder at the lives of
carnal men, and at their temper, how they can laugh, and be merry, when they
are ready to drop into Hell; and that they are merry, and joyful, when they
know they are in the hands of the Devil. And wicked men usually wonder at the
Saints, to see them sad, and weep, and mourn, and the like.

Beloved, the main thing, that makes the difference between their temper, and
life, it is this: Wicked men live on earthly things.
the one lives wholly upon base earthly things, as credit, and preferment, and
wealth, and the like; and the other wholly lives upon the face of God, upon the
seeing of God. Give a carnal man credit enough, and honor enough; commend him
highly, give him money, and means, and trading, and A Saint lives by seeing
Gods face.
wealth, and there he lives; then he has a good life, then he is as a Fish in
the water. Now the other that sees the face of God in Jesus Christ, though you
put him in a cold Prison, in iron chains, yet he is alive: Then give him
honor, and riches, and credit, he cares not a straw for them, if Gods face be
hid: Therefore says David, Psalm. 4. There be many that will say, who will show
us any good? That is, worldly men will ask, who will show us a good bargain?
what course shall we take to increase our trade? what course shall we take to
be happy, and rich, and the like? Says David, Lord, I will none of this, I am
of another temper, my whole desire is, that thy blessed face may shine for ever
on me.

This is the reason why carnal men wonder at the Saints, and that the Saints
in a sort wonder at them. Nay, this is the reason why there is such a great
difference between a Saint and himself; Why Saints differ from themselves
sometimes.
not only between him, and wicked men, but between him and himself. A Saint, O!
how full of joy is he one day, when (it may be) his house is bare enough, and
his clothes are bare enough, and he is full of reproach, yet he is full of joy,
and sweetness, and comfort. Another time, it may be it is better with him in
the world without, yet he is full of heaviness, and sadness, and sorrow, and
sighing: the reason is, the one day the Lord shines, upon his soul, but now
the Lord hides himself; now when the Lord shines upon him, he is full of joy;
but when the Lord hides himself he is full of trouble, as David says. This is
one word for your information.

There is another word for exhortation, and so I conclude this lesson, the
exhortation is this. All 1 Not to envy wicked men's prosperity.
you that are Saints, and do see the wicked prosper, and it may be you shall
see it more and more hereafter, unless God work wonders; you shall see the
wicked posper, and Hypocrites prosper, and have more honor, and more wealth,
and more preferment, and the like. Beloved, my exhortation to you is, that you
would no way envy them, but rather pity them. Why so? Why? because this is all
their Portion, and your Portion that God has given you, is infinitely,
incomparably beyond their Portion, your Portion, what is it? I remember as the
Lord says in Ezekiel, of the Levites, they had no portion or inheritance with
the People, but says he, I am their portion; and as it is said of Elkana
concerning Hannah, he gave her a worthy portion; he loved her, though Peninnah
bare him Children, he loved Hannah that was a worthy portion: So you have a
portion, that theirs, holds no comparison with; that is, though you have
nothing in the world else, yet you have portion enough, that Gods face shines
on you; that God in some measure, many ways, and many times, makes known
himself to you in a special manner through Christ, therefore envy them not,
but pity them; you that have tasted this by your own experience, I appeal to
you, (because you will hardly believe, but that they are happy people) there
are none of Saints sadness in desertion.
you that ever have seen God, but sometime or other God has hid his face; and
it may be has given these things of the world, at that time, he has given you
credit, much credit, and honor, and wealth, good meat, and brave clothes, but
he has hid his face. I pray how merry were you in those days, in that week
when God did so, when you had meat, and brave clothes, and the like? you know
you were weary of your lives for all these* then judge what is to be thought of
a poor carnal man that has no other all his life long. Only, this makes it a
little more bitter to you, because they know no better, and you do; they know
nothing but merryment, and drunkenness, and eating, and drinking, and roaring:
Judge you by that week, or fortnight that you were in desertion, and yet had
the good things of the World, what the comfort of an Hypocrite, and a worldly
man is all his life; envy them not. It is hard to learn this lesson, do not
say you are neglected, and despised, and you can hardly live in the world, and
every base Professor, and every Hypocrite he gets up. Let him go, and say with
David, the Lord has bestowed a fair portion on you, he comes once, or twice,
or thrice a day in Jesus Christ to look upon you: lay up these things. So I
have done with that Lesson.

Now I come to the next doctrine.

You have heard in the former point, that a Saint has a peculiar, special
sight of God in this world.

Now the next Lesson is that, Doct. 2. The sight of God in Christ, the way to
true humiliation
That special sight of God does truly humble the soul of a Saint.

OR The saving sight of God in Christ is the right, and ready way to true
Gospel humiliation.



VVoe is me, for I am undone; because mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of Hosts.

Before I come to open this, I must lay down before hand for your understanding
these three things.

First, that when I speak of Humiliation, because it has many senses, and is
taken variously, I do not understand it as one act, for a fast day, or a day
of humiliation as you call it, to hang down the head like a Bulrush, or in a
preparatorie way to make a man fit for Christ or the like; whether that be
right or no, I speak not now. But I speak of that 1 What humiliation, here
meant.
grace of humiliation; that is, that gracious humble disposition of heart in a
Saint, that in Scripture is so called, when men are said to be humble: it is a
grace that is never away from a Saint; we should be clothed with it as Peter
says: I am to speak of it in that sense; it is the gracious, lowly,
spiritual humble frame of heart that is in a Saint, and is in no wicked man,
nor can be, as I shall show afterward.

Secondly, when I am speaking, that the sight of God in Christ humbles the
soul, you must not 2 Other means of humiliation excluded.
mistake here, and think that I exclude other means, inferior means: For I
told you before, as God shows himself by any means, by any creature, by any
providence, or any way: So he may so show himself that way, that he may humble
you in that way. Therefore you must not say, that therefore we speak against
means, because I say the sight of God does humble a Saint; for I exclude not
other means.

Thirdly, and in a special manner take notice, 3 Sight of God does humble
occasionally.
that this sight of God; the seeing God of as Saints do see him, does not
properly humble the soul of a man, but occasionally as it were. It does it not
properly: because you know that in Heaven; when we shall be in Heaven, we do
not read that we shall then be humbled. We shall then be in a state of glory
every way, and yet we shall see God there more then ever we did before. But
(beloved) the sight of God humbles us here occasionally; that is, by reason of
the frailty, and corruption that is upon us. Just as the Law made Paul to
sin more, Romans 7. Sin taking occasion by the Law: So I say, because we are
frail and weak, and vile, and sinful, every apprehension of a glorious, and
great and powerful God abaseth, and humbles us, as in Luke 5. 8. when Peter
saw a little of God in Christ, working a miracle (for I told you God many
ways, by any means can reveal himself to the soul of a Saint) says he,
Lord depart from me, I am a sinful man. Peter's heart was taken down, and he
was amazed to see the glory of God, and why so? because he considered he was a
sinful man; that threw him down, and humbled him. Now these three things
being laid down beforehand.

I shall briefly in a word prove this lesson, Job 42. 5, 6. when Job had seen
God, it humbled him. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now
mine eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes. So likewise Peter, Luke 22. 61, 62. Peter having a glance of Christ,
Christ, looked on him; and he seeing his Master look on him, he went out, and
wept bitterly. Paul having seen the Lord, he was stricken down from his
Horse, and cried Lord, what will thou have me to do? though God manifested
himself variously; and their humiliation is variously expressed, and set forth
in Scripture; yet it is but one, and the same thing; so it holds true, that
this sight of God does truly humble the soul.

I shall in the next place show you two things.

First, I shall give you some reasons to prove that it is so.

And secondly, show you somewhat, why it is so.

Concerning the first, I shall give you but these two or three reasons.

First of all, I find clearly in Scripture, that God Reas. 1. All graces
wrought by seeing of God.
works all graces in the souls of his Saints, by beholding him; I say, I find
clearly in Scripture that every grace that is wrought in the heart of a Saint,
is wrought by beholding God in Christ; and if every other grace be wrought
thus; why not this? As for instance.

First, for holiness, take it in a general sense 2 Cor. 3. Holiness.
ult. We all with open face, behold as in a gloss the glory of the Lord in
Jesus Christ. We behold the glory of God as in a glass, and are changed into
the same image; that is, we are made like unto Jesus Christ, holy, as he is
holy, we are changed from glory, to glory; that is, by beholding the glory of
God in Jesus Christ, we are made holy.

And then you shall see for patience, that comes into the soul, by beholding
God in Christ; as Patience.
you shall have it, Heb. 11. 27. It is said that Moses, he endured, and feared
not the wrath of the King; he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.

How did Moses endure all the threatenings of Pharaoh?

The Lord revealed himself to his Soul, and by the grace of God, the Lord
wrought him to a patiently bearing of all his threatenings. So Stephen in Act.
7. He saw Jesus Christ sit at the right hand of glory, and then he did quietly
fall on his knees, to pray for his enemies, when they were stoning him to death.

So also for faith; how will you have faith see in Heb. Faith.
12. 2. Looking to Jesus the author, and sinisher of our faith. We have not
faith of our selves; neither can we make a faith of our selves, but by
beholding of Christ; the Lord works faith in our hearts to receive Wisdom.
him. So, also I might show, of wisdom, and of strength, as you may see Isa.
45. 23, 24. an observable place, Strength.
Christ would have them to look upon him, Look to me and be saved, surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness, and strength. Christ bids them
look to him, and then they shall cry out, they have strength.

Nay, in Joh. 1. 12. you shall see that all graces are put together, We beheld
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, and out of his
fulness, we all receive grace for grace. By beholding the glory of God in
Jesus Christ, we receive grace for grace, that Jesus Christ has, we have it,
as they say, the Paper receives the print from the Press. Now, beloved, if
this be the ordinary way in Scripture to beget all other graces in the soul,
then why not the way to humble the soul before God?

Only with this difference, which is worth your Difference in the working of
humiliation, and other graces.
observing, that every other grace is wrought in the soul, by a kind of
assimilation; but this is wrought in a contrary way. I mean thus, by beholding
the strength of God in Jesus Christ, my soul is made strong: by beholding the
wisdom of God in Christ, I am made wise; by beholding the holiness of God in
Jesus Christ, I am made holy. But now of this humiliation, it is not so; by
beholding the holiness, and power, or strength, or any thing else in God,
humiliation does not rise by assimulation, by making me like, but every thing
in God dasheth a man, and makes him nothing in his own eyes. Thus the sight of
God works it.

Besides, I find in Scripture, that every thing that is in God (if I may so
speak) is of a humbling Reas. 2 All that is in God, is of a humbling nature.
nature, I find, that God manifesting any attribute of his, at any time, to any
of his children, it does humble them; as for instance, let the Lord show his
greatness (in a spiritual way I mean) as he 1 Gods greatness.
did to David Psalm. 8. when he saw the greatness of God, that the Sun and
Moon were the works of Gods fingers, then David cries out; What is man Lord,
that thou do respect him? It made poor David to be as nothing. So also, his
goodness, his love, 2 Gods goodness.
as that in Samuel; when David daunced before the Arc; he cries, I will be
yet more vile, Why so? Because God has chosen me, (says he to Michel) rather
then thy Fathers House. He saw the goodness of God, therefore he would be more
humble, and more vile: And so I might show of all the rest, There is nothing in
God, if it be discovered to a poor creature that is a sinner, but it dasheth
and abaseth, and humbles him; I will not speak of the Scriptures that
positively, and punctually prove it; for I spoke something of them before to
you.

But if you ask, how can that be, that the grace in the heart.

Beloved, I have told you a little how it does it; and I can tell you no more,
and if this will not serve; if you cannot see clearly how this can be, I must
refer you to the works of God in the creature, and there you shall see some
resemblance of Secret works in grace and nature.
it, if you can tell me how Labans sheep conceived spotted Lambs, by beholding
the peeled rods; or if you can tell me, how the men were healed of their
wounds, by looking on the brazen Serpent; then I will tell you how a man by
seeing of God in a special manner in Christ is humbled.

We see in nature many such strange mysteries, that we cannot unfold. As they
say, the Basiliske with her eye, will kill a man at a distance: and as we see
here in our own home, an onion will make a man weep at a distance.

We can give something that we call reason, but there are a world of things
in the creature, as the ebbing, and flowing of the Sea, and the like, that we
cannot give a reason of. And if it be so in the creature; why should it not in
this, that a poor sinner beholding God in Christ, by faith spiritually should
receive grace for grace from him? And if we be posed in knowing the particular
reason of the strange operations of God in the work of creation; we might well
cease our disputes, how God humbles the soul, even by beholding him; when God
beholds the soul, or the soul beholds God.

But the last thing I shall open is this, why the humble our souls. Why the
Lord will humble men b^ the fight of him.


We cannot go far in asking such questions as these: Why God will work it
thus: but yet I will give you these two reasons instead of all.

The first is this, that I find that it is a general rule with God toward all
creatures: mark it; all good is in God; every good, and perfect gift comes
from him; and I find that it is a general rule, God will have all to look to
him in giving.
that when God gives any thing to Man or Beast, or Bird, to soul or body, he
will make them look up to him that is the giver. As in Psalm. 145. 15. The eyes
of all (says David) wait on thee, and thou give them meat in due season;
thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. That
is, the meaning is, that all the creatures, though you know not how it is, yet,
God makes the Birds and Beasts in the Wilderness, he makes them to eye, and to
look after him.

Another thing is this, the Lord will do this as God will draw our hearts to
him by a fight of him.
Christ said in another sense, that he might draw men's minds and hearts to him:
just as we use to do, when we have a mind to bring our children to love us, we
will have some fine thing to give them: we will give it, and the child must
come to us; there is nothing in the child's coming, to make us give it: but
because we will not only bestow the thing on the child for his good, but win
his affections, and bring him to know us, and love us, and make a Leg, and to
thank us, and the like: so, the Lord will not give any thing to us, but we
must come and look to him, that we may not so much love the thing, as fall in
love with that blessed hand that gives. Therefore, our life is hid with Christ
in God, Why so? that our affections may be above where Christ is, Collos. 3. 2.
So the Lord will not bestow any thing upon us, but he will have our eye upon
him, that we may love, and delight in him that bestows all upon us. So much
briefly for the opening of it.

Now I shall conclude at this time with a word, or two of use, and leave the
rest for another opportunity.

The Use for the present is this, that you may clearly learn hence, that
sinners, and carnal men, men that are not borne again, or are not new Use. 1.
Unregenerate men cannot be truly humbled.
creatures; they cannot be truly humbled; they can have no true humiliation:
because as it is evidently proved in the doctrine before, they have no true
sight of God: therefore they cannot be truly humbled: they may keep Fasts, and
come to church, and hear Sermons, and do a great many things, but they cannot
be truly humbled. They may have diverse things like humiliation, but it is not
true Gospel Yet he may 1 See his sins.
saving humiliation.

As for instance, a wicked carnal man, he may see his sins; and he may be
convinced of them, in a naturallway; just for all the world, as a man by the
Statutes of England, if he have broken any of them if he read the Statutes, by
the strength of reason, he may say I have brok the Statute. And so he may, by
reading the book of God, God says that whormongers, drunkards, and coveteous
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; and he may say, but I am such a one;
he may do this in a natural way; alas this is far enough from humiliation.

Nay farther, the Lord may put wrath in the 2 He may be terrefied.
Law, he may put wrath in judgments, and afflictions, and he may be terrified,
and woefully troubled because of sin, and yet not be humbled: So the Devils in
Hell, though they have enough of that, yet they are not humbled. So Judas, and
Cain, and Saul, they were troubled in this manner, and yet this was not the
saving grace, that the Saints have, and that the Saints only have.

Nay farther, he may have many acts of humiliation, 3 He may do acts of
humiliation.
or as it were, that that is like it; he may express humiliation, he may hang
down his head as a bulrush for a day; he may keep monthly Fasts as
constantly as any; and be sorrowful, and heavy, and yet he has not true
humiliation. But as the Prophet says of the Hypocrites, they hang down their
heads for a day as a bulrush, but the Lord abhors them, and their Service. But
the likest thing that I know to true humiliation, is that that wicked men shall
have at the day judgment: Then I find that there will be somewhat like it; I
find then that the wicked man his mouth shall be stopped; he shall be so far
humbled, that he shall have no argument to plead for himself, he shall have no
cloak for his sin: then the pride of wicked men will be pulled down in a
great measure, in a sort notwithstanding it is not true humiliation: for, even
then, and for ever in Hell, the wicked will be grumbling against God; and a man
is not said to be humbled truly, till he submit to God in any thing: Therefore
it is said in Mat. 22. in hell, there shall be weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. There is gnashing of teeth, for vexation, and anguish. There
is no true humiliation, or shall be in Hell world without end. Nor there is no
carnal man upon earth that is truly humbled.

Therefore to conclude, do not wonder; I say, cease Not to wonder that the
wicked grow worse.
wondering; (for indeed, a man cannot choose but wonder) but endeavor to cease
wondering, when you see carnal men, and Hypocrites, notwithstanding all those
means, wherein you see God comes clearly in the eyes of them, yet
notwithstanding they grow worse and worse, prowder and prowder, and more
hardened, and more coveteous, and more carnal: wonder not at it, because in
all these, though you see God, and are bettered, and more humbled: as now in
the carriage of things in these times; every honest heart makes a holy use of
it, and God will discover himself to many of his people through that, they shall
be better for it. But wonder not at worldly people that they are worse; they
never had a sight of God: wonder not that sinners, and wicked men under the
means of grace, are nothing better, as I fear there are many in this, and in
other congregations, that notwithstanding all the means of grace,
notwithstanding all the teaching and preaching, and beseeching, and exhorting;
yet they sometimes in secret can laugh, and jeere at religion, and persecute
those that embrace it. A man would wonder at this, how men should be so
sottish, as to learn nothing; how men should be so profane under such means,
and ministry, and amend nothing: I say, a man would wonder; but only that it
comes from this, God has not showed himself to them: if they had but one
sight of God, as thou that art a Saint have, it were a wonderful Carnal men
see not God in Ordinances.
thing indeed: but it is because the Lord never revealed himself to them: they
only see a poor weak creature, weaker then themselves; and they hear the
Word read in the Bible, or they read a Chapter, but there is not one jot of the
sight of God in it. So the other Nor in mercies.
day, we had abundance of Victories; and strangely God came into the hearts of
his Saints by it; how gloriously did the Lord appear in them? and ravish their
souls, that their hearts are yet nearer to God, and they walk more humbly,
and closely, and thankfully. But we see the gang of the world, Magistrates, and
Ministers, and all carnal people are more proud, and wicked, and carnal, and
ready to beat their Fellow Servants; they are worse, and worse, and no wonder,
because God has not discovered himself in these mercies, they will not learn.

And then for corrections; a man would think that Nor in corrections.
God did deal with us more palpably then he did with Egypt; they had ten
plagues, we had twenty or thirty, God has punished us, and then God stops his
hand; and then we break out into mischief, and cruelty and oppression. And then
God turns the scale another way, and then we begin to amend a little. The
other day the Lord did begin very fairly; the Lord turned the Scales diverse
ways, you know how it was with Scotland, and with the King. One would think
that there were no Magistrate, nor Minister, nor no man that has the name of a
Professor, but he would learn somewhat by all this; yet how many are bettered?
nothing in the World. Wonder not; because God has never showed himself in
mercy, in any ordinance, in any correction, or affliction, or judgment to any
carnal man.

I conclude with this word, carnal, wicked men, wicked men shall one day be
humbled.
are never humbled in this world, that is certain, unless the Lord change
them, and reveal himself to them: but there is no wicked man in the world, but
he shall have a Humiliation, such as it will be. There will be a day when the
worst man in the world, shall in some part be humbled: you shall read in Luke
2^. how men shall be at their wits ends, for fear of what shall come upon
them. And in Revel. 6- when the Lord Jesus shall come to judgment, they shall
run to the Rocks, and to the Caves, and to the Mountains to hide them from
the presence of God; their pride shall be pulled down, there shall be a kind
of Humiliation, but no true humiliation, but even in hell, they shall be there
grumbling against God for evermore.

Be pleased to learn from these few broken words, that it is the will, and way
of God, that you get your souls humbled, which is the thing that I, and you
principally (it may be) want, you see it is by seeing of God in Jesus Christ:
therefore labor to see him, and study this blessed skill of seeing him; and
though we know not how it is, yet you shall find that that grace, and every
other grace, will come more, and more into your Souls.

SERMON 5.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
THe last lesson or doctrine that we were upon from these words was this, that
A saving sight of God in Christ is the right, and ready way to true Gospel
humiliation.

Woe is me for I am undone, because I have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.



First, I showed you, that, Every true Saint has a peculiar sight of God.



That was necessary to make way for this; that every such peculiar sight, is
the means, or way to true Gospel humiliation.

I proved it, and gave you the Reasons, and made some short Use of it.

The next Use that I shall open to you, which is Use 2. Trial if we have seen
God a^ight.
the maine, shall be to show you a way how you may know whether ever you have
thus seen God, it is an ordinary phrase in John his Epistles, such a man has
not seen God, He that hates his Brother, has not seen God. And the seeing of
God, even in this world, is the glorious privilege that the Saints have. Men
usually say that the Saints have every thing here, that they shall have in
Heaven, but only the beatificall vision; but truly they have here the
beatificall vision; they do see God as truly, though not so fully, as they
shall in Heaven. Therefore you may know whether you be of those that have this
great privilege, that you have seen God; if you have, you are truly humbled;
that will follow: for, the right sight of God makes a man By our humiliation.
cry out, VVoe is me for I am undone.

Now the question will be, whether this grace be wrought in our hearts, in
yours, and mine; whether we be rightly humbled.

And that you may know by two ways, in general.

The one by your carriage toward God. True humiliation may be known.


The other by your carriage to your Brethren.

You may know it by your carriage to God in these five things.

First, in respect of Gods justifying grace.

Secondly, in respect of his truths that are made By our carriage to God.
known to you.

Thirdly, in respect of his commandments, that are laid upon you.

Fourthly, in respect of his corrections.

Fifthly, In respect of his mercies.

Now to open these to you. I say that every Saint that is truly humbled. By
humiliation I told you, I mean not a preparatorie humiliation, as some In our
Justification.
of our Divines say; or an after humiliation: but the grace of humiliation that
is always in every Saint, and that grows more and more as other graces; as
meekness, and joy, and love, and goodness, and the like; now to know whether
you be thus humbled.

The first question will be, whether ever God has brought thee to submit, to
the righteousness of 1. By submitting to the righteousness of Christ.
Christ, for justification?

That is the first, and the chiefest thing, as it is in Romans 10. 3. They being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, they have not submitted to the righteousness of God. Now whether
has the Lord ever brought thee to a full despair, of ever being justified in
the sight of God, or of getting any favor from him, or of salvation by any good
that is in thee, or has been done by thee; or any hope that thou shall have
any good or do any good. I say that if thou be truly humbled, thou art brought
to that. And I say, this is the first, and chiefest thing. Because that a man
is more prone to his own righteousness (such as it is) then to his sin, and a
man sticks closer to his own righteousness then to his sin, for it is an easier
thing to bring twenty men from their sins, then one man from his
righteousness. Why man is naturally prone to cleave to his own
righteousness. Simile.


The ground is this: because it is that liquor, that was first put into us; the
liquor that is put into a vessel first, that sticks longer, and has a deeper
impression, and keeps the taste longer, if it be Vinegar, or Wine, or any thing
that is put in a new barrel.

Now God made us first righteous; afterward we sought out many inventions,
after we fell: therefore it is more natural to us, to be righteous in some
fashion, with some fashioned righteousness such as it is, then to be sinful.
And a man sticks closer to his righteousness, and is more troubled with it,
and more endangered by it a thousand fold, then by his sins. For truly, sin
is nothing but a feverish distemper in a man, he is many times Sin what.
drawn to drunkenness, and to whoredom: but take a carnal man, when he is
best his own man, he approoves righteousness better then sin: so that we
may see, it is righteousness he aims at, and he will commend a Preacher that
would have him leave sin, rather then one that will help him on in it: so
that its a principle more rooted in man's heart to be righteous, then to be
sinful: but it is not the righteousness of Christ, remember that; it is but
that a man would get up; he would repair that shattered, and torn
righteousness, that once was in him by Adam, that a man is more prone to:
though by sin, by a feverish distemper, he is often carried from that; but
none are so far carried, but he follows it in some measure, and in a great
measure.

Now the question is, whether the Lord has wholly brought thee from that
righteousness to submit To be content with the righteousness of another.
wholly to the righteousness of another. That is the first expression, whereby
I shall demonstrate it; Whether a man be brought wholly from his own
righteousness, to submit wholly to the righteousness of another; that is, to
the righteousness of Jesus Christ now in Heaven. If thou art come to this,
then thou art an humbled man. For, it is a great point of humility for at man
to stoop to another; to be beholding to another for a thing, when he thinks
that he has one that is good of his own: Now for me to leave my own
righteousness, and to go and seek a righteousness only in Jesus Christ, and
to walk in that all the days of my life, and to live upon that
righteousness, this shows that a man has a humble heart; let the world say
what it will, here is the maine point of humiliation in this world. It is not
whining, and crying, and howling, wicked men, and proud men may do this, and
be roaring, and damning themselves, and the like, the Devil may do so, that
has no true humiliation.

But here is true humiliation, for a man to deny his own righteousness, and
to embrace humbly the righteousness that is in Jesus Christ; I say to be
content wholly, and fully with it.

That as one godly man says, God at the first put a great stock of
righteousness in Adams hand to Simile.
trade with; he made him a righteous man, and when Adam fell, God took away
his stock, and God said he should never trade, and set up shop more. God had a
way indeed to do him good, but he should never set up shop again. We would
set up shop, and trade as Adam did: there is no man in the world though his
righteousness be never so little, but he would rather go with that portion,
of a righteousness of his own, then submit to the glorious righteousness of
the Lord Jesus.

Therefore I say, this is it, whether the Lord has brought thy Spirit to be
humble, that thou art content to be a fool while thou live, and to let
Christ be wisdom in thee; that thou would be a poor infirm frail
creature, and let Christ Jesus be thy righteousness; that thou art content to
walk in rags, and let Christ be thy riches. This is one thing.

In that place, Romans 10. 3. It was the pride of the Jews that kept them from
salvation by the righteousness of the Gospel; they would not submit to the
righteousness of God; they were a proud people. So that is it that keeps many
a soul that hears the word; it is that that keeps you weak, What it is that
keeps men in inward trouble.
and full of woe, and sorrow all your days. You think it is the want of this
grace, and the want of that grace, and other things; but it is nothing but your
own stubborn heart, that you will not submit to the righteousness of Christ:
You would have this grace, and that grace; that is, you would fill up every
corner of your own shop, and you would amend your own trading, but you would
not shut up shop, and be journey-men (as I may speak with reverence) to Jesus
Christ. That is one thing.

Then again, the second particular I have to demonstrate; 2. To take the
righteousness of Christ on his bare word.
that whether you be humbled or no, is this, whether the Lord have brought you
to be content to take the righteousness of Jesus Christ upon his own bare,
and naked word? Whether now you can say, there is Jesus Christ, full of
righteousness for me, and my own righteousness is full of rags.

What evidence have you for it?

Here is a word, Jesus Christ is come to dye for sinners, I find nothing in me,
but here is a bare word; and hereupon I am content to take his righteousness,
and throw away mine own.

I do not say, but that a good Christian may Christians may make use of signs.
make good use of signs, and marks, even in earthly things; Christians see the
love of God by temporal, outward things: for God uses what Pipes he pleases
to convey his love.

But the question is in matter of believing, whether I should not throw away my
own righteousness, and wholly believe in Jesus Christ's righteousness, before
I see any grace; or any sign?

A humble heart can do it, and is content that marks should come after he
believes; after I believe God will sanctify me, and work grace, and then I
shall see his love more. But the first bargain between God, and me, is his
bare word: therefore that Romans 10. is glorious, and clear, and comfortable.
The Apostle lays down the difference between salvation by the Law, and by
faith; says he, the Righteousness of the Law, speaks on this wise. The man
that does these things, shall live by them: but the righteousness which is of
Faith, speaks on this wise; say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into
Heaven, or who shall descend into the Deep; but he that believes shall be
saved. Mark it, this is the strain, and stream, and language of the Gospel;
that is, salvation by Jesus Christ; and whosoever believes on that salvation,
shall not be ashamed; he shall be sure of it.

But how shall we come to believe, and to be sure of this salvation? Say not in
thy heart, who shall go up to heaven, or who shall descend into the deep: but
what says it? the word is nigh thee; that is God has given a word, and he
will give a spirit of faith with it; and there are but two words to the
bargain, there is the spirit in thee, and the word without thee: and this is
the righteousness of God; the righteousness of faith says so. Say not who
shall go up to heaven, or down to the earth: For, the eyes of a fool are
scattered about the world. And when men come to believe in Christ, they ask,
who shall ascend into Heaven? how shall I come to know that I am a Saint, and
that I am predestined? The Lord would have us believe the word, that Christ
Jesus came to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Here is a word, if the heart
now could apply this by the spirit of faith. That is another thing, I would
have you think on.

Your ordinary Professors most of them, they Why ordinary professors want
assurance.
have not assurance of salvation, why? They cannot believe. Why so? because
they find so many corruptions in them, and they find so many graces wanting,
and they have ill memories, and hard hearts, and if it were not for these
things, they could believe. What is the meaning of it? It is as if they should
say, I will never trust God in the righteousness of the Gospel, upon his bare
word.

God will have us trust him, ere he will trust us; we must take God upon his
word, God will bring every child of his to this, to take his salvation upon a
bare word, and he will bless his name for it; I have but one soul, and if I
had a thousand, I would venture them all upon his word, and say there my soul
lies, sinck, or swim, or go to heaven, or hell, here is the word, that Christ
came to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Now, if there be pride in the heart,
it will not come, and rest on a bare word. The Lord make you understand these
things that they may not be lost.

Thirdly, a humble heart, will be content not only 3. With a general word.
with a bare word, but with the least word, and the most general word.

A proud heart will not be content unless he has a particular word. For my
part, I may mistake, but I will tell you my opinion; that those men (how Christ
dyed not for all.
ever otherwise they be godly, some of them) that do hold that Christ did dye
for all men, and that he came to save Judas, as well as Peter.

If Christ came to save all, and yet many shall go to Hell, how come they to
be saved?

It is a proud thought in the heart that would teach God how to speak, and how
to make promises, and we poor wretched, damnable creatures, must show him what
language he shall speak in: whereas now, a humble heart will take the least,
and most general word, and thank God: as we see in the woman of Canaan,
Christ gives her never a word a great while, but frowns; and then he gives her
a terrible word, and bids her go, he calls her Dog; why, that was something;
a Dog has some privilege; he has the crumbs that fall from the Table, he
looks for outward mercies; and therefore in that he calls me Dog, I have so
much of that word that I will follow him for the crumbs. Says Christ to her, O
Woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou will. So Benhadads servants,
when they came with Halters about their necks: says the King, Is my brother
Benhadad alive? that was a comfortable word, they harpt upon, and caught at
that; Thy brother Benhadad is alive: So, we come with Ropes about our necks,
poor damned creatures, and God comes in infinite wisdom, and makes promises,
and a humble heart will take them, and bless God for any promise, be it never
so general, and not stand so nicely, as proud people do. This shows a humble
heart; therefore examine if this be so with thee.

Fourthlie, a humble heart in matter of justification, it appears by this;
that as it is content to have a righteousness in another. 4. To renounce our
own righteousness.


And secondly, to hold it upon a bare word. If God give more, he will take it,
if not, he will hold it upon his bare word.

And thirdly, he will take the most general word.

So fourthly, he will wholly renounce, and throw away his own righteousness,
and as Paul did, call it du^g, and dogs meat, So I may be found (says he) in
Jesus Christ. Now a proud hear, would have Jesus Christ only to s^der his own
righteousness, and Jesus Christ's together; he would have Christ only to make
up a little, what is lacking in him; to make out what is wanting.

There are many men that go a great way in the pofession of religion; but
being pretty honest, civil men before, they will never be brought to renounce
their own righteousness. Now Jesus Christ will never mend the heart by
patching it, but either he will make it wholly new, or the Devil shall have
all; he will have the heart to have his righteousness wholly, or none at all:
now a man must throw away all, there must be nothing kept, as in the practice
of Saul, there must be no buts: for men to say but we have some good things;
and it is great pity to throw away all, What, all my prayers, and all my
humiliations, and all my fastings? all good for nothing, to make dung, and dogs
meat? I, Paul speaks as if his righteousness, had been a chain, and a burden.

Lastly, a humble heart, a humble man, or woman 5. Notwithstanding our sins,
and want of preparation.
will do all this, and he will do it, let his sinfulness be never so great,
or let his preparations be never so little.

There is a great deal of pride in men's hearts, they will not receive grace,
and salvation of God, because of the greatness of their sins. There is no man
that talks of the greatness of his sins, with a spirit of unbelief, but it
proceeds from pride. When a man talks of his great sins, and therefore he is
afraid to believe; that is from pride: for the greater a man's sins are, the
sooner he would believe, if he had a humble heart. Depart from me Lord (says
Peter) for I am a sinful man. He had more need to have said come to me Lord,
for I am a sinful man.

And then if his preparations be never so little. Men think that they could
believe, if they were qualified, and had such preparations. It is as if they
should say, I will get so much, and then I should be but a little beholding to
Christ, half the work is done. There must be no stay for want of preparation,
when the Lord calls; when the Lord offers Christ, well, that is one thing that
you may try your humiliation by; your carriage toward God, in respect of his
justifying grace, or the righteousness of Christ that justifies, or Gods
righteousness which is the object of justification; and that you see in those
five things.

The second thing is this, you may try if your 2 By our carriage to God in his
truths revealed.
hearts be humbled; if you consider your carriage toward God, in respect of
his will, or in respect of his truths, that he manifests to you, from time to
time. For, here is the difference, a humble heart will submit to every truth of
Christ, as far as it is revealed. Therefore it is said, Romans 8. 6. The
carnal mind is enmity against God, for, it is not subject to the law of God,
nor can be. A carnal mind, is enmity against God; It is not only an enemy, but
enmity it self. And he does not only say it will not, but it cannot be subject
to the Law, that is, to the will of God.

Beloved a proud heart, or a heart that is not Proud carnal men.
humbled, it will not submit to the Truth of God: but, it will always do one of
these three things.

The first is this; he is not willing to know all the 1. Are not willing to
know all the truths of God.
truths of God: he is not willing to know them: for he knows if he do know
them, he must do them. He thinks it safer to be ignorant of the truth,
then obey the truth, and some have been ready to say, if I know the will of God
I must do it.

But here is the question, whether thou be willing to know the will of God?

A man that is not truly humbled, always when he hears spiritual truths,
that come to rule him, he wishes (as a godly man says) that either the
minister were dumb, or that he were deaf: for it is a burden to him. He is
like those People in Isay 30. 10. The rebellious People, that Isaiah was
troubled with. This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will
not hear the Law of the Lord. Which say to the seers, see not; and to the
Prophets prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things;
prophecy deceits. This was and is the language of the hearts of carnal
Christians: they say to the seers see not. They wish that the Preachers could
not find out those truths that are so contrary to nature, and that cross
their corruptions, and they wish that Preachers would take other texts and
handle other Doctrines that were more pleasing, and smooth, as Job says, Job
21. They prosper and their children dance, and there is the timbrell and the
harp; and they say to God, depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. We are not enemies to it, we do not fight against it; we allow
Preachers to be there, but truly we desire not the knowledge of thy ways,
this is the language of a proud heart.

Now is there in you such a heart, that though Saints willing to know all Gods
truths.
you know that you shall be saved, and go to Heaeven (as an honest man once
said) yet have you a desire to know every truth, though you suffer never so
much persecution for it? There is a humble heart. It is so, and it will be so,
as we see in that blessed man Eli 1 Samuel 3. 17. you know what a blessed humble
man he was; and when there was a Vision that Samuel saw, that was for his
ruin, and the ruin of his House; and the Lord had called Samuel, and showed
him the Vision, Eli calls him and said, What is the thing the Lord has said;
I pray thee hide it not from me. Samuel was not willing to tell him, being but
a child; he knew by his countenance it was not good tidings, yet says he, I
pray thee hide not from me, what God has told thee; God do so to thee, and
more also, if thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto
thee. O Blessed man; he was willing to know it, though it were a sore message,
that the Lord would take away the Preisthood, and he should break his neck;
and his Sons should be slain in the Wars. So Cornelius Act. 10. 33. When
Peter came to preach, We are here all in the presence of God, to hear all
things, that shall be commanded us of God. We are not here, that we may please
our own humors, and suit our own lusts; but to hear all, let it be rough,
or smooth; with us, or against us, we are here, to hear all that the Lord will
say. Can thou say so, when thou come before the Lord, and hear the
Word, I am here to hear all the Lord will say? Beloved I wish it were so; but
I sear that of all the People in England, there are many in this City that,
it may be, are good People abundance of them, and yet we are willing to learn
nothing in the world but what we like; and we crumble the bread of our
salvation, as children do their bread and butter, who eat one bit themselves,
and throw the rest to the dogs. So many proud carnal sprits take a part of the
word, and they say that was a good note of Master such a ones, and such a ones,
and (so you call men's words) and that was a good doctrine, and pick out this,
and that, and go, and tell it. I never saw, nor I think never any under the
Cope of Heaven, such spirits, that do so basly mince the Word of God, and
crumble it; and take one piece, and throw two away. Therefore look to that; an
honest heart will hear all that the Lord will say, and be glad too; that is
one thing.

A second thing is this; a proud carnal heart 2. A proud heart makes cavils
against the truth.
that is not truly humbled, it will appear by this, that if he cannot choose
but know the truths of God; as many times he cannot but he must know it, if he
live under the word, God will make some men know it, whether they will or no:
then the next work of a proud heart will be, to raise up cavils against the
word, and to make Pleas against the truth of God, and arguments as much as may
be when it comes in unto him. Just (as one man says) as we do with a common
enemy: it we can, we will keep him out of the country, and it is safest to do
so: So, he will keep out the truth if he can: but if the truth come, and he
begin to see it, and sees that it is the will of God; then his next course is
to levy forces, to raise arms, and thinks to put it out, he thinks to put out
the light that God has put into his soul 2 ^^m. 3. 8. Men of corrupt minds,
men of rotten minds, that like Jannes, and Jambres resist the truth. There is
no mention of Jannes and ^ambres in the Old Testament, but it is generally
thought by learned men, that the meaning is this. When Moses came to Pharaoh at
any time, to speak of the things of God, and of the will of God, and that the
People of Israel must go free, and he did work miracles, and that light came
to Pharaoh to convince him, presently he sent for Jannes and Jambres, that were
Southsayers, and made them help him, and get arguments against Moses, and they
would argue like Moses, to keep out the truth: So carnal People, when light
comes into the soul, and they cannot resist it; this is their ordinary course
to go to their carnal neighbors like themselves, or to a carnal Priest, or
Minister if they have any, and get as many arguments, as they can, and then
they will say, the other was a Phancie, it is not right, it will not hold; and
so never leave till they get it out of their coasts, as the Gadarens dealt with
Christ.

Thirdly, and lastly; if he cannot do this, if he 3. A proud heart will shift
off Gods truths.
cannot beat it out by violence; he will endeavor to escape the edge of the
tool by some shift; he will use his wits, and go to policy, and see if by
any shift he can escape the power of the truth. If he cannot beat it off, he
will labor to escape the power, and the edge of it. As a man that is in debt,
that is under an execution, or an outlarie; if he can, he will keep far enough
from the Sergeants, and if they come, he will shut his door, and keep them
off; or if they come to take him, he will throw them off. But if they say, if
you stir, we will knock you down, or kill you: then he will say; why I mean
to pay, and such a man knows it, and he will give them fair words, that so he
may avoid the power, and authority of the Law from coming upon him: So carnal
men desire to be ignorant of those truths; that all their life time are
contrary to them: and if truths come in upon them, they consult with all their
carnal Neighbors, and friends to get it out: and if all will not do, then
they go to their shifts.

As for instance, suppose a truth should come upon one of your souls, that
thou that art a drunkard, or a whoremonger, etc. unless thou be borne again,
thou shall never enter into heaven, and this truth has seized on thee, and God
has set it on thy soul, that a man cannot get it out; and then he goes to his
shifts, he says it is true, I must be borne again, or else I shall be damned:
but says he, I hope I was borne again in baptism; and I hope that was a
washing away of my sins. And so put it on another; it may be this truth comes
into his soul, that every man that lives in any known sin shall be cast out
of the Kingdom of God, and of Christ. 1 Cor. 6. Know ye not that neither
Drunkards nor Swearers, nor revilers, nor extortiouers, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, and of Christ. Suppose God set this truth home to thy soul.
It is true says the man; but I hope God has given me repentance for it, and
all is well. He hopes God has given him repentance, and he goes on in sin;
then God comes, and tells him, that if he had repented, he would leave his
sins, and amend his course, then says he, I hope I shall repent hereafter, I
shall repent sometime, or other, though I do not now.

If God tell him again, the day of salvation will be past, and the door will
be shut, and repentance will come too late: then he shifts it off, and says, I
hope I do repent with all my heart, and with all my soul.

But if God say, if you did repent, then you would leave all your sins. He will
say, good Lord, is there any man in the world without sin? and so it is
endless the shifts, and tricks, and quillets whereby a man, when he is
Arrested by the truth all his life, would avoid the edge, and power of the
truth.

Now let us come to our own souls, you, and I, and see how it is with us, in
respect of all the blessed truths of God that are in this book.

Are you willing, and desirous to know them, though they bring persecution? And
when a truth has come, that has been cross to you, have you not taken Arms
against it, or contended with it; as the Scripture speaks of those that obey
not the truth, but strive against it. It is not said, those that contend with
their Neighbors, but those that contend with the truth.

And so, have you not used shifts?

What a world of endless shifts have men against plain truths?

There is no Drunkard, nor Swearer, but he knows that if he live in that sin,
he shall be damned; and he cannot deny but that he is a Drunkard, or a Swearer,
or it may be a Whoremonger, and yet you may talk with him two, or three
hours, and he will go from this to that, and he hopes this, and that, and you
shall never have him let the edge of truth come to him.

Thirdly, and lastly, and so I have done. I have showed you how you may know
you are humbled, by your carriage, and deportment of your souls in respect of
Gods justifying grace.

And secondly, how to consider of your constant temper, and carriage of your
souls to the truths of God, to the will of God revealed to you, 3. By our
carriage to Gods commands.


Now thirdly, consider the carriage of your souls, in respect of the
injunctions, or commands of God that are laid upon you; the nature and property
of a heart truly humbled by seeing of God in Jesus Christ is this: to be
willing to obey God in any thing that God lays upon him, just as we see it was
with Paul, Acts 9. When he was humbled by seeing of God, he cries out, says
he, Lord what will thou have me to do? As if he had said, I could have
indented with thee formerly, whether I should do this, or that; and I would
do what I please, and when I pleased; but now Lord, What will thou have me to
do? Whatsoever it is, it shall be all one, only show me what it is, and I will
obey it. And then he bids him go, and have his eyes opened; and then he must
Preach, and then he must be Persecuted, and then he must go into a Ship, and
be carried a Prisoner a great way by sea; and there Soldiers were like to kill
him; and then the ship must be split, and yet Paul was content. Lord what will thou have me to do? he followed God in every thing; so in Luke 3. 10. 11. When
John Baptist did come and teach the will of God; the people they cried, What
shall we do? and the Publicans, What shall we do? and the Soldiers, and
what shall we do? This is the disposition of a heart that is humbled, he
desires to know what the will, and what the command of God is, and he yields
obedience to it.

Now on the other side, it is not so with carnal Proud hearts disobey Gods
commands.
proud people; they are like those in Psalm. 12. 4. Our tongues are our own we
ought to speak, what Lord shall control us? We will speak what we list, and
do what we please; we will go our own ways, and do that which is right in
our own eyes. As they say in Jer. 2, 31. We are Lords, and we will come no
more unto thee; We are Lords, and we will go our own ways. Beloved: every
carnal man in the World though he think there is a God; yet he thinks he was
borne, and brought into the World to do his own will, and to please himself:
therefore as far as the will of God suits to that, he will do it: but
otherwise that is the maine stream of his life to do his own will. Now as I
told you in the former, so in this, there are three tempers in the heart of a
carnal man, concerning Gods commands, that are contrary to the temper, and
posture of a gracious heart that is truly humbled.

The first thing that we find in the word, and by 1. A proud heart soon weary
of Gods commands.
experience, is. That when the Lord lays a command upon a man that is not
truly humbled, it may be he does not resist presently, but he will be soon
weary, and tired, and that is a base thing, he will be jaded under it; It may
be at the first he will not fight against it, as some do, but he will soon be
jaded, he will soon be tired. There is many a man, and many a woman, that have
taken pleasure in the will of God, and in the commands of God in former time,
and have gloryed, and rejoiced in it: but now they begin to be weary, and to
be jaded like tired horses, they are past their best, they have no heart to it.
I fear it is so with too many of you. Like the people in Mal. 1. 13. The Lord
bids them to offer sacrifice, and they say, Behold what a weariness it is, and
they snuffed at it, and they brought that which was torn; and lame, and sick.
So you need not wonder that God has a quarrel with you when you say, what a
weariness is it to serve him; what a weariness, and tedious thing it is to
hear the Preacher thus all day long: and to be praying, and hearing all the
week; what an endless thing it is to begin again to morrow, and next day, and
every day: and you snuff at it, and you are ready to loath it. This is the
disposition of a heart that God has not truly humbled, that has never seen
the face of God in Jesus Christ. Look in Romans 1. The people that God laid
those spiritual judgments upon, to give them up to all uncleanness, to
commit filthiness man with man; what was the reason of all this? One was,
because when they knew God, they did not glorify him as God: they had some
knowledge, but they did not improve it. Another was, they did resist the truth,
they did levy forces against it: and they liked not to retain the knowledge
of God. They had a little knowledge of God, and that galled them, because their
practice was contrary, therefore they liked not to retain that knowledge; they
had no liking to keep that little knowledge of God; they wished as Calvin
says, every wicked man in the World wishes that he were wholly Ignorant of
God, for his knowledge does but only imhitter him, and trouble him in his way.
That is the first thing.

Secondly, He is not only weary of it, and if he 2. He lays violent hands on
Gods commands.
can he will be rid of it so: but he will lay violent hands upon the commands
of God. There is a terrible word in Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven, against those that hold the truth in unrighteousness. The word in
the Greek is, those that Imprison the truth: There was truth came to them, and
they held it till they were weary, till they were tired, and jaded: but then
they locked it up, and would not suffer it to break forth in their lives, but
lived as if there were no light at all in them. There is some kind of light in
them, but it is in Prison, you cannot see it, and you would think there were
none at all, like those people in ^ Sam. 8. 19. When God had said they should
have no King but him: but say they, we will have a King, and so they go
violently, and desperately against the command of God. Thus is it with a
carnal proud heart.

Thirdly, and lastly, it may be some men will 3. Proud hearts obey Gods
commands, but upon their own terms.
not do so with the commands of God, but they will obey them, but it shall be
only upon their own terms; they were as good do nothing.

As for instance, he will obey, first by sits, and 1. When they please.
when he is at leisure. As it may be, you have seen a proud servant that will
work well sometimes; but he is so sturdie that he will do nothing but what he
pleases: and if the humor take him he will go to the Shop, or else it may be
he will Walk at his pleasure two or three days together; you cannot build on
it. So carnal unhumbled hearts, when they are in the humor they will obey the
commands of God; but it is but for a fit. Now a right Christian, is holy always,
according to the grace God has given him, he is always ready to obey the
commands of God.

Secondly, a proud unhumbled heart, as he will obey 2. What they please.
but at sometimes; so he will obey but in some things; he will pick and choose
in the commandments and service of God, what he pleases. That is the manner
of proud Servants, they will work sometimes, but if a man bid them do one
thing, they will do another, a man were as good be without them. Such a
Servant will be wiser in his own eyes then his Master. It may be he will do
his Masters work, and his Master cannot say but that he is a diligent servant,
but he will do but what he lists, and he will do it but in his own way; and
if his Master bid him do one thing he will do another. So it is with a
carnal man, when God bids him do any thing, he will do somewhat, and let his
Neighbors do the rest if they will. But now an honest heart, whatsoever God
commands, without respect to this or that, be it what it will be, if the Lord
command it, he will endeavor to obey him.

Thirdly, and lastly, as they will obey God at 3. When God gives them rewards.
their own leisure, and obey him in those things that they please: so they
will do it if God follow them with a reward. As for instance. You may observe
many a proud hearted man, Minister, or others, as long as God has given them
credit enough, and riches enough, they will do the work of God bravely: but
take away that, and they will do nothing at all. Therefore if God will let
credit, and riches go always with Religion, he shall have Servants enough, and
proud ones too. But now a humble Christian he values the love of God, more then
the things themselves; and let these things come or go, his eye is upon God,
and his love is such to God, and he sees that God loves him so, that he will
endeavor to obey God in all things, whether he be rewarded or no. Now these be
the dispositions of carnal unhumbled hearts; you may examine your own hearts
by these three things. By your carriage toward God in respect of his
justifying grace; By your carriage toward God in respect of his truths
revealed to you; And be your carriage toward God in respect of his
injunctions, and commands that he lays on you. If you examine, and find that
your hearts are not humbled, you know what to do, desire God to show himself
more, and as you see him more, so you will be humbled more; for the right
seeing of God in Jesus Christ is the true and ready way to humiliation.

SERMON 6.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
YOu remember the last doctrine which we had from these words, which we have
something more to say to, was this, that A true and saving sight of God in Jesus
Christ, is the way to true saving humiliation.



The principal means to saving Gospel humiliation, is to have a saving,
supernatural sight of God in Jesus Christ. Mine Eyes have seen the King, the
Lord of Hosts: Therefore woe is me I am undone.

This I opened to you as far as God revealed it to me; and we had some uses,
and lessons thence for our souls.

The last use of all was of trial, as we call it, that you may hence see, and
know whether ever you have seen God aright, to wit by your humiliation. If you
have seen God aright then you have cried out with Isaiah, Woe is me I am
undone; and as Job, I have seen the Lord, therefore I abhor my self; in dust
and ashes.

Now the question was, how shall I know whether I be truly humbled or no?

I told you, you might know it in general, two ways.

First by your carriage and deportment toward God.

Secondly by your carriage toward men.

Concerning your carriage toward God, I have spoken of three things.

First your carriage toward God in respect of his righteousness, or of your
justification.

Secondly, to examine your carriage toward God, in respect of his truths that
he has revealed.

Thirdly, (and there I left:) your carriage toward God in respect of the
commands he lays upon you.

Now to go forward a little. The Fourth 4. A humble heart known by its
carriage to God in affliction.
thing is this, that you shall know how far God has humbled you, and
bestowed this Gospel grace upon you; by your carriage to God when he corrects
you: by your carriage under Gods corrections, and your afflictions, whatsoever
they are. For I shall not name them; every one can best put his finger upon his
own face, whether they be on soul, or body, whatsoever they are. I say thou
may know whether thy soul be a humbled soul by thy carriage in such times
as these are. It has been a common rule among the godly that as a man is in
afflictions, so he is indeed. Truly that rule has much truth in it, though it
be not always true: for a man may loose himself sometimes in afflictions more
then in another condition. As Jonah, he was a godly man, yet very unlike
himself when God corrected him, and had taken away his Gourd: but ordinarily,
such as the man is, so he will be in affliction. The Lord in the Prophet
Ezekiel compares affliction to a boiling, seething pot, you know if you put
meat into a pot, and though it be not so clean washed, if you put no fire
under it, the water will be clear: but if you put fire under, then you shall
see the scum and Afflictions as fire.
filth come up. Afflictions are called Gods fire, because usually the scum and
the dross that is in us which otherwise lies hid, is then seen: and afflictions
are called trialls; they try what is in us. And truly of all corruptions
there is none, there is no froth in the soul of man that will appear sooner,
or more in afflictions, then the pride of his soul, the loftiness of his
soul. This was the reason why Satan would have God to give him leave to Why
Satan desired to tempt Job.
tempt Job: because I know says he, that Job is a devout man, but he Serves
not God for naught. I warrant you if you put him in the fire of affliction you
shall see a great deal of dross in Job; he will storm, and rage, and fume,
you would quickly see the pride of his heart. Says God thou shall have him,
do what thou will with him, try him if he be so: and doubtless though it be
said a good while, In all this Job sinned not, yet Job sinned before the end:
and there is a great deal of Jobs pride to be seen from the beginning of the
Book to the end. Well then I say in afflictions thou may know thy own, and
I mine. Therefore let us not speak of things we know not, but speak of our
own afflictions, the afflictions and corrections that thou art wont to fall
into, and that are thine, whether it be sickness, or weakness, or a bad
Husband, or a wanton Wife, or an ill Neighbor, thou know them best; now by
thy carriage under those, thou shall find how far God has bestowed on thee
this grace of humiliation.

But you will say, how shall I know that, whether humbled by my carriage in my
afflictions?

I will give you ten instances of the carriage of Ten instances of the carriage
of a humble heart in afflictions. 1. A humble heart sees God in the affliction.
a humble heart in any affliction that shall be laid upon him. as,

First of all, if thy heart be humbled, whatsoever thy affliction is, or
whatsoever is the Instrument that afflicts thee, thou will presently and
clearly see God in it. That is one thing; thou will see that instrument
whatsoever he is, in the hand of God: a proud heart does usually look upon the
creature, he looks upon the man, upon the troublesome Neighbor, upon the
graceless Child, upon the unreasonable Husband, etc. but a humble heart
presently sees God. As in Isa. ^0. We see those that corrected the Saints
there, the King of Assiria, he is said to be the Axe in Gods hand; he is said
to be the rod, and the staff, and the Axe, An Axe cannot cut without some hew
with it, and a staff cannot beat without some hold it; and a rod cannot whip
unless some take it in their hand. A humble heart, let the affliction be what
it will, and the Instrument be what it will; it sees all as a rod, or as a
staff that is a little heavier, or as an Axe that is heavier, and sorer then
that; but all in the hand of God. I will give you a common known instance, 2 Samuel 16. 5. There was a man whose name was Shimei he comes against David and
casts stones at him, and Shimei cursed David, and said come out, come out thou
bloody man of Beliall. Tuvir Belial, Thou son of Belial. The proper description
of a wicked man, a man that does not grow in goodness: it is ordinarily read,
thou son of Beliall. This man cursed David in Verse. 9. Then said Abishai the
son of Zerviah unto the King, why should this dead dog curse my Lord the King?
Let me go over I pray thee, and take off his head. He being of a proud
spirit, calls him dog; and did not see God ordering the tongue of Shimei. But
what says David? What have I to do with you ye sons of Zerviah? so let him
curse, because the Lord has said unto him curse David, who shall then say
wherefore have thou done so? It had been an easy thing for a King to take off
the head of a single man that cursed him: but he reasoned with himself and saw
that the Lord had commanded Shimei to curse David, and therefore says he, why
should I meddle with him? Shimei calls him bloody man, because he had taken the
Kingdom, and succeeded Saul: but David calls to mind the blood of Uriah, that
the other thought not of; It is true thought he, I took away the life of
Uriah, that thou mindst not, and God has sent yonder man to call my sin to
remembrance therefore you sons of Zerviah I will not meddle with you, nor do
you meddle with him, let him alone. So if thou be a humbled man, whatsoever the
Instrument be, if the spirit of God has humbled thy heart, presently thou will
look upon God, God has made yonder Neighbor vex me; and when thou come
home perhaps thy Husband raves, and railes, God has stirred up the passion of
my Husband, and made him do thus against me.

This is one thing that I find frequent in the Scriptures, to be an act, or an
expression of a humble heart in the time of afflictions. Nay I find carnal,
and Heathenish people have strange expressions, 2 Kings 17. 26. The people of
Israel were carried captive, and there came lions and devoured the people of
Assiria, that came to dwell there, and the people go home and say, The God of
the Land has sent Lions among us, because we know not the manner of the God of
the Land; how many of us that are called Christians, when things fall out, we
fall foul with the Instrument, with the rod, or the Axe, or the staff, this,
or that man, did this, or that; when the very Heathen could say, the God of the
Land has sent Lions, much more should a Christian, whose heart God has
humbled. That is one instance.

A Second thing is this, you shall discern, and 2. He has high thoughts of
God.
see a humble heart in afflictions, by the high and reverend; and precious
thoughts, that he has then of God. A humble heart has glorious thoughts of
God in the lowest condition. As for instance, he sees there glorious things in
God, in his affliction, that makes him think reverently, and honorably, and
dearly, (as David says,) of him.

First, he sees the justice of God; the equallnesse Of his justice.
of Gods dealing with his soul, or with his body, let the Lord do with him
what he will, he will not say as the people of Israel proverbially said. Ezekiel.
18. The ways of the Lord are not equal. A proud heart will say so; it will
think so at least: for the Scripture speaks the language of men's hearts. The
heart of a proud man thinks that God deals unjustly, and unequally, that he
lays so great an affliction on him, and then another affliction upon that;
that first takes away one mercy, and then another; first one Child, and then
another, and then a third; the heart, out of pride, thinks God deals
unjustly; but if the heart were rightly humbled, it would see that all that God
does, is very just, and equal. I, not only (observe it) just according to
Law, for so a man may do by legal humiliation, that Ahab, and Judas had.
Judas saw that it was just with God to destroy him; and so did Ahab, and Saul,
and Pharaoh: it is not only According to the Gospel.
so, but according to the Gospel, there he sees that the ways of God are very
equal, and that it is a righteous thing with God to afflict him, I mean thus,
a man I say under the Gospel that sees himself the son of God, and that God
is his Father, and that he is united to Christ, and that his soul is justified
perfectly by the blood of Jesus Christ; yet when God shall lay some sore
affliction upon him. A man would think now, how can God justly do this? As
some proud or inconsiderate people say: Will God be paid twice? has he not
been paid in his son? Now a humble heart will say, though God be satisfied,
and the Law be fullfilled, and he is my Father; yet I am such a graceles
wretched son, such a provoking son, I do so often vex, and slight, and neglect
my Father, that even according to the law of love: and according to the blessed
Gospel, it is equal that God should deal so with me.

Nay he can say at all times that God lays on me (according to the Gospel it
self) less then I deserve, as they said, Lament. 3. 22. It is the Lords
mercy that we are not consumed. Indeed it is an affliction that I am whipped,
but it is a great deal of mercy that I am not utterly destroyed; Look to thy
heart in this thing, when afflictions come upon thee, can thou justify God,
and say his ways are equal, and just, and right, as they say in Nehem. 9. 33.
Howbeit thou art just and right in all this. In all what? you shall see in the
Verse before, Lord let it not seem little before thee, the trouble that has
come upon us, etc. And it was not little, for they suffered sore, and long, and
yet notwithstanding all that, thou art righteous, and just in all this, that we
have suffered. That is one thing.

Another thing that he has reverend thoughts 2. Of his Love.
of God for, it is his love, a humble heart will be able to see a sun through a
cloud; he will be able to see the heart of a Father, and the love of a Father,
when he frowns most, or shakes his rod most over him, God cannot shake his rod
so much over a Saint that is a humbled Saint, but he will be able to epsy some
Smiles of love: Therefore I say he has honorable thoughts of God, Why?
Because he thinks though this be so, yet it is just, and equal. It is true
says he, I am a son, but of my conscience God has not such another son, on
the face of the Earth: I vex him more in one week, then all the other do in a
year: therefore for all this, I see him move his eyes, and yearne his heart
for my good; so that still he has honorable thoughts of God.

Now a proud heart, such a one as Judas, may say it is just: but here he comes
short, he cannot say it is love.

Thirdly and lastly, he has honorable, and precious, 3. Of his wisdom.
and reverend thoughts of God: because in his affliction he discerns the
infinite wisdom of God. Truly Beloved, there are but two great wisdoms that
are great indeed, that are before the eye of a Christian in this World: that
is, the wisdom Two wisdoms great in the eyes of Saints.
that is hid in the Gospel, that the Angels desire to pry into: and the
wisdom of God, in his carriage to his Saints in affliction. Now when things
seem cross and thwart; when a proud heart says, I am undone, I am broken, and
spoiled; I shall never set up again, I shall never eat my bread cheerfully
again; a humble heart can say, though I know not what God will do, yet he
has a wise design in it; it is love, whatsoever it is, and it is wisdom
too. Therefore the Lord does with us in afflictions, as he did with Peter, when
he washed his feet, says Peter, what do thou mean? What I mean thou shall
know hereafter. So a poor Saint when God strikes him; he takes away, it may be
two or three of his Children: thinks he, Lord, what do thou mean? Says
God, thou shall know hereafter, I have a wise design thou shall see it, but
now I must keep it from thee, thou shall not know it. And truly ordinarily
when the affliction is over, God comes and takes his child a side, and opens
the design to him, and tells him thou did wonder at me many times, and had
hard thoughts of me for a great while when it was under ground; come now, I
will read thee a lesson, I will tell thee the story; and so takes him by the
hand, and says, do not thou remember before I took thee in hand, what a
froward creature thou were? what a proud creature thou were? thou might have
been damned, if I had not taken thee in hand; and I gave thee first such a
gentle affliction, and then added another. God shows him the whole plot, and
then he says, Lord pardon all my hard thoughts of thee; glorious God, I see
now that all was love, and wisdom. And God so inures his people to show them
the design when the affliction is over, that most Saints, though they
understand, and see nothing of God in their affliction, yet they know it is a
glorious design of wisdom that God has upon them: therefore they will not
censure God, because they see it not; it is but their own ignorance that they
do not comprehend it. As if you should see a Plowman, or a country man come
to a Mathematician, that were at his Globe, and his compasses, and were drawing
lines from one to another; the Country man knows nothing of this: but he
would not therefore say the other is a fool, and does he knows not what. He
would rather say, I warrant you he is a Scholar, and has had good breeding:
but allas what simple people are we in the Country, we know not what belongs
to the Globe, and compasses. So a Christian when he is in affliction, he does
not say, God does he knows not what, and he plagueth me: but says he, God has
wisdom, and love, in all this; only I am a simple poor creature that know not
this. So now there are two things I would have you to observe. First if you
have humbled hearts, you will see God in the affliction. And then you will have
reverent and high thoughts of God, in respect of his justice and his love, and
wisdom toward you.

In the third place, a soul that is humbled (I mean all this while, as far as
it is humbled) it 3. A humble soul quietly submits in affliction.
does quyetly, and silently submit unto the Lord in all his afflictions; that
the Lord may do with him what he will, and truly he has reason enough and it
cannot be otherwise; if he see God in the Instruments, and see such thoughts of
justice, and love, and wisdom in God, he cannot but quyetly submit; this will
follow. As you know in 1 Samuel 3. When God told Ely that he was coming to cut
off his house* and his Priesthood, and his Sons. Says he, It is the Lord,
let him do what semeeth good in his eyes. It is the Lord, I will not suffer my
heart to grumble, but it is the Lord, and I will submit. A man would have
thought he had not offended, he did chide his Sons, and told them, Ye do not
well; but he should have corrected them: they were wicked men, and because he
was too Indulgent to them, God sent him word that he would cut them off, both
him, and his Sons, yet says he, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
good in his eyes.

Nay, let a man be never so stout otherwise in The stoutest heart humbled, will
submit to God.
his natural constitution, let him be of never so strong, and sturdie a
spirit; yet i^ he have this grace, if he have the spirit of humiliation, he
shall notwithstanding submit like a Lamb when the Lord lays his hand on him.
I will give you one place to prove this, Isa. 29. 1. 2. Woe to Ariel, to Ariel
the City where David dwelt, let them kill, sacrifice, yet I will distress
Ariel. What is that? That is, the Lion of God. God calls Jerusalem the Lion,
and the Lion of God, you know the Lion is a stout creature. It is said of Saul
and his Servants that they had hearts like Lions hearts. And the Lion of God,
that adds something to it, yet when the Lord coms upon this Lion of God; Thou
shall (says the Lord) be brought down: mark that expression in Verse 4. Thy
speech shall be low to the dust, and thy voice as one that has a familiar
spirit, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. Though thou be like a
Lion that roares, thou shall go and whisper in the dust, and thy voice shall
be as one that has a familiar spirit. Thou shall peep or chirp, as it is in
the Original. The Lord will make a Lion, to chirp, and make a Lion lie low in
the dust, and whisper. And if you compare Lam. 3. 28. There is an expression
that does a little more clear it. It is good for a man to bear the yoke in
his youth. He shall sit alone, and keep silence, because he has borne it; he
shall put his mouth in the dust if there may be hope. When it is a man that is
humbled, he will put his mouth in the dust, he will submit, and lie down if
there may be hope; though he know not whether there be or no, this is
plentiful in Scripture in every place; the people of God, though they were
afflicted never so soar, and did abide it never so long, yea those that had
humble hearts they used to submit patiently, and quietly to it. I held my peace
and was dumb, because it was thy doing, says David. Psalm. 39.


Try your hearts by these things, how you are in afflictions: do you see God
in the Instruments? What kind of thoughts have you of God? (for as the mind is,
so is the man) have you high, reverent, precious, thoughts of God? And do you
submit? can you stoop, and quench the boylings of your hearts, and the
stirringe of your spirits? Can you say as Eli did. It is the Lord, let him do
as he will. He has taken one child, let him take the rest if he please; he
has taken one of my Family, let him take more if he will. He has taken away
some of my Trading, let him take all if he will. This is the frame of heart, of
a humble man.

In the Fourth place, a humble soul that is savingly 4. A humble heart envies
not the prosperity of others.
humbled in his afflictions (for of such I speak all this while) in the
greatest afflictions that befall him, he does not use to envy the prosperity
of others: that frame of a humble heart I find in Jam. 4. 5. Pride, and envy,
are as it were Synonomies, they seem as it were the same thing. The Scripture
says not in vain, the spirit that is in us lusts after envy. But he gives
more grace; wherefore he says, God resists the proud, but gives grace unto
the humble, He makes pride, and envy one, and the same. And indeed so it is,
you shall never see them severed, you shall never see a proud heart, but it is
envious. Now one that is humbled is not so, as you shall see, Psalm. 37. David
indeed was tempted to it, but the Lord delivered him from it. And in Psalm, 73.
He speaks of the prosperity of the ungodly, they flourished in the World; and
increased in riches, and says he, Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain:
for all the day long I am plagued, and whipped, and chastned every morning. It
is a strange thing says he, see how yonder wicked man flourishes, and
prospers; and for my part I am as sure to be whipped every morning, as I am of
my breakfast (as they say) But if I should say so (says he) I should offend
against the Generation of thy Children. I thought so, till I went into the
Sanctuary of God; and then he understood their end, and his own folly: indeed
it was David's weakness: and it was that which his heart was not thoroughly
humbled for, as it should. Therefore you see proud people in the Prophecy of
Malachi. Chap. 3. He more plainly describes them, Verse. 13. Your words have
been stout against me, says the Lord. They had stout words, and stouter
hearts: for always the heart is worse then the words. You have said it is in
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and
that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts. Mark, what do we get
by walking mournfully, and by obeying the Commandments of God? And now we call
the proud happy, yea they that Work wickedness are set up, yea they that
tempt God are even delivered. Here is the temper of proud spirits, and hearts
of wicked men, they are all for Honor, and wealth; what profit shall we have
by humbling our souls, and keeping Gods Ordinances. O! these were stout words,
and stout hearts, and spirits, to envy the prosperity of other people while
they were corrected. And in Job 2^. You shall read that Job did almost fall in
that point also; but it was because he was not thoroughly humbled, as in the end
he was: for then he abhorred himself.

The Fifth thing is this, that a soul that is truly 5. Humble hearts repent not
of receiving Christ.
humbled in his afflictions, as he does not envy the prosperity of others the
while; so he does not repent of his bargain that he has made in receiving of
Jesus Christ: though all his afflictions, and miseries it may be fall on him
for his sake, or the most of them; he never repents that he has been so holy,
but that he is not more holy.

A proud heart repents of what it has done for God. O, says a proud heart, If
I had not heard Puritans, and followed their Sermons, and gone their ways, and
lived in their Conventicles, I had not been noted, and hated, and afflicted. It
is a proud heart that repents of any jot of good it has done for God, or that
repents of his receiving of Christ for any affliction, or misery that may
befall him, it is a sign of a base heart.

There is a blessed expression, Psalm, 44. 9. Of David and the people of God, I
have often thought of the great sufferings of the Saints there spoken of, Thou
have cast us off, and put us to shame, and go not forth with our Armies.
Thou make us to turn back from the Enemy: and those that hate us, spoil for
themselves. Thou have given us like Sheep appointed for meat: and have
scattered us among the Heathen. Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do
not increase thy wealth by their price. A strange thing, thou sellest them, and
take no money for them. Thou make us a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn
and derision to them that are round about us, etc. Here is as it were an
inventorie of all the troubles of the Church; and wherefore does he speak all
this? you shall see after. For all this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Our heart is not
turned back neither have our steps declined from thy way. Though thou have sore
broken us in the place of Dragons, yet we have not stretched forth our hands to
a strange God. He reckons up all these troubles, and yet says he,
notwithstanding all this, though God have brought all these miseries upon us,
yet We have not been false in the Covenant, nor stretched out our hands to a
strange God; we do not repent that we have received thee, and are married to
thee, and have chosen thee for our God.

I remember the practice of a godly Minister many years ago, who speaking of
the manner how God uses to bring in sinners to Christ; (though there were a
great deal of curiosity in those days, more (if I may speak with reverence
to the worthy men that then lived) then should have been) as if a man should go
about to describe the forming of a child in the womb, which it were better
leave to God, then study too much how it is framed. But I remember his
expression; says he, God takes a sinner the first time, and shows him his
misery, and shuts him up that he sees no way of deliverance at all: and then
after a little while he opens a little crevice that he may see deliverance, and
Salvation but he gives him not the least occasion of hope that he shall have
deliverance: but in the mean while what does the sinner? He leaves his sins as
fast as he can, and turns them off, and throws them away. He sees Salvation,
and he says, yonder is Salvation, but I have no reason to hope to have it: but
whether I have it or no, I will never go back to sin. I am resolved whether
Christ will give me pardon, and Salvation or not, I will not take sin any more.
I apply it to this; when afflictions and miseries come in storms on a poor
soul, shower after shower, that there is no end; the soul says. I know not
how I shall be delivered from these troubles, here is death, and misery, and
sickness upon me, and I know not what the issue will be, but be the end what
it will, by the help of God I will not go back to sin, I will not repent that
I have received Christ, but will keep close to the Lord. This is the meaning
of that phrase, Mat. 13. Where Christ says when the sun is up upon the corn
it scorcheth it, that is, when there is Persecution; (for every Persecution is
an affliction, though every affliction be not a Persecution; now when the sun
of Persecution is up) men are offended. What is the meaning of that? Men repent
of their bargain, they begin to be sorry, that ever they were Professors of
Religion. Therefore the Lord Christ would have a man cast up the cost. For when
a man enters into Religion, it is as if he were to fight a Field, there will be
loss, and trouble, and danger, there will be tribulation, and hot Persecution;
consider if thou be able to go through it: thou must have the shell as well as
the kernel, it is a decree of Heaven. Therefore consider before hand that thou
may not repent when troubles come. There may be base times, worse then yet,
if worse may be; and if when tribulations come thou shall repent that thou have
gone so far in Religion, and that thou have been acquainted with the Saints,
and that thou have been so often in their company, thou have (to speak the
least, and the best of thee) an unhumbled heart.

Sixthly, a Saint that has a humbled heart, you 6. He is more careful to carry
himself aright, then to be delivered.
may know it by his carriage in afflictions by this, he is more careful by far
of his right carriage in it, then of deliverance out of it. That is always in a
humble heart, he studies more how to behave himself like a Saint under the
rod, then how to get away, and be delivered from it. You may read in Acts 4.
There was very hot persecution, and great affliction upon the Saints; and yet
there they are blessing God notwithstanding all their Persecution, to see the
Scripture fullfilled; that which was spoken in Psalm. 2. The Kings of the Earth
stand up, and the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against
his anointed; they rejoiced to see that fullfilled, as if they had said, they
killed Christ the other day, and now they Persecute us. Now what would you, and
I have asked had we been in their condition? O that God would deliver us, that
he would show us an Island where we might never be troubled more; many of us
would have done this out of weakness; but what do they do? Verse. 29. And now
Lord behold their threatenings. And what then? They do not say Lord deliver us
from their threatenings, But grant unto thy servants that with all boldness
they may speak thy word; By stretching forth thine hand to heal: and that
signs, and wonders may be done, by the name of the holy child Jesus. Lord say
they, thou hear their threatenings, and we fear that our base hearts will be
fearful, and so we shall be loath to Preach the Gospel of Christ, and to do
signs and wonders as thou have commanded, therefore good Lord give us
boldness. This is the carriage of an honest holy heart.

So you have it of Paul ordinarily in Phil. 1. 13. There he was in bonds. And
in Verse. 19. He does implicitly desire the Prayers of the People for him: What
to do? For I know (says he) that this shall turn to my Salvation through
your prayers, and the supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ: according to my
earnest expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that
with all holdnesse, as always, so now also, Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life or by death. I do not pray you Phillippians that
you would pray that God would bind the hands of Nero that he may not put me to
death; or that he would open the Prison gates to let me out; but I pray that in
nothing I may be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now, Christ
may be magnified in my body. I care not whether it be by life or by death, so
God may be glorified, that if I live I may do good there, and if I die I may
die as a Saint, and a Christian. So in Ephesians. 6. 18. I beseech you says he,
give your selves much to prayer above all things; and pray for me; What to
do? That utterance may be given me that I may open my mouth boldly to make
known the Mysteries of the Gospel: for which I am an Ambassador in bonds,
that therein I may speak boldly as I ought to speak, He was in bonds, and he
desires them not once to pray that God would break his bonds; O, but pray that
I may open my mouth boldly. I find fear comes upon me many times; fear of
Caesar, and fear of the Sword, and fear of putting me to death: therefore Pray
that I may open my mouth boldly. This is the carriage of a heart that is truly
humbled.

Another, a Seventh thing is this, a humble 7. A humble heart more careful of
benefit then comfort in afflictions.
heart he is always more careful to reap benefit from afflictions then to
fetch comfort to himself in afflictions. A proud heart is altogether for
comfort, he will do any thing for comfort. As Saul, he will go to the VVitch
if need be for to fetch comfort. but he studies not how to partake of Gods
holiness by his afflictions.

Eighthly, (to draw to a conclusion) a humble 8. He neglects not Gods commands
in afflictions.
heart does not remit one jot of his obedience to the commands of God
notwithstanding all his afflictions. Proud dogged spirits, I have often observed
it in my self, and others; there are some hearts that will not serve God, and
take pains for him, otherwise then when the Lord dandleth them, and cockers
them, and feeds them with white bread, and if he do not they will give over
their callings, and sit mopeing in their Closets: there are diverse Women, and
other Professors, that will sit mopeing in their Chambers a whole week
together, and why? Because God has laid such afflictions upon their spirits,
they will do nothing for God, all the business of their general and
particular callings must lie at six and seavens: they will do nothing for God
when his hand is on them. Now a humble heart as Job said in another case.
Though he kill me yet will I trust in him. So says a humble heart, let him
kill me yet I will obey him. I believe that he loves me, there is a design of
a great reach in it, there is the glory of God, and the wisdom of God, and the
greatness of God in it. Let him do his work, let him do what he will, and by
Gods help I will do my work in my general, and particular calling
notwithstanding all the task that he lays on me, I will not abate any thing of
the obedience I am to bring in.

Another thing is this, a humble heart always 9. He sticks close to the
Covenant in afflictions.
sticks closer to the Covenant of God in affliction then otherwise: and the
more the Lord will afflict him, the more he will stir up his soul as Isaiah
says, to lay hold upon the Covenant. As a loving child, the more you whipp
him, the more he will endeavor in love to close with you, and cling to you,
and catch the rod in a reverent manner, in a loving way; so a humble heart will
get to God in affliction, and lay hold upon him. And this was the fault as Isay
says of that people, Isa. 64. When the Lord had laid his hand on them, and
suffered others to be Lords over them. Says he, V. 7. There is none that
calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee: for thou
have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us because of our iniquities. Here
was a great affliction on them, they were consumed, and God had hid his face,
yet there was none that did stir up himself to lay hold on God, out of the
pride of their own hearts. A proud heart always goes from God in affliction.
As we see Judas, he went not to God, but to the halter; and Caine, he went to
the Land of Nod, when God was angry he went to buyld Towns, he did not go to
God, and lay hold upon the Covenant: so Saul he goes to Endor, to the VVitch in
stead of going to God, and laying better hold of the Covenant. So a proud heart
departs from God, and grows further off, and looser from God, whereas always in
afflictions a humble heart sticks closer to God and gets better hold of his
blessed covenant.

Another thing is this, that in afflictions a humble 10. A humble heart apt to
pray in afflictions.
heart desires in nothing to be troubled, but in every thing to make his
requests known with thanksgiving, and that implies two things.

First, he does not restrain prayer, as Job^ 1. To make requests.
friends said to him, Thou art a wicked man: for thou restraynest prayer before
God in thy afflictions. And indeed if they had said true of Job, he had been
so, he had been proud at the least; proud people they will not call upon God
ordinarily in afflictions and troubles.

Secondly, it implies thankfulness, In Phil. 4. 2. To give thanks.
Make your requests known with thankfulness. A humble heart will always
pray; and it will in the greatest affliction be praising God; why so? Because a
humble heart in the greatest affliction can spy something to praise God for, as
well as to (...) for that he wants. Therefore says James, If any be afflicted
let him pray. Sometimes a Saint is so afflicted that he can do nothing else
but pray, and he is never better fitted to pray then when he is most afflicted,

Then lastly, you shall discern it by this, that 11. He is not weary of
waiting on God.
in his afflictions he will never be weary of waiting upon the Lord till he
have remooved it. It is the pride of our hearts that makes us that we do not
wait on the Lord, as the Prophet Habakkuk says, His heart that is lifted up is
not right in him: but the just shall live by his faith. In 2 Kings 6. 33. This
evil is from the Lord (says that wicked man) What should I wait on the Lord
any longer? A proud heart, God must come in at his time, and when he calls, or
else he will stay no longer, but will be weary. As a godly man says, what art
thou that thou will not wait for God? Why do thou take such state upon
thee? Who shall wait, God or thou? Should the King wait upon the Subject, or
the Subject upon the King, should the Master wait upon the Servant. or the
Servant upon the Master? should the Judge wait on the Traitor, or the Traitor on
the Judge? Such a one a humble heart sees himself to be, he is a Servant, and a
Traitor if God should take him at the worst. Therefore he blesses God that he
may wait for mercy. O says he, there are many thousands in Hell that shall
wait for ever, expecting more wrath, and more flames of fire, World without
end; and may not I bless God that I have a little mercy though I have many
sorrows, and that I may wait on the God of mercy for more mercies? I will
wait upon the Lord.

Thus briefly I have poynted out the carriage of a soul that God has humbled
by a saving sight of himself in Jesus Christ, I say his carriage in
afflictions.

There is another word to show you, his carriage under the mercies of God, but
I cannot speak of it now, without passing my own strength and yours.

SERMON 7.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
YOU remember the last doctrine that we had from these words, that A true and
saving sight of God in Jesus Christ is a principal means to humble a soul.



This I did open, and prove fully to you, out of the Scriptures. And so as God
led us we went along. And came in the last place to examine our selves: (for
that we were upon) whether the Lord had truly humbled us by discovering
himself to us: For there is no soul that is truly humbled, but he that has
seen God in Christ. I speak not, as I told you, of a day of humiliation, or of
the duty of humiliation, or of a preparatory humiliation, but of the Gospel-
grace of humiliation, of that frame of heart that is, or ought to be in a Saint
at all times. For the discovery of it, I told you, we should find much of it.

First, by our carriage toward God.

Secondly, by our carriage toward man.

Toward God; I told you first in respect of his righteousness. And indeed
therein chiefly is discovered the pride of our hearts, or the humility of our
hearts by our receiving, or not receiving the righteousness of God by faith.

Secondly, by our carriage to the truths of God, therein we may see how much of
this grace God has bestowed upon us.

Thirdly by the commands of God.

Fourthly, and lastly, by the corrections of God. And therein I showed you what
the posture of the heart of a Christian is, that is truly and savingly humbled
by his carriage in afflictions. For if there be pride in the soul, usually
affliction will bring it out. I shall not repeat any thing but go on a little
further to that which remains.

There is one thing more, and but one thing 5. A humble hearts carriage toward
God for mercies.
that I shall speak of in respect of our carriage toward God, wherein you
shall discover how much God has given you of this grace; and that is by your
carriage toward God in the way of his mercies. Truly mercies, and afflictions
are much like Summer, and winter; and sometimes our sickness will break out
in Winter that is concealed in Summer, and sometimes it is discovered in Summer
that is hid in Winter. So in some souls the evils of the heart will break
out in afflictions more then in mercies, and in some it is more discovered in a
state of prosperity, in a way of mercy then in the way of afflictions. As on
the other side in some souls grace is more clear, and shining in afflictions
then in prosperity; and truly I think that in some souls grace will shine
more in the way of mercy. And if God will come and have mercy upon poor
England, my hope is, and it is my prayer, and request to God that we may
discover more godliness, and more grace, then in all this time. We have
discovered a great deal of pettishnesse, and frowardness, and pride, and
ambition, and covetousness, and cruelty, and rashness: but I hope (there
being diverse Saints among us) that God will give us another frame of heart, if
he have mercy on us, and turn away his wrath. But that by the by. But I was
saying that the pride of the heart, and other corruptions also, are Corruptions
discovered by Gods mercies.
sometimes discovered in a way of mercy that are not discovered in a way of
affliction. I will give you but one Scripture for it, in Hosea 7. 1. When I
would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the
wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood, etc. Ephraim and Israel are
two names almost of the same thing: though Ephraim were but one tribe yet
because it was a great tribe (as York is a great County in England) all
Israel is often called by the name of Ephraim, Now when God would heal
Ephraim, or Israel, then their iniquity appeared. So it is to be feared that
if God come to heal England as he seems to smile on us sometimes, and
according to that word in Acts 7. Where he says, I have seen, I have seen, the
afflictions of my people in Egypt. So I hope God has seen, how the bread is
done, and the provision is gone, and the people are ready to go away
themselves, by reason of their miseries. I hope God has seen, and will put an
end to our miseries, and I much fear, that when mercy comes, and when peace
comes, there will then be a discovery of rotten hearts then much more then in
these times, yet in these times there are abundance of rotten hearts discovered
that were not known before. The Lord comes near the quick of our profession in
these times: there are abundance that have been professors that now jeere the
Saints and dishonor God, and embrace the World: but in times of mercy there
will be more: the sun makes the Traveller put off his cloak when the wind
cannot. But to open it to you as I did the former: that which I shall do shall
be to discover to you what the carriage of a humble heart is, and what our
carriage should be when God shows mercy to us, when the Lord deals kindly
with us in the way of his mercy. What is the posture of a humble heart, then?

I answer, First of all, a humble heart he can be 1. A humble heart content to
be denied any mercy.
content that the Lord should deny him any mercy, let it be never so dear or
precious to him; though he prize it high, and pray earnestly for it, and wayt
long for it, yet if God come at last and say thou shall not have it; he can be
content patiently, and meekly to take a denial from God and go away contented
if it must be so.

Indeed there is a kind of earnestness that should be in us, and in a sense we
should take no denial from God, we should not be easily put off. As we see in
Mat. 15. That Woman of Canaan when Christ put her off, she comes again, and
again, and again. But if God say, say no more, it shall not be so; rhen a man
should quietly submit himself to God: though like Hannah, he desire Children
and pray earnestly and seek God again, and again, and seem to be near
toward it sometimes, but at last if God come, and say thou shall never have a
child, then says a proud heart Give me children, or I die. I will give you an
instance or two of this, in 2 Samuel 15. 25. David there was in a poor condition,
he was pursued by his enemy, by Absalom his own son; and David David.
had the Arc, and Zadock the Priest. But says the King to Zadock carry back
the Ark of God into the City, if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord
he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation. But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee; behold here I am, let him do to me as seems
good unto him. As if he had said. I am in a miserable condition; but I will not
trouble thee, or endanger the Arc, if I have found favor in the eyes of God,
he will bring me again to my house, and to his, but says he, if he thus say, I
have no delight in him; Behold here I am let him do to me as seems good in
his eyes. God will bring me back to Jerusalem, if I have found favor with him:
but if God say, David, I have no delight in thee, thou shall never see my house
more. Lo here I am, let him do as seems best to him. This is the posture of
a humble soul that desires this, and that, and the other mercy, yet if God
say, I have no delight in thee. I will do none of these things; he can say,
here I am do as it seems good in thine eyes.

I will give you one instance more, in Deuteronomy. 3. 24. You have Moses there
praying; and he desires a great request; and that earnestly of God. Moses.
O Lord thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: for what God is there in Heaven, or in Earth, that can do according to
thy might: I pray thee, I pray thee Lord (see how familiar he is with him) Let
me go over, and see that good land that is beyond Jordan, and that goodly
Mountain, and Lebanon. Moses was going toward Canaan that was a type of the
Kingdom of grace under the Gospel, and a type of Heaven, and they had
traveled forty years in the Wilderness. I pray thee (says he) let me go
over, and see that good land, and see Lebanon that goodly forest. But says
he, the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me, and the
Lord said unto me let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter.
Let it suffice, I will hear no more concerning this thing. Get thee up into
the top of Pisgah. I will give thee leave to look on it, but thou shall not
go over. Now in the Chapter following, Deuteronomy. 4. 21. Says he. The Lord was
angry with me for your sakes. It was for their sakes, that God denied him. And
he swear that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto
that good land, which the Lord thy God has given thee for an inheritance: but
I must die in this Land. It is a broken speech, I must die: he does not say it
in passion; must I die? must I lead this people forty years, and when there is
any good to be had, I must be cut off? he spoke it not on that fashion; but
says he I must not go over, but you shall go over, and possess it. He
submits to Gods will, and rejoices that they should go over, though it was
for their sakes that he was crossed. And he shows them how they should carry
themselves there. A proud heart would have said, you may get you over if you
will; and if it had not been for you I might have gone too, but I may thank
you, that I must stay and die here. But says he, God has said I shall speak
no more of that matter, it is my lot, I submit. So in all the mercies of God to
thee, if thou can quietly as Moses, and David, submit in silence when he
denies thee any mercy, though it be never so dear, it is a sign thou have a
humble heart.

Truly some godly men are of opinion that a Saint can come to this to be
content that God should deny him everlasting Salvation for his soul. I have
read of one, and I have spoken with another, I have known two godly men in
that posture, the one was so; and the other seemed to be so by his writing;
that if after all the means used, he cannot come to believe as others do,
that he can have no assurance, or hope of life from God; but that God almost in
every Ordinance does as much as tell him, thou shall be damned, yet he can be
content to go to Hell it self. I have seen a glorious Saint, that has said,
that if God should tell him he should be damned, yet he could submit without
murmuring. Such a thing may be, but I think it is not ordinary: neither Grace
crosses not principles of nature.
does God expect it because grace never crosses the ground principles of
nature; and of all, this is the chief principle that the creature should
desire its own preservation. It is so in all creatures. Grace screws up, and
makes nature spiritual, but grace goes not contrary to the main, and solid
principles of pure nature. Now therefore I say, that a man by grace should be
brought to wish his own destruction, it is very harsh. For besides that it is
contrary to the principle of nature, Ground of true submission to God.
it is contrary to the spirit of adoption; for what is it that makes me submit
to God? It is because I have loving thoughts of him, and I conceive of his love
to me, and the like: if I should look upon God as an enemy, I should love him
no more then the Devil himself does; it is ordinarily so. But what may be in
one soul, or two, or a few, I know not. But that which I mean is in ordinary
mercies, especially in temporal mercies, it is the frame of a humble heart to
sit still, and be quiet if God deny the mercy. That is one thing.

Another thing is this, that as a humble heart 2. He is content that God should
take away any mercy.
will be content that God should deny him any mercy: So Secondly he is
contented if it please God to take away any mercy that he has. God shall pick
and choose; and if he will take away all, yet he is contented, and quiet. It is
just with a humble heart toward God, as you read of an honest hearted man in
the Book of God that was humble toward David, you shall read of him in 2 Samuel
19. 24. It was one Mephibosheth, David had given Mephibosheth.
him a great deal of land for his father Jonathans sake; and being a lame man;
for his Nurse let him fall when he was a child; he had a wicked servant one
Ziba, and when David came home, he sadled asses, and brought presents, and told
David Mephibosheth would not come to 2 Samuel 16. 1.
meet the King, which was a gross lie, says David, if he be so sturdie, take
thou the land. At the last Mephibosheth finds a way to come to David, and David
asked him why he did not come to 2 Samuel 19. 24.
him, says he, My Lord O King, my servant deceived me: for he sadled an ass
and went away, and has slandered thy servant unto my Lord the King, etc. Says
the King, Verse. 29. Thou, and Ziba divide the land, honest hearted
Mephibosheth, once I gave him all: but now, the more was the pity, he shall
have one half, and thou the other; says Mephibosheth, yea let him take all,
for as much as my Lord the King is come again in peace unto his own house. I
care little for the land though I be a lame man, and cannot get any thing for
my self: and Ziba though he were a wicked man, and deserved it not, yet says
he, I am so taken with the Kings person, that he is come home, that let him
take all. So a humble heart carries himself thus toward God, that when the
Lord seems to be as it were in a holy chafe, and anger, that he takes away his
mercies, he takes away a child, or a husband, or a man's estate, or the like; if
thou have a humble heart, thou will not be in a rage, and say let him take all,
in a desperate humor: but he says meekly, let him take this, or that, or all,
if he will, so I may enjoy him, and his love, I will bless God.

I say when thou can bless God notwithstanding all be gone. This was Jobs
condition, God took all from Job one after another in a little while; as we
see in Job 1. Says Job notwithstanding God has taken all from me, Naked came
I out of my Mothers womb, and the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be
the name of the Lord. Or as it is in some old Greek coppies. As it pleases the
Lord so comes things to pass, blessed be the name of the Lord. He blessed
the Lord that had taken away his children, and thrown down his house, yet he
could bless him.

Now look a little upon your hearts, how you find your spirits when God has
denied you mercies; when God has taken away mercies. As I could give you many
instances, but to name one or two, it may be when thou were a carnal man that
thou were a very honorable man in thy Country; thou were the only
Statesman, the man that did do all the businesses but now since thou art
Religious, thou art despised, and there are none that make use of thee; thy
honor is gone. Thou were accounted a wise man, but now thou art accounted a
mope, and a sot. Thou were once accounted a fine young man or woman, and now
thy esteem is gone, can thou be content that God has rubbed off these
mercies, that one while he takes away thine honor, another while thy wealth,
another while thy friends, and yet thou can bless the name of God: this a
humble heart can do.

Another thing, in respect of the mercies of 3. A humble heart will wait for
mercies.
God is this, that a humble heart can be content to wait upon the Lord though
he stay never so long for the least mercy. Proud hearts unless you feed them
in have they will be gone. A proud heart will not wait on God, but a humble
heart will stay Gods leisure till he give him what he pleases, and how he
pleases. Hab. 2 3. The vision is for an appointed time, but at the end it
shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely
come, it will not tarry. Behold his soul which is lifted up is not upright in
him, but the just shall live by his faith. The proud heart, and the just man
living by faith are put opposite one to the other: the just shall live by
faith, that is, though he desire mercies, yet he shall be content to wait on
God; but he that has his soul lifted up he will be gone, he will not stay for
God; just like that wicked King that you read of in the Book of God. This evil
says he, comes of the Lord, what should I stay for him any longer? a wretched
man. So an unhumbled heart says, what should I stay for God any longer in
this? and so he takes base courses to help himself, and will not wait upon
God, and go in Gods ways.

It is a thing highly commended in the Saints throughout all the Scriptures,
when they had a frame of heart to wait on God. As Abraham the father of the
faithful; we read of him in Acts 7. When God brought him from his fathers
house, and from his whole estate, and led him abroad from one place to another,
and had brought him at the last to the Land of Canaan, where he had not one
foot of land, and his posterity was not to possess it of four hundred years
after, yet he blesses God, and rayseth Altars notwithstanding God did all
this. Examine your hearts by this.

Again, as a humble heart can be content that 4. A humble heart content with
the least mercies.
God should deny him any mercy, and secondly, be content that God should take
away any mercy; and thirdly, be content to wait upon God for mercies. So in
the fourth place after all his waiting he can be content with the least
pittance of mercy. A proud heart will not do so; take a proud beggar and make
him wait an hour or two, and then after give him but a farthing, and he will
grumble that he should stay so long, and loose other customers, others that
might have releeved, and helped him: but a humble heart is content to wait
long, and after all is content with a little. I will give you but one instance.
Mat. 15. 26. There was a blessed woman that followed Christ for a mercy;
Christ was silent a while, and said nothing, and though she cried out, yet he
says nothing. At last he calls her dog, says she, am I a dog, I take it
well, but the dogs (says she) eat the crumbs that fall from their Masters
table. What is the meaning of that? You know the dog stays till his Master
have dined; and when his Master has dined he is content with a bone, or with
the least crust that falls. The dog is not served presently, as soon as his
Master sits down; but he stays till all have dined, and if a bone or a bit
fall, he is content with that. A humble heart is like a dog in that, he will
stay his masters time; as that woman, she could stay Jesus Christ's leisure,
and see him carve mercies upon other men's trenchers, and she have but a bone,
or a crust, or a bit of bread when all was done, and yet be well content.

The Fifth thing is this, that a humble heart in 5. He is thankfor a heart to
receive mercies.
respect of Gods mercies he will be content, and thankful to God to give him a
hand, and a heart, to receive mercies. That is a great measure of this grace of
Gospel humiliation, when God gives a man a little mercy after all his
waiting; he sees his own weakness, though the Lord be rich in mercy, yet he
cannot take it, though it be laid down upon the nail, yet he cannot take it
up, without God give him a heart. It is not so with the poor beggars of the
World; if you give them money they have a purse to lay it up in; if you give
them meat they have a budget to put it in: but the soul is not able to receive
any mercy, I mean not any spiritual mercy; temporal mercies it may, but not
spiritual, unless God give a hand, and a heart to receive it.

I have seen poor women in the Mountains of Wales (and I have often thought of
it) they have been so poor that when they have come to a house to beg a little
whey or butter-milke, they have been fain to beg the loan of a pot, or a dish
to put it in. So we, when we come to beg mercy of God; we must desire the Lord
when we have done our best, to give us eyes to see it, and a heart to lay it
up, and a hand to receive it: for the natural man receives not the things of
God. And beleiving is called receiving; and it is the gift of God to believe.
We cannot believe, that is, we cannot receive the least mercy of God, unless
he give us hands, and hearts. This is the disposition of a humble heart; when I
pray for mercy of God, I see God is full of mercy, and Christ is a Fountain
full of grace; but I have not eyes to behold it; I have not a hand to receive
it. We cannot carry one grain of grace home, unless God give us spiritual
buckets. As that woman said, John 4. Here is water, but where is the bucket to
draw? So God may say, thou want grace, but where is thy bucket? says the
humble soul, Lord I have none, thou must both give the water, and lend the
bucket to carry it home.

And then Sixthly, a humble heart is discovered by this, that when the Lord
shall give him any 6. He is content that God give laws how to use his mercies.
mercy, he will be content that God shall give him as many laws as he will to
use these mercies, a humble heart will do so. A proud beggar if you give him a
couple of shillings and say be sure you buy you some clothes with this, or get
some good thing for your wife, and children; he will be ready to say you need
not tell me how I shall use it, I know what to do with it. Now give a humble
beggar four or five shillings, and say carry one to your wife, and with two
shillings buy you a pair of shoes, and do this, and this: he will be content
to do all you tell him, make as many laws as you will, if you give him any
thing. It is just so with the soul of a humbled Christian, when the Lord gives
a mercy to a proud heart, he is ready to say I know what to do with it well
enough; but when he gives any thing to a humble Saint, he is content that the
Lord should teach him. And thence it is that when the Lord offers mercy, and
Salvation, and offers Christ to a proud heart, he is content to take the
mercy, but he would go on in his sins still: but hold says Christ, now thou
receivest Salvation, and grace, thou must not live in thy old ways, thou must
shake off thy old company, and be a new man. No, the proud heart will have
none of all those, he would take the mercy, but he will go on in his own
way. But a humble man is as Abraham, we see he stayed long for a child, and
then God gave him a son; and when he had his son Isaac, God gave him a law for
Isaac. Abraham says he, there is a son, and a great mercy, and all Nations
shall be blessed in him: but thou must take thy son, and carry him to such a
place, and with thine own hands upon such a hill, thou must cut his throat:
and some of the old Rabbis say, that he was to take a pole, and to stir his
bowels in the fire; and according as the Lord, so Abraham handled his mercy.
Thus it is with an humble heart.

But lastly, and so I shall conclude; a humble heart toward God in the way of
his mercy, is New mercies added, add to his thankfulness.
discovered by this, that every addition of mercy that God bestows upon him,
obliges his heart more, and more, to a holy thankfulness and obedience. And
truly (as I have said) we often break our communion with God by our
unthankfullnesse, and our unthankfulness arises from the pride of our hearts.
A proud heart thinks that Proud hearts unthankful.
he has always too little; therefore he is praying for more, but he forgets
to pray with thanksgiving, to make his requests known with thanksgiving. Now
let a humble heart be in never so much distress, and misery, the man can see
abundance of cause to praise God; if he have but water that the beasts drink,
and if he have but strength to dig, he can say, Lord I own this as a mercy,
and whatsoever is on this side Hell is mercy. So in Romans 12. 1. I beseech you
by the mercies of God, that you give up your selves, a living, and holy, and
acceptable sacrifice to God. He would have the mercies of God to bring them to
obedience, to give up themselves to obey God. So in Romans 2. Says he, Do
thou despise his riches, and goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering;
not knowing that the goodness of God should lead thee to repentance. The
goodness of God, and the patience of God, and the mercy of God; should lead
all humble hearts to a holy thankfulness, and obedience, and so it does. And
the more the Lord does multiply mercies upon him, the more obedient, and
thankful he is.

Now in all this that I have said, I would desire you to examine your souls,
and if you find that in any of these, or in any of the rest that I am yet to
speak of, you are faulty, and come short; yet I would not have you conclude,
therefore I am not the humbled soul that the Minister spoke off, there is none
of this grace in me: for though it be not so with thee in every point, though
thou come short of perfect humiliation that should be in thee, it follows not
that therefore there is none at all. The end why I put these things before you,
is not so much to try your selves, as that you might labor with the Lord to
bring up your hearts to these things. And I have the rather chosen to speak of
this at this time, because me thinks the Lord is preparing to come toward us
in a way of mercy; and that I would have you to think of, and pray for, that
the Lord may still come in a way of mercy, that he may turn from the evil he
has intended, or else he may easily bring us again to the red sea if we
provoke him as we have done. But so much for this time.

SERMON 8.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
I Hope you are not weary of this subject though I have been something long
upon it; you may remember the last doctrine was, that A saving sight of God in
Christ is the principal means of true humiliation.



It is the principal means to humble the heart of any man whether he be a
Saint, or a sinner. I have spoken much to you concerning that sight. At the
last we came to this, to examyne whether we have seen God or no. John puts much
stresse upon that word, If any man love not his brother, he has not seen God.
I say if you have seen God in Christ, as Moses had seen him; and as all the
Saints see him with open face, it will appear by this, it will make your
hearts humble, it will work a holy frame of humiliation. No proud man has
ever seen God; no man has ever seen God, but his heart was thoroughly humbled.
But that begat another question. How shall I know whether I have an humble
heart or no?

I told you, you might know it.

First by the carriage of your souls toward God.

In point of justification. In regard of his commands. In regard of his truths.
In regard of his corrections. In regard of his mercies. And this last was the
thing I did endeavor to open to you the last day.
Secondly, you may know whether your hearts 2. True humiliation known by our
carriage toward men.
be truly humbled by your carriage toward men. When ever men are converted to
God there the hearts of the children are turned to their fathers.

Now among men, there are two sorts in general, They are either

Sinners. or, Saints.
I shall leave to speak of our carriage toward Saints for the last: because
it will require a little more time; and because I shall speak but a few words
of this, of the carriage of a humble heart toward sinners, and that I shall
endeavor to show you at this time. Therefore briefly, whosoever has this
humble frame of heart, his carriage toward sinners is according to the rule
that we 1. To sinners, with meekness.
read of, Titus 3. 2. To speak evil of no man, to be gentle, showing all
meekness unto all men. His carriage I say is meek. and affable, and courteous,
and gentle, toward all men.

Indeed, there is no heart in the World so proud (you shall observe it) but it
has in it some meekness, and especially to some men. The proudest Tyrants in
the World have had some favorites that they did fawn on, and in some sort
might be termed meek men: but the Apostle says that we must show all
meekness, and that unto all men: to all sorts of men, to whoremongers, to
drunkards, to those that deprive us of our goods, and of our good name, which
is hard to do: but I will give you a Scripture that will open it. Collos. 1.
9. I pray for you, says Paul that you may be filled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, etc. If the Lord has
revealed himself, that thou have had a saving sight of him, then the Lord
humbles thy heart. How will that appear? By thy carriage to all men, there
will be all meekness to all men. It will appear by thy affability, for
meekness and humbleness have the same name in the Original. Moses was a
humble man, and Moses was a very meek man. Where ever there is a humble
heart, it is a meek heart; there will be meekness showed even to sinners.
That you may see this, I will give you but one solid instance instead of many.
You know that of all proud men there were none that had the name so much as the
Pharisees, therefore they are called the proud Pharisees. And of all that have
Christ's meekness to sinners.
been humbled, there was not such a pattern of humility as our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now you shall see how the pride of the Pharisees was expressed, and how
the humility of our Savior is set forth by his carriage to sinners. As he
says, Mat. 11. 28. Come, and learn of me: for I am meek and lowly of heart.
It is because of the pride of our hearts that we are not meek: you shall see
this meekness of Christ by parallel places, in Luke 7. 34. You shall find
there, that our Lord Christ was at a feast: when he sat at meat in a Pharisees
house, there comes in a woman, and she was washing his feet, and wyping them
with the hair of her head, as he sat at the table. The Pharisees fall a
reasoning with themselves: Surely if he were a Prophet say they, he would have
known what manner of woman this is; for she is a sinner. We did hope he had
been a Prophet, and a good man, but sure he is no Prophet, for then he would
know what this woman is: for this woman is a Harlot, she is a Whore; and if he
were a Prophet, he would be as we are, he would have nothing to do with her.
Then Christ asks a question concerning a Creditor that had two Debtors, and
thereby sets forth himself as a pattern of meekness in conversing with, and
forgiving the greatest sinners; he was at a feast, and he does not with
violence reproove the Pharisee and fall upon him, calling him hypocrite, etc.
But secretly whips the Pharisee upon another back as it were. So in John 8.
There they brought a woman that was taken in adultery, and set her before him,
and said, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act, now Moses
in the law commanded us that such should be stoned, but what say thou? Their
end was to tempt Christ; but when they were thus accusing her, Christ stoopes
down, and writes in the sand. Not as if our blessed Lord were wont to be idle,
but he had rather do any thing then hear malicious people be condemning poor
sinners. Well at last they make him hear; and then he makes them an answer. He
that is without sin, let him cast the first stone at her. He was loath to
hear, and when he did hear he was loath to condemn her, though she was
taken in the act, and though he hated the sin, for this is not to plead for
sin, though it be for sinners; He that is without sin, let him cast the first
stone at her. Now see the Pharisees in the next Chapter. There was a blind man
whose eyes Christ had opened, and the Pharisees began to question the man, and
he begins to set forth Christ, and his power, and says he, if this man were a
sinner he could not have done this: For God hears not sinners, and so they
cast the man out as a great sinner. Beloved, people think it is their
holiness to be churlish, and austere, and bitter to poor sinners. But I say,
it is the pride of their hearts, the loftiness of their spirits. If ever they
had seen the face of God in Christ Jesus, their hearts would be meek, they
would show all meekness, even to the worst of sinners. In Luke. ^5. The
beginning. You shall read that Christ was a companion to poor sinners, they
came about him; he left the Pharisees at the other Cautions in meekness to
sinners.
end of the table, and he speaks Parables in three long Chapters, to show the
necessity of 1. Not to have communion with them in instituted worship.
the care of poor sinners. I shall say no more of it. Examine, and try your
selves by that. Only let me give you these cautions concerning that.

First of all, in your meekness, and courteousnesse, and affablenesse to poor
sinners, take heed least it draw you into company, or communion with them in
any instituted worship. Take that caveat, for though it be a glorious
Gospell-truth, yet you must take a few caveats, I say, beware of communion with
them in any instituted worship. Indeed you 1. Sinners may be conversed with in
natural things.
may have communion with them in natural things, you may in eating, and
drinking, and buying, and selling, or else (as Christ says) you must go out
of the World. And I speak it out of experience those ties and restrictions that
you put upon your selves, to keep you off, and to distinguish you from
sinners, it does but harden them. The Apostle calls it a develish thing to
forbid meats, and drinks, and Marriage. So, for you to distinguish your selves
from sinners by natural things; to my knowledge, and experience, and woe, it
does but harden them. Therefore you may in natural things converse, and be
affable with them.

Secondly, you may be affable, and converse 2. In winning Ordinances.
with them in winning Ordinances, that is, in Ordinances appointed by Christ,
to win sinners to be Saints, that is, the Preaching of the Gospel: an I deot
came into the Church of Corinth among the Saints: and truly Beloved in my eye
it is not commendable to sever sinners and Saints in this Ordinance, in hearing
the word of God preached.

Thirdly, we may join with them in natural 3. In natural duties.
duties, that is (as I have formerly told you my opinion) in praying, and
singing, for singing is nothing else but praising God, whether it be with a
tune, or without a tune. These were written in the hearts of men at the first;
and when a natural man does these things, he does but his duty; every man
should call upon the name of God. Therefore when a natural man joins with me
in prayer, I do not sin: for it is a natural thing: Prayer a natural duty.
it is his duty to pray; but if he pray without faith it is his sin. Therefore
if you ask, shall a natural man pray or not pray? I answer, if he pray, he
sins, but if he pray not, he sins twice; he sins both in the matter
and manner. But now in instituted worship, in things that are merely so, if
there be a mixture of Saints and sinners, it is defiling: for that Ordinance is
not to win but to buyld up.

Secondly, you must not have unnecessarie conversation 2. Unnecessary converse
with sinners forbidden.
with them, I do not teach you to delight in the company of sinners; for
sinners will delight in sinners; as we say birds of a feather will be together:
but we should show our meekness to win them, and to edify them. If I see one
that is a drunkard, I will get within him to win him to Christ if I can. If I
cannot I do not say that you should leave the company of the Saints, and
forbear to come at them, and take pleasure in the other: for David tells you
how he was affected when he was forced to be in evil company. Psalm. 120. 5.
VVoe is me that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. And
so in the text. VVoe is me, I am undone, for I am a man of polluted lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips. There is a great grief and
trouble in the heart of a Christian to be among sinners: but yet there is an
abundance of joy, so far as he has any hope to do any good: but take heed of
unnecessary conversation notwithstanding.

Thirdly, take heed of too near an union with 3. Too near union with sinners
forbidden.
sinners, you must keep them at a distance: as in marriage that is a very
near union, for the Scripture says They two are one flesh. Those that are
Saints after they are called they must be careful that they marry in the
Lord, they must have fellowship with those that are in the light, and not in
darkness. I may, and ought to love sinners, so as to do them all the good I
can; but not so as to make him, my husband, or her my wife. And so there ought
to be a care in the choice of servants.

Not that it is utterly unlawful: there are but a Few things unlawful.
few things that are unlawful, under the Gospel, though some there are. But I
mean for servants, though it may be lawful, yet it is very unnecessarie to
have too near union with carnal men, especially in spiritual things: besides
the unfaithfulness that may be found.

But especially take heed of having any thing to 4. Not to comply with sinners
in sin.
do with them in any of the works of darkness. If a sinner be excercised in a
duty that is natural, I may go a long with him, and join with him, or if it
be as I said, in a winning Ordinance, but I must take heed of joining with him
in any thing that is sinful, as you have it set down by the Apostle. 2 Cor. 6.
17. 18. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, And I will be a
father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. That place is mistaken by some who take it as if the Apostle meant
that we should so come out from sinners as to have no manner of communion, or
fellowship with them. We know the Apostle elsewhere teaches us to show all
meekness to all men, as I told you before. And why does he do so? I shall
speak a few words of that, and so have done for this time.

How is it possible that a Saint that is a Newtestament holiness required of
him, that he should in any kind be a companion of sinners, as the Scripture
says our Savior Christ was; whence is it that he should carry himself thus,
withal meekness toward them?

Truly there are these four reasons for it, there Why Saints should be meek
to sinners.
are four lessons written in the heart of an humble Saint, that teach him to
do this.

First, when he looks upon another that is a sinner, he considers that he
has been worse then 1. A Saint considers what he once was.
he, whosoever he is. Thinks he, whosoever he is that is yonder, that is a
wretched man, that even the boys in the streets are ready to shout at, and
throw stones at, yet I have been worse then he. Beloved, it is a strange thing
that Paul should say that he was blameless for holiness such as it was, and
yet that he should say after, I am the worst of sinners, the chief of sinners.

Truly one cannot say I have been in every particular act as bad, or worse then
any other: but yet in some sense or other in some respect or other, any man may
say he is the chief of sinners: Paul said so in regard of his persecution of
the Church: and though otherwise he was honest, and better then most other men,
yet there he accounted himself the worst of sinners. That is one thing that
makes a Saint to be mild, and affable in his carriage to sinners, because he
has been as bad, or worse then they.

And Secondly, in some respect a humble heart 2. He thinks himself as bad
still.
he thinks himself to be worse still. Truly, I will tell you a lesson that it
may be is a mystery to some of you. Take the most glorious Saints that are,
and they will tell you that all the good that is in them, it is rather passive
then active; that is, he will say, I am carried on by God merely, and by his
spirit; it is God that does it, I know not how nor why. So that though God does
work much good in them, yet they see themselves passive, and not active, and
they can say it is God that does it, and not they. And therefore when they look
upon themselves in some respects, they can put themselves below even the worst
of sinners, the vilest of sinners. And so we see Paul in that place 1 Timothy 1. I
am the chief of sinners says he, and yet to me was more mercy showed then to
all men, that I might be a pattern of Gods mercy to all men; therefore I have
received more mercy, and more riches of grace then any man. And so a Saint may
say I have had more mercies then that man; but I was passive in it, and if God
did work upon that man, but half that which he has done on me, he would have
been far better then I am.

Thirdly, he thinks though there be a difference, 3. He knows God makes him to
differ.
yet it is god that has made it, and not any thing in himself. 4. The worst
sinner may come to be as good as he.


Fourthly, and lastly, he considers that the vilest sinner may be in Gods
good time better then he. Remember these four rules that a humble heart has
to bring himself to be affable, and meek in his carriage to poor sinners.
And therefore you shall see in Mat. 19. Compared with Mark. 10. When the young
man came to Christ that was rich, and Christ bids him go sell all, and give to
the poor; he would not do it, but went away sorrowful; the Disciples came to
Christ crying out as it were, and insulting over him, and say they. Master we
have left all and followed thee, what shall we have? As if they had said, we
see that yonder man is not so good as we; he would not part with his riches,
but we have left all; we have left our fathers, and our mothers, and our
boats, and our fishing, and our nets, and all, and therefore we hope we shall
have a good reward. What says our Lord to them? Many that are last shall be
first, and those that are first shall be last. What is the meaning of that? It
is as if he had said, you should rather have reasoned thus, yonder is a man
that is gone away for the present, yet he may be in the Kingdom of God before
me for ought I know; he is now last, but he may be first. And indeed Beloved, I
doubt not but that there is many a poor sinner that now follows the alehouse,
and drinking, and swearing, and whoreing, that yet may be in Heaven before
thee, and me.

The Apostle Peter wishes Christians, to walk honestly before all men, to Let
their light shine before sinners that they may glorify God in the day of their
visitation. (Remember that word) what is the meaning of that? That they may
glorify God in the day of their visitation? Why thus; we should conceive of
every sinner, that there is a day of visitation appointed by the Lord for him:
not only Day of visitation, what.
the general day of Gods mercies toward all sinners, but there is some
special time when God will make at his heart: there is a time, there is one
day of peculiar grace that God has reserved almost for every sinner, which is
called the day of his visitation. Why now a poor humble hearted Saint thinks
thus, yonder is a man is now jeering of the people of God, he is an enemy to
all holiness, and says he, yonder man his day of visitation is not yet come;
but then he will bless God in that day, and say, O blessed be the Lord that
sent me such a friend, or such a neighbor, he would often come to call upon me
to go to Sermons, and I did curse him when he entreated me to go: I would
stay at home, and drink, and swear: but now I remember his prayers, and his
instructions that I did then jeere at, but now they are precious to my soul.
And therefore thinks a poor humbled Saint, why is it that I am better then the
worst sinner? It is because God has sent me the day of visitation before him.
When God shall send his day of visitation to him I have reason to think that he
may be in the Kingdom of heaven before me, and therefore let me be meek and
affable toward him. Beloved, that stir, and rigor, and ridgidnesse in
Ridgidnesse to sinners arises from pride.
professors toward poor sinners it arises only from the pride of their
hearts. Now I say if thou have seen God in Jesus Christ, thou shall know it by
thy humble carriage toward sinners.

There is but one thing more, and so I shall have done with this text and that
is, how a heart that is rightly humbled by seeing of God in Jesus Christ does
carry, and behave it self toward other Saints. But that I must leave to
another opportunity.

SERMON 9.
Isaiah 6. 5. For mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
THE last lesson that God taught us from these words, you know was this, that A
saving sight of God in Christ is the principal means of the humiliation of
the soul.



The last Use we were upon was of examination to know whether the Lord has
given us this grace or no. For the clearing of that, I told you that we may
know much of it by our carriage, and demeanor.

First, toward God. Secondly, toward man.
Concerning our carriage toward God, I instanced in five perticulars, which I
shall not now repeat.

Secondly, we may know it by our carriage toward men, which is the last thing,
and so I shall finish what I have to say on these words. I began to speak of
this the last time. I told you, that men are of two sorts: either Saints, or
sinners, according to the Scripture language: not according to the cursed
language of these times, that denominate men from every opinion, and call them
Seekers, and Presbiterians, and Anabaptists, and Independents, I know not what
cursed languages; but I say all men, are either Saints, or Sinners: thou art
either a Saint, or a Sinner. Christ has but two names for men here: and will
have but two hands when he comes to judge, his right hand; and his left hand,
and there are but two places after judgment, Heaven, and Hell. So by our
carriage toward Saints, and Sinners we may know whether we have this grace of
humiliation or no. Of our carriage to sinners I spoke somewhat the last time.

I shall now proceed to the last thing of all, that is, our carriage, and
demeanor to the Saints, and therein, because we are now upon examination. I
beseech you in a special manner to have an eye upon your hearts while I am
speaking that God may make this as a lookinglasse to some proud souls that they
may thereby see how it is with them. I shall therefore endeavor to open this
to you as I did the former. Now I say thou may know if thy heart be humbled
by the spirit of Christ in The carriage of a humble heart toward Saints.
the Gospel by thy carriage toward the Saints.

You will say, how is that?

It will appear these ways.

First, if thou be rightly humbled, thou do usually conceive thy self and
thou art willing that 1. He thinks himself the least of Saints.
all men should so conceive of thee, to be the least of Saints. I pray thee
remember that. I say thou do usually reflect upon thy self, and do
conceive of thy self, and art willing to be so conceived of, and accounted of
by others, as the least of all Saints. I will give you but a Scripture, or two
for it. 1 Cor. 15. Paul you know was a glorious Saint: and truly in many things
(as far as we may have leave to judge,) more glorious then any of the Apostles
yet says he, speaking of those that had seen our Lord; meaning the Apostles:
He was seen of James, and of Cephas, etc. And last of all he was seen of me,
as one borne out of due time: for I am the least of all the Apostles, and am
not worthy to be called an Apostle. The Greek word signifies a child that is
borne dead, or as it were into the World, before the time. We say sometimes of a
child when it is borne there is the least child that ever was borne alive; but
yet it was borne alive and in season: but an abortive is a child that is borne
by miscarriage, that is borne dead, it is less then the least child, and less
esteemed. Job says, O that I had been an abortive, that my mother had buried
me in secret? Paul could not compare himself to the least Saint; but as it
were to an abortive, to a thing not worth the mentioning among the living, I am
an abortive says he, not because of the time that I did come after them;
though it be true that Paul was made an Apostle after the rest: but says he, I
am the least of all Saints; this was the reason.

Take but one place more. Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me, who am less then the least of
all Saints is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ. To me that am less then the least. The meaning
of it is, for in the Greek language, in which the Apostles wrote; they have six
degrees of comparison; now in English, and in some other tongues there are but
three, as we say, good, better, and best of all; we go no further: a thing is
little, and less, and least of all. But they double it again, and they say,
little, and less, and least; and a thing less then the least, and more
little, and less then the least of all. Paul chose to go to the lowest pin*
less then the least Saint. Minor minimo, less then the least. As if he had
said, suppose we gather together all the tottered broken professors in the
World, that walk dishonourably to God, the blind, and the lame, (as it were)
that do least resemble him: yet let them be but Saints, though the blindest,
and loosest, and foolishest, and giddiest professors, put them all in a
company, and put me in the midst, and I am less then the least of them.
Can thou say so, and think so, when thou walk in the street, or* when
thou art in the congregation of Saints, I am less then the least? The Apostle
Paul could say so. That now is one thing, that is this Gospel grace, Gospel
humility to think so.

Not but that man (understand me) may conceive, 1. Though God have bestowed
more mercy on him.
that there is more grace showed to him, then to all the World besides. I mean
in a passive way; God has conferred more mereie, and I have had more mercy
from God, more patience, and long suffering, God has borne more with me, and
suffered longer, then with any Saint that I know. This is not contrary to the
grace of humiliation: for this Paul that said he was the least of Saints, in 2 Timothy 1. 16. He says that he had received more mercy then any other, and that
he was made a pattern to all that should believe, not of any good in him; but
of grace, and mercy bestowed on him from God.

Nay, a man may go further, and yet be a humble 2. And may do more service
for God.
hearted Christian. He may say, as I have received more favors from God then
others, so God has carried me on to do more then many others, I am less then
the least of them says Paul, yet I labored more abundantly then they all.
That was no pride in him, I am less then the least, yet I Preached the Gospel
from Jerusalem to Illiricum; but not I, but the grace of God. That is the
goodness of God that carries us on, if any man be carried on to a good work,
and God blesses it, let him look on it when he has done, and he will say he
was passive in it, and was carried on by grace. Now take those two cautions,
and then a humble hearted Saint will say, put me into the regiment of broken
professors, and I am less then the least, and the raggedest of them.

But you will say, how can that be that a Saint A humble Saint judges himself
the least.
should be taught in the communion of Saints, should so conceive of himself,
it seems impossible?

I answer, there are many ways, I shall only 1. In regard of the great means
he has had.
name a few.

First, a humble Saint may generally conceive so of himself in respect of the
greatness of the means he has had. It may be he has lived in a glorious
family that he has lived under a glorious Gospel ministry, and so he may
think Chorazin, and Bethsaida, better then he: he has been planted in the
Vineyard, and if others had had the Gospel, and the means that he has had,
they would have been better.

And others it may be, may think thus in respect 2. In regard of the time.
of the time; it may be they are old professors, and have but little grace, and
according to the rate, and time they have had, they see they have little, or
nothing: for professors of a year or two old have more grace, and more
knowledge of Christ, then they have in seaventeen, it may be in twentiseaven
years.

So, another, in respect of the motions of Gods 3. Motions of Gods spirit.
spirit: he may think with himself. the spirit of God has striven more with
me then with others. I have seen other people runn mad that have not committed
one of my sins, and God has cast them off, and I have greived the spirit, and
vexed him a thousand times over, and yet the blessed spirit has come into my
heart again, and restored all again.

Others are carried with this consideration; because 4. Seeing more good and
less evil in others.
for all other Sts they see more good in them, and but little ill; but in
themselves they see a World of ill and little good: for humble hearted Saints,
study their own evils, and other men's good. Says a humble Saint. I know
yonder man, he has more grace, and holiness in his heart then is in mine
own. I have a world of pride, and frowardness. It may be I have seen him once
or twice angry, and to love the World too well, but he did not continue so:
but mine own heart loves the World every day too well, and I am often sinfully
angry. With these, and the like considerations the Lord leads his people that
are humbled by his spirit, and by the sight of God in Christ, to think
themselves the least of all Saints.

If you say, I, but I cannot be brought to think Ob. They that think they know
more then others.
that I am the least in knowledge: it may be in holiness and grace, I am the
least, but I know more then they and am able to teach, and instruct others.

For that, take these two or three words.

First, I tell you, when people conceive that 1. They know nothing.
they know more then others, ordinarily they know nothing. The Scripture says.
If any man think that be knows any thing, he knows nothing. -- And it may
be thy knowledge is nothing else but darkness: there is a knowledge called
ignorance, and a light called darkness.

Secondly, it may be thou may know more in 2. They have not more saving
knowledge.
divinity, there is a kind of knowledge of godliness that thou may have,
but in the pure, saving knowledge of Christ, if thou be a humble man, thou
can not think that thou know more then another that is a Christian. I may
think I know more in the common rode; but in saving knowledge, and light
revealed by the spirit out of the Scriptures: I cannot but think I am least.

Thirdly, thou may know more by way of 3. They have not more knowledge for
the manner.
expression; being a Scholar thou may be able to express thy self
better: and thou may know more matters, more subjects, and discourse of many
things, that another Saint (it may be) cannot, but for the manner of knowing
what thou know, thou can not conceit, but that the least Saint knows more
then thee, if thou be a humbled Saint. I may know more in the rode of
divinity, and more matters, and subjects in godliness: but for the manner of
knowing it, the poorest Saint in the World if he were able to express
hemselfe, he may know more of God in Christ then I. This is one way whereby you
may know whether you be rightly humbled by your carriage to the Saints, if you
look on your selves as the very least of Saints.

Secondly, if at any time your hearts in any 2. By condiscending to the weakest
Saint.
consideration, think your selves above others, yet notwithstanding if your
hearts be humbled you will then be willing and will easily condescend to the
weakest Saints. Sometimes a humble heart may be lifted up to think he is
something more then his brethren: but then even with a hair you may pull him
down to the lowest form, with the least, and lowest of Saints. This you have
Romans 12. Mind not high things, but condescend to them of low estate. A humble
heart can rank himself with the meanest sort of Christians. Proud hearts
(especially in this City) tread poor Saints under feet, you have many that
are only for disputing professors, if he can hold an argument bravely and
sophistically, or be a controversiall Christian, that can discourse upon this,
or that controversy; such your spirits are carried after. But a poor Saint
that can hardly pray in his family: or speak a little broken fragments of
godliness, you despise him. But a humble heart knows how to suite to the
poorest Saint, let him be weak in any thing, he can be weak also. As the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11. 9. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended
and I burn not. If any one be weak I will come down and be weak with him, if
any be offended, I burn, that is, I suit my self to all men that I may win
some, as he speaks of sinners: so it is with Saints, when they can be weak
with the weak, and ignorant with the ignorant, and suite themselves with the
meanest. So you have two words.

The Third is this briefly (observe it) that a 3. He is jealous of those truths
he knows.
humble heart, you shall see it by his carriage toward his brethren, toward
Saints by this, that out of the high, and honorable opinion that he has of
all other Saints, he always has a kind of jealousy, even of those truths which
he is most assured of, I say merely out of the very honor, and esteem, and
respect that he has of all Saints, he sees them all over, and above him, and
from thence even those truths that he is most assured off, he is jealous of.

O, the pride, and the wretchedness of some that are ready to say, what do I
care what all the World thinks; all the World now, or they that were before;
and it may be it is but a conceit of yesterday, or it may be it is a truth: but
it argues a vile, proud heart. Shall I say what do I care what others think?
why should I be persuaded that I am so sainted, that I should not care what the
Generation of the Saints that are otherwise minded say. There are many things
in our preaching that we may have full assurance of: but there may be full
assurance of understanding concerning truths, that a man may preach with
boldness, and suffer, and die for it with fearlesnesse, and yet there may be a
kind of jealousy in the soul concerning it, when the Generation of the Saints
that he looks on as above him, are of another mind. This is a mystery, and a
riddle that is only known to humble men. Acts 2^. 9. Say they, let us not be
too violent against Paul, Who knows but that an Angel has revealed this to
him. So a humble heart thinks, this is the will of God, and I dare die for it:
but this is the time of pouring out of the spirit; and such men as are above
me, they are of another mind, and how do I know, but God may be in it? So
there is a holy suspicion, (that yet hinders not full assurance) that rises
merely out of reverence, and respect of all the Saints that he sees, and thinks
are above him.

Therefore we have proud spirits; a devillsh spirit of pride among us, when a
man shall conceit that he only is in the right, and slight others. We have
every good gift from above; and I must not be angry with yonder man, because
he does not believe as I say: for he has received of God what he has. But
when a man shall say, this thing I think to be so, and all the rest of the
World are Schismatics, and factious people, it is an argument of a devilish
spirit; of a proud spirit at the best.

Fourthly, from this (for they depend one upon another) you may know a humble
heart in his demeanor to the Saints; he is very meek, 4. He is meek to Saints
of another mind.
and patient: and long-suffering toward other Saints that are otherwise
minded; and hence it is from his humility that he is meek, and patient. For
he thinks either be is in the truth. or I, he thinks one thing, and I another,
if he be in the truth, and I be not, God will reveal it in due time to me: and
if I be in the truth, and he be not, God will reveal it to him in due time.
Therefore he says that is a golden rule. Romans 14. 5. Let every man be
persuaded in his own mind, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Therefore he
will not do as many men do in our times; if men differ a tittle from them,
they cry out, we shall have the Commonwealth, and the Kingdom undone, and
such, and such are Heretics, and schismatics, and one will have them
^^^^shed, and another will have them imprisoned, and there must be fire, and
faggot, and it may be some of Gods people may be carried with the rous of
blaspheming creatures that rail at the people of God, who have various
dispensations, various graces, in a various measure, and manner. But these are
not humble persons: for I never heard a humble Saint use that language. And I
dare say, it is for want of grace, either men have no grace at all, or else it
is because they have not this grace of humility in their souls.

Fifthly, the demeanor of a humble heart toward 5. He yields to the reproof,
or instruction of others.
the Saints will appear also in this, (mark it) a humble heart he dares not
resist, or slight reproof or instruction from the meanest Saint: because he
sees him above him that is the reason, you know the Scripture is full of it;
how David was a man after Gods own heart, therefore he had a humble, and good
heart: when Ahigal, a woman, comes to give him instruction that he should not
shed innocent blood, blessed be the Lord (says he) and blessed be thy council,
it is good council. And Job says, If I have not hearkened to my maid servant
it were a wickedness to be punished by the Judge; he would hearken to her, if
she reprooved him, and admonished him, and instructed him in any thing How was
Apollo, an eloquent man taken and instructed by a crafts-man, and his Wife? and
the wife did teach him for ought I know as much, if not more then her husband;
the Holy Ghost puts her first; he learned the Gospel of God, and Christ from
them. David did learn from his enemies, he did take a reproof from one of the
worst of his enemies. And says Paul, Romans 2. 12. When I come we shall be
edified by our mutual faith. Paul thought they would do him good; and he
would endeavor to help them.

Take a humble heart, let him be never so excellent in grace, and let him come
to the least, and the meanest of the people of God, he thinks there is something
in yonder Saint, though he speak not three words of godliness, yet there is
something in him if I could draw it out that is able to do me good. God has
^^de us as the members of the body that we should depend one upon another. God
has made the little toe not only for it self, but for the whole body; and the
best member is beholding to it. Therefore if it be a poor Saint, though he be
never so poor, and mean; yet a humble heart sees there is some treasure of
God in that soul for me if I can get it: though he be weak, and the thing be a
common thing, yet if I have a humble heart I shall learn somewhat: and if he
come, and reproove him, thinks he, I am the least of Saints, and this man is
above me, therefore he dares not storm.

Not like many people among us, that set themselves, and their hearts above
most of the Saints: whereupon they go on to others, and tell them, there is
such a man he will not hear me. Why? Because his heart is set above most
Saints, and above the word of God too; if we should tell Archippus that he
should look to his ministry. If a poor Saint should go to a brave Minister
as he rides in his Coach, and bid him take heed of the love of money, and of
the love of the World, and that he be not proud, how would he disdain him?
whereas we should be more humble then any other, and readier to receive
reproof, or instruction from the meanest Saint then any other. The Lord make
us so; and do you pray to God that we may be so.

Sixthly, you shall know the humility of his heart 6. He undervalues not grace
in others, though it be with mixture.
in his demeanor to the Saints by this, that notwithstanding alll mixtures
whatsoever, in the graces of the Saints, yet he dares not undervalue the grace
of God in them. I say notwithstanding all the mixtures: for we are Gods wheat;
but there is a great deal of chaff in us; there is a strange mixture in the
Saints of flesh and spirit, that is one. Then there are other mixtures; want of
breeding: it may be coursnesse, it may be roughness of carriage, it may be, an
untoward natural disposition, it may be, want of natural parts, as some say.
Now a humble heart, though there be any of these mixtures with it, yet he will
prize the grace, yea even for these mixtures sake.

Now to proud hearts, bring a clownish man, though he be full of grace; alas he
is not for their company; they know not what to do with him, he cannot tell
stories as they can: he is not a companion for them: but take an humble heart
and let it be a Barbarian, or Scithian (and they are strange people) let it be
bond, or free, be he what he will be, so he see Jesus Christ in his soul, he is
company for him.

Beloved, the very gifts, and graces of God are variously dispensed to us, and
they have various operations. As the dispensations are various to us, so their
works are various from us; but let the dispensations and operations be what
they will if it be a humble heart that sees Christ in the soul he can rejoice
in him.

Seaventhly, (in a word) you shall know a humble 7. He is readier to learn then
to teach.
heart in his carriage toward the Saints by this, He is swift to hear, and
slow to speak, as James says, Chap. 1. 19. You will say, what is that? Why is
that the mark of a humble heart? The meaning is, he is always more ready to
learn then to teach. The humblest heart is always more apt to receive then to
do: it is more apt to hear then to speak, to learn then to teach others.
Now a proud heart will be always teaching, and talking, take a proud man, or
woman, and whatsoever company they are in, they look on themselves as teachers
of that company: all must stand still (as Job says) to hear their wisdom,
and they must fasten something upon them that they would have them learn. But
wherever a humble heart comes in company he thinks first of receiving; he
thinks this people are more fit to teach me, and to do me good then I can to
them; at least we will do one another good mutually, as Paul says: it is the
manner of some people you shall never add to them; they will talk all if they
be in company, they will feed themselves with their own speeches; you shall
never fasten any thing upon them: it is the weakness of some women to be over
forward in talking and it is the wickedness also, or pride of heart in others
who else would be more willing to hear then to speak, and to learn then to
talk out their opportunities.

Eighthly, you shall know a humble heart by his 8. He is not discouraged by
seeing greater grace in others.
demeanor to other Saints in this: he is not discouraged in grace, by the
sight of greater grace in others; and he is not discouraged in his endeavors
to do good, though all round about him be enabled to do more good.

He is not discouraged in grace by the sight of greater grace in others. Indeed
he is humbled that others are more watchful, and tender and live more to God:
but yet he is not discouraged. There are some (but it is the pride of their
hearts) when they look one others that are greater in grace; (they are as a
weak sight that looks on the sun, then they can see nothing) there is nothing
but mopeing, and louring, whereas they should go sweetly, and humble
themselves: such a one has more grace, but it may be I have had as much time,
and as many stirrings up of the people of God, and yet what a poor, low
creature am I?

Again, he is not discouraged from endeavoring to do good in any place
though others can, and do more good then he. I have seen some that have gone
for brave Christians heretofore, that a man when he had seen them, would have
thought he had seen an Angel of Heaven, they were such glorious Saints: yet
they have been struck in the head when they have come to do good among people
that they thought were more able then they. Though it were their humility to
be more apt to hear then to speak: yet when I am called to do good and do
not do it, because others are more able then I, that is priae of heart,
because I think if I set up my little candle among so many great ones that
shine brighter mine would not be seen. Therefore in Galla. 6. one of the works
of the flesh is emulation: that is, a kind of contending with others about good
things: when another brother does good, and I strive and cannot do so much as
he, therefore I am discouraged, and will do none at all, that is emulation.
Emulation is taken in a good sense sometimes, to do good before another, but
not to be discouraged because another can do more good.

A Ninth thing is, there is a constant sweetness 9. There is a sweetness in
his heart to all Saints.
in the soul toward all the Saints, where there is a humble heart. I cannot
express this sweetness but a little by the contrary. 2 Cor. 12. 20. says the
Apostle, I am afraid when I come among you, I shall find this, and this: among
the rest he names swellings. Now a swelling, a boil, or a plague sore, where a
swelling, or any tumor is, there is continual aches, and stitches, and
prickings, and uneasinesse, and the party cannot sleep, or wag, or stir, but
is ankward, and unquiet in his body. So it is in the soul where there is pride,
there is swellings it is puffed up, and blown as a bladder. And where there
are swellings in the heart, so much swelling, so much uneasinesse, and unquyet.
The Lord humble thee, and me for it, there are in our hearts stitches, and
aches many times, toward this, and that Saint, I am unquyet, I find fault with
this, and that and the other man I wrangle with him; and I think the fault is
in him, but the swelling is in mine own heart, for we find by experience, if
the Lord prick that bladder, and let down that swelling the heart will be
sweet as a nut, and look on all Saints with joy. Whereas take a proud
professor, put him into what assembly of Saints you will, he is always
jangling, and wrangling; there is a swelling, and plague sore, and prickings in
the heart, in Ephesians. 4. It is called bitterness. The Apostle may allude to a
fever, when people are in a fever there is a bitterness on the tongue, the
man can take nothing in while he is in that disposition he is angry with every
thing, his wife and his children cannot speak to him. What is the reason? Not
because his wife is not a loving wife, and his children good children; but
there is a bitter humor on his tongue, and the disease puts him into that
aukardnesse. So where there is pride in the heart, there is bitterness to the
Saints: we are moved with this Saint, and displeased with that, and fall out
with the other, and we are well no where, we like no way in Gods Kingdom, but
the reason is, there is a bitterness on thy tongue and there is a swelling in
thee. Therefore a humble heart has the gallantest life of any man in the
World, it is full of sweetness, there is no bitterness, nor swelling but it
is always filled with love, and joy when he sees the least Saint,
notwithstanding all his own graces.

In the Tenth place, as he is not easily offended 10. He is careful not to
offend other Saints.
with others (for I might speak much of that) so he is careful of avoiding
the least offense to others. Indeed a humble heart, you cannot easily provoke
him. A hand that is full of swellings if you touch it you provoke it, and make
it burn; or else if it be whole you cannot easily chafe and distemper it. And
he is very careful also of avoiding just offense to others; and therefore he
does these two things.

First, he will if need be, abate much of his light 1 In abating of his own
light.
in his practice, for offense sake. There is a lesson for these times. It may
be some do thus, but not the Generality of these times. Pray Evodiach, and
beseech Syntiche that they be of the same mind in the Lord. A humble heart will
abate of his light, and knowledge. Paul knew many things that he did not preach
nor practice. We have men that say, this is my light, let all the World say as
they will, this is my light, and I must contend for the faith. O this is
contending for corruption, when there is not respect to all the Saints, and a
doing of our utmost to avoid offense.

And Secondly, when he must practice any thing 2. He is sorry that he must do
that which offends them.
that offends them, there is a kind of sorrow at his heart, unspeakable sorrow
that he must do any thing that shall give them offense. I mean the doing of
good things; and his conscience foreeth him to it: but he is sorry for it, that
he must do them.

A proud heart is glad, and joyful of any new nik, or notion whereby he may
provoke the Saints: I know diverse such, that live upon found conceits, as
Tailors invent new fashions, and though they provoke the generality of other
Saints, yet it must out every week or fortnight: it is not so with a humble
heart, he will see two steps before he will tread one (as we say in Wales) and
when he sees it, and must go a step that crosses the light, and spirit of the
Saints, it makes his heart ache, though he must obey God.

The Eleaventh is this, a humble heart in his demeanor 11. He is gentle to
other Saints in their infirmities.
to the Saints is very gentle toward the Saints in their Infirmities, and
falls. Gall. 5. 1. If any one be fallen by infirmity, ye that are spiritual
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness. He should be like a Physician,
or Surgeon that gently sets a bone, Considering thy self. When a man is
rough to another he does not consider himself what he has been, and what he
may be; how God may leave him, or her to that corruption that he sees his
brother or sister fall into: it proceeds from a proud heart, if a professor
fall, men are ready to say, I expected no other, I thought he was an Hypocrite,
and so farewell he. No, thou should go to him, and with pity, and love
labor to heal him; it may be when you fall, you will fall lower, and worser
then he. This is the nature of an humble heart.

Another thing breiflly is this, he is heartily 12. He is glad to do any
service for the Saints.
glad of any service he can do for the Saints, he rejoices in any service he
can do for the least Saint; nay as he is glad to do the service, so he
earnestly desires that his service may be accepted of the Saints: he will
bless God if such a Saint will accept of such a service. There is the
strangest word one of them in the Book of God (for ought I know) Romans 15. 30. I
have often wondered at it. Now I beseech you brethren for the Lord Jesus sake, and
for the love of the spirit, you would think there were some great business,
that you strive together with me in prayer to God for me. Why, what was the
matter? Paul did never more earnestly desire their prayers. That I may be
delivered from them that do not believe in Judea, and that my service for
Jerusalem may be accepted of the Saints. For Jesus Christ's sake pray for me.
Why? He was going to Jerusalem to carry money to the poor. A man would think
that they should be beholding to him, that Paul a Preacher would come, and
bring it himself: but I beseech you for Christ's sake pray that the Saints may
accept of my service. O, God give Parliament men, and great ones that they may
be Willing to do for the Saints, and to pray to God for the Saints acceptance.
It is a great matter for the Saints to accept the service of the Saints.

The Thirteenth thing to know a humble heart 13. He rejoices at the growth of
grace in others.
by in his demeanor to the Saints is this, he rejoices much that grace grows
in others though it do not in himself, and he rejoices in the good that is
done by others, though he can do none himself. Paul. 2 Cor. 4. 13. I rejoice
that ye be honorable, though we be beggars. A humble heart rejoices, though
he be the least of Saints, yet to see, such people grow, and to have full
grace, and to thrive accordingly: a proud heart will murmur, and it is a sign
of a cursed heart that does not rejoice in the good that is done by another, it
is a cursed hellish disposition, in Numb. 11. We read how diverse did Prophecy
in the Camp, and they come to Moses, and desire him to forbid them, O say
they, look yonder, he is turned Preacher now. O, says Moses, I would that all
Gods people did prophecy. Now there are such a generation of men among us,
that will not endure that any good should be done but by themselves, and if a
poor man go out of my Parish to another place for the good of his soul, I
must envy the man, because he would get more good: and others that have been
tradesmen though they be men of parts and breeding in the Army, and elsewhere,
yet if they have not the languages, though they teach the people gloriously,
yet we must cry them down as Aereticks: whereas if God will do good by using
such we should rejoice, if I rejoice not in the good that is done by another in
this Congregation, or in the Army, or any where, as much as if it were done by
my self, I am a cursed, proud man. Let us think of that.

Another thing, which I spoke of before, is, that 14. He can love though he be
not loved.
a humble heart, he can love, though he be not loved. As Paul says: Though the
more I love you, the less ^ be loved of you. There is none but a humble heart
that can love, when it is not loved.

Lastly, and so to make an end of this text, the 15. He measures not himself
by himself.
demeanor of a humble heart to the Saints it is seen in this, he dares not
measure himself by himself, nor compare himself with himself. You shall find
that word. 2 Cor, 10. 12. We dare not make our selves of the number, or
compare our selves with some that commend themselves: but they measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves are not
wise. Man naturally is the best judge of himself; only every man has
abundance of self-love, whereby every man thinks in every point, better of
himself then he is; and they think themselves the wisest people in the World,
and that other people have no brains, and so measure themselves with
themselves. Or rather thus, I have observed in proud hearted professors (to
their ruin, unless God work a miracle) that do not approove their hearts to
God, nor to the generality of the Saints, but measure themselves by themselves:
they are good because they think they are good, or else they will have two or
three fawning flatterers by them that shall commend them, though all the World
condemn them yet if they approove them, and commend them, they care not.
Thereupon I have known some that have lost all their reputation with all the
Saints excepting only two or three that would call black white, and white
black. You shall have a great man when he has done an action, he will go to
his Chaplain and say, is not this well done? and it may be he will flatter him
in it. We are all subject to this, it is not peculiar to one alone. We should
make use of some friends when we have done an action that should be joint
judges in it, and if they entertain it for good we should account it so, or
else not for a World, and if these condemn us we should hold our selves
condemned: but beware of setting a few creatures like our selves to be judges:
but to approve our selves before the Lord, and before the Generation of Saints.
And so you have heard the demeanor of the Saints, that they are humble in
their carriage toward God, and toward sinners, and toward Saints. And so
much for this text.

Mount Sion, OR, The Privilege and Practice OF THE SAINTS.

By WALTER CRADOCK, late Preacher at ALHALLOWS Great, in LONDON.

HEB. 12.22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living
GOD, etc.

GAL. 4.26. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.

SERMON I.
Romans 8. 4. That the righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.
THE maine drift of the Apostle in this Epistle is to hold forth justification
by faith, or by free grace without the works of the law. And in Chap. 7. The
Apostle does answer an objection. For they might say, what then shall we do
with the law if it cannot justify us? There the Apostle tells us that though
the law cannot justify us, yet there are many blessed uses, both for sinners,
and Saints to make of the law, of which I shall not now speak.

Now in this 8th Chapter the Apostle draws this conclusion from what he had
said before. There is therefore (from what I have said) it is evident that
there is no condemnation, there is no damnation, there is no danger of hell to
them which are in Christ Jesus. Now he opens who those are, he says they are
those Who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And he gives a
reason of it in Verse. 2. why there is no damnation to those people. For the law
of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made us free from the law of sin
and of death. Now he amplifies that in Verse. 3. For what the law could not do
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. As if he
should have said: thus it comes about that we are now free from the law, and
that there is no damnation to us, because says he, that God has sent his son
in the likeness of sinful flesh, like one of us, and he has fulfilled the
law of God, and condemned sin; therefore there is no sin to condemn us, nor no
jot of the law that is not fullfilled: therefore we are just, and righteous,
and clear. There is no condemnatiom to them that are in Christ Jesus: For God
has sent his son to condemn sin, etc.

Now in this fourth Verse it is more particularly expressed. That the
righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit.

I shall not orderly go over, to show the Coherence distinctly, as I might;
but briefly as I can, come to those lessons that the Lord is to teach us. That
the righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in us, etc.



There are in the words two things.

Here is a great privilege as any can be, to have the righteousness of the
law fullfilled in us.

And here are secondly the parties that have the benefit of this privilege
Those that walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.

Concerning the privilege, to understand the words a little. That the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us. That the law might be fully
satisfied in point of righteousness: that the law might have such a
righteousness, which indeed the law requires, that it might have a full, and
complete righteousness in us. So that briefly these are the lessons which I
shall open from hence, which I desire that our souls may feed upon.

First, that The law requires of every man a righteousness to fulfill it.

Or that Every man is bound to get him a righteousness to fulfill the law of
God.



Every man is bound to fulfill the law of God. That is one thing.

The second lesson will be this, that The law is perfectly fulfilled or
satisfied in all true beleivers,

And thirdly, that All those that are true beleivers (or that have these
privileges) they are those that walk not according to the flesh, but
according to the spirit. These are the three lessons I shall speak of.



I say first, The law requires a righteousness from every Doct. The law
requires a perfect righteousness.
man, to fulfill it.



Or, Every man is bound to fulfill the law of God.

That is the first thing. The grounds of that are these, I shall but touch them.

First, because that God made man, man was his creature, and the Lord was his
sovereign: and Reas. 1. From Gods sovereignty.
when God made all Creatures, you know he made Laws for them; he made a Law
for the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, etc. and every thing goes according to
the law that God determined for it. Now when God made man, (who was but his
creature though he were a more excellent creature) he made a law for him, this
blessed law of God which is in his book here, the Covenant of works as it was
sometimes called: therefore as all other creatures were bound to go in their
course, and keep their peculiar laws that God laid on them, so man also was
bound to keep the law of God that God made for him.

Another thing is this, that besides the soveraigntie 2. From man's covenant
with God.
of God, that might impose a law upon him; there was secondly a compact between
God, and man, and so there was a kind of bargain: for God laid that law upon
man, and Adam as a public person he undertook to keep that law by a
contract, or bargain. If God (as it were) had had no right before to lay it on
him, yet now man undertook it, by way of bargain to keep the law of God. Adam
first did it, and might have done it: and afterward the people of Israel
profess to do it. All these words we will do; we will keep them. That is
another reason whereby it appears that every man, and woman in the World is
bound to fulfill the law of God.

Thirdly, another thing is this, if you consider 3. Nothing can exempt man from
it.
what there is that might free a man from keeping a law that is laid upon him,
you shall see that there are none of those things that can help him in this. As

First of all, our laws many times are repealed; 1. It is not repealed.
and that law that a man was bound to keep a few years ago, he is bound to
protest against now, as the Service-booke, the common prayer, etc. There is
that penalty now for using it, as there was for not using it a few years
since: now it is not so with the law of God. Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but one jot or tittle of the law shall not pass. That law is an eternal law,
there is no repealing of it.

Then Secondly, you know Judges, and Lawgivers 2. The Lawgiver cannot be
bribed.
among men, may be corrupted, and bribed, and may be brought to dispense with
their own laws, nay sometimes to go against their own laws: but God is a
just God. and when his own son, the son of his love did take upon him to be
borne under the law, and to be a surety for man, he endured the smart of the
law, and was dealt with, as if he had been another.

Then there is no evasion, or escaping: among 3. There is no escaping.
men there is. If a man break the law, and go into another Country, he is
clear, and free: but here is no escaping, one cannot go away. VVhither shall
I go from thy presence, says David, where Psalm. 139.
shall I hide my self from thee? A man can go no where but the law of God
will be on him. So that every man, and woman in the World are still bound to
fulfill the whole law of God, or to get a righteousness, a perfect
righteousness to satisfy the law of God.

Now there are but three ways in the World 3. Ways to fulfill the law.
to fulfill the law of God.

Either a man must do it in his own person, as 1. In a man's own person.
most men do, (besides Papists) more or less; they will go and do their
best, and do the good, leave the evil, and perform duties; and they think by
their doing to keep the law.

Or else secondly, by suffering, that is, partly in 2. By suffering.
this World; and afterward in Hell: for that is the business of Hell, for Hell
is nothing but the place where people are fulfilling the law of God. What does
Caine, and other wretches doing in hell? They are paying the debt, fulfilling
the law of God to eternity by suffering, because they did not fulfill it by
doing while they were here. That is the reason that they are in Hell for ever,
because they can never pay the debt, therefore they must abide there for ever:
for if it could be supposed that they could give a complete righteousness that
might satisfy the law they should stay in Prison no longer, they should be in
Hell no more.

Then thirdly, there is another glorious way, 3. By Jesus Christ.
that is, in Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ he has kept the law, and perfectly
fulfilled it, now a man by beleiving in Jesus Christ, and by being unyted to
him, and married to him, that in his own person has fulfilled the law, being
married to him, whatsoever he has, is yours, and whatsoever he has done, it
is as if it had been done by you, all shall be imputed to you, and so the law
of God may be fullfilled in you perfectly and you shall never go to Hell, and
have nothing to do, or to suffer in that kind. This being premised briefly:
the use of this may be twofold.

First, to show you what a vain, and foolish Use. The vanity of those that go
about to keep the law.
thing it is for a man to go about to keep the law of God in his own
strength or in his own person: for you to think to save your souls, or to
fulfill the righteousness of the law by your own doings: Beloved it is a
great matter to bring poor sinners to be awakened, to see their sins, or to
break off their course in sin. For there are many drunkards, and swearers, and
jearers of Religion, and prophaners of the Lords day that sit as sots all the
year and are never awakned: but generally when men are awakened Sinners
awakened labor to fulfill the law.
out of their sins this is the resolution of all man kind, of every man, none
excepted, unless God have mercy on him; he is ready to say, I see I am in a
damnable way, and this course will bring me to hell, by the grace of God I will
turn over a new leaf, and now I will hear Sermons, I was wont to jeare at
them, and I will get me a practice of piety or some other good Book, and I will
have prayers in my house, and I will be drunk no more, and swear no more; I
will be a new man, I will avoid that which is evil, and do that which is
good. And mark it, this is more natural to man then sin: it is more natural
to man to be righteous then to be sinful: because he was righteous before he
was sinful. The liquor that is put first into a vessel, the vessel keeps the
taste of that longer then of any that is put into it afterward. Now God at
first made man righteous, and man is more apt to fall to that kind of
righteousness, then to any sin. And this is the great misery of people, every
one in some fashion or other, this is his business he goes about to fulfill
the law of God in his own person: and there you shall have one praying, and
another crying, and another keeping so many fasts, and days of humiliation
upon humiliation: and the end of all is, if men had eyes to see it, his
endeavor is to fulfill the law of God; he endeavors to scrape, and to get up
a righteousness to pay the law of God.

You cannot conceive, and comprehend how subject you, and I, are to this
misery; and how this is in your very bones (as it were) and I fear truly it is
the greatest part of your Religion, and the most of your profession is nothing
but to endeavor to get a righteousness to fulfill the law of God, though some
do it in a closer, siner way then others.

Now I beseech you consider this word, lay No man can fulfill the law by doing.
down this thoroughly in your hearts, that it is a vain thing so to do, and
who would go about a vain thing, a thing that he shall never bring to
perfection? For it is not every paltrie righteousness that can fulfill the law
of God. It is not ten thousand fastings that can fulfill the law of God; it is
not praying in your family three times a day that can fulfill the law. I
speak not against these things in their right way, and course: but all will
not do in this respect; for if you fail but once, if you miss but one
farthing you are gone, if you have but one bad thought in all your life you are
lost. Therefore I would have you despair of getting by your own doing, and
suffering, any righteousness to fulfill the law of God, never go about it. No
wise man will go, and buyld a Castle in the air. It is reason, and argument
enough in any natural busnesse to make a man desist to tell him it is a vain
thing, it is a work that will never come to perfection, therefore desist, and
give over, and think of some other course. Why should we not prevail in
spiritual things, as well as in natural? Let every man lay down this for a
certain truth, for a certain conclusion in his soul, that I were as good be a
sinner, as a righteous man in my own person in respect of fulfilling the law,
I am sure I shall never do it; but as a snowball, the more it is roled the
bigger it grows: so the more you go on, and endeavor to get a righteousness
to fulfill the law, the further off you will be: for as I said if you fail but
once you are guilty of all. And as you cannot reach it by doing, Nor by
suffering.
so not by suffering: for what men have mist in doing they shall be suffering
to all eternity in hell: but the law is so holy, and God is so glorious whose
law you have broken that when you have suffered millions, yet the debt will be
still unpaid. Therefore who would be so mad (as Paul calls the Gallathians mad
Gallathians; Who has bewitched you?) It is a kind of madness for any man to
attempt in his own person, by doing, or suffering to fulfill the
righteousness of the law, or to justify, and save his soul.

You will say, we grant it is true, and therefore Many seek to be justified by
works besides Papists.
the Papists are much to blame, that labor to be justified by their works.
They are so, and so are many others much to blame besides them; and blessed is
that man, or woman among you, whosoever it be, that does not in some measure in
his own person endeavor to make up his own righteousness. It is a thing
that sticks nearer to you then you are aware of: though it may be at sometimes
you see Christ, and justification by him clearly, yet at other times you know
how many pangs, and how may secret glances we have at our justication by our
own works: take notice of the vanity of this. That is one word.

Secondly, me thinks this should move you above Use. 2. It should move us to
come to Christ,
all things in the World if it were considered, and O that the Lord would be
pleased yet to open your eyes while it is called to day: I say this should be
one of the greatest motives in the World to come to Jesus Christ, to get into
Christ; to receive Jesus Christ and in him (as I shall show after) you shall
have a righteousness that has fulfilled the law. Let every man say, I see
here is a law that God has laid upon me, I am subject to it, and this law must
be fulfilled, there is no help for it, every man is bound to it, he must have
a righteousness to satisfy the law, Heaven, and Earth shall pass away rather
then that shall not be. Now there are but three ways to fulfill it: either in
mine own person here: or to suffer for ever in hell: or else to believe in,
and receive another that may do it for me. Now we neither by our doing, or
suffering can get such a righteousness, that is clear: therefore there is but
one way, that is, in Jesus Christ, there is a perfect righteousness in him, he
has fulfilled the law; get into him, and be one with him, and then we shall be
able to say perfectly with Paul, That the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us that believe, and are in Jesus Christ. There is but that one
way; now when there is Where there is but one way there needs no deliberation.
but one way, me thinks there needs no deliberation, or consultation. In
Worldly things when there are diverse ways, and courses that a man may take,
he will consult with his friends, which to take, this, or that, or the other;
but when there is but one way there needs no consultation. So if there were
two, or three, or many ways to Heaven, we might consult which way to take: if
there were as many ways, as you imagine, and make in your own heads. if
Antinomianisme were the only way, or Presbyterians, or Independents were the
only way, men might demurr: but in Gods language there is but one way, and
that is the way, the truth, and the life: Jesus Christ is the way, go out of
that, and you wander for ever; he is the only sacrifice, miss that, and there
is no more sacrifice for sin. There is but this one thing necessary; there is
no other way in the World but Jesus Christ, there is no other name under Heaven
by which you can be saved.

Therefore we should do in our condition just as a man that were fallen into a
great pit, that were full of stones, and snakes, and serpents, and sire, and
all that we can imagine to be terrible, and miserable, and there comes a man,
and casts a rope into this great, deep pit; you need not persuade the man to
lay hold of it, he would presently catch at it as soon as it comes. Why so?
Because he knows he is in a miserable case, and there is no other way to help
him but that. We are fallen into such a pit, where there are snakes, and
scorpions, and serpents, and fire, the sting of sin, the curse of the law, the
wrath of God, we are in the paws of the Devil, we are in a manner in hell
already: and God has sent his son Christ, and has put righteousness in him,
and he has let down this rope that poor sinking miserable creatures might lay
hold on it. Therefore what shall I say to you but this. I beseech you stand not
trifling, and dallying, and wh^n^ing, and go to this Preacher, and say, what
shall I do Si^? and to that Christian, what course shall I take? as though
there were many ways, and you had choice of things. What should thou do,
but study Jesus Christ thoroughly, and roundly, make a work of it, or else
thou will be damned. There is no other way left, there is no other means to be
had: God will not abate one farthing token, the law must be satisfied: as the
people of Israel in Egypt when they made brick, they must bring in such a
number; so the law must be perfectly satisfied, and thou art not able to do it
by doing here, or by suffering in hell: therefore what shall I do? Receive
Jesus Christ, study Jesus Christ, and resign thy self wholly up to Jesus
Christ; and stand not trifling, and dallying, till thou go to the Devil in
hell, as many do* if there were twenty ways to Heaven, God might say, I
wonder not that yonder people stand musing, and consulting a twelvemonth
together: but when there is but one way, and yet people stand mopeing, it is
that that angers God.

Therefore remember that in Zephan. 2. 1. Gather your selves together before
the decree bring forth: before the day pass as the chafe, etc. Seek ye the
Lord, etc. Gather your selves together. He does not mean in companies, as you
use to meet in the Guyld-hall: but the meaning is, when he says gather your
selves together, that man is a worried creature, a shattered thing, as Solomon
says. The eyes of a wiseman are in his head, but the eyes of a fool are over
the World. There are abundance of men that have their understandings go in the
World this way, and that way; but gather your selves together. How? To get into
Christ: you hear that there is no righteousness but his will serve the turn,
gather your selves to study Christ, to obey Christ, to receive Christ, to love
Christ, and to resign your selves to Jesus Christ, in whom there is a perfect
righteousness. That is one lesson you should desire the Lord to teach you
hence.

The next lesson is this, that The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in
all Doct. 2. The righteousness of the Law fulfilled in all true believers
true beleivers.



Says the Apostle. That the law might be fullfilled in us. In us; we are not
to understand it personally, as though any Saint, though it were Abraham
himself, were able in his own person to fulfill the law; but the meaning of it
is, in respect of the unyon that we have with Jesus Christ, who is our Husband,
and our head. The law is perfectly fulfilled by him, therefore it is perfectly
fulfilled by me, because I am unyted to him. The law is not perfectly fulfilled
by me, because I do more good, or do less evil then another, but only the
law is fulfilled, and has reason to be satisfied, because I am married to one
that has done it, and that perfectly.

Now you shall see diverse Scriptures that hold it forth blessedly. As those
phrases that you have in Gall. 2. the latter end, where it is said we are dead
to the law. I through the law am dead to the law I am crucified with Christ, I
am dead to the law. What is the meaning of that? That is, I am dead to the We
are dead to the law as a Covenant of works.
law, as it is a Covenant of works, the law has no more to do with me then
the Laws of men have to do with a man that is in debt when he is dead, when
he is dead he is free from it. So the law is paid by Jesus Christ, it is fully
satisfied, I owe not one farthing, or farthing worth to the law: I am dead to
the law. And so in Romans 7. You^ know, how by the comparison of a man, and his
wife, we are said to be dead to the law of God. The meaning is not as though
the substance and matter of the law were not eternal, and a rule for all
Saints, doubtless it is in the New Testament as well as in the Old: but the
law as it is a contract, a bond, a bargain, as it is a Covenant of works
between God, and us, it is perfectly fullfilled by Christ, and we are dead to
it, we are free from it, or delivered from it. And that is the reason that in
Heb. 12. It is said, in Mount Sion we are come to the spirits of just men made
perfect. That is, not of just men personally, just in their dealings, though
that follow in a sort: but the meaning is, that every Saint that is in Jesus
Christ is perfectly a just man, or a just woman, by reason of their morrtage
with Jesus Christ, who has obtained a perfect righteousness, or justice for
them. So in Romans 3. You have there also a blessed place, where the Apostle
says we are saved, not only by the mercy of God, but by his righteousness.
Therefore it is three times repeated, we are saved by the righteousness of God:
and again by the righteousness, and again in Verse. 2 c. the third time; to
declare I say at this time, his righteousness. What is the righteousness of
God? That is, says he, that he is just, and a justifier of them that believe
in Jesus Christ. It is just, and righteous with God to save people that believe
in Jesus Christ. Why so? Because Jesus Christ has fulfilled to a tittle all
the law of God for them.

I shall give you but one word of Use, and leave Use. 1. Upon what our
Justification is built.
the reasons, and the further enlarging of it till the afternoon. And the word
that I desire to make known to you from the Lord is this, to instruct and
help you a little to understand where your righteousness does lie, or upon
what your Justification is buylt. For this is the misery, the general misery
of most Christians that they mislay their justification: they do lay it partly
upon faith, and partly upon their sanctification, and holiness. And that is
the reason that when a poor soul, it may be, is tempted to some sin, and has
some strong lust he loses his faith, and his assurance, and his peace of
conscience: because he grounds his Saint-ship, and his justification upon his
holiness. Now Beloved this is it that I would desire the Lord to bring you,
and me to, to know that I am a just man only by the righteousness that is in
Christ that the law is perfectly fulfilled for me by Jesus Christ, and not
partly by him, and partly by me, but only and perfectly by him, and I am called
just, but only as, or because I am unyted to him that has gotten a perfect
righteousness for me.

Then let me buyld my Justification upon that only; and not upon what I am, not
upon my temper, or upon my graces, or my gifts, or the like. Take heed of that,
but let it be buylt wholly upon Jesus Christ, his death, and resurrection. He
was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification. Let us
buyld upon that, that we may come to this temper, once to have our
justification We are not more or less justified by the good, or evil we do.
in a stock clearly in Jesus Christ's hands, that when we do good we may not
imagine that we are a jot the more justified, or when we fall, or fail in good
we may not conceive that we are a jot more justified, then before, that though
one day we have our hearts enlarged to do good, and to do more good in one day
then it may be we did in a month before, yet this goes not to the stock of my
justification; I am not one jot the more justified: and sometimes God leaves
the flesh, and the remnants of sin that foil us, I will mourn for it, and be
humbled for it, as a transgression against my father, but I am not a jot more
unjustified then I was before in the sight of God: in regard of the Covenant of
works that Christ has fulfilled. So thus I would have you do as your
Merchants, and Tradesmen in your City, you have a certain stock, that you
lock, it may be, in an iron chest, and that stock is the quick as you call it,
and you have besides so many pounds, or so many hundreds that you turn, and
wind about, through all the year, as you have occasion; but from the stock, the
quick, you will not lay any thing out of that, you will not touch that, but lay
out in expenses, and wind, and turn the rest. Just so I would have it with
you, that seeing justification is only builded on Christ, and I have the word
of faith to certify me of it, and the spirit of faith to show it me within; I
would not have my good or evil to be an ingredient into that, but leave that
as a stock clearly in the hands of Jesus Christ. Or as we see a maid or woman
that spins, she holds one hand steddie, and turns about the wheel with the
other: so our justification we should hold it steddie for it is not buylt at
all upon any thing that is in us, but let us turn, and wind the rest, that is,
sanctification, we must strive against sin, and mourn for it, but leave
justification wholly to Christ, for it is not buylt on me, but is only by the
death, and resurrection of Christ. Therefore as Christ says. Luke 17. When we
have done all the good we can, say we are unprofitable servants. I have not
gotten one farthing to day, nor in all my life to help to fulfill the law of
God, or to help to my justification, that is only in the hands of Christ, that
is my quick, my cash, my stock, and when thou failest, and see lusts, and
pride, and wantonness arise in thee, say this has no influence to hinder my
justification, it is no ingredient into that, that is buylt upon another thing,
it is wholly in Christ, and his righteousness: he has fulfilled the law, and
I am just by marriage, and by unyon with him. Therefore I will go and take my
sins, and mourn for them, and desire God to cleanse me from them: but I must
hold the quick still, hold justification untouched, and unshaken, and unmovable
in the hands of Jesus Christ. I shall leave the inlargment of this, and other
things till the afternoon.

SERMON II.
Romans 8. 4. That the righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.
THere are three Lessons that we should learn from these words. The first is
implied, that The righteousness of the Law must be fulfilled,

Or Every man is bound to fulfill the Law of God.



That we have already done with.

Secondly, that The Law of God is perfectly fulfilled in all true believers.



Thirdly, that True believers are they who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit.



We made some entrance upon the second, that The righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled in all true believers.



I spoke a little of this, and shall add something farther to what I said, if
God will. The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in every The righteousness
of the Law fulfilled in every true believer; not personally
true believer.



Not personally, as I told you: for there is no Saint, no not Abraham himself
that can say the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in me, that is,
personally; that I have walked so the Law is satisfied by my walking. But the
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, not personally, but in us by
reason but by our union with Christ.
that Christ, and we are one: and he is made righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1.
30. He is made of God to in, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. Then whatsoever Christ is, or has, it is ours. Therefore says the
Apostle; The righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us. He does not say, it
is fulfilled in Christ, though that be true, but he takes the boldness to say,
it is fulfilled in us, by virtue of our union with Jesus Christ. So in every
true Saint or believer, the righteousness of the law through Christ The
weakest Saint in Christ has satisfied the Law.
is perfectly fulfilled. The weakest Saint, if he be a true Saint, he has
perfectly fulfilled the law of God, he has perfectly satisfied every demand
that the law can make; he has perfectly paid every penny worth of debt that he
owes to the law, the weakest Saint, it may be a poor Saint that men can see
nothing but corruption in all the day, and all the week, and all the year
long almost, yet that man, if he be a true Saint, though he be weak, has
perfectly in Christ kept the law of God, and is a just man, and the law of God
cannot come upon him, nor the Sergeant the Devil to arrest him for one penny
or farthing, because he can say as Paul says here; The righteousness of the
law is fulfilled in us. Therefore that is the reason, as I told you, that Paul
says, I am dead to the law, that is, I am as free from the law as a man that
is dead: when a man is dead the law goes no further on him. So it is said we
are delivered from the law, and freed from the law. And that is the reason also
that the Apostle In Christ we are saved by Gods righteousness as well as mercy.
three times in one Chapter puts our salvation upon the righteousness of God;
he says not by the mercy of God, though that be true, there is infinite
mercy, but says he, that God might declare his righteousness in Christ to
save us. It is a merciful thing for God to give us Christ, and to give us
hearts to know that Christ, and to believe in that Christ, it is infinite
unspeakable mercy. But now that we are in Christ, and united to him; as there
was mercy, so it is righteous, and just with God to save us, because we are
righteous persons. Mistake me not, I say, every poor Saint through Christ is a
righteous person, a just man. I say in and through Christ, he has taken away
all our sins, and forgiven all our iniquities, Coll. 2. So that when God saves
believers, he does not only save them out of mercy, but out of righteousness,
he can do no otherwise: therefore it is three times over, his righteousness,
his righteousness, his righteousness, Romans 3. And that is a blessed word in
Heb. 12. Ye are come to the spirits of just men made perfect. I do not
conceive that it is spoken of the spirits of men in heaven, as many do, and no
wonder they mistake: for I did so for many years. That place it looks so like
heaven, that I took it for heaven it self; Ye are come unto mount Sion, to
the general assembly, and Church of the first borne, and to the spirits of
just men made perfect. A man would think it were heaven it self: it is called
heaven, but it is nothing in the world but the glorious estate of the Saints in
Jesus Christ under the new Testament, as you may see afterward.

Therefore as Christ says, let this word sink into your hearts, that if thou
be a right believer, thou art as perfectly just and righteous through Jesus
Christ, as if thou had never sinned against the law of God: not by thy own
righteousness, but by the righteousness of Jesus Christ. For what can be said
more? says the Apostle, The righteousness of the law is fulfilled. He does not
say we have a piece of it, but it is fulfilled, that is, to a jote, or tittle;
the law cannot say, black is thine eye, because Christ has paid and done all
that it can demand.

Now to give you a word or two of the grounds, or reasons, to help you to
believe this truth, to show you how it comes about. It comes about three ways,
I mean it will be clear to you three ways, if you consider three things.

First, You must consider that Jesus Christ, Reas. 1. Christ a public person.
which is our surety, he was sent of the Father, out of his love as a public
person to fulfill the law of God, by doing and suffering as a public person.
There is much comfort in that. Beloved, you can never thoroughly understand your
justification, unless you study the first Adam, what kind of person Adam was,
as you may see in Romans 5. Now the Lord Jesus, he came as a public person, and
he was delivered for our offenses, as it is said, Romans 3. ult. he did die for
our sins. That is one thing.

Now the second thing that demonstrates this to 2. From the union between
Christ and believers.
us, is besides his dying, and that as a public person, there is a union made
between every poor believer and Christ, as really as between Christ and his
Father. Indeed it is called in Scripture a marriage; because as in a marriage
all the wealth of the husband is the wives, it becomes hers, and she has a
right to it after marriage: So all that is in Christ becomes ours by this
union. But it is a more real union, a closer union by far then that of
marriage: it is compared to the union between the members and the head. Now by
this union, that you may read of in Joh. 17. all that is ours becomes Christ's,
and all that is Christ's becomes ours. There are two things.

Then thirdly, we find that God the father, to 3. God the Father is satisfied,
which appears
whom the debt was owing, and whose law this was that we must satisfy, he
acknowledges satisfaction. And what can we have more? God the father
acknowledges that his Son has satisfied the law, and therefore we are freed.
Now he does acknowledge it three ways.

First, You shall have it Mat. 17. compared with 1. by Gods own testimony.
2 Pet. 1. For Peter is much in it, we follow not devised fables, but we come
to speak of the voice in the Mount, This is my beloved Son. As if he had said,
This is one maine piece of the Gospel, we heard a voice when we were with our
Master in the mount, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom my soul is well
pleased. That for his person.

Then a second thing that did show that he was 2. Christ is out of prison.
satisfied, was by suffering Jesus Christ after he was arrested, and in prison
for our debt (for Christ was in prison for our debt; he was arrested, and that
according to law, he was brought into prison, and all our suits were clapped on
his back; all our executions and outlaries were laid on his shoulders, and then
the Father let him out of prison being our surety. If he had not paid our
debt, he had not come out of prison, but) now the Father lets him out, that is,
the Father suffered him to rise from the dead. Therefore we find that our
justification is laid more upon the resurrection of Jesus Christ, then upon his
death; as we see in Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised
again for our justification; that is, he did die for our sins, and was raised
again for our justification. And in Romans 8. He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things?
Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. That is, his dying for us did satisfy the law, but that did not justify
us, until we see that he was risen again; and then we see that all the debt
was paid, because our surety is gotten out of prison. Therefore justification
(I mean the knowledge of it at least) principally arises from Christ's
resurrection. Now when I see Christ is risen, and is gone abroad, he is gone
out of the grave, and gone to heaven, I know that the law is fulfilled, and the
Father is satisfied, and the Sergeant the Devil has nothing to arrest me for,
all is satisfied, all is clear.

Thirdly, and lastly, I know God the Father is satisfied: 3 Christ is gone into
heaven.
for the law it is God the Fathers Writ that he had against us; and now we see
that all is paid, not only because our surety is got out of prison; (for so a
man may do that has not paid a debt) but because when he was out of prison,
he ascended to his Father; and the Father made him sit at the right hand of God
in the glory of Majesty on high, and he has given him power, and authority to
rule the world till the day of Judgment. Now in that the Father has given the
Son that honor and respect in heaven, as to come and sit at his right hand;
we may see it was not a breaking of prison, but a real paying of the debt,
and a fulfilling the law, before he could come there. This may give a little
light how the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us through Jesus Christ.

Now the use of it, I named in the morning, I Use 1. To learn the ground of
our justification.
was not able to express it, neither can I now fully utter it, I beseech you
consider the more of it.

The first use we may make of it is this, that you should learn from what I
have said, where your justification does lie, your justification does not lie,
or is not built upon any thing that is in you, or that is done by you, or that
you may hope to do hereafter; you are not justified by your own personal
good, or unjustified by your own personal evils, you are not one jote the
more just when you have done all the good you can in the world, and you are not
one jote the less just when you have committed all the weaknesses, and fallen
into all the frailties that a Saint can fall into; because your justification
is built only upon Christ, and upon what he did, and suffered; My
justification is built upon the death of Christ, and his resurrection, he has
fulfilled the law, and he has paid the debt, and he is out of prison, and the
Father is satisfied: here is my justification; and I believing this I am happy.

Now you shall find that you lay a great part of Men build justification upon
something in themselves.
your justification upon something in your selves, therefore when you are
enlarged in good, you think you are more justified; and when you fall into sin,
you think you are more unjust then you were before, and you look strangely upon
God. Now the Lord has put it out of our hands. Adam should have been
justified, by that that was in him, and that should have been done by him: but
blessed be God, he would not trust us with that good any more, but has put all
in the hands of Jesus Christ, and there is the whole foundation of our
justification. Therefore it is not for a Christian to come, and say, O Sir, I
fear I am no child of God, I fear I shall prove an hypocrite, why so?
because I find so much sin, and so many lusts in me. It is very well that you
find, and feel sin, and that you mourn for, and strive against sin, but that
therefore you should think there is a flaw in your justification, that you
should make any good that is in you a prop to support your justification, or
any evil in you a thing that might crack your justification, this is Popery.
My justification depends not on this, that I am justified the more when I am
strong, or less justified when I am weak; but whether I be weak or strong,
whether I do much or little for God, whether I give thanks, or be humbled,
seeing Christ is dead, and risen again, I am justified, that is still entire,
because it is not built upon me, but wholly upon the death and resurrection of
Christ.

In the 4th of the Romans, Abraham is laid down Abraham how justified.
as a pattern of believing, Abraham had the word of faith; So shall thy seed
be, and without hope, or reason, or any thing he believed; that is, he cast
himself on that word; so it is said he was justified without works. What a
strange thing is that? for it is impossible that there should be true faith,
but that all good works should in some measure follow after: but if we speak
properly, and look to the thing as it is in it self, how a man is justified, he
is justified wholly without works. Abraham did many good things, he offered his
son Isaac, and he relieved his kinsman when he was in misery, and did teach
his family, and relieved the King of Sodom, he did many good works. Though
these good works did justify his faith to the world, that they knew he was a
believer by it, and he himself did know it by it, yet never a one of these
were an ingredient into the justification of his person, that was by the
righteousness of God without works.

We must get good works after. This is the Good works to be done after we
believe.
rule of the word; Charge them that believe to maintain good works; that is,
after they believe, charge them to avoy'd the evil, and to do the good, and
to abound. But for the point of justification, which is the maine thing for
your soul, and mine to feed on, that is built on another foundation, upon the
grave of Christ, and upon the death of Christ. Therefore you shall find those
speeches of the Apostle Paul when he speaks of this glorious condition, he
speaks always of his union with Christ; I am crucified with Christ, and I am
buried with Christ, and I am dead, but Christ lives in me.

Learn this lesson that you may come to this: Ground of humility.
for if you had learned it spiritually, when you had done the most for God, if
you could do ten times more then Abraham, or Paul, and yet Paul preached from
Jerusalem to Illyricum, yet then thou would say, I am an unprofitable
servant; there is not one grain that I have done that is an ingredient into
the death and resurrection of Christ, to help to make me a just man, or to
procure the favor, and love of God. And when you had done evil, and it may be
failed in carelessness, and committed sin. O what a glorious thing were it to
go home, and fall upon thy knees, and say, Lord I have sinned grievously; but
yet I am not one jote the less just before thee, because my justice, and my
righteousness is not depending upon my sinning, or my unsinning, upon my
holiness, or my unholinesse, but upon Jesus Christ.

Then you would find by experience your hearts The right way to mourn for sin.
melt in pieces, you would be able to look upon sin in the vastness, and
unkindness of it against a dear Father, then you would see your selves, the
vilest objects, you would not so think or speak of any man in the world as of
your selves, even for the least frailty. For then the love of God, as oil
working with iron, would press your hearts. Then you shall know, and not
before, what it is to be truly humbled, and then you shall have power to
reform; Then you would be able to say, my soul is truly humbled, I can mourn
for sin till I am weary of weeping: Then you will be able, though you make not
those covenants and resolutions, there will be such an impression upon the
soul, that you cannot choose but mourn, and loath your selves, and avoid the
occasions of sin, seeing your selves just men in Jesus Christ: For when a man
sees himself unjust, he can never mourn kindly for sin, if he see God on Sinai
as a Judge, there will be but untoward mourning for sin. But when a man sees
the coast clear, then he can say, I have been the greatest sinner in London;
there is never a child of God that has walked more barrenly then I have done,
and yet through Christ I am as just in Gods sight, as any man in London: I am
Gods child, but I am an unhappie graceless child; then a man can call
himself fool, and be angry with himself, and weep bitterly.

Now usually when you mourn for sin, you Men usually think justification is
cracked by sin.
think there is a crack in your justification, and so many sins as you have
committed, there are so many flawes in your justification, and so many
faintings of faith in the favor of God, and therefore when you pray to God,
and are humbled for sin, it is your manner, and it was mine most of my days,
only to dawb up the flawes of justification; and you pray the Lord to pardon
such a sin, and now you see God is wrath with you, and you are like to be cast
off, and your hearts begin to be hard, and you have sad thoughts of God arising
in you, and unquiet, and horror in your souls, and you are far enough from
true sorrow all this while. It is impossible there should be true sorrow, when
you keep a coile, and confess your sins, and wrangle it out with God, and you
will confess your sins to day, and think to make God amends to morrow: and so
as a man stops chincks in a wall, we think to dawb up the flawes, and cracks
of justification this way. Whereas we should look on justification as a thing
entire in the hands of Christ, that we have nothing to do in, but it is in
Christ altogether founded on his death, and resurrection, and all the title
that we have in it is only by says; As Romans 10. shows; The righteousness
of faith says on this wise, etc. The word is nigh thee. There is our title,
and tenure, I have nothing to do for my justification: but Christ has
fulfilled the law, and he did die, and rise, and sits on the right hand of
God; and I endeavor to believe it, that is, to consent that it is so, and
praise his name, and live to him all the days of my life, O here is the life
of Christianity.

I have seen people quarrel with themselves, Hindrance of reforming our ways.
and complain, O I have a hard heart, and I desire the preachers to pray for
me; and when you have fallen into weakness, you will go, and confess your
sins, and strive to break your hearts, and mourn for your worldliness, and
your pride, and frowardness, and yet it will not do, but your hearts grow
harder then they were before: and whereas when you have committed a sin to day,
you think to go, and reform to morrow, and to turn over a new leaf, to
morrow you will be worse then to day; because you think to make God amends, he
leaves you to your selves, and you grow worse. The reason is this, because in
some sort, even to this day, you mix sanctification with justification. Now I
know it, I speak what I know, could you leave your justification alone in the
hands of Jesus Christ, and look on it (as I said) as cash in the cupboord, not
to be touched; and as long as Christ is righteous say, I am righteous, behold
your selves always, as just men, and women, that in Jesus Christ have fulfilled
the law of God, and then you will find your hearts inclined to any good thing:
then would your hearts break and shatter to pieces, when you have done the
least evil against God; then you would know what true sorrow, and what true
repentance is, and not before; then you would know those things, that now you
know not, nor cannot know. Therefore labor to learn that lesson, it is one of
the greatest Mysteries in the World; and that is the reason that carnal people
carp at these things. What greater Mystery then for me being a just and
righteous man through Christ, yet to be so sinful, that I can say there is
none more sinful, and yet I am as righteous as Abraham, or Paul; in respect of
the righteousness of Christ I have as large a share as Abraham, or Paul, and
yet I am full of sin. A Christian knows this, and he knows how it is so.
Well, that is one lesson, consider of it, that you may know where to plant your
justification, upon the death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Lord teach
it to you, and me.

Secondly, if the righteousness of the law be Use. 2. Saints should see their
condition in Christ, glorious.
fulfilled in all that are beleivers through Jesus Christ. Then, all you that
are Saints, all you that believe in Jesus Christ, labor to see the glorious
condition that you are in: that you may be able to reflect upon your selves not
according to what you are out of Christ; but what you are considered to be as
Members of Jesus Christ, as unyted to Jesus Christ. Therefore you shall have
Paul (and it does me good to see his spirit) he never reckons himself as in
himself, but as in Jesus Christ, I can do all things, I can want, and I can
abound. I can do this, and that, and all in Christ: So, I To look on our
selves as unyted to Christ.
must never conceive of God out of Christ, nor of my self out of Christ, I
must never conceive of my self, and Christ, as two: but I should endeavor
clearly, and constantly that whatsoever good there is in Christ, it is mine, as
if it were in mine own person. And so we should have our spirits raised above
the temptations of the World, and above the afflictions of the World, and above
corruptions.

It is a pitiful thing to see poor Professors, Why many Christians have such
low Spirits.
there is not one of many, but they are ordinarily below temptations, and they
lie under burdens, and are below their sins. Nay, there are many professors
that are more sad, and drooping then carnal people. Surely this was not the
way of those Saints that we read of in the New Testament, they had glorious
spirits; how do you think else, they could go to the stocks, and to Prisons,
and from one Compter to another, and have their spirits so raised, and yet
sometimes they were to die the next morning for ought they knew? Your spirits
will never be heightened and raised to live the life of Paul by beholding any
thing that is in you personally in your posession: but what you are by
relation, and marriage to Christ. Reckon your selves dead with Christ: and so
conceive, I am a just man, I was bound once to the law of God, a terrible law,
and there are thousands in hell paying the debt and cannot pay it, and yet I
have paid every farthing, and the law cannot ask me more. I have offered a
perfect righteousness to God; and I am now sitting at Gods right hand in
Heaven, by my unyon with Jesus Christ.

This is the life of faith that we may be able to The life of faith.
triumph over all these things below, from our Justification as Paul does, Romans
8. It is God that Justifies, and who shall condemn? Who shall separate us
from the love of God in Christ Jesus? Shall Tribulation, or distress, or
Famine, or nakedness, or peril, or Sword? Nay in all these things we are more
then Conquerors through Christ that loved us. Indeed Tribulation, and hunger,
and Famine, they are sad things, but these are the least troubles of a
Christian, these outward miseries. Over these we are more then Conquerers,
says Paul I can tie my right hand at my back, and with my left hand beat all
these back; I can beat them with a finger. Nay I say more, Neither death nor
life, that is more: nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. See there how he dares all the Enemies to come upon the Stage, and
tramples them under feet. As in Malachy it is said that in the time of the
Gospel they shall tread their Enemies as ashes under their feet. So there is a
place also in 1 Cor. 1^. Death is swallowed up in victory. As if he had said,
you that have received Christ Jesus I will tell you news. Death is swallowed up
in victory. O death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? He
fears the grave, and death, and triumphs over them. O death where is thy
sting? thou thoughtest to overcome me; but where is thy sting? The sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks be unto God who
has given us Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. He does not say which
will give us Victory when we are dead, and then we shall be perfect in Heaven.
It is true, then we shall be more perfect: but he says which has given us
Victory for the present, I have already overcome Hell, and death, and the
Devil: for all hangs on the law, the law is Gods writ, and the Devil is Gods
Sergeant that executes that writ, and Hell is the Prison. Therefore if the law
be satisfied, if the righteousness of the law be fulfilled, death and Hell,
and the Devil have nothing to do with me. So in Romans 4. ult Who was delivered
for our offenses, and was raised for our justification. And then it follows
Chap. 5. 1. Being Justified by faith we have peace with God. See where the
Apostle lays justification. And we glory in tribulation knowing that it
works patience, etc. We rejoice in tribulation, and affliction. Why? Because
we are Justified by Christ's death, and Resurection. O, what kind of spirits
should we have? How full of joy and comfort should we be in the greatest
tribulation? How should we tread all this World under our feet, the evils of
this World, and the comforts of the World? How should we insult and triumph
over the Devil, and over death, and Hell for all their power (as I said) is
from the law, and if the righteousness of the law be fulfilled, then all our
Enemies are subdued, and all is clear, Heaven is open, and God is mine, and
the favor of God is to me.

For know this, that there is no natural imbred What hinders the creature from
enjoying God.
hatred in God to his creature; there is nothing that keeps the creature from
the full enjoyment of God, but the law not being satisfied. God made a law, and
we made the breach of it, and there falls out the distance, between the
creatures and God, whether men or Devils. Now then if I can say though I be a
sinful man, yet Jesus Christ has fullfilled the law, the law has a full
righteousness to a farthing, then I know I am one with God, he is wholly for
me, and I for him, and all the enemies of my Salvation are conquered.

Now if the Lord would open your eyes to understand the hope of your calling,
the glorious condition you are brought into, you would not walk so weakly, and
poorly, and sadly, and dejectedly, that every thing should cast you down, but
you would go on, and trample all the World under your feet: we should be above
men and Deviils, and the World, and every thing, if we did but understand to
what a glorious estate God has called us in this World, through Jesus Christ.
Therefore a man reflecting upon his justification, as he may look upon
himself, and account himself something, so he may account death, and Hell,
and all subdued, and he may account that the law cannot demand a farthing of
him. That whereas the breach of the law kept us from communion with God, that
being taken away we are as righteous as if we had never fallen. O glorious
condition. There Paul Ephesians 1. He prays that they might know the riches
and hope of their calling. That is, that they might understand what this
glorious calling is, that God has called us to. That is a second lesson we
should learn hence.

First seeing the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, we should
learn how to buyld our Justification aright, how to lay the Foundation of it.

And Secondly we should endeavor to get out spirits raised like people that
are freed from the law.

Thirdly (and there I shall end for this time) Use. 3. To conform our hearts
and lives to the will of God.
being freely and fully justified by the grace of Jesus Christ, this should
follow to any one that understands it, that therefore we should study and learn
to conform our selves in our hearts and lives, out of love to the will of God.
There comes in holiness and there it comes in amayne, and never before: all
before is nothing but bungling, but then it comes rightly. We should I say
conform our selves to the example, and to the rule of Jesus Christ in his
Gospel. And that you may understand that, you must know that every man in this
World Three rules, to one of which, all men are conformd.
has a rule to walk by. And there are but three great rules, and all men do,
and must conform to one of these three. For there is no man that does an
action, but it is in reference to a rule.

Now you have one rule in 1 Pet. 1. 14. As 1. Men's lusts.
obedient Children not fashioning your selves according to the lusts of your
former Ignorance. Which shows that once they did conform themselves, they did
fashion themselves unto their lusts: but says he, now God has justified you,
you must not conform your selves to your lusts. Most of man kind make their
lusts their rule, which the Prophet calls in Scripture to do that which is
right in their own eyes. To do what is their mind, what they like in their
own mind, and as that worthy Dr PRESTON says, they think when they are in
their beds, what place they shall go to, and where they shall spend their
time; and when they are up, they do that which is right in their own eyes,
what they have a lust to; when they have a lust to be drunk, they will be
drunk, when they have a lust to be filthy, they will be filthy; when they have
a lust to be idle, or a lust to be malicious against their Neighbors, they
will be so. So that the stirrings of their lusts are their rule, and their
whole life is nothing but a transforming them from one lust to another. Says
Peter you must not do so, but as Obedient Children, if God have justified you,
if Christ have fulfilled the law perfectly for you, that you can dare sin, and
Hell, and Satan, and tread all under feet, does it become you to fashion your
hearts, and lives to your lusts? Is that a good rule? no, you must not do so.

Another rule is this World, Romans 12. 2. Be not 2. The World.
conformed to this World. It is the copy of many men, the Looking-glass that
they dress themselves by every day: how to square it in the World; how to keep
their port with their Neighbors, and Gentlemen they converse with, and with
great men that have command of them, and with their fellow Officers, etc. And
so women how they may go brave as their Neighbors do, and get credit in
their eyes. So most people, their maine rule is, they care not whether it
please God, and conform them to his son at all, so they can keep
correspondensie with the World. Now you must not do so: for 3. The example and
rules of Christ.
they are yet in their sins, poor wretches: therefore let them conform to
their lusts, and they that are of the World let them conform to it. But since
God has redeemed you from the wicked World, by the blood of his son, and has
brought you to this condition, and bestowed glorious and unspeakable
privileges on you, you should conform your selves to the Image, and example
of Jesus Christ, and to the rules of Jesus Christ in the New Testament, in all
your actions and ways.

You cannot write without looking on your coppie, the best Saint cannot write
one line without viewing and looking on his coppie for every letter. For all
your actions, you are to have two things in your eye, that you may do the
action right, and carry your selves right. Either eye Jesus To look on Christ's
example.
Christ, and his example; how would Christ have done, if he had been here?
What did Christ do in the like case in the Gospel? So by eying that there
will be a power, as in Jacobs sheep by beholding the rods, the spirit of God
will convey a power looking upon the picture that is before us, that is, Jesus
Christ to transform us into his likeness.

Or secondly, think of the rules of Jesus Christ, To look on Christ's rules.
the rules of the new Testament, this blessed word: have frequent recourse to
the spiritual rules of the new Testament that should be your copy. When any
case comes, follow not your lusts, and act not according to the wisdom of the
flesh, to say this, or that I will do, but consider what is your rule, you
walk by another rule. What have I to do what such a man, and such a man does;
but what is my rule? how must I carry my self? As for instance; when you come
among people Several Gospel rules.
that rejoice for any mercy, what is the rule? Rejoice with them that rejoice,
and weep with them that weep. It may be a man has received great unkindnesse;
and is wronged by him that he has been most kind to, of all the men in the
World; and yet he proves most ungrateful, if a man should go to flesh and
blood, he would hate and abhor him, and not endure him; man in his best
naturalls would not bear it; he would not bear ungratefullnesse, and wrong,
but labor to requite it. But what is the rule? The Lord is good to the wicked
and unthankful. Therefore Lend freely, looking for nothing again. Presently,
God will bring a spiritual rule to your mind, and God will give you power to
do it. And so, suppose a man should charge and challenge you with a debt, and
would have you pay such a debt, you perhaps know no such thing, and are
persuaded of the contrary. What now? You know what most men think, I will never
pay him, I were a fool if I should give away my estate, and be a Beggar when I
have done: but what is the rule? If thine enemy sue thee at the law, and take
away thy cloak, give him thy coat also. A Christian comes to this law, he
consults not with flesh and blood when a case comes, but he thinks what is the
rule in this case? But all the misery is, you will be fingering with
justification, which you should leave alone upon Christ's death, and
Resurrection, and you should be working out your holiness every day, that
should be your way, God will bring it in. So when a woman is putting on her
clothes, and making her fine clothes, and thinks to be as fine as her
Neighbors, she should think, but what is my rule? Not to conform my self to
others in embroydred hair, and fine apparel, and gold, but with the Ornament
of a meek spirit. So you have the New Testament full: for every case there is
some thing that will direct and lead you, that thereby you may conform to Jesus
Christ.

I give you but general instances, if God open your eyes to see your glorious
condition in the New Testament, you must resolve on this, to walk according to
the copy and the rules of it; that in any case you may ask, what is my rule
as I am a Christian, as I am a free man, one with God, that I may walk by it?

Now I exhort you to this, because if a thousand The best motive to holiness.
Devils should preach instead of men, and tell you what the Torments of Hell
are; all would not be so great a motive by half, to walk holily, as to tell
you that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled by Christ, that you are
righteous, and just, and all your sins are done away by Christ. Therefore, O
love him, and live to him, conform to your copy. Let your Neighbors conform
to their copy, to the World, and others conform to their lusts (as too many
do) but do you conform to Jesus Christ; think, what would Christ do if he
had my opportunity? what would he have taken in hand? And what ever occasion
you have with God, or man, ask; what is my rule in the New Testament, and
conform to it. Blessed is the man or woman to whom God gives a heart so to
do. There remains one word more of this, and the third lesson, which is the
principal thing, the description of those persons that have this privilege.
They walk not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. But because
the time is gone, and my strength also, I shall leave that till God give
another opportunity.

SERMON III.
Romans 8. 4. That the righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in us who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
THERE were three Lessons that we may learn from these words. The first is
implied, namely, that The righteousness of the law must be fulfilled by every
man.

OR, Every man is bound to fulfill the law of God.



And Secondly, that The law of God is perfectly fulfilled in all true Beleivers.



And Thirdly, that True Beleivers are they who walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit.



We were the last time upon the second; we have prooved it, and opened the
point, and have made some Use of it.

First, that from hence we may learn where our justification lies, and whereon
it is buylt, not upon any thing in us, or done by us; but only upon the death,
and resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, hence all that are Saints; all that believe in Jesus Christ, should
labor to see the glorious condition they are in by Christ.

Thirdly, we should learn (being justified freely, and fully by the grace of
Jesus Christ) to conform our selves in our hearts and lives to the example of
Jesus Christ, and to his rules in the Gospel.

I shall add but one word more from this Lesson; Use 4. True beleivers no
Antinomians.
that is, that seeing the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in them that
believe; you may hence see that none are further from Antinomianisme. then
those that are true beleivers, those that are godly Saints. You have a great
stir concerning Antinomians, what they should be. It Antinomians, who.
is one that is against the law, that is the signification of the Greek word.
Now the question is, who is most against the law of God? I do not deny but
that there are some, and they may be called Antinomians (though we should not
miscall people) yet they deserve it. But now a Saint that is in Christ he is
not an Antinomian, he is not against the law, because he has satisfied the
law. Every man must pay the law, and they that would fulfill the law with their
own righteousness, they do the law wrong, they that do most here, and they
that suffer most in Hell, they can never satisfy the law. But a Christian has
satisfied the law, because he has given it a perfect righteousness. Now if a
man should owe ten thousand pounds, and he had but fifty shillings a year
coming in, and it may be one year he pays ten shillings, another year he
pays a Noble, and another year three pence, yet he pays as well as he can.
But now suppose there come a Surety and he pays the whole ten thousand pound,
and he says to the Creditor you shall be paid no more by three pences, but you
shall receive the whole sum; what do you think? is not that better? None
satisfy the law but beleivers.
So there are none that satisfy the law so roundly, and fulfill it so
perfectly, as he that relinquisheth all that is in him, and lays hold on Jesus
Christ, and in him pays God to a farthing. Therefore when Paul is prooving
strongly that we are justified by Christ, and not by the law, says he. We take
not away the law, but we establish the law. This is a better way of fulfilling
the law, then any other. All the damned men in Hell, and all the Pharisees on
Earth cannot satisfy the law so well as one poor sinner that beleives in
Jesus Christ. And so for matter of practice, a man that beleives in Jesus
Christ he walks more strictly then any Pharisee can; for he looks not only what
is lawful, but what is convenyent, he walks by a more sublime excellent rule.
A Pharisee looks only what is lawful, and what is not lawful, but a Christian
he looks what is exact, and expedient: take any man that knows what it is to be
justified by Christ, and that man goes a thousand fold further then another,
for a man that would be saved by his own fulfilling of the law, if he cannot
come up to the law, he will bring the law down to him. As a man that has a
heavy Burden, if it be too heavy for him, he will cast off some of it: so
when a man goes about to keep the law, and finds it too heavy for him, he will
throw away some, and cut out a part, and make a carnal, gross law, and
endeavor to keep that. Now a man that is justified by Christ, he knows that
the law must be satisfied, and so he takes it in the purest spiritualitie, and
goes to Christ Jesus, and he has satisfied all. So much briefly for the second
lesson.

Now I shall enter a little upon the third, as sat as the Lord shall give
strength and time. Those that believe, and have this great privilege which is
the Foundation of all others, to have the law perfectly fulfilled for them in
Christ they are here described to be such, as walk not according to the flesh,
but according to the spirit. So in the third place take this doctrine, or
lesson: that, They, and they only that walk not according Doct. 3. They only
that have Christ to fulfill the law for them walk according to the spirit.
to the flesh, but according to the spirit, are partakers of this privilege, to
have the benefit of the righteousness of Christ to fulfill the law of God for
them.



I say they, and they only have it, for it excludes all other. The Scripture
does not only set it down positively, as it says, Go, baptize all Nations in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: therefore we may
conclude thence that we may baptize those that are Disciples: but from that
place to gather this doctrine, that they, and they only are to be baptized
cannot be right: but here I say, it is they, and they only. Why so? Because we
see after, those that walk according to the flesh shall die, the
righteousness of the law is not fulfilled for them, for then they should never
die, nor be damned. They that walk after the spirit, and they only have this
privilege. Now the maine business that I shall endeavor at this time, will be
only to open to you these two words.

What it is to walk.

And what is meant by flesh, and what by spirit.

For if we understand what it is to walk acording to the flesh, we shall
easily understand what it is to walk according to the spirit.

Concerning the former word, to walk, I shall To walk, what.
say but little, because you understand it. To walk is a general word in this
place, it is of a great extent and comprehends a man's whole course, and way,
and practice. A man who goes, or converseth, whose course, and way, is
according to the flesh, (whatsoever that flesh is, as we shall see afterward)
such a man walks. Therefore it is often set down in Scripture by several
expressions. They that are after the law, and they of the concision, etc. Put
what words you will so they be general enough, they whose thoughts, and words,
and courses are that way, they are they that are said to walk. There are three
words in the Original for walking, and of those three, the word here is of the
largest extent. To walk according to the flesh, what is the meaning of that? I
shall be a little larger in the opening of this, I will not trouble you with
the various acceptations of the word flesh. You know there is a litterall sense
of it, and by a Synechdoche, it is put for the whole person, soul, and body,
and there is a Metonimicall acception of flesh. I will give them a heart of
flesh. It is called flesh for softness: and there is a Metaphorical acception
of flesh, a borrowed kind of speech; and so it is to be understood in this
place. Now to open this to you. I shall show you. First, in general what is
meant by flesh. Secondly, particularly what is meant by flesh.


By flesh therefore in general, you are to understand Flesh what meant by it.
in this place and the like, every thing, let it be what it will be, that is
against Jesus Christ, or his spirit, or his worship, or any thing else that
belongs to it, any thing that is not of faith, or of Christ, it is flesh, in
general. Let me speak more plainly, any thing that is of Old Adam is flesh,
whether it be good, or evil, and any thing that is of, and from the new Adam
that is spirit. Now you Two things from old Adam.
know we receive two things from Old Adam: some natural, moral good, some
relics of that that he had the fullness of, and we receive evil, when he was
corrupted. Now both these take them in the largest extent, they are both called
flesh in Scripture, whatsoever is of, and comes from Old Adam, is called flesh,
therefore flesh in many places in the New Testament it is the very same with the
Old Man, and you have them taken promiscuously, Our old man is crucified. Romans
6. And in another place. Those that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, not
only the corruption, or evil, that Original sin (as we say) that is within
us, but whatsoever of the Image of the old man is upon us: whatsoever we have
had, whether it be good or evil, from the old man. And indeed in the New
Testament it is more frequently taken for the moral good of Old Adam, then the
evil, though it be taken for both, yet I say most frequently the good of Old
Adam, especially the wisdom of Old Adam. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity
to God. Romans 8. As in the New Adam the Lord Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the
holy Ghost is a most excellent piece, so the wisdom of Old Adam is the
unhappiest, and most miserable thing of all.

That you may understand this, you must conceive Two principles whence all men
work.
that all the principles of this World, I mean, of all mankind, all their
motions, and actions do wholly spring and flow from two roots, two
principles: as the Heathen Philosophers said in another sense, they held that
all this world did rise from two beginnings, from two beeings, from two
principles, there was one good and another evil, that set all things on work:
so all things in every man in this World, the principles, and motions, and
actions, and thoughts, and inclinations, and wisdom, and reasoning, and doing,
whatsoever is within, or without man, it springs from one of these two roots,
that is, it is either from Old Adam (I mean not nature in you: but) it flows
from Adam that was once in Paradise, or else from the New Adam Christ Jesus.
For there were but two men that ever in the World were public persons, that
were the Fountain of the Only two public persons the two Adams.
principles, and proceedings of mankind; Adam in Paradise, natural Adam, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, the spiritual Adam. All mankind was made after the
Image of the first Adam. We have borne the Image of the earthly Adam. 1 Cor.
15. And indeed all the Saints shall bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam too,
hereafter at the least.

Now both these Adams are as two springs in a hill, conveying their streams to
two rivers; they are springs from whence arise all the thoughts, and
imaginations, and actions, and proceedings, all the wisdom and
righteousness, whatsoever is in us, it springs either from the second Adam,
the Lord Jesus planted in the soul, or else it flows from Old Adam, from
natural Adam that is in us. Therefore they are called the roots: the Lord Jesus
is called the root of Jesse. Why so? Because all the new creation, all the
work of grace, all the principles, and thoughts, and actions, of a Saint, so
far as they are of grace, they rise from the new Adam the Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, I say, to understand this a little in general, before I go further.
A man that walks according to the flesh who is he? A man that walks according
to any thing of Old Adam, whether it be good, or evil. And usually in the new
Testament it is taken for the good. 1 Cor. 1. There flesh is taken for the good
of old Adam, when a man walks according to the wisdom of Adam, according to
natural wisdom and according to the righteousness of Old Adam that is done
by us; or when we walk according to the sins, and lusts, and corruptions of
Adam; for both are put together, and all makes but flesh, and whole flesh
strives against whole spirit. Now I say take it in a general sense, to walk
after the flesh, is not only to walk sinfully, and carnally; but when a man
walks, though devoutly, and righteously in the eye of the World, yet if it be
after the principles of Old Adam, if he do not walk by a principle planted in
him from the new Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, all this is but flesh.

Now then for a man to walk according to the To walk according to the Spirit
what.
spirit. What is that? All his principles spring from the root of Jesse, from
the spirit of the Lord Jesus; all his actions are upon another ground. Now, I
say, all the principles, and actions of every man, and woman in the World,
springs from one of these. Therefore it is convenient and necessary that you
consider how the two Adams are the two springs of all mankind, the two pillars
(as it were) upon which God has laid all mankind, and all that is done in the
World, and those that walk after the one, walk after the flesh, and those that
are after the other walk after the spirit: So much in general.

Now more particularly, by walking after Three things meant by walking
according to the flesh.
the flesh, in this place, there are Three things meant.

The first thing meant by walking after the flesh, according as most of our
godly and learned translate 1. To walk according to the corruption of nature.
it, is when a man walks according to the dicttates, and suggestions of corrupt
nature. So flesh is taken for Original sin, that is, that corruption of
nature, that is prone to every evil, and that is an enemy to all good. So a
man that walks according to the flesh, is when the course, and bent, of a man's
soul, and life, goes after sin, though he do some good sometimes, yet when
his course is that way, that is, his continuedness, and contentedness is after
sin this is to walk after the flesh.

First, when it is his continued course: for walking is not a step, or a leap,
or a stride: but walking is a thing of many paces. So it is called a goeing
from iniquity to iniquity. Romans 6.

And then there is in walking contentedness, and sweetness: a man is not said
to walk when he is tired, or when he goes in danger, but walking it is
pleasant to all, young and old. So when he says they that walk according to
the flesh, that is, not only when men are overtaken by lusts, and sin, but
people that in their ordinary course go with a great deal of contentment in
evil ways.

But, though this be true that this is comprehended Which is not the main
scope here.
in walking after the flesh, yet this is very lame, and short, of the full, and
whole meaning of this place. I say it is not the maine nor chief meaning of
this place, it is not primarily, nor principally meant: this is a truth, and it
will follow as a necessary consequence, as I shall show anon, and I doubt not
but the Apostle means it, when he says, we walk not according to the flesh,
because in Romans 6. He takes a great deal of pains in that point: but I think
this is not the chief meaning. My Reasons are these.

First, because I find that the very scope of this 1. The Apostles scope is
otherwise.
learned Epistle is different, if not almost contrary to this, his scope is
not to quarrel with them for want of doing good works, and for walking in
sinful works, but the scope of it is, to beat them off from their own works,
and to bring them to Christ and therefore he says Abraham was justified without
works, he all along disparageth their works as they did them. Therefore I think
he does not go so far from his text, or from his scope as to make this the
maine business, their sanctification or holiness, the not walking in evil, or
the walking in good works.

Secondly, this cannot be the chief scope of 2. These things must follow which
are contrary to the Gospel.
the place; because if you take these words, They that walk after the flesh, in
this sense, that is, those that follow sinful courses, if you take them so;
that none but such as walk holily have a right to Jesus Christ, and his
righteousness. Or if you take them in this sense that they only that walk in a
holy life can come to know that they have the righteousness of Christ
fullfilling the law for them, neither of these can hold.

For the first, that no man can have to do with 1. That none have to do with
Christ but those that walk holily.
Christ, or his righteousness but that man that walks according to the spirit,
that walks in a holy way, and not in sinful courses, this is contrary to the
stream of the Gospel. Why? Because the Gospel all along offers Christ to
sinners, to the chief of sinners, to aliens, and to the ungodly.

Then again if this were so, sanctification 2. Sanctification should be before
justification.
should be before justification, a man must be holy before he should be
justified.

As for the latter sense, to wit that the Apostle should mean this, that no
man can know any other way that the righteousness of Christ did belong to him,
but only, by not walking after the flesh, or by walking after the spirit; this
cannot be neither: for however we may know a little in a way of sense by our
walking, yet the maine way to know our justification is the same way that we
come by justification: for faith is the evidence of Justification chiefly known
by Faith.
things not seen. The maine evidence whereby I know I am justified, is because
the word of faith says so, the word tells me so, and faith evidenceth it. That
faith that I believe by, it shows me that I believe. Therefore though I be
inconstant in my way of grace, that to sense shows me a little, yet it does it
not solely, and chiefly, and primarily. So that this is the substance of it;
that that sense which godly reverend men give of this place, it is true, but it
is not all, nor the first, and the chief part of the meaning of it.

Secondly, flesh in the Scriptures, and so here 2. Flesh taken for Jewish
privileges.
and in diverse other places, it may be understood concerning the privileges,
those various prerogatives, and privileges, that the people of God, the
Israelites had in a natural, fleshly way, from Generation, to Generation.
Being borne of such Parents, of such Tribes, they had such privileges
belonging to them, they had the Oracles, and the Covenant, and the Tables, etc.
And this is called flesh: and I doubt not, but the Apostle had this in his eye.
Says he; The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us that walk not after
the flesh. As if he had said, do not think because you are of the seed of
Abraham, or because you have the Covenants, and Circumcision, and that you are
borne of such Parents, that therefore you shall the sooner have this privilege
to have the law fulfilled, take heed of that, for now it springs from another
root, and it comes now in a spiritual, and not in a fleshly way as it did
before: for they had their mercies generally in the Old Testament according to
the flesh: that is, by Generation, I saak as he was Abraham's Son, and Jacob,
his Son, etc. but now it is in a spiritual way.

Now that flesh is so taken in Scripture, I will give you that one place in,
Phil. 3. 4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh says Paul, If any
man thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more. What
does he mean by flesh here? He tells you. Circumcised the eight day, of the
stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as
touching the law, a Pharisee; concerning zeal, Persecuting the Church:
Touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless. As if he had said,
I had all the privileges, if any man might boast in the flesh, I might, I am
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, a Gentleman of the best descent, etc. So in 2 Cor.
11. 18. Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also, ye suffer
fools gladly. Wherein any is bold I am bold also. Are they Hebrews? so am I,
are they Israelites so am I, are they the seed of Abraham? so am I. They had
privileges being Israelites more then other People, and this is called flesh.
So I am confident that the Apostle had this in his eye, in a special manner,
when he says, They that walk not according to the flesh. And you shall find
that they attributed all privileges to them because they were Israelites. As
you see in Mat. 3. Say they, We are the Children of Abraham. Says John The
Jews boasted of outward privileges.
Baptist. Ye are a Generation of Vipers. And so in John 8. Say they, we are
free men, we are the Sons of Abraham. Says Christ. Ye are of your Father the
Devil. See, the Gospel takes away that fleshlyness, and puts all in another
stream and course, and way. The Apostle aims at that here, when he says.
Those that walk not according to the flesh. As if he had said, you shall never
have this righteousness to satisfy the law the sooner because you are the
Sons of Abraham, no more then if you were Scithians, or Barbarians.

Thirdly, and lastly, the maine, and chief 3. Flesh taken for the old Covenant
of works.
meaning of this place is this, though the other be included, when the Apostle
says those that walk not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit.
By flesh, here the Apostle means walking according to the old Covenant,
according to the Covenant of works, in the way of the law. And by spirit is
meant walking in the way of faith, or in the way of the gospel, or in the way
of Christ. There be diverse expressions in Scripture that help us to understand
it, as in Romans 4. 14. It is called, they that are of the Law, that is, those
that walk according to the law. In Gal: 3. there are two or three phrases,
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith. The
walking according to the spirit is the hearing of faith: and it is twice there,
they that are of faith, they that are of faith. To be of faith, and to walk
according to the spirit is the same; to be of the law, or of circumcision, is
to walk according to the flesh. In Romans 10. 5. The righteousness which is of
the law says on this wise. The righteousness of the law, that is, the way of
the law: that Scripture sets out the way of those that walk according to the
Covenant of works; now the way of the law is the same as walking after the
flesh: and says he, the righteousness of faith says on this wise; that is,
the grace of the Gospel, or the way of faith. So the meaning is this, we near
of a glorious privilidg that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us,
and there is no man in the World can get it by his own works, or in reference
to the Covenant of works, no not Abraham himself, but it is merely by Jesus
Christ. Therefore if any of you think to have this righteousness fulfilled in
him, and go in the old way, to Mount Synai, to the Covenant of Works, he is
deceived, he shall never have it, but by walking according to the spirit: no
man can enjoy this privilidg by a Covenant of works, by their own doing, by
seeking to fulfill the law of God, by their own righteousness; but they that
walk after the spirit: as if he had said, do not mistake me, it is a great
privilege to have the law fulfilled for you; but it is not by your own
strictness, and zeal: and though some of you go further then others, yet none
of you can attain the fulfilling of the law that way: for all are come short.
Romans 3. But it is those that walk after the spirit, that is, those that seek
it in a way of faith, in another, not in themselves; those that seek it
according to the principles, and directions of the Gospel.

Now, because I know this Exposition is harsh to many of you; (Though I exclude
not the other) therefore I shall endeavor to show you three things.

First, I will prove clearly out of the Scriptures That flesh is so understood
that this is the meaning.

Secondly, I will give you a reason why that is the chief meaning.

Thirdly, I shall give you a few Reasons why the Apostle says that they that
walk according to the Covenant of Works, walk according to the flesh, and they
that go according to the way of faith walk according to the spirit.

Concerning the First, that flesh is often taken 1. prooved by Scriptures.
clearly in this sense, I will give you some places of Scripture. Gal. 3. 3.
This I would learn of you, received you the spirit by the works of the law, or
by the hearing of faith? Are ye so foolish, that having begun in the spirit,
are you now made perfect in the flesh. We see in Chap. 1. They are called to
the grace of Christ through the Gospel, Gospel principles were rightly and
savingly practiced among them; and after there came some among them that
perverted them; and says he, are ye so foolish that having begun in the
spirit, and have had Christ crucyfied among you, that now you will be made
perfect by the flesh? That now you will go, and seek justification, by your
own works, and go about to keep the law, etc.

Another place is in Phillip. 3. 4. Though I might also have confidence in the
flesh, and then he speaks of the privileges of an Israelite: and if you look
further, Verse. 7. I count all these loss that I may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is
of the faith of Christ. So by flesh he means the righteousness of the law,
which he throws away, for the righteousness which is of faith.

Take another place, Romans 10. 5. Compared with Romans 6. 14. Says the Apostle,
sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but under
grace. When you were under the law, and walked after the flesh, sin had
dominion over you, and you obeyed it. Here is a parallel place: for says the
Apostle, When you were in the flesh, the motions of sin by the law did Work in
your Members. When you were in the flesh, that is, when you were under the law,
then the motions of sin did work. But now sin shall not have dominion over you;
because you are not under the law: you are not in the flesh, you do not walk
according to the flesh. And that I suppose is the meaning of that Scripture. 2
Pet. 2. 10. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly, and to reserve the
wicked to be punished; but chiefly those that walk after toe flesh, in the
lusts of uncleanness. Now if you take walking after the flesh for sinful
ways, it would be the same, as if he had said, there are diverse people that
walk wickedly, but chiefly they that walk after the flesh: for all people
naturolly walk after the flesh: but these were a peculiar people that the Lord
would bring judgments on, and they walked according to the flesh. Who were
they? They were most of them Jews, they were Adams Sons, that walked in the
old Covenant, chiefly they that walk according to the flesh; that is the
meaning of it, or else he would not have said according to the flesh: for every
man naturally walks according to the flesh.

So in this text, Who walk not according to the flesh but according to the
spirit, and in the 8 Verse of this Chapter. They that are in the flesh cannot
please God. Now I shall open that by another Scripture, Heb. 11. 5. Where it is
said that Henoch pleased God. We read of Henoch. Genesis 5. 24. That he Walked
with God; he walked not according to the flesh: now says the Apostle, without
faith it is impossible to please God; now he that walks in the flesh cannot
please God. Why so? He that goes not in the way of faith by Jesus Christ, he
cannot please God. By beleiving I please God, by walking in the obedience of
faith to God, I, and my works please God. Now to please implies one that was
offended before: all my doing cannot please God, but my beleiving, presenting
to God a perfect righteousness by faith pleases God, and then all my works
are accepted. There are two words for it in the Original. One signifies to
please one that has been offended: another is pleasingnesse with one that has
not offended; as my child pleases me though he have not offended me; but the
other is to be pleased with one that was an Enemy before, one that was against
me, that is now received to favor. So I have told you briefly some Scriptures
to show you that flesh is taken in this sense.

Now the maine reason of it why I believe this It is the scope of this Epistle
to be the chief meaning of it, is because that I see clearly that this is the
chief drift and scope of this Epistle, and if I may speak without
disparagement, there is nothing more methodically laid down; and this is
spoken to bring them from the way of works, to the way of faith. But I hasten.

Why does the holy Ghost call walking after the Covenant of Works, and after
the law, walking after the flesh, and the other walking after the spirit?

The reason is, because there is so great affinity, 3. Why walking after the
Law is called walking after the flesh.
and nearness between walking legally, and walking sinfully that they are
promiscuously in Scripture taken one for another. For let a man walk, and
endeavor, and do his best, according to the law, and not by the Gospel, he
shall be sure to walk 1. They are taken one for another in Scripture.
sinfully, and carnally; there is no help for it. If he be under the law, sin
will have dominion over him: and if he go after the flesh, the motions of the
flesh will bring forth fruit unto death. Sin, and the law are (as it were) of
so near a kin, that the law makes sin more sinful, and the more a man strives
to keep the law, the more he sins. The Apostle brought it so near that people
were ready to speak nonsense, that the law was sin. He prevents the
objection, Is the law sin? O no, says he, sin is the transgression of the law.
So that a man that walks according to the law, and not according to the way of
the Gospel, in spite of his heart he shall walk according to the flesh, that
is, according to the lusts of nature, he can never walk holily, let him do
what he can.

A second reason why it is called flesh, is in allusion 2. In allusion to the
allegory. Gal. 4.
to the two Sons of Abraham: as we see in Gall. 4. 22. The Apostle there,
speaking of these two Covenants, he says, Abraham had two Sons, ^he one by a
bond-maid, the other by a free Woman: But he who was of the bondwoman was
borne after the flesh, but he of the free Woman was by promise, which things
are an allegory (or a comparison) ^r these are the two Covenants, the one from
Mount Sinai, which gendereth to Bondage, which is Agar, ^r this Agar is Mount
Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage
with her Children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of
us all. He is proving that the old Covenant was to be done away, Agar was to be
thrown out with her Children. He prooves that those two Sons of Abraham,
Ishmaell, and Isaak, were types of the two Covenants that Ishmaell and Isaak
Types of the two Covenants.
God made with mankind, the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of grace. Now
the Covenant of Works he compares to Ishmaell, that was borne after the flesh,
as other Children were, Abraham went in to Hagar, and she conceived, and bare a
Child as other Women. But Isaak was not borne after the flesh, all Fleshly
ways could not produce Isaak, he was a Child of promise, and the spirit of God
breathing in the promise, and working mightily in Abraham, and Sarah, Isaak was
produced. This is an allegory, there is a great Mystery that you think not
of, when you read of Ishmaell, and Isaak. By Ishmaell is meant the Covenant of
works, and the principles of it, and the practicioners of it, and they walk
according to the flesh, as Ishmaell did: and by Isaak is meant the Covenant of
grace; and those that go that way, are Children of promise, as Isaak was. So
God has set this comparison and I conceive the Apostle alludes to it, and
calls it a walking according to the Flesh. As if he had said, thou shall never
have this righteousness by walking in the way of thy Father Ishmaell, by Mount
Sinai in Arabia, by walking in the law to turn away the wrath of God: but if
thou will get this righteousness thou must walk according to the spirit, thou
must get the spirit, and be a Child of promise.

The third, and last reason that I shall give, why it is called walking
according to the Flesh, is because of weakness: for Flesh is put for
weakness; as the Scripture says. They are Flesh, and not spirit; that is,
they are poor weak things: so, those that walk in that way, in the way of the
law, they are weak creatures; there is nothing, but wishing, and woulding, and
covenanting, and promising, and protesting, and vexing, and fretting but there
is no strength. Now one Saint that is truly planted in Christ, and the Gospel
has truly taken place in his heart, he has more strength then five hundred
of the other. Says Paul; I can do all things, I can want, and I can abound, I
can go to Prison freely, I can rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with
them that mourn. Because the spirit that dwells in Christ, and works
effectually, the same spirit dwells in us, and works in us. Therefore that is
the meaning of it; they that walk after the Flesh; that is, they that go after
the law, they are weak, they tugg, and are never the nearer Heaven; and if
they should live a thousand years they would be no better, but wishers, and
woulders, and say I have a good desire to do as the Preacher says, but I have
no power.

Let me conclude with one word of Use, from all this that has been said, which
I hope you Use. That few shall be saved.
will consider of. From this Doctrine thus opened, you may hence see the saying
of our Lord Jesus Christ verified, and made good, that few shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Doubtless Paul did not look on sinners, and Saints as we
do: we account every Professor, let his principles be what they will, either
from the first, or second Adam; if he begin to leave sin, and to perform
duties, we account him a good man. But the Lord when he comes to judge, he will
look further, and examine us, and will (I fear) find abundance that shall
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, even of those that follow good old
Adam, I mean there are abundance of Professors, that have left corrupt Adam in
his grosnesse, and follow good old Adam that is a sprig from that: they will
abstain from sins, and they will perform duties, and they will do no wrong;
and all is but old Adam still. Now, good, or bad, if it be old Adam, it must
perish, the bond Woman must be cast out.

Therefore you that are Professors, look to your selves for the Lords sake, I
am mistaken if there be not many hundreds of us that will be found the Sons of
Ishmaell at the last day: many that make a great Profession, and many that make
a greater profession then others, that are honest, spiritual, Saints before
the World, before men: for when a man goes to keep the law, every light that
comes into his soul intends his resolution; every thing intends it in that
course he is in; and he may go to the highest, and be the greatest Professor,
and be ready for all duties, and yet be found a stranger to Jesus Christ:
therefore look to your selves.

I remember Mr. Belton that blessed man, he divides the World for the fowness
of them that shall be saved; says he the greatest part of the World, two, or
three parts of it, are most entire Heathens. In Europe here we have the most
part Papists, and but a few that are Protestants: and among those parts there
are few, that profess Religion; and among those that profess Religion, there
are very few that do it in truth: as another godly man says; take a multitude
of Professors, that have been bred under the law, that have been bred on Mount
Sinai, take a Congregation of such Professors (as there be many such in Many
legal Professors miscarry in their transplanting.
England) and let the Gospel come and be Preached rightly among them, to
translate them, let a Minister of the Gospel come and say there is no
damnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, and you are justified freely, and
Christ has fulfilled the law, and all is clear; whereas before there were
fears least they were not righteous, and they did work hard; now let a man
labor to draw them to the Gospel, and to plant Christ and the principles of
Christ in their hearts, and I fear that there is not one in ten but will
miscarrie in the remooving as you find it often with your Trees when you remove
and transplant them. I say abundance of those Professors will come to nothing;
for when the fear of Hell and damnation is gone from their conscience, when
the Whip is gone, they will turn the grace of God into Wantonness. Nay, some
will turn down right Enemies, and persecuters of the Gospel, as the
Pharisees; and of those that would come in, in all probability, in removing
and translating them from the law to the Gospel, there is not one in ten but
would turn the grace of God into wantonness, and there goes all their
Religion. The way to Heaven is narrow, our Lord Christ says, and I think it
will be found far more narrow then we conceive of it.

Therefore as another godly man says, we are exceedingly mistaken in judging of
Professors, we look upon them, and those that begin to amend from their sins,
we call them Professors. But this Professors to be judged by their principles.
is the true way of judging; that there are but two roots in the World, the old
Adam, and the new Adam. There are but two Covenants, Sinai, and Jerusalem,
there are but two ways of walking, after the flesh, and after the spirit,
after the law, and after the Gospel. Now I judge him to be a Saint, and a
beleiver, and God calls, and ownes him as a Saint; though he be weak, and be
not so glorious in the eye of the World, as many formal Professors; yet if I
see any principles of the Gospel in him, if there be a little of Christ in him
in power, though it be but in a little measure, and he can pray but little, and
he cannot keep fasting days, and days of Humiliation so plausibly (as many
that make a Trade of it in this City) yet if that prayer, and repeating, and
reading, and hearing, or preaching, or whatsoever it be, if it flow from the
Lord Jesus Christ, as a natural, man knows natural things, soon Saint
knows another, the spirit of God knows the things of God.

It is true we all of us have a great deal of flesh, The best have somewhat of
old Adam in them.
and there is somewhat of good old Adam, as well as of corrupted Adam; but
surely we ought not to conceive him to be a Saint, let him be never so glorious
in the eye of the World, and in the performance of duties, if there be not
somewhat of Christ in him. You may see a poor despicable creature, and see a
great deal of Christ in him, and on the other side you may see great
Professors that are Ringleaders of others, and yet there is not a jot of Christ
in them, but all is old Adam, scrued up in his brave parts, and all is but
Flesh, a little more Resined; and he that is Flesh, and all that is Flesh,
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

Look to your selves seriously, especially you that are most emynent, that
think best of your selves, that are ancient Professors, unless you look to your
selves, you may take a great deal of pains, and when all comes to all, after
all your praying, and fasting, and repeating, and preaching, you may be found
to be nothing in the world but men that walk according to the Flesh, that is,
according to the refined, and well educated principles of old Adam, you may be
Ishmaeils, and be built upon Mount Sinai when all is done.

Therefore I say we may hence learn to judge How to judge who are Saints and who
not.
rightly of Persons, who are Saints, and who are not, who are the Children of
God, and who are not. For in most things we do not judge rightly, we do not
judge as God judges. We usually judge of men, and things, according to natural
wisdom, or according to some distinctions, and desinitions that we have of
things, in that natural divinity we have. As for instance. If a man leave his
drunkenness, and whordome, and come up to some kind of holiness in his lips,
in appearance, if he come to hear Sermons, and repeat them, and pray a little
in his Family, that man we call a Saint, a godly man, and it may be, he may be
so, and it may be not so. Now the way that God judges of all men, is as they
are the Children, oyther of the old, or of the new Adam, and not according to
such a proportion of strictness in their lives: for the Pharisees went beyond
many weak Professors, in common righteousness.

And this should be a main ground of our Ground of fellowship with others.
communion, and fellowship, and delight in others, whether in Churches or
otherwise. It should not be grounded on this: if such a man be of my opinion in
such things, if he agree with me, he is for me; and another that agrees with
another, he is for him. These kind of communions will prove nothing but
faction in the end. But the true communion is when Saints together keep
fellowship, Church fellowship, or other upon spiritual grounds. That is, when
Christ in his soul, and Christ in mine close together; this is the maine
ground that makes communion, and fellowship, whatsoever comes in besides that
is additionall, but if there be a communion of people without this, I say it
will prove but faction, but walking according to the Flesh.

I should show now what course we should take to bring our selves to spiritual
walking.

And Secondly what they should do that God has brought up in some measure to
this condition. But I must leave that till God give another opportunity.

SERMON IIII.
Romans 8. 4. That the righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in us who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
THERE were three Lessons that the Lord did Teach us from these words.

The First is implied in the beginning of the Verse: that Every man is bound to
get him a righteousness to fulfill the law of God.



And Secondly, that All those that rightly believe in Christ have in them a
righteousness perfectly to fulfill it.



And Thirdly, that Those that thus believe, and have this great privilege (for
it is the Foundation of all others) they are known, or described by this, they
walk not after the Flesh, but after the spirit.



The two former I have finished, I entered upon the third the last day; I opened
it at larg, and prooved it to you, and came to make one Use of it.

That from hence we may learn how to judge of Use. How to judge who are Saints
and who are not.
Persons, how to judge of those that are Saints, and those that are not Saints,
not according to some kind of holiness they may come up to, but according to
the principles they walk by, either as they walk according to the Flesh, or
according to the spirit. For I told you there be diverse Profesors among us,
that it may be, are emynent in the eye of the World, before men, yet when all
coms to all, their fasting, and praying, and preaching, and repeating, etc.
will be found to be nothing in the World but a walking according to the Flesh,
that is, according to the refined, well educated principles of old Adam. But I
shall go on a little further.

Therefore in the next place, the Question will be: how shall I know whether I
walk according Use. 2. How to know whether we walk according to the spirit.
to the flesh or according to the spirit? How shall I know whether I be one of
those that walk according to the spirit?

I will only give you a few expressions of it. (I will not say signs; for it
may be you could not all bear that word) and these expressions are most of
them laid down in this Chapter, and hereabout; whereby you may have a guess of
it, whether you be men that walk according to the spirit or no.

First you shall find in Romans 6. that those that 1. Such are dead to sin.
are under grace, or that walk according to the spirit, sin is destroyed in
them, they are dead to sin, and alive to righteousness. And there are many
expressions of the same thing in diverse phrases. As in Verse. 6. Knowing this,
that our old man is crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed that
henceforth we should not serve sin. If thou be a man that walk according to
the spirit, thou can say the body of sin is destroyed, and thou do not
serve sin, Then it is said in Verse. 11. That those that are under grace, they
are dead indeed to sin, and alive to God; that is another expression. And in
Verse. 12. Sin shall not reign in their Mortal bodies, that they should obey
it in the lusts thereof. And in Verse. 13. Yield not your members as instruments
of unrighteousness. And in Verse. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over them.
So, there are diverse expressions of one, and the same thing. Now from all (for
I cannot open them particularly, how much is held forth in each of these
expressions, but to help thee to see a little the State of thy soul) I would
gather these three things from all these expressions, there is I say meant by
them these three things.

The first thing is this, that those that walk according 1. Sin is dead in
respect of guilt.
to grace, and according to the spirit, sin is dead in them. That is, they are
dead, in respect of the guilt of sin, they do see, and understand in some
measure, that Jesus Christ by his death has abolished, and destroyed, and done
away all their sins, in respect of the guilt of them; they are not under the
law in that respect. They see that there is a full righteousness in Jesus
Christ, that has satisfied the law, and so their sins are done away, that they
shall never condemn them. This is one thing.

Now a man that walks according to the flesh, he sees not that, neither can see
it: for these things are spiritual. Now take a man that walks according to the
flesh, that is, according to the most refined principles of old Adam; and he
always carries guilt upon his Conscience, he will always be as a man that is
rouling of a Snow-ball, the more he goes on in his Service, the more guilt, and
horror. But a man that walks according to the spirit, let him be weak or
strong, he sees this in some measure (and probably for the most part) that his
sins are done away, and that there is no condemnation to him, because he is in
Christ, and beleives in him: therefore as it is. Romans 5. 7. He that is dead is
freed from sin, or justified from sin. That is one thing.

Secondly, in all these phrases this is held forth 2. Sin is dead in respect of
the power.
to us (as I understand) that a beleiver being planted into Christ (for so he
looks upon himself) and ingrafted and united to Christ, in respect of the
power of sin he accounts it as dead: that is, when he sees any sin stirring in
him, he considers, I am one with Christ, I am planted with him in his death and
resurrection, and this sin was condemned when Christ was condemned, and as sure
as Christ did die, this sin must die; therefore he looks upon all his sins and
lusts, as things that are gasping for life, as things that are ready to die,
and that will surely die, as surely as Christ did die.

Another man that walks according to the law, when he sees sin in him, and
finds lusts to rise in his soul, he says as David in another case. Surely I
shall one day fall by the hands of Saul. Surely, I shall prove an Hypocrite,
one time or other, this sin will break my neck, and so he is discouraged, and
his heart is hardened. But a man that is under grace, that walks according to
the Gospel, let sin be never so strong and prevalent, he looks on it as a
condemned thing, he can triumph over it when it is strongest, and can say, I
know thou must be laid in the Grave with Jesus Christ; he reckons himself dead
to sin. That is another thing.

Thirdly, and lastly, from all these expressions 3. They are more holy then
others.
here in Romans 6. We gather this, that surely all those, that are under grace,
or that walk according to the spirit, in some eminent way, are more holy, and
more freed from sin then once they were, and then all those are that walk under
the law, in some eminent way I say they are more holy, though I do not say
there is no sin in them, for then we should lie as John says, but certainly
there is a power in their souls against sin, that is exceedingly transcendent
in respect of the best moral men, in respect of the exactest men in the World,
that walk according to the law, what else is the meaning of all this. Ye are
dead to sin, and sin shall not reign and have dominion over you, and you shall
not yield your members as instruments to sin? Shall we turn all this into
speculation? No, certainly, there is some eminent, real holiness and power
against sin that they had not before. Therefore says he, What pleasure had you
in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? those sins that you committed
before, you are now ashamed of them.

And let me look a little upon my own soul, or appeal to you, take any man,
or woman, that understands what it is to be under the law, what it is to walk
according to the Covenant of works, and according to the flesh, and what
covenants, and resolutions, and promises, and fastings he had, and let him
look upon himself, what he is now since he has known a little of Christ,
and has known that he is a justified Person, and that he is dead to the law,
and the like. I appeal to you, whether you do not feel a strange power in
your souls killing, and subduing sin, that you never imagined before, or
almost hoped to have. There are some Saints that I know, that when they came to
know a little of Jesus Christ, they have found a power to subdue their sins,
that they did not hope for in their other condition, they were so strong; it is
an emynent power. A poor Saint that sees another tugging, and striveing, and
wrestling, and bustling with his corruptions, he knows that there is a sweet
power in his soul that pulls down the highest, and proudest imaginations. As
a godly man says, there is as much difference between a man that walks after
the flesh, according to the law, and he that walks according to the spirit, as
between a man that is in a great Lyter or in a great Boat, that is fast upon
the sand, and there are it may be a dozen or twenty men tugging and striving to
get it off, and yet it sticks: and another man that is in a Boat upon the
water, and needs only to hoist sail, and sit down and it is gone, he goes
with wind, and tide. So a man that walks according to grace, he can go as a
child, and speak loving, and plain words to his Father, and get power over
his sins, that all the bowling, and roaring, and crying of another a whole
Year together cannot do. It is so, and all you that know what grace is, know
it. That is one thing: therefore consider this, if thou walk according to the
spirit, thou art dead to sin. That is, in respect of the condemnation, and
guilt of it, thou hear that Christ has fulfilled the law, and that sin is
done away.

And secondly in respect of the power of it; thou can look upon it as a
dying, gasping thing, that must die, and thou can tread on it through the
death of Christ.

Thirdly, thou find no lust so strong in thy soul, but thou can ordinarily
bring it down; thou can bring it to the obedience of Jesus Christ: another
man may throw his cap at his sins, and be wishing, and woulding all the year
long, but there are strong lusts in his soul that will not out. Therefore
says the Apostle, when you walked according to the law, the motions of sin
brought forth fruit unto death: inevitably it will be so.

Then further you shall find the fruits of walking Fruits of walking according
to the spirit.
according to the spirit. I will but name them to you, and wish you to consider
of them. You have many set down in this Eighth to the Romans.

When a man walks according to the spirit, you shall see this is one fruit of
it, a spirit of adoption whereby we cry abba Father. As many as A spirit of
adoption.
are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: for ye have not
received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit
of adoption whereby we cry abba Father. That is one fruit of it, as soon as a
man comes to walk according to the spirit, he has not a spirit of bondage any
more. What is that? It is nothing but this, a temper of soul like a slave,
just as you may conceive of a Spirit of bondage what.
man that is taken Prisoner in Turkey what temper he is of, he is glad of a
crust of bread, and he fears whipping and beating, and (it may be) killing:
such is the temper of a man's soul in a spirit of bondage: when one is in such
a temper that he is always in fear of being whipped, and scourged, and he has
hard thoughts of God, and he fears that he shall prove an hypocrite, and the
like. Now says the Apostle we have not that spirit, but we have the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry abba Father. That is, there is a sweet temper, such
as is in a loving Child to his dear Father, there is a boldness, a love, and
delight, and rejoicing and a sweetness, etc. This is one fruit of it,
therefore as far as thou art under horror, and mopeing, and howling, and
crying, thou come short of walking according to the spirit: for thy soul
would be always full of sweetness, in the greatest affliction, if there were a
spirit of adoption; and under the worst sins thou do commit, though their
would be sorrow yet thou would be full of sweetness and joy. That is one
thing.

Again, another fruit, and consequent of it, is Raising up of the spirit.
that the spirit of God bears witness with our spirits that we are the
Children of God. If thou will be lead by the spirit, and walk after the spirit,
the spirit of God will witness with thy spirit that thou art the Child of God.
What is that? the meaning of it is this (as I understand) the spirit of God
will raise up my spirit, to be able to see, and know, that I am the Child of
God, for the spirit of a man, knows the natural things of a man, and no more.
But the spirit of God witnesses with my spirit, that I am the Child of God,
that is, he rayseth up my spirit whereby I may see, and know, that I am the
Child of God: that as before by my own spirit I was able to know whether I
were poor, or rich, whether I were sick, or well, whether I were beloved, or
hated: So now my spirit is raised by the spirit of God, I am able to reflect
upon my self spiritually, and look upon my self as beloved, and chosen, and
holy, and called, and justified, and this in a spiritual way.

Thirdly, here is another expression of it, and An earnest hope.
that is, an earnest hope, or expectation, of the glory that is to be revealed.
I find, and observe little of that to be in Professors, and I have often
marvailed at it, and the reason is, because they have not the spirit of
adoption, and walk not fully according to the spirit, therefore they are not
filled with those expectations, and those earnest desires, that the Saints were
ordinarily in the primitive times. Says the Apostle in this Chapter. The
creature groaneth and desires to be delivered: and not only they, but we our
selves, which have the first fruits of the spirit, we groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our body. The meaning is,
there is no man knows what that glory is, that is to be revealed; nor no man
what it is to look for it, and expect it. The word in the Original is (as one
says) as a woman looks for deliverance when her pains are on her. O! she
would feign be delivered, or as a man in Prison that looks for his friend out
of a window, he puts out his head, and looks, but he cannot get out, though he
feign would. Such an earnest hope, and expectation, and desire there is in the
Saints that walk according to the spirit, to see Jesus Christ come, and to
enjoy that glory that is to be revealed.

There are many more expressions there, that are the fruits of it, as the
spirit of supplication, Verse. 26. And there is also a triumphing over all our
spiritual enemies. Verse. 31. What shall we say then if God be for us, who can
be against us? etc. And then, there is an absolute dependence upon God for all
things. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him give us all things. And then there is also a patient
suffering of all afflictions. Says the Apostle Verse. 18. I neckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed. And then there is lastly, an absolute, eternal union
with Christ Jesus, in respect of his love. I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor any thing shall ever be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our lord: these are
the expressions of the fruits of the spirit of God in the soul; when men walk
according to the spirit, when they walk according to grace. Take a man that
walks according to the flesh, or according to the law, you shall find none of
these kind of things in his soul. So much concerning that Use.

In the next place, as this Doctrine is a Touchstone, Use 3. Trial of our
actions.
whereby you may try, and judge of men's persons: so hereby also you may try
your services and actions. I say this is a rule whereby you may come to know
what your services are, what worth is in them. For as they only are Saints, who
walk according to the spirit (let the World judge how they will) and those that
walk carnally, according to the flesh, according to the law, are not Saints: so
I say those actions or services of ours, that proceed from the spirit of God,
they are only pleasing to God, and those that proceed from the flesh, from Old
Adam, those are not pleasing to him. Now I say, by this we may try our
services, and actions, as well as our persons; for there is the same reason for
both, in all my actions, all that I expect from them, is that they be pleasing
to God: that is the end of all that we do; for they cannot justify us, that
is done already, or if it be not they cannot do it; but all is to be pleasing
to God. Now then the maine rule by which I am to judge of my actions, it is
this, not to judge of them according as they are plausible to men, or according
as they have affection, or enlargment in them (as we call it) but we are to
judge of our actions chiefly (if not principally) by the principle that they
flow from, if it be the weakest, and meanest action, if it be the least sigh,
or prayer, if it proceed from the new Adam, the Lord Jesus, it is sweet, and
pleasing to God, it is an acceptable Sacrifice. But if it be the most glorious
thing in the World, if it proceed from old Adam, not only from sinful Adam,
but from natural Adam, as he is called the natural man, 1. Cor. 15. I say
that that rises from natural wisdom, and invention, and understanding, and
memory, etc. it is but flesh, and Whatsoever is borne of flesh is flesh, and as
we say, Pepper is Pepper, that is, it is dear; so flesh is flesh, that is, it
is a filthy abominable thing to God. As it is in this Chapter, they that walk
according to the flesh cannot please God. So that that is borne of the flesh,
that service that arises from the flesh, that is done from the flesh cannot
please God.

But you will say, cannot the actions that proceed principles of natural Adam
be pleasing to God? -- Every man knows, that of corrupt Adam cannot; but
cannot that of natural Adam? as a man may pray merely by a natural wit, and
bravely to please man, and to please himself, and he may preach by a natural
wit, and do other Excercises, and do them finely, cannot they be pleasing to
God?

No, this is a certain rule, that there is nothing Nothing that comes from
natural Adam pleases God.
that comes from flesh, from a principle of old Adam whither it be naturally
good, or evil, there is nothing whether from pure Adam, or corrupt Adam, that
is pleasing to God.

The reason is this, because, as it is Genesis 3. 5. That when Adam sinned against
God, you know his punishment was, that he should die: he was not to eat, or
touch the forbidden fruit, least he should die. Now when Adam eat of that
fruit, you know the curse came upon him. And in reference to this you shall
find those phrases in this Epistle, whosoever walks according to the flesh
shall die, whosoever walks as old Adam, is in the State of the old curse, he
shall die, and O miserable man, who shall deliver me from this body of death.
He calls it a body of death, alluding to the maine curse of old Adam, which was
that he should die.

Now when the Lord said that Adam should Adam to dye as a public person.
die for sin, conceive not, that the meaning is only, that he should die
personally, that his person now should be subject to the wrath of God, to
damnation of soul, and body, for ever in Hell: that is not the only meaning of
it; it is true, he fell under that, but the meaning is this also, that whole
Adam, Adam as thou art a public person thou shall die, that whereas I made,
and appointed thee to be the spring, and Foundation, of all mankind, and every
man in the World is to have thy Image on him, and I have filled thee with
righteousness, and wisdom, and good things, that may tend much to thy
happiness, and thy posterity, that thou may derive a principle to them to
be like thee in good, and to be pleasing to me. But when Adam sinned, now says
God, thou shall die, I made thee a happy creature, and put abundance of
excellencies in thee for thy self, and thy posterity as a public person: but
now thou have sinned, and extinguished all that good. Now I will blast them
all, thy wisdom, and thy righteousness, thy soul, and thy body, thy very
being, Adam shall die. Thy person as thou art a private man, and as thou art a
public man, soul, and body, flesh, and bone, all that is in the, and all that
comes from thee, shall die: this is that great curse that God laid on him, a
curse of a great extent.

Therefore I say, whatsoever now arises from All that springs from old Adam
condemned.
the Sons of Adam, that springs from old Adam, be it good, or evil it is
condemned to die, it must die, it cannot please God. As Adam when he had eaten
the forbidden fruit, the Lord set an Angel with a Sword to keep the Garden,
that he should come in no more. Just so now since Adams fall the Lord has set
a Sword as it were to keep men from all the principles of Adam, that those
things shall never please God any more. Or I may say of it as Josuah speaks of
Jericho when he had pulled down and destroyed it; Cursed be the man that
builds this City any more. So when God pulled down Adam for sin, the Lord
laid that curse upon him, that he should never be a blessing that way any more,
God would never look on him, or any thing that should come from him any more:
God would bethink himself of another way, but that way he would not meddle
with. But now this is our fault, we are still going to build Jericho again.
We are every man more apt to righteousness then to sin, such a righteousness
as it is; we are apt to go, and build up the ruins of old Adam; when we go
about the service of God, and to do any thing for him: or as the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 1. God bids them arise, and go into Canaan, and then they would
not, but by and by they would go, and then God tells them they should never
go: So the time was that we might have gone the way of old Adam, when God made
him righteous; if we had continued so, it had been well, and the more we had
endeavored to be righteous that way, the more blessed we had been. But now we
are fallen, and God has cursed Adam to dye: now any one that goes that way is
cursed, that goes about to repair those old ruins; no, says God, do not now
anger me in seeking to be holy in that way as old Adam was: We must labor now
to go a new way and get the new Adam, Jesus Christ into our souls.

This is the reason why (as it is clear, in 1 Cor. Why godly men dye as well
as other.
15.) men must dye, why godly men must dye as well as the wicked, It is
appointed to all men to dye. Why so? The reason is this, because God in
Paradise condemned old Adam wholly to dye; therefore Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, no piece of old Adam: therefore he being a public
person, and we being in him, that curse must be fulfilled, and we must dye.
All that belongs to old Adam must dye one time or other, Nolens, volens.
Therefore as we bear the Image of old Adam, though we have some beginnings of
new Adam, yet because we have the disposition of old Adam (I speak not of sin,
but) of natural Adam, we are earthly as Adam was; therefore we must lay down
this flesh and body, because of that great curse in Paradise, that Adam should
dye, and all that are of him.

But you will say, why then does not corruption old Adam) dye in the wicked in
Hell? You say whole Adam, corrupt Adam, and natural Adam must dye: Now the
wicked in Hell, they have sin and corruption World without end: for Caine is a
murderer, and Judas is a Traitor to this time.

It is true, that corrupt Adam in the Saints must Sin remaining in the wicked
in Hell, it is a curse.
dye; but that comes not by the curse, but it is by Christ, and is a blessing,
and that corrupt Adam, sinful Adam, lives for ever in them in Hell, it is a
part of the curse; for to live in sin, is to dye properly. Now in that we
shall have this flesh and blood dissolved, and shall have natural wisdom and
the like all dashed out, therein we are common with them, that is of the
curse, though God after (by an after game as we may speak with reverence)
turned it to a blessing. But for the dying of corruption in us, that is the
blessing of Jesus Christ, and no curse. It is a curse to live in sin; therefore
though Adam be wholly to dye, yet the wicked continue in sin, World without
end, even in Hell. I mean there are the sins of the heart at the least. And in
those places of the New Testament I conceive the holy Ghost alludes to this, as
that in Romans 8. They that walk after the flesh shall dye: Why does he not say
the plague of God shall come on them, but they shall dye? It is as if he had
said, do you not remember that God threatened a curse in Paradise to flesh, and
he that walks after that shall dye; for God has said, Flesh, and Adam shall
dye. And so Romans 7. Who shall deliver me from this body of death? that is,
from this body that God has condemned to dye. Therefore I say whatsoever
springs in us, and comes from us, from old Adam, it is a dead thing, that God
cursed even in Paradise, and therefore cannot be acceptable to him.

Take the best piece of old Adam, and offer it to God, and it is as that
strange fire that Nadab and Abihu offered, it cannot please God. Let me give
you one chief instance that makes Divinity mistaken.
my heart bleed when I think of it. That thing that you call Divinity, or those
that you call Divines, they are good words of themselves; for John is called
the Divine: But that which you call Divinity, which is the great Idol of the
World, it is nothing but old Adam, a kind of godliness learned in a natural
way, a man learned after the old Adam as we learn Logic, or other things in
the Universities; and such a one comes and scatters this among people, and this
you call Divinity, and he is a Divine, and yet this is abominable to God. And
that is the reason why there are many Divines that Preach excellently, and yet
God curses it, Why? It is old Adams wisdom, and invention, and brave parts,
but God curses the soul; he curses that Fig tree that it shall bring forth
no more.

O Beloved that we would not suffer our selves as children (I had almost said
as fools) to be carried on wheeling in a profession of Religion, and to think
it enough to carry it plausibly in duties, in observing fast days, and days
of humiliation, etc. But that thou and I may be content to let all the
Professors in the Town to go before us that way, let them be more gallant
Professors in outward performances in all they do: let it be thy care and mine
to gleane the spirit of God after them; let people say there is such a man made
such a brave piece of work, and such a man prayed excellent well, and prayed
so long; let us pass by these things, and if I can do a little from the
spirit of Jesus Christ; and if God will frame my heart from the Lord Christ,
and his spirit, to speak a few words to my Father, this is all I care for. And
so for other things.

Therefore I beseech you, let this sinck into you. Why men are proud of their
duties.
That makes you proud; that you cannot rule your hearts, but you are lifted up
with pride, when you have done duties, it is because every fine thing you do
from old Adam makes you proud, you take all in the bulk, and consider not
whence you do things, you consider not how much of the old Adam, or of the new
there is in your Prayers, and Duties. Therefore, let this be an universal,
eternal rule, to know the worth of all your services and actions by,
whatsoever is of the flesh is flesh, and whatsoever of my Preaching, and of
your praying, and lending, and giving, and of your public actions, if it be
not from a spiritual principle, from Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel
planted in you, it is of old Adam, and it is condemned, labor to leave that.

I shall conclude with one Word more, and Use 4. To expect the fulfilling of
Prophesies and promises.
that is this, that this being so, that this is to walk according to the
spirit. Then we should long very much for the fulfilling of those Prophesies,
and Promises, that God has made unto us concerning the latter times. There is
no Saint almost now, that I know, but expects glorious times, only one Saint
thinks that the glory of the Saints shall be in this thing, and another in that
thing, but every Saint expects continually the fulfilling of those Prophesies,
and promises set down in the latter end of the Revelations, and they are
glorious ones, whatsoever the meaning of them is, and I think the chief thing
there promised which shall be the height of our happiness, that the new
Jerusalem shall come down from Heaven, mistake me not, though it be a
consequent, yet it is not chiefly, and properly such a way of government, this,
or that, or the other way, though it be true that Government will follow upon
it, yet if the meaning of it were only to reform our Churches (though that
were a blessing) or that Christ, should come, and reign here temporally, and
give us Inheritances, and riches, and the like, truly a Saint would not long
much for these things. But the New -- Jerusalem shall come down from Heaven,
and abundance of blessings that shall go along with it. What is that? The
meaning of New Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, what.
it is, we shall have the light of the Gospel clearly revealed unto us, and we
shall have Gospel principles fully put into our souls, which by Antichrist,
by Babylon we have been seduced of these thirteen or fourteen hundred years.
For that was the mischeife of Antichrist, he has kept us all his reign under
the old Testament with Altars, and Sacrifices, and Priests, and I know not
what: every thing just as they used under Moses, and we are not wholly gone out
of Antichrist yet. But the Lord will send a light into our hearts, to know the
truth, in the power, and spirit, and to square our hearts to it. For that is
new Jerusalem, if you compare it with Heb. 12. where the holy Jerusalem, the
heavenly Jerusalem is clearly opposite to Mount Sinai: So compare it with Gal.
4. he tells us that Jerusalem which is above us is Mother of us all; that is,
the Covenant of grace, and the principles thereof in the souls of men.
Therefore I wish that the Lord would set your hearts and mine a longing after
that, that we may have more of the spirit of the Gospel, and of the Principles
of the New Testament in us; and then for matter of Government of Churches,
those things would follow. For to set up Government and Discipline before this
comes into the soul, truly it is to build Castles in the air; for let a man
take us, and frame us in the Independent, or Presbyterian way, in what way he
will, unless the Principles of Jesus Christ in the Gospel be spiritually
planted, it will be a fleshly Independent, and a fleshly Presbyterian service.
Therefore labor chiefly for that, and pray the Lord to fulfill that, and then
your Government whatsoever it shall be God will reveal it more fully. People
are now generally going to build and order Churches, and I know not what,
unless the spirit (of the New Testament) govern in the New Testament, it is a
vain thing thing; for if we have our former fleshly hearts, that walk
according to the Law, and according to the flesh, all the Government in the
World will never do us good, because God has cursed Flesh, and it will never
be regulated, and brought to good.

And this also should move us exceedingly to Upon what ground to long for the
coming of Christ.
long for the coming of Jesus Christ to glory, for his coming to us, or our
coming to him, and the reason of that you shall have in 1 Cor. 15. 49. a
glorious word that has dwelt much in my thoughts. I told you the reason why
every man must dye a natural death, because of that absolute grand curse that
Adam did fall in as a public person, and we being from him we must dye. Now
here is the comfort of it; a blessed word it is, As we have borne the Image of
the earthly, so we shall bear also the Image of the heavenly; that is, when
the redemption of our bodies comes, at the day of Christ, then as we have borne
the Image of the earthly, so we shall bear the Image of the heavenly. We have
borne hitherto, and do bear the Image of natural Adam, we are all his Sons
and Daughters, just like him in our wisdom and understandings, and bodies,
and souls, poor earthly creatures, natural, frail creatures we are, and by
that curse that was laid upon him we must all dye, and lay down these earthly
Tabernacles, these earthly creatures must be dissolved: As we have borne the
Image of the earthly, not only as we have borne the Image of old Adam, sin,
and wickedness, and pride, and frowardness; so now we shall bear the Image
of the new, not only in respect of grace, and holiness, and righteousness,
that if I be in him all those corruptions of nature shall out, and I shall have
a new nature. That is true, but that is not all; but as I wholly bear the
Image and shape of old Adam, his body, and soul, and senses, and all those
must dye; so when these bodies shall be raised, we shall as absolutely, and
largely bear the Image of the new Adam the Lord Jesus in our body and senses,
and all our whole man, soul and body, in respect of substance as well as
quality; we shall bear the Image of the second dam as lively and in as large
an extent as ever we bore the Image of the earthly Adam. Therefore that is a
Not only sinfulness but earthynesse troubles a Christian.
great comfort; I will tell you why, because it is not only the sinfulness of
a Christian that troubles him, but his earthinesse, so many distempers, and
troubles, that it is a misery, the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak;
there is so much weakness, and earthinesse, and frailty, sometimes a man's
heart is right for God, yet his head aches, or his stomach is full of wind, or
he is weary, and wants sleep, there is some frailty or other. This is all
earthly Adam; all this shall be gone, and this kind of body and soul shall be
altered and changed to the Image of the blessed second Adam, we shall put off
our earthynesse as well as our sinfulness, and have his blessed complete Image.

Now how glorious that shall be, as you never The glory of Saints in Heaven
unspeakable.
saw the first Adam, but only by hearsay, and by reading of the Word of God,
so you have not seen the second Adam, but you may partly know by the
manifestation of his glory on earth, you have heard much of his glory, We saw
his glory, as of the only begotten Son of God; we shall then see him, Phil. 3.
19. Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies: He means vile, not only
in respect of sinfulness, but of dustinesse, of earthynesse, and weakness;
that they may be like his glorious body, according to his mighty working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself; that is, according to his
usual manner of working he can do what he will in Heaven and Earth. We cannot
conceive what an Imnge we shall have upon our bodies and souls, but according
to his wisdom and mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all things, he
will do it.

Therefore let me tell you this, I find few, or Saints formerly had more
lively expectations of glory by Christ.
none that have those live by expectations in these times of that glory that is
to be revealed, that the Saints of old had; See how they speak of it, What
manner of love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God? But yet it
does not appear what we shall be; for we shall be like him. And gird up the
loins of your minds, be sober and watch for the glory that shall be revealed.
The Saints heretofore, more then half their hearts were in Heaven before hand.
That is the meaning of that, Our conversation is in Heaven. Just as you see men
that go a long journey, or as you see people that have been plundered, that
are returning to their own homes, their conversation is there half a year
before; their hearts and their thoughts are there, and they wish they were
there, and think the time long, and are thinking what they will do, and what
they will be, when they come there.

So, our conversation is in Heaven, the Saints do so long after the glory that
is to be revealed in the day of adoption and redemption of our bodies, that the
most part of them is there already.

Now we do not consider of this, because the new Jerusalem is not yet come
into our hearts. We have not that Gospel-temper, and frame of spirit that the
Saints had before.

That which remains, is a little to show you what your duty is that the Lord
has brought up to walk according to the spirit.

And two or three words I have to show you how you should every one endeavor
to attain to it, or to attain it more and more. But I shall leave that till
the afternoon.

SERMON V.
Romans 8. 4. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
IT is the Foundation of all our happiness, to have the righteousness The
foundation of a Christians happiness.
of the law fulfilled in us; for thereby we are exempted from all misery, freed
from all our enemies; and thereby we are made capable to enjoy all happiness,
and blessedness. For all the misery that man suffers here, and hereafter, is
because he has not a righteousness to fulfill the law. And therefore
whatsoever man, or woman it is, that the Lord has bestowed this great
privilege upon, they must needs be in a blessed condition.

Now that we may know whether we are of that number, the Apostle tells us that
they that have this privilege, they walk not according to the Flesh, but
according to the spirit; which was the last thing I was upon. I told you what
was meant by walking after the flesh, and what by walking after the spirit, I
gave the Reasons of it, and made two or three Uses.

There are two things remain, which I shall endeavor to speak of at this
time.

First, you that have received the spirit of God, Use 4. Exhortation to those
that have the spirit, how to walk.
and in some measure do walk according to the spirit, and not according to the
flesh, that the new-Jerusalem from Heaven is in some measure come into your
hearts, I will give you a few Exhortations from the Lord, how you should carry
your selves. That is the first thing I shall do, and that shall be in four or
five short words.

The first is this, that the Lord having called 1. Not to abuse this liberty.
you to this glorious, free estate, to this free condition; that you would take
heed of abusing your liberty, that you would take heed of turning the grace of
God into wantonness, as many do. And by that I mean but two things.

That you would take heed of using your liberty as an occasion for the flesh.

And Secondly, of using your liberty so, as to give offense to your Brethren,
or indeed to any.

I say first, beware of using your liberty for an occasion 1. Not to use it as
an occasion to the flesh.
to the flesh. That you shall have Gall. 5. 13. For Brethren (says the
Apostle) you have been called to liberty, only use not your liberty for an
occasion to the flesh; but by love serve one another. The Apostle shows them
in that Epistle the glorious condition, and estate, that they were in through
grace. And here in this Verse there are two things that he tells them, the one
is implied (it is worth observing) ye are called to liberty. That The Gospel
brings liberty
is, there is a freedom, there is a liberty in the Gospel in diverse things
that did seem to be sinful when ye were under the law, for else what sense
can you make of this, ye are called to liberty, only use not your liberty for
an occasion to the flesh. For we find that the people under the law, either
they made the law stricter, or looser then it was. And there is no man in the
World that walks according to the law, but he makes many laws to himself,
that Christ has not made. Now when the Gospel coms in clearly, all those
laws that you made of your own head, vanish. Ye are called to liberty: that
is, you see more freedom, you are not bound to every thing that before you
were. Before you must not smile, it was a sin if you seemed to laugh, or smile,
and a hundred such things. Now you are called to Liberty, but use it not as an
occasion for the flesh: That is, take not occasion from your liberty, to live
more sinfully; to say you are made free, and others are tied by the Law, and
therefore you will live more carelessly, and loosely, and sinfully,; take heed,
and beware of that. There were some it seems: I am sure there are some now,
that all the liberty and freedom they hear off from the Gospel, or by getting
off from the Law, it is nothing in the World but that they may go on more in
sin, and enjoy their lusts more freely; this is to pervert the Gospel.

And what the end of these people shall be, you The danger of abusing
gospel-liberty.
may see in 2 Pet. 1. and in the Epistle of Jude. They are appointed to
damnation. And their damnation slumbereth and sleeps not. That is, they are
going on amain, they are going faster toward Hell then any Drunkard or
Whormonger. A Malefactor never goes so fast to death, as these do to
destruction; when all the knowledge of liberty that they have is only to give
occasion to provide more for their lusts then before: Let us consider and take
heed of that.

Another thing is, seeing you have liberty by 2. Not to use liberty for the
offense of our Brethren.
walking according to the spirit (for where the spirit is there is freedom,
that is certain) use it not for the offense of your Brethren. As some there
are that when they hear they are free, are ready to say, I care not what all
the World say, I know this is not a sin, and therefore I will do it. Beloved
that is far from walking worthy according to the Gospel; I became all things
(says Paul) to all men, that I might win some: I am under the Law to them that
are under the Law, and without Law to them that are without Law. I became all
things to all men that I might gain some: So we must not please our selves,
but one another for edification, Romans 15. and condescend to them of low sort,
Romans 12. Who is weak (says the Apostle) and I am not weak? If thou see a man
under the Law, fumbling and wallowing upon Mount Sinai, without the knowledge
of the Gospel, despise him not, and say, he is a Legallist, and what have we to
do with him? but endeavor to frame thy heart, and thy language, and carriage
so suitable to him, that thou may win upon him, and so with others. This is
the language of the Gospel, and the true way of the spirit of God; when a man
knows his freedom, and yet he becomes all things to all men, that he may do
them good. There is one word, that I think is the word and will of God, and I
desire that thou may take it so, and carry it with thee.

A second thing that I advise you to that are 2. To walk humbly.
spiritual, that the Lord has revealed a little of the Gospel to it, is this,
that you would endeavor to walk humbly. O, walk humbly. Why so? I will tell
you why, because a man when he is under Because of the abundance of revelations
in the Gospel.
the law, he shall be twenty years striving for a little knowledge, or grace,
and shall hardly get them: but as soon as ever a man comes rightly to Christ,
and to know him, then there is such a flood of grace, and such abundance of
Revelations, (it is the Scriptures word) there is such abundance of
manifestations of GOD, and of the Image of GOD, when they begin to come in,
that it is a hard thing then to keep the soul down, for spiritual things
when they come in rightly, when the Floud-gates are open, they come in as
Waves, one upon the back of another. For spiritull Gospel truths, multiply in
the soul a thousand fold, one lesson from another, and one Scripture opens
another, and then there is no end, and then it is hard to keep the soul
humble. Therefore in 2 Cor. 12. When Paul was wrapped into the third Heavens,
because of the abundance of Revelations that he had seen (for he had seen and
heard things that he could not utter, and speak to others) he was ready to be
proud, to be lifted up, and least he should be so, God sent a Messenger of
Satan to buffet him. It implies, it was a hard thing for Paul the Apostle when
abundance of Revelations, came into his soul, not to be lifted up. And this
spoils some honest hearts. I hope they are so, and that God will bring them
home, that having been kept bare of food, as some Soldiers, that went to
relieve Gloucester, when they came home to the City, they killed themselves
with eating full, and good food: So when poor souls have gone upon the bare
Mountains of Sinai, and then have come to the Pastures of righteousness, they
go so greedily, and are so taken, that if God be not wonderful merciful,
they will be undone by being lifted up. Therefore beware of this, learn from
Paul's example to seek to the Lord to keep your hearts humble.

A third thing is this, endeavor to walk simply 3. To walk simply.
I mean to keep to the simplicity of the Gospel. The Gospel, though there
be glorious mysteries in it to feed the soul, yet notwithstanding it is a
plain, simple thing. Now here the Devil endeavors to undo souls, as it is
ordinary in this City, when men come once to understand a little of the
Gospel, and to taste the sweetness of it, The Devil makes men sublimate
Religion into notions.
the Devil screws them up to sublimate all Religion into notions, to cleave a
hair, and Religion will be all in Ideas and conceits of the nature of God, and
of the creature. Whereas the Gospel is a plain thing. Paul desired to know
the death of Christ, and the power of his Resurrection. And Paul teaches
Servants how to obey their Masters, and Masters how to carry themselves to
their Servants, and Wives to their Husbands, and such simple plain things.
Now these things are accounted nothing: that is the Reason that many among us,
they do more and more loose the Word of God unless it be about some sublime
notions. If a Minister be upon such points, some high Ideas (for they feed upon
such) that is worth the while; but if a Minister speak of things that concern
their calling, or their sex, and condition; that is plain, it has no taste in
it, no more then the white of an Egg. It is a hard thing to keep to the
simplicity of the Gsopell As the Devil tempted our first Parents, God gave
Adam and Eve sufficient knowledge to do his How the Devil tempted Eve.
will: and they had sufficient natural knowledge, for they Named all the
Creatures, yet notwithstanding she musts neds go from the simplicity of Gods
will, and be curious, and she must know good, and evil, there was the
distinction, good, and evil, thought she what kind of good, and evil, she
goes to this sublime conceit, and so was lost.

Now says Paul I am afraid of you least the Devil should beguile you so

I am loath to offend you: for I had rather win 4. To het the comfort of our
privileges.
you, or else I could instance in twenty or forty conceits and distinctions, of
things, Ideas, that are above the simplicity of the Gospel, and that is enough
to make us leave them, because they are above the simplicity of the Gospel,
and the excellency of the Gospel is not in those Ideas, but in knowing the
power of plain things, as the death of Jesus Christ. Every man in Jerusalem
knew the death of Christ: but to know the power of that death; keep close to
the simplicity of the Gospel.

Another thing is this, you that have known a little of the spirit of God, and
have enlarged hearts, and enlightened eyes. Let not God rest till thou find the
comfort, and power of what thou know. O, we know that the righteousness of
the law by Christ is fulfilled in us, and the like: but we have not the full
comfort of such a truth, and many others. We know Christ has paid our debt,
and that we are one with him, as he is one with the Father; but we have not the
power, and the comfort of these things.

Beloved, for thy comfort, know that Paul in a Paul's condition.
sort was in thy condition. Phil. 3. Not as though I had attained or
apprehended, but I would apprehend him of whom I am apprehended, and I would
know the virtue of his death, and the power of his Resurrection. Paul saw
something that he did not fully apprehend, but he would feel more of the power
of Gospel, spiritual truths, and if he saw that he wanted it, much more we.

O, do not content your selves to have an old, frozen knowledge of Gospel
truths, whereby you are able to prove that men are legallists, and that men
are under Mount Sinai, and yet have cold, and frozen hearts, cold truths
without life: therefore think of minding God of this.

Then lastly, labor to take heed that you be 5. Not to fall back from the
light of the Gospel.
not by any means bewitched so as to fall back from that little light in the
Gospel that you have received, it is an easy thing so to do. I do believe,
(and it is my comfort, and will be when I am far from this place) that the
Lord has enlightened diverse of you to know the Gospel, to know Jesus Christ
a little clearer. Now I know not wha^ the Lord may do for you: but I say it is
wondrous easy, you may under one quarter of a years fleshly Preaching, lose
that that you have been under two or three years Preaching a getting. I have
known, after a quarter of a years buylding up of my soul in the knowledge of
Christ, and the settling of my faith, and assurance, I have heard one Sermon
that has routed and dashed all that work in my soul.

Therefore I beseech you beware, faith is a tender thing; especially the light
we have, that is but very weak, and very tender, therefore says Paul, Who
has bewitched you, you foolish Gallatians, before whom Jesus Christ has been
lively painted? As the word signifies, Christ was drawn lively before the
Gallatians and yet they did fall. If Paul that was an Apostle, and had the
spirit of God in such a measure, laying open the spirit of Christ, and yet his
people did go back to Moses, and to Sinai, the Lord help, and uphold us.
Therefore stand fast in your liberty in Jesus Christ. This is all in short I
have to say to you for that. I hope you will lay up these words.

Now I have a few words of advice, and counsel Use 5. How those that walk
after the flesh, may come to walk spiritually.
to those poor souls that do yet in a great measure walk according to the
flesh, in one fashion or other. Their religion is a fleshly Religion, from old
Adam, and according to the law, in a great measure. Now the Question is what
shall they do that they may be spiritual Christians, that they may walk
according to the spirit?

I will only name a few things. 1. Study the difference between the two
Testaments.


The first is this, I would desire you to endeavor to study much the
difference between the two Testaments, the new and the old. I mean not the two
Books, but the two Testaments, that we read of in Heb. 8. and Heb. 9. Whereof
the one is faulty, and the other is excellent, the one is done away the other
remains. Study the difference between them: for thereby you lay the
foundation of your Gospel- happiness: for there is the misery of many
Professors, and will be their misery if they should live a thousand years,
they jumble both Testaments, without knowledge, and distinction, and so they
will never be better.

Another thing that I would exhort you to, is 2. To prize the spirit.
this, to prize the spirit of Christ more then you do. There is nothing in the
Gospel but it is a Mystery, you cannot know it but by the spirit: and there is
no duty in the Gospel to be done that can be done but by the power of the
spirit. We may do many things in the law by the strength of old Adam: in the
Gospel we can do nothing, but the spirit is all.

And that is the reason I think (for I speak according to the grace given me)
why people now are left so bare, and poor, and confused, and know not which
way to go, or what to do, they do not prize the spirit of God.

Many men extol Learning mightily, and it is Learning extolled to the
disparagement of the spirit.
accounted almost Heresy to commend the spirit of God. There are many men, I,
and many Professors, that do not love to hear a man in a few modest words to
commend the spirit of God: but all must be by study, and reading, and
learning, and for the spirit of God it is a plain mere Cipher, and there is
an end. But my life on it (if I had a hundred I would say so) they shall be
beholding to the spirit of God, and extol him before they be taught
spiritually; they shall be willing to lay down all their learning (as I have
seen a learned godly man of late) even with the Plow-boy.

I do not say, but that learning is good for some Learning of what use it is.
uses, and God may bless it to help a man to express what he knows, the
better: but as I told you, Adam must die, he cannot by it come to know one jot,
of the spiritual meaning of God in the Gospel, or one jot of power or
assurance, to be happy, or to do any thing for God: toward this, all
learning is not worth a straw: therefore labor to extol the spirit. And if
any of you have a mind to learning, go on, I discourage you not from it;
learning is a thing in another Element; take pains and diligence to be
learned; it is good to do so. But if thou will be a Gospel Christian, thou
must thank the spirit of God for all. Says Paul for all his learning, I am not
sufficient to speak a good word, and he was a learned man, that Festus said,
Much learning had made him mad. Beza in his Comment upon 2 Cor. 11. Where the
Apostle says, Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Jews? so am I. Says he, I
never read in any Latin, or Greek Author, so much eloquence, and elegancie of
speech, as Paul has there: and yet he Professes, he could not think a good
thought (for all he was learned so much) much less do a good work. The will
of God not known till we extol the spirit.


As long as thou keep the spirit an underling; as a Cipher, as many of the
clergy, and learned men, they extol learning to the Heavens, and many of them
upon purpose to despite the spirit of God; as long as they do so, they shall
never know the will of God, We are not debtors to the flesh, but we must be
debtors to the spirit, if we will have one true thought of Jesus Christ. O
praise the spirit, and prize the spirit. If you have any thought of Christ,
thank the spirit; if you have any glimps of him in your souls worth any thing,
praise the Spirit.

That is the reason that the Saints in the Book How Saints of Old spoke of the
spirit.
of God, speak not of the spirit of God, without some special epithet of
commendation. Guide me by thy HOLY spirit, and says another, thy BLESSED
spirit, and thy GRACIOUS spirit, and the spirit of GRACE says another. They
never speak of it without some word that showed their love to it, and their
high esteem of it. When the Lord shall come, and his spirit shall be advanced
in the hearts of men, we shall have glorious times, and never before that, and
those times will come. I remember Calvin on those Prophesies in I say, and
Joell. The SUN shall be darkened, and the MOON shall be turned into blood in
that day; Says he, the meaning is, all the excellency that a man naturally
has, his learning, and endowments; in the days of the Gospel, when the
spirit shall come with his light; when God shall exalt the spirit, The Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood: Men shall not so much
esteem learning from Books, but learned, and great men, and Scholars shall
come to one classis, and one rank, and form with simple people, all waiting on
God by his Word through the spirit. A man can take his Boy from School that
has his Lattine and Greek, and send him to the Universitie, and he assures
himself that he shall be as good a Minister as his other Son, that, it may
be, has served the spirit seven years, this is our way, and a hundred more,
whereby we basely slight and disdain the spirit of God, and do not honor
him, and therefore he will not honor us.

Thirdly, if ever you will be true Gospel Saints, 3. To be led by the spirit.
you must suffer your selves to be lead by the spirit of God. That phrase you
find often in, Romans 8. Gal. 5. If you live in the spirit, walk in the spirit, be
lead by the spirit. We are not complementary to commend the spirit of God, etc.
But give it scope to lead us. You must heed more what the spirit of God says
unto you, and what he works on you. If there come a place of Scripture in your
mind, hear, and consider, whether the spirit of God has not put it in thy
mind, and would have thee study it, and would have thee compare Scriptures.
And when thou come to do any action whatsoever, not so much to advice, with
this man, or that man, but what says the spirit (I mean according to the
light of the Scripturs) harken to that more then what all the World faith.
Therefore I have known some men that in their whole lives have often mist the
will of God, in circumstantiall things usually, it may be for a year or two,
or three and they have mist it again in another thing, and in another thing.
And when they have examined how this comes about, they can say if they had
hearkened to the spirit of God, they had not done so, but they hearkened to men,
and so went against the dictates of the spirit, in their conscience, they would
hear what this man said, and what the other man did. But now the spirit will
say to them, you see I would have showed you the right way, but you would not
give me scope, but made a Cipher of me. And for my one particular I do not yet
see how I should ever have mist the will of God since I knew him if I had
hearkened to the spirit of God, if I had but observed so much light as the
spirit had put into my heart. Now we Balance the spirit with this man's
example, and with the other man's opinion, and so, come home by Weeping Cross.
Therefore give scope to the spirit, I mean not against the word, or above the
word, but still I mean the spirit of God working according to the Scriptures,
and no otherwise.

Another thing, and a special one is, I wish you for the mysteries of the
Gospel to study the 4. To study Scriptures without men's glosses.
Scriptures in the simplicity of them without the glosses of Men: For a man in
extremity must do that that a man that is not in extremity would not do. We
have brought our selves in such slavery to Men, that we must take that course
that another sober man should not. I mean thus, when ever we go to look for
any truth of God, for the will of God, we have notions in our minds before
hand, according to the times and places we live in. As concerning Baptism,
what need I go to the Scriptures says one, we have it in such, and such Men's
Writings? And so we forestall the will of God, that we are blinded, and cannot
see it.

Therefore if you will see the will of God, I wish you (for a while at least) to
look on the naked Three uses of other Books besides the Scriptures.
Scriptures. And for my part I know but three uses to be made of other Books.

As first there is this use of Books, you have 1. To set forth Scripture in
diverse languages.
Books that will read the Scriptures in diverse languages, and show the
Original, and open the tongues; now when I see a word in English, and doubt of
the meaning of it: then I will go to the Greek or Hebrew, as God has endowed
me with knowledge.

Then there is another use of Books, when I 2. To open one Scripture by another.
read one single Scripture, it may be I have a book that will point out half a
dozen Scriptures, to open one Scripture by.

And it may be I have some books that take 3. To press Scriptures on the soul.
some Scripture, and press it upon my soul, as Doctor Prestons, and other
godly books. But to take books, and say, Jerome thinks this, and Austin that,
and fill our heads with notions, they blind us that we cannot see the will of
God.

Therefore in reading of Scriptures there should Difference in the learning of
Christians, and others.
be this difference, from our reading of other Books, I mean in respect of
age. When we are Children, and young, we use not Spectacles; it may be at
twenty, or thirty, or forty years old, we can read without Spectacles; but
when we come to fifty, or sixty, then we can see nothing but through
Spectacles. It should be just contrary with us, when we are Christians. When we
are young we usually never read the Word of God but through the Spectacles of
men's glosses; but when we are older Christians and stronger Saints, we should
learn to read better without Spectacles; we should daily make less use of
Men's Books, and more of Gods Book. That whereas before a man turned over twenty
Authors upon a point: Now he can go humbly to God with his Bible, and without
Spectacles he can see what the will of God is. Therefore lay aside Spectacles
sometimes, and only take the spirit of God, and compare Scipture with
Scripture, that you may come to know the mind of Christ.

Shall I name one thing more? If you would 5. To be borne again.
come to be spiritual, Gospel-Saints, you must be borne again; you must be
borne from above. A Gospell-profession is Jerusalem from above, and there are
none that can come into Jerusalem that is from above, but those that are borne
from above. Therefore mark our Saviors reasoning, John 3. Nicodemus asks
Christ which was the way to Heaven? And he tells him, Verily thou must be borne
again, or thou must be borne from above, or else thou can not see it;
Nichodemus wonders why he must be borne from above, says he, Shall I go into
my Mothers belly, etc. Says Christ, marvel not, wonder not; why should he not
wonder at such a strange speech? Here is the reason, That which is borne of
flesh is flesh: therefore think it not strange that I say thou must be borne
again. So I say, whatsoever you do by the power of nature, by your own
wisdom; by your own righteousness, or your own strength, all comes but to
this, but to flesh, and whatsoever comes of flesh is flesh; Flesh cannot bring
out the spirit no more then a thorn can bring out Grapes, as Christ speak.
Therefore wonder not, that thou must be borne from above, that is, thou must
have the Lord from above, to beget thee again. You have every one, been borne
once, you must be borne once more, you must have a new creation in you: the
Lord must create new, strange properties, and dispositions, that no flesh, and
blood is able to comprehend.

Lastly, take the council of the Holy Ghost, 6. To pray for the spirit of
wisdom, and revelation.
and that is in Ephesians. 1. 16, As Paul prayed for them, so do thou pray for thy
self, and there is all the reason in the World that thou should. I cease
not (says he) to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers,
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory would give to you
the spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him. Pray for the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ. Slight not these
words, because some wicked men abuse them, and others reproach them; but
because Paul says so, pray that the Lord would give thee the spirit of
wisdom and revelation. So much concerning the directions I had to give you.

There is one word of Information, and with Use. 6. The true ground of
persecutions and divisions.
that I will conclude: From what I have said before concerning the flesh, and
the spirit, learn this instruction more, hence to see what is the true ground
of all persecution, nay even of all the divisions that are among us; Men may
pretend what they will, and deceive themselves, but all the strife and
persecution in the World is merely between the flesh and the spirit, between
the old, and the new Adam. There are two Princes in this World, and these are
contrary the one to the other: The flesh lusts against the spirit. Old Adam
seeks to get up, and the new Adam will have him down. Therefore you shall have
these two in every Town, in one Church, in one Family, in one soul, and
wheresoever they are, the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, and these two are contrary. Are contrary, what is that? That
is, there is no true contrariety between any things in the World, but between
the old Adam and the new; between the flesh and the spirit. Now by Flesh I
mean not only corruption, but whole flesh, fleshly wisdom: The wisdom of
old Adam is enmity against the wisdom of the new; the righteousness of old
Adam is quite contrary to the righteousness of the new; this is the cause of
persecution.

Let people pretend what they will, you shall see godly men persecuted, you may
see Christ in their souls as clearly as the Sun, and people keep a coile about
Independency and Presbytery, but the truth is, it is old Adam in those that
persecute, and the new Adam in the other, a man with one eye may see it. There
are many pretenses, but all the strife is between the old Adam and the new. For
(to give a little illustration) take Gospel godly Saints that have the spirit
of God in them, they agree well enough, they will not strive, sometimes they
may differ a little, but for the generality, they live well enough together;
nay, take some Gospel Saints that are filled with the spirit of God, and the
knowledge of Jesus Christ (in these times, and in this City which is the center
of all division) and they cannot attest divisions they cannot make a party,
and give railing, for railing, and strife, for strife; they cannot but love
their enemies, and bless them that blaspheme them As James says, Whence come
all wars? You think they come from your zeal for your way, and yours for your
way, but it is from your lusts. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh. It is from old Adam.

And I was going to say, but I will but name it. Cause of Saints weakness.
This is the cause also of the weakness generally that is among you. It is not
wickedness that troubles a Saint, but weakness: it is not positive ills, but
weakness. And whence is this weakness? Because he walks after the flesh. The
spirit is powerful, but the flesh is weak. As the Scripture says, Their
horses are flesh and not spirit: so I may say, your Prayers are flesh, and not
spirit, and it may be my Preaching, and it may be our endeavors to resist sin.
But as far as they are flesh they are weak enough. But where the spirit is,
there is power: I can do all things, says Paul. I can preach the Gospel from
Jerusalem to Illyricum: and I shall come to you in the fullness of Christ. A
man would think he had been mad; but it was the strength of his spirit. A poor
weak Christian he does nothing but wish, and would, and confesses his sins to
day, and falls into it again to morrow, and then confesses again: and when
will it once be, O Jerusalem? But the Gospel is the power of God to Salvation:
and all the principles of it, are powerful, and all the precepts of it have a
power through the Knowledge of Christ no ground of licentiousnes.
spirit for a man to keep, and observe them.

Men talk that the learning of Christ, and the knowledge of the Gospel is to
make men loose, and lycencious. It is true, carnal, vain hearts, the better
any thing is, the worse they be: but assure your selves, concerning true Saints
it is false: for the only way to be lively, and lusty, and fruitful in good,
is to know Christ more according to the Gospel. Let men please themselves, and
say so as long as they will, they shall be but poor old barren creatures. You
will be wishing, but you shall never overcome your sins. I have known some
Saints, that by the knowledge of Jesus Christ have had power to subdue those
sins, and to bring them under, that before they never so much as hoped to bring
under in this World: yet the power of Christ has brought them under, when all
their fastings, and humiliations would never do it, when they were in that
way, without the clear knowledge of Christ: but when they have come to Christ
they have found it done. In 2 Pet. 3. You shall find there, men that were
carnal men, that were as Dogs that returned to their Vomit, yet the common
knowledge of Jesus Christ did make them clean from the pollutions of the World,
and did give them power against their sins, what then will the spiritual,
effectual, knowledge of Christ do? Therefore never entertain any prejudice
against Christ, or against his Gospel, or against his spirit, and his ways:
for if there be any power in this World, it is there. All the rest is but a
flourish, but a show of mortification, when the heart is as full of lusts, as a
Toad is of Poison. There is no true mortification or holiness but what comes
from Christ, and his holy spirit.

SERMON VI.
Romans 8. 5. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.
IN the former Verse you remember how I showed you that there was a great
privilege to Scope of the words.
all true Believers, which indeed is the chief of all Privilege, for it is
the inlet of all mercies, and the principal deliverance from all evils. It is
contained in the beginning of Verse. 4. That the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us. In the latter end of the Verse I showed the persons
more largely described, to whom this privilege does belong; that is, Not those
that walk after the flesh, but those that walk after the spirit. And I have
as God enabled me, opened the meaning of that to you, what it was to walk after
the Flesh, and what to walk after the spirit.

Now the Apostle in this fifth Verse goes forward a little more particularly to
discover those that have a right to this privilege, by drawing one thing from
another. The maine was, They walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
I, but that is a general word, and how shall we know that? Says he, you shall
know that also by this, They that are after the flesh do mind fleshly things,
and they that are after the spirit do mind spiritual things: You shall know
whether you have the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in you, if you walk
not after the flesh but after the spirit. And you shall know that also by your
minding, by the frame of your minds; if you walk after the flesh you will
mind fleshly things, if you walk after the spirit you will mind spiritual
things. And then he goes on to prove that also; as we see often in Scripture, as
in 1 John 5. where one thing is made the mark of another by a gradation; there
are five or six things, and one thing proves another, We know that we are the
children of God if we keep his Commandments; and we know we keep his
Commandments by another thing, and we know that by another thing. So that I
say the scope of the Apostle is to clear unto the Saints their right and title
to this great privilege; and also withal, to convince those that are carnal,
that they are without it, and to show them their great misery in being so; for
you shall see after, how, as he discovers them, so also he shows their misery,
he says they are enmity to God, and they that walk after the flesh must dye,
etc. Now that we may go on briefly to handle this a little to you; you may
take the Doctrine as it lies here in the words: (for I will not, nor need not
frame it otherwise) That, Those that are after the flesh do mind the Doct.
They that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh.
things of the flesh.



Only remember what I said before, for it is of great concernment; for that
great privilege depends upon this: If you have the righteousness of the Law
fulfilled in you, you must be those that walk according to the spirit, and not
according to the flesh: And then would you know that? Says the Apostle, Those
that are after the Flesh do mind the things of the Flesh, and those that are
after the spirit, the things of the spirit; so let that be the Doctrine, or
Lesson.

I will give you but two short words to prove this to you; and then to open it
as God shall help us.

The first thing to prove it is this, that it must Reas. 1. Every thing works
according to its principle.
be so, because that every thing in the World, in all the creation of God does
act according to the nature of its principle from whence it flows. As Saint
James says, Jam. 3. 11, 12. Does a Fountain send forth from the same place,
sweet water and bitter? Can a Fig Tree (my Brethren) bear Oliveberries, or can
a Vine bear Figs? You know that a Fig Tree bears Figs, and a Vine-tree bears
Grapes, an Apple Tree bears Apples, and a Pearetree, Pears, and every Tree,
and every thing will work according to its principle. Make the tree good (says
Christ) and then the fruit will be good, such as the tree is, such will be the
fruit; such as the Fountain is, such will the stream be. And when a man's
principles, the frame of his heart is nothing but flesh, then of necessity his
actions must be fleshly, his affections must be fleshly. If he have a fleshly
mind, he must have a fleshly will, a fleshly love, fleshly hatred, a fleshly
life, fleshly prayers, fleshly Sacraments, fleshly every thing: for every thing
must be according to its principle. So, on the other side, where the principle
is spiritual there a man will mind spiritual things, he will love spiritual
things, he will do spiritual things, he will delight in spiritual things.
That is one reason of it,

And the second is this (for I will give you but Reas. 2. Carnal men know not
spiritual things.
these two, because the chief thing that I intend at this time is the opening
of it) fleshly, carnal men that are after the flesh, they must mind fleshly
things: because they know not spiritual things, they understand not spiritual
things. Or if you will, (and it may be that word has something more in it) 1
Cor. 2. They perceive not spiritual things, they do not ken and Perceive
them. Now you know that a man minds not (I mean look upon it as the acting of
the understanding) a man cannot mind, but what he knows: a man cannot think of
things he knows not. That is the reason to prove that poor ignorant people
speak an untruth, and deceive themselves, when they say, we remember God, we
mind God, wheresoever we are; and yet they know not God. For God is not minded,
but when he is known. As in that place of the Corinthians; A natural man
cannot perceive the things of the spirit; he does not know Jesus Christ,
therefore he cannot mind him; he does not Know the things of the spirit of God,
therefore he cannot set his heart upon them. Without Knowledge the mind cannot
be good. That is, till a man have a stock of knowledge of things, he can never
act his understanding and mind, about it. There are two short reasons why those
that are carnal, and fleshly, those that are after the flesh, they mind the
things of the flesh, and they mind nothing else, nor cannot; and those that are
after the spirit, mind the things of the spirit, because they know them, they
understand them, and understanding them, they cannot choose as David says,
Psalm. 1. But exercise themselves in them, day, and night. They exercise their
thoughts and affections, and all in them.

Now for the opening of it unto you, here are The Point opened by 3 questions.
three questions.

First, what is meant by being after the flesh.

And Secondly, what is meant by the things of 1. What meant by being after the
flesh.
the flesh, and the things of the spirit. I will put them both together. For
the one will open the other.

And what is meant by minding the things of the flesh, and by minding the
things of the spirit.

First, by be^ing after the flesh, it is in effect the same that I told you
before to walk as to the Flesh, therefore if you have not forgotten that you
will easily understand this. But yet to make it clearer, you must understand,
that a man is said to be after the flesh, or carnal, for so they read it in
Latin, Qui carnalis, etc. Men are said to be carnal, or after the flesh three
ways.

The first is when a man is a true Saint, but has 1. When a Saint has little
grace and much corruption.
but a little measure of grace, and has much corruption, much flesh. It
pleases the holy Ghost many times to denominate such a man by the greatest
part that is in him, which is flesh, and so to call him carnal. As in Romans 7.
Says Paul, speaking how spiritual the law is, but says he, I am carnal,
sold under sin: sold to sin. Not that there was no grace in Paul, but that
there was such abundance of corruption, at least, in his feeling. So in 1 Cor.
3. Are ye not carnal? (says Paul) have ye not need of milk? are ye no^
Babes? When I hear there are such divisions, that some are for Paul, and some
for Apollo, and some for Cephas. Are ye not carnal? are ye not after the
flesh? That is, is there not a World of corruption in you? does not corruption
rule, and bear sway, over that little grace that is in you? So in Gal. 6. 1.
If any man be overtaken with sin, ye that are spiritual restore such done.
That is, as if he had said, there are some carnal and they cannot keep
themselves from being overtaken freequently with sin, and much less can such
restore others: but a spiritual man, one that the spirit has prevailed in
some measure over the flesh in, keeping him from the foyles, and falls, that
weak men fall into, and making him able in some measure to raise, and heal
others. Now so we are not to Understand it here in this place, when he says,
They that are after the flesh.

Secondly, a man may be said to be after the Flesh, or to be carnal. A man
that is a true Saint may be 2. When a Saint does a carnal action
called carnal, when he does some one action that may in a sense be wholly
carnal. For a Saint may do an action that he, nor none about him may perceive
any thing but carnallitie in. As in Mat. 16. 23. Compared with Mark 8. 32.
There you shall see a godly Saint, Peter by name, when his Master was Preaching
to him, what he should suffer at Jerusalem, and how he should be put to death,
and the like: Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him saying, be it far
from thee Lord; this shall not be unto thee. This was a Fleshly Speech a mere
carnal Speech. Christ was going to Jerusalem to die for Peter, and for other
poor sinners, and Peter takes him aside, and rebukes his Master, and tells him
it should not be so. Far be it from thee. Christ takes him, and tells him. Get
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me: for thou savourest not the
things of God, but the things of men. Thou speak as a carnal fleshly man,
thou have no taste of spiritual things. If thou did look on it
spiritually, thou would rejoice, and pray the Lord to help thee to suffer in
that temptation with thy Master, or to make a spiritual use of it: but thou
art carnal, and savourest of Flesh, Now when the Apostle says here, They that
are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, he does not properly
mean that neither.

But thirdly and lastly, a man is said to be after the Flesh, when he is in his
pure naturalls; when he 3. When men are merely carnal.
is merely carnal, when he is wholly flesh, when he is destitute of the spirit
of God: when men are so flesh, and fleshly in their principles, and actions,
that there is nothing of the spirit of God in them. So it is principally to be
taken here. Though for the former two, I may say this, that as far as a Saint
either in the measure of his graces, or in his actions, is Fleshly, he minds
Fleshly things: but a man that is wholly fleshly, wholly minds Fleshly things.
And so much concerning the first Question.

The second thing is, what is meant here by the Quest. 2. What meant by the
things of the flesh, and of the spirit.
things of the Flesh, and by the things of the spirit? If you remember what I
have told you of Flesh before, you will understand much what is meant by the
things of the Flesh. I told you Flesh was old Adam, both in his good, and in
his evil, pure Adam and corrupt Adam, and every thing that came from him, or
every thing that leads to him, that was Flesh. So the things of the flesh are
these things, and all opportunities belonging to them in general.

But, that you may understand it a little better. I will show you what the holy
Ghost calls these things of the Flesh, and the things of the spirit, that so by
the Scriptures you may understand Scriptures. We will put them both together,
the one will open the other to you. In 1 Cor. 2. 11. There you shall see the
things of the flesh are called the things of a man. For what man knows the 1.
The things of the flesh are the things of a man.
things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him. The things of a
man. The things of the Flesh, are the things of a man, that is, proper to a man
as man. Therefore. Mark. 8. 32. They are called The things that be of men. The
things of the Flesh are called the things that men deal about, the things that
men as men naturally deal about, and look after, the things of men. But the
things of the spirit of God, in that 1 Cor. 2. You have diverse expressions The
things of the spirit.
of them. Verse. 9. They are the things that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
nor has entered The things that eye has not seen, etc.
into the heart of man; the things that God has prepared for them that love
him. What are these things? These glorious things that no carnal man has ever
seen or heard, or understood any thing of them, that God has prepared for
them that love him? They are as we see there afterward, clearly the things of
the spirit of God. They are called the deep things of God. Verse. 10. They are
deep, because no carnal man can reach them, and in Verse 11. They are called
the things of God. And in Verse. 12. The things that are freely given to us of
The deep, things of God
God. And in Verse. 14. They are called the things of the spirit of God. The
things of the spirit of God are foolishness to him. In 2 Cor. 4. ult. There
you shall have both these things described: for in that we shall have a little
light from that description of it: the things of the flesh, are called there
Things of the flesh are seen.
the things that are seen, and the things of the spirit are called the things
that are not seen: the one are said to be temporal and the other eternal.
The things of the Flesh are temporal things that may be seen, that is, not so
much seen with the eyes of the body; but he means that a man, every carnal
man may perceive and understand them. All the things of old Adam, a mere
narurall man is able to comprehend them: but the other things are things that
are not seen: that is, that eye has not seen, nor ear beard, nor has
entered into the heart of man. Therefore Christ in Mat. 11. 25. says, I thank
thee O heavenly Father that thou have hid these things from the wise, and
prudent, and have revealed them to Babes. What were these things? the things of
the spirit of God, they are the things that are hid from the wise and prudent
of the World, they are not possible to be seen of them, but God reveals them
to the least Babe of his own Kingdom. In Collos. 3. 1. 2. You have another
description: for you may put these together, and so the better understand They
are things on Earth. Things of the spirit, above.
them. In Verse. 2. The things of the flesh are called things on Earth, and the
things of the spirit are called the things that are above. The things of the
flesh, are the things that are beneath, as it were, things on the Earth. That
is, though in old Adam there be many excellent things; you must not conceive
earth here in a gross sense: there is fine refined wisdom, and understanding,
and prudence, which the spirit of God usually slights, and despises; Where is
the wise and the disputer, etc. Notwithstanding, all old Adam is but Earthly;
all the spirituality, as it were, of old Adam, are but things on the Earth. It
is no wonder they are called things of the Earth, when the Doctrine and
Preaching of John Baptist he himself calls it Earthly. I am from the Earth; I
speak earthly; he is from above, he speaks Heavenly and spiritually. It was
Earthly in comparison of Christ, though there was some Gospel in it. Much more
earthly is all the devotion and Religion, and what is best in Fleshly man, that
has nothing in him but old Adam.

In Philip. 3. 7. there is another large description Gain and loss.
of these things. The things of the flesh there, they are those things that
Paul once accounted gain to him, and those things that Paul now accounted
loss to him, see there what those things are, those excellent fine things, the
things of the flesh; a man while he is in the flesh, accounts them gain, a
great gain to him; he lives by his wit, and his wisdom, and it is a mighty
gain to him to increase; and build up old Adam in him. But when a man comes to
spiritual things, he accounts all these things loss, I account them loss,
says Paul. Now the things of the Spirit, were those things that Paul desired
to win, and to gain; in the Things behind and before.
verses following; That I may gain Christ and his righteousness. And a little
further, you shall see Paul calls the things of flesh, the things behind, and
the things of the spirit, the things before. And in verse 19. the things of the
flesh, he calls them earthly things, They mind earthly things; and so by
contraries, the other things are heavenly. I can not open every particular
expression, only I would point out the descriptions to you, as the Holy Ghost
lays them down. In 2. Cor. 5. there the things of the flesh are called old
things; and the things of the Spirit are called new things: for says Old, and
new.
the Apostle; We know no man after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ
after the flesh yet know we him so no more: therefore if any man be in Christ
he is a new creature, old things are passed away. All the things of the Flesh,
are old things, the things of the Spirit of God are new things. Therefore in the
Acts, the Athenians desired to know that new strange doctrine that Paul brought.

What was this new doctrine?

Only the things concerning the Spirit of God, the other things are old things
Gal. 2. 18. there the things of the flesh are described to be the things That
Paul destroyed, and built up.
that Paul destroyed; and the things of the Spirit, the things that Paul sought
to build up. 1 Cor. 7. 32, 33. The things of the flesh are called the things of
the world, but the things of the Spirit are called there, the things of the
Lord, The married, The things of the world, and of the Lord.
cares for the things of the world, but the unmarried for the things of the
Lord. Philip. 2. 20. The things of the flesh are called, our own things, and
the things of the Spirit, are called the things of Jesus Christ. Says the
Apostle, I have no man like minded, who will naturally care for your state?
Mark that expression, it is well worth observing in these self-seeking times.
We may well say so now, if Paul said so then, I have no man like minded, who
will naturally care for your estate. A man can hardly, find a Professor in a
multitude, that will naturally, and freely care for the state of others of the
Saints: The things that are a man's own, and that are Jesus Christ's.
For says he, All seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's:
all seek their own things, the things that make for old Adam, that make for
the Flesh, and for man's self. Joh:* 6. 27. the things of the Flesh are called
meat that perishes; and the things of the Spirit, meat endures to everlasting
life, Luke 10. 41. they are called many things, perishing and enduring meat
and the things of the spirit are called one thing, Martha Martha, thou art
cumbred about many Many and one thing.
things: for, indeed there are many distracting businesses in the things of the
world: therefore in Mat. 13. when the seed was sown among thorns, it is said,
the deceitfulness of riches, and pleasures; and the lusts of other things; who
knows how many, it may be a thousand, two thousand other things, the things of
the flesh are endless, but the things of the Spirit are called one thing, the
ruinous building of old Adam, is going into a thousand pieces; but there is but
one Jesus Christ, and in Trouble, and peace.
the things of Jesus Christ there is a greater union then in the things of the
Flesh, and old Adam. In Luke 19. they are called the things of trouble, and the
things of the Spirit, the things that belong to our peace. O that thou had
known in this Vain, and excellent.
thy day the things that belong to thy peace. In Jerem. 2. 8. they are called,
things that do not profit, vain things: and the things of the spirit in Phil.
1. 10. they are called excellent things, that ye may be able to know the things
that are excellent, that is, the things of the Spirit of God: and to conclude
this, Philip. 4. 8. speaking of the things of the Spirit, says he, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things of
good report; these things do. These are the things of the Spirit of God. Then
impure things, dishonest things, dishonorable things, unjust things, unlovely
things, these are the things of the flesh.

Thus much in general, according to the description The things of the flesh in
particular.
of the things of the flesh in Scripture.

But now in particular, I will sum up the things of the Flesh, or of old
Adam, (one or other of which Fleshly men do wholly mind) to these three heads.

The first is to establish their own righteousness, 1. To establish man's own
righteousness
by the law, to procure to themselves justification by their works. This is the
master-peice of old Adam: for, I told you, that man is more prone to this then
to sin, though he be prone to that also; and old Adam works stronger toward
his righteousness (such as it is) in a forbidden way, then to sin. Therefore
it is said, Romans 10. 3. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, went about
to establish their own righteousness, went about to establish their own
righteousness. He speaks there of the Jews. The word in the original is,
they went to make it stand; just as a tottered house that every blast is ready
to throw down, and it must be underpropped on this side, and on that side to
keep it up: So every fleshly man in the world, this is half his work, to
make the Babel of his own righteousness to stand; he is always peicing, and
patching, and doing some good work, he is wishing and woulding, or in one
fashion or other, to make up a good estate, against the latter day. Therefore
that was the question Act. 2. and Luke 3. and it is the grand question of all
mankind, What shall we do to be saved? and we see when they came to Christ, it
was always with this, Master, what shall I do to be saved? As if he had said, I
know it must be by doing, and I am willing to go about it to frame some kind
of righteousness, or other: Therefore in Joh. 6. say they, What shall we do
to work the works of eternal life? says Christ, This is the work of God to
believe; he takes them off.

Now this is one thing whereby you may know what it is to be a fleshly man, and
to mind fleshly things; when people mind, and cast projects, and ways to
procure righteousness to themselves, or justification to their souls, any
other way, then only by the Lord Jesus Christ. Men may be, as it were, drunk
sometimes, and mind neither heaven nor hell; but there is no fleshly carnal
man, when he is his own man, but he thinks there is some good work or other
that he must do, either giving, or lending, or building an Almes-house, or
giving to the poor, or somewhat to get him a righteousness: But remember, thou
art a carnal man, and all thy minding, and all thy thoughts this way, are but
according to the flesh, and those that are after the flesh must dye: it was the
first and the greatest curse that ever was in the world, when God said to old
Adam, he must dye; it is a general rule, all old Adam must dye, either thou
must get that piece of old Adam that is in thee to dye, or thou shall dye with
it, one of the two.

Then another thing that is called the things of 2 Carnal privileges.
the flesh, it is carnal privileges, either men that are Fleshly, mind their
justification out of Christ, or else their carnal privileges; I told you
before that those are called Flesh, says the Apostle, if any might, I may
glory in the Flesh. What is that? I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews, etc. and so
the Jews in Mat. 3. Joh. 8. and 2. Cor. 11. They were apt, as to stablish their
own righteousness, so, to glory in their privileges; we are the children of
Abraham, we were never slaves, nor Servants. We have not their privileges to
glory in, yet this is a maine piece of old Adam, a great part of the things of
the Flesh, outward privileges, let them be Church Priviledges, or what you
will; when people rejoice, and mind and contemplate outward privileges, and
do not regard the inward power, nor what is in, and through and by them, this
is but flesh.

I fear you will not bear with me, you will account me your enemy for telling
you the truth: but I am persuaded, there are many among us, that talk of
churches, and government, and ordinances, and privileges, and yet all is but
flesh, and you cannot well judge of them by their strictness in it; for flesh
will go as strictly in its way as the Spirit: but it is to be feared, that
diverse build of it, and glory in it; and it is a great part of their religion:
I warn you in love to look to it, and if those privileges were taken away,
as Christ takes away the privilege of being the Children of Abraham from the
Jews, such people would be poor carnal people. Take heed of it, and let him
that glories, glory in the Lord.

Thirdly, and lastly, the things of the flesh (for 3 To fulfill sinful lusts.
all old Adam is included in these three things) that fleshly men mind, is to
fulfill their lusts, which are many. To make provision for the flesh, Romans 13.
that is, to be casting how to feed one lust or other. Now if you would know
what those lusts are in particular (though in a sort it be general) you have
it in 1 John 16. says he, all that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. These are the lusts of the world;
all the lusts in the world may be reduced it seems to those 3. heads: so I
say, these are the fleshly things that al Carnal people mind: all their
thoughts throughout the year, every one runns, either in stablishing their own
righteousness, or in glorying, and contemplating their outward privileges, or
in projecting for the fulfilling of some lust or other, thus they spend their
whole life, these are the things of the flesh, that carnal men mind.

Now the other, the things of the Spirit that are contrary to these, you may
comprehend them all Things of the spirit.
in three words That is,

They are either the things of faith.

Or else their hope, and happiness in Jesus Christ.

Or else their Obedience to the will of Christ.

All the things of the Spirit, are comprehended in these three.

Either the things of faith. They mind the 1 The things of faith.
things of the Spirit; that is, they always mind, and study how to believe in
Jesus Christ, and how to lay firmer, and righter hold on him, how they may know
him more distinctly, and hold him more firmly, and get fuller assurance, this
is their work.

Or they are excercised about the things of hope, 2. The things they hope for
by Christ.
that is, they are contemplating and rejoicing in their happiness by Christ,
how their persons are justified, and their sins pardoned, and the
righteousness of the law fulfilled in them, and all in Heaven and earth
bestowed on them. As Paul says, Phil. 3. This is our Religion, we glory in the
flesh as if not, but we rejoice in Jesus, we have no confidence in the flesh,
but we rejoice in Jesus, that is, in all the happiness we have in Jesus Christ.

Or thirdly, and lastly, the things of the spirit 3 Obedience to the will of
Christ.
are the will of God, or the commands of Jesus Christ: they always study how
they may obey, and fulfill the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.
So, that a Saint, if he be spiritual, he is always, either acting his faith,
and increasing, and strengthening that; or he is contemplating his happiness
in Jesus Christ: Or studying which way to glorify God, to know what part of
the will of God, he knows not; and to study what part of the will of God he
knows, and remembers, this is his exercise. And let this suffice to show what
the things of the Flesh, and what the things of the spirit are.

Now the third question briefly is, what is meant Quest. 3. What meant by
minding the things of the flesh, and of the spirit.
by the minding of the things of the Flesh, and the things of the spirit?

You must understand, first, that the meaning is not, as though a man might not
think upon Fleshly 1. Not but that a Saint may provide outward things.
things. For a spiritual Saint often thinks upon Fleshly things in a spiritual
manner, as to consider his sins, to bewail, and to mourn for them: and he may
mind, Earthly, Worldly things, to provide things honest, to provide for his
Family, as the Apostle says; he may think of his business. Therefore the holy
Ghost here does not use the word Frounesis, but Frounena, Frounesis signifies
prudence, or discretion, or providence in business. He does not use that,
least we should think that the holy Ghost forbids to provide, to be mindful,
and careful of Worldly business, but Frounena, that signifies a further
thing, as I shall show presently. Now then you must understand this also, 2.
The understanding is not only meant.
that when the Apostle says, they mind the things of the Flesh. The word does
not only signify the understanding, but it signifies all the affections also.
I could give you diverse places of Scripture where this word is set down to
express the working of any affection in the soul. Therefore the meaning is
not only of the mind that studies: but his affections, his will, the way of his
delight, his joy is in earthly things; his care is after fleshly things.

But in particular, there are these four or five Five things meant by minding
of fleshly things
things implied in the word, when they are said to mind the things of the Flesh.

The first is, that the very care of his heart (as 1. The ca^e of the heart is
fleshly.
I told you before) is Fleshly, and carnal. A Christian has outward VVorldly
things in an outward Room, and Jesus Christ next his heart. There is (says
one godly man) a closet in the heart of a Saint, only to entertain Jesus
Christ. Which the Scripture calls the spirit frequently: I worship God in my
spirit: Romans 1. And in 1 These. 5. That ye may be sanctified in your spirit.
That is, in the very Coare, and quintessence of the soul.

Now a godly man may have many hurries of Worldly things, and lusts cross and
come through, but the coare of his heart is for God, and for holiness. Therefore
says Paul. Romans 7. I serve the law of the flesh with my members, and the law
of Christ with my mind. That is, inwardly, with the care of my heart: I showed
the meaning of that word before, I shall not now go on further in that.

Secondly, a man is said to mind worldly things 2. When a man savours fleshly
things.
when a man not only thinks of Worldly, and fleshly things, but savours of
worldly and Fleshly things: Therefore the same word Frounena, that is here
minding, is often read to savor. As in the Speech of Christ to Peter, Thou
savourest the things of the World, thou have a smack of it, thou have a relish
of carnal things. So then to mind Fleshly things, is when a man not only
thinks of them, and considers them, but when a man finds most joy, and taste,
and delight in such kind of things. Put a Fleshly man about Worldly, or
carnal, or if you will about sinful business: O there he is as a fish in the
Water, there he is his own man, he is well; but put him about any spiritual
thing, let him come to learn a little for his soul; or let his Neighbor come
to teach him, and admonish, and reproove him, he is upon thorns then, he has
no taste of it at all: now if thou be a Fleshly man thou mindest Fleshly things,
that is, thou do not only in thy understanding consider of them, but thy
soul relisheth them; there thou art thy own man, when thou art in the midst
of the World, and the Flesh, and earth, and hell: therefore look to thy self.

Thirdly, to mind Fleshly things, is when the 3. When the stream of the soul
goes that way.
stream, the maine of the soul goes upon Fleshly, earthly, carnal things;
when the things of God are but by* business to a man. It is not so in a
spiritual man, 1 Cor. 7. He uses the world as if he used it not, he minds
little of the World, as little as may be, but the maine stream of his soul is
upon Jesus Christ, there he excerciseth himself day and night, as David speaks.

Fourthly, when a man does study and plod continually 4. To study and plod
for fleshly things.
upon Worldly things, upon Fleshly carnal things. When a man takes care, for
so the word is used often in Scripture, as it is used. Romans 14. 6. If any man
does observe a day, or care for a day, Curare diem, as we read it in the
Latin, if one observe it, and another will not, or will not regard it. When a
man observes and regards, and takes care, and studies, and plods for earthly,
Fleshly things, this is to mind Fleshly things. Therefore in Phil. 4. 7. Says
the Apostle, I am glad that your care is renewed toward me; says B E Z A, it
is more then care, there is a kind of solicitude, it is addicere animam, it is
a word that signifies when a man addicts himself, when he is given wholly to a
thing; when a man is addicted, and gives his mind wholly to the World, to
fulfill his lusts, or to enjoy his pleasures, this is to mind Fleshly things.

Then fifthly, and lastly, it is when a man, does judge of things according to
the Flesh. Non est Cogitare, etc. To mind is not only to think of it, but to
judge of things. As you have it 2 Cor. 5. I judge no man according to the
flesh. If Christ Jesus were here again, I would not look on him according to
the Flesh. Now when he says, they mind the things of the flesh, this is the
meaning of it, that is, they judge of things in an earthly fleshly way, they
judge of the worth of things by the fleshlinesse not by the spirituallnesse of
them. A godly How godly men judge of things.
man does not so, all that he accounts of in the World, are the things of God,
and of the spirit; were it not for that, this World would be a Hell to him: and
he judges of every man as he has the spirit of God, he accounts of him as
without that, not worth any thing; a carnal man judges of things carnally, as
they are fleshly, and carnal, and as old Adam is set up; so he judges by
carnal arguments of spiritual things. Thus I have as briefly as I could,
opened the meaning of it. I will only at this time name one Use, and leave the
rest till God give another opportunity.

You have heard what it is to be after the flesh, and what the things of the
flesh, and the things of the spirit are; and what it is to mind the things of
the flesh and the things of the spirit: for we may judge of the one by the
other.

Now the Lesson, or the Use (as we call it) is use. 1. Why most people
understand not spiritual things.
this. Hence we may learn and see what the reason is, why diverse people
notwithstanding all the means used, even among us in this place, and in other
places, why they cannot come to understand any thing of Heavenly things; of
spiritual things. What is the reason? Because they mind them not, and why do
they not mind them? Because they are fleshly. I have wondered often times, and I
do believe in my Conscience that had I been here but a twelve month, and had
taken any natural thing under Heaven, had I read a Lecture of Philosophy, or
of Logic, or any thing in your Trades, or State business, there are none
either great or small, but could have given some account what the man had said:
and yet there are some among you that though we have been speaking to you as
the Lord has enabled us, almost these two years, yet you are as ignorant, and
as unknowing in any thing that has been said, as if you had been a sleep, or
had been in your Graves all the while. It is a wonderful thing that no word
should stick, nothing in the world of all that has been said.

If we should ask some among us, do you remember any one passage, or any one
thing, that the Preacher has spoken of these two years? they remember not one
word. What is the reason? You did not mind it: that is the meaning of that
word, Seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not; that was the plague upon
that people in Isaiah When a man's mind is taken up with other things, a man may
ride by the door, and one may say, did you see such a man? he came by your
eye; I saw him not says he, seeing he saw not; his eye was on him, but his
mind was not, he was thinking seriously of something else; so, hearing, they
hear not. Many times a man hears a sound, and is near enough, yet hearing he
hears not, so it is with many among us, the Lord pity them, my heart is
ready to burst every day, more, and more to consider, and think of it; hearing
they hear not all the year long, there is not one notion, or exhortation from
the word that sticks on their souls; the reason is, they mind not, they mind
the things of the Flesh, they are feeding some lust, they are providing for
some fancy, or when they are best they are contemplating to set up a way of
justification by works, and all because they mind not these things. Therefore
says the Lord, I say 1. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, I may well say
so of diverse among us, hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for the Lord
has spoken, I have nourished, and brought up Children, and they have rebelled
against me. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but
Israelld oath not know, my people does not consider. Hear O Heavens, and
hearken O Earth: As if he had said, I expect that Heaven should hear, and that
Earth should hear, as soon as this people, and yet there is nothing further
from hearing then Heaven, and nothing dulier then the Earth, and yet the
Prophet would Preach to Heaven, and Earth, before he would to this dull peoplo:
and says he, The Ox, and the Ass know their owners, but my people have not
known me. Why? They do not consider, they do not mind. So you do not mind
what we spoke before; that, you that are drunkards, and Whoremongers, and
Swearers, that wast your Estates, and souls, and bodies, in the service of the
Devil, that you are under the curse of God, and must perish, that there is
nothing that you do that is pleasing to God, till you be borne again, did you
ever mind these things, and lay them to heart? Did you ever say, yonder man
speaks really, and tells us the truth? But you go home when Sermon is done,
and say there was a great Company, a throng, and he Preached a little too long,
and we must go to him again after Dinner, and so you mind not, the Lord Jesus
pity you; that is the reason that you are ignorant, and will be World without
end, because you mind not spiritual things.

And this is the reason also, why you have carnal Why people care not for
Gods Ordinances.
people that care not for the ordinances of God, they care not to use those
means of grace, that the poor Saints do; why, they mind not spiritual
things, they are like Gallio, he cared not for those things; he was busy about
natural things. It is likely he was a wise, judicious man, but he cared not
for these things: So to hear Sermons, or discourses, or conference of thy
Neighbors, or at thy table, of spiritual things, thou art like Gallio, thou
carest not for them, and therefore thou respectest them not.

Therefore desire the Lord to put his Law in thy mind. O! the maine misery of a
man is in his mind, the man is nothing but his mind in a manner; the maine
happiness of a man is in his mind, if the Law of God be there. Therefore,
before ever thou can have thy heart good, or thy wishes or prayers good, thou
must get a good mind, desire God to put his Law in thy mind, for there is the
first, and maine work.

So also for the poor Saint; this is the reason Why the Saints take injuries
patiently.
why the people of God are so weaned from the world; those that are spiritual
Christians, you can easily cozen and cheat them, and take away all from them,
and they bear it very well: Why so? they mind not earthly things, fleshly
things. Let the Devil come with all the policy, and power of hell to cheat
them in spiritual things, to take away their peace, and crack their communion
with God, they will see, and be wise, and resist; but come and cheat them in
worldly things, poor creatures they are quiet, and part with them: as it is
the manner of many of you that are rotten Professors, and self-seekes, you make
it a trade to abuse them, but they are quiet, they mind spiritual things: As a
cutpurse that comes into your shop, and a man minds other things, he may
easily steal: So the poor Saints are made poor and suffering, because they
mind God, and heavenly things; or else I tell you, if their minds were not
employed elsewhere, a Saint could be as cunning, and as wise, and worldly as
thou: but thou may easily steal any thing from him, and cheat, and cozen
him, because his mind is upon other things, it is upon heaven, and those
blessed things. Therefore learn that one thing, learn to understand that the
maine of thy happiness, or misery, is in thy mind; beg of the Lord to give
thee a good mind, to write his Law in thy mind, without knowledge the mind is
not good. Therefore when the Lord gave the people of Israel up, it is said,
the misery came upon their minds, blindness of heart is happened to Israel;
that is, blindness of mind, there was the maine. And there is the excellency
of the Saints. When Paul saw nothing but flesh, yet he rejoiced in God, in the
law of his mind: therefore look on it, as the fountain of all good and evil;
if thy mind be fleshly and carnal, thou will mind fleshly things, and love
fleshly things, and walk fleshly, but if the Lord sanctify thy mind, the Lord
will give thee sanctified affections.

SERMON VII.
Romans 8. 5. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.
IN the former Verse I told you The scope of the Apostle.
the Apostle holds forth unto us a great privilege: the greatest that I know
that a man can have, that the righteousness of the law might be fullfilled in
us. For it does protect a man from all evils; for all evil is founded upon
this, that a man has not a righteousness to fulfill the law: and he that has
this privilege it does lead him to the enjoyment of all good: for if a man has
a righteousness to fulfill the law, then there is nothing that can keep the
Creature from a full enjoyment of his Creator.

Now this privilege being so great, the Apostle shows us who they are that are
Partakers of it, who have the actual enjoyment of it: for the worst Fleshly
carnal man, may come to be a Partaker: but he shows who are for the present,
and says he, they are those that walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. That is a sure way to know, and distinguish them, but it is a general
way; and therefore the Apostle draws down some particulars from this
general, that are more known, and easy to be discerned. As in 1 John 5. 1.
You shall see there the same kind of reasoning, says the Apostle, Whosoever
beleiveth that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. How shall we know that we do
believe? Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten
of him. How shall we know that we love God? we love them that are begotten of
God? How shall we know that we love them that are borne of God? If we love God,
and keep his commandments. And how shall we know that we keep his
commandments? They are not greivious, and so he goes from a more general to a
more particular thing. So the Apostle in this place, after he had given a
general, he comes more particularly to show it. They that are after the flesh,
do mind the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit do mind
the things of the spirit. As if he had said, if you do not know whether you
walk in the flesh, or in the spirit, I will show you, I will instance in one
thing, I will pitch The bestthing in a carnal man is his mind.
upon the best thing that is in a natural man, and that is his mind; I will
instance but in that; for you may know the Lion by his Paw, you may know the
man by his mind, for he that is fleshly, minds Fleshly things. As if he had
said, if the mind of a man (which is his best thing) be altogether about
Fleshly things, then his will is so, and his affections, and actions, are so.
And if the mind of a man be upon spiritual things, then his will is so, his
affections, his actions, his whole life is so. This is the drift, and scope of
the Apostle. Now the Lesson we had in hand the last time from the words, it was
I told you the same with the Text here: that Those that are after, or walk
after the flesh, they do mind fleshly things, and those that are after the
Spirit, do mind spiritual things.



I gave you two reasons of it.

I opened it by answering three Questions.

I came to make some use of it, and finished only one, which was to see the
reason why carnal Fleshly people, do know so little of the things of God,
though they have so much means, and Ordinances, and have time to enjoy them,
and have Ears to hear, and Books to read, and yet they know nothing of
spiritual things, the reason is, because they mind them not. But I shall now
proceed.

Another word is this, from this way, and method Use. 2. The misery of a
carnal man is the fleshlynesse of his mind.
of reasoning, that the Apostle uses here, you may learn this; that the maine
and chief misery of a Fleshly carnal man, is the fleshlynesse, and
carnallnesse of his mind. As the chief happiness of a Christian, the choicest
piece that is in a Christian, is the spiritualnesse of his mind: so the worst
piece in a carnal man is the fleshlynesse of his mind. Therefore the Apostle
does pitch upon the worst piece to demonstrate the rest, he that is after the
flesh minds fleshly things. As if he had said, you may easily guess at the
rest, if the mind be naught. You are wonderfully mistaken when you see a little
of your misery you complain, O, I have a weak memory: when I am hearing
spiritual things I think they are written upon my heart, but I presently
forget it, and I am passionate, etc. And that is all my fault. O, but here is
the root, thou have a fleshly mind, and therefore there are fleshly thoughts
and fleshly actions, all proceed from that.

The mind of a man is either the chiefest Seat The mind the Throne of Christ or
Satan.
for Jesus Christ, or the chiefest Throne for the Devil. If Christ be in thee
there is his Throne in thy mind; and if Satan, the Prince of darkness, be in
the, there is his Palace. Therefore you shall read in Luke 12. Christ throws
out the strong man, the Armed man. Now what is the royal seat that the Devil
has in a man? Compare that with 2 Cor. 10. You shall see there, it is the
Imaginations of the mind, the reasonings of the mind (of which, God, willing, I
shall speak more after) for as the mind is the chiefest faculty of the soul,
so the reasonings of the mind are the chiefest acts of the mind. Now the strong
holds of Satan must be thrown down, and be brought into captivity to Jesus
Christ, every thought of them. If thine eye be single, says Christ, the whole
body is full of light, but if thine eye be evil, the whole body shall be full
of darkness. You know that if the eye have light in it, the hands have light
to work, and the feet have light to go, and a man knows where he is, what
he is doing, and wither he is going, but if the eye be dark the whole body
is darkness. Just so, if the eye of the mind have spiritual light in it, then
all the whole man has light, then the will has light, and the affections, and
the actions, all have light, but if the eye be dark, if the mind be dark, the
whole body is full of darkness. If the Coachman (as a godly man says) be The
mind the Coachman of the soul.
blind, then you know where the Coach must be. The mind is to the soul and
body of a man, as a Coachman is to the Coach, and Horses, he guides them, and
if he be blind, or mad, or drunk, then all goes out of order.

Therefore you shall find that when God in God inflicts the greatest misery on
the mind.
Scripture does express the height of the misery, of people, he sets it out by
some misery that is upon their minds; and when the holy Ghost would set out the
height of what God does for Christians, he sets it forth by something that he
does upon their minds. As you have it in Romans 11. 7. What then? Israel has
not obtained that which he seeks for, but the election has obtained it, and
the rest were blinded. To be blind, or to be without judgment (in the
Scriptures language) is to be a Reprobate. Therefore when the holy Ghost
speaks of Reprobates, he takes a word that is the same in the Original, and
Reprobate is the worst word that is in the Scripture: for it is far worse, to
say a man is a Reprobate, then to say he is a wicked man, or a cursed man: for
he that is in a cursed condition for the present, may be in a blessed: But
says he, the election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

So, on the other side, when God will show the The great happiness of a
Christian in his mind.
chief happiness of a man, he sets it forth by some good he does to the mind.
As in Heb. 8. I will put my law in their hearts, and write it in their minds:
And if it be said, what shall we do with our wills, and affections, and
actions? O says God, if I be pleased to put my law thoroughly in their minds,
their affections, and actions cannot go amiss: and so poor Paul, when he was
struggling with corruptions, Romans 7. He ends all with this, I thank God through
Jesus Christ, that though I serve the law of sin in my members, yet my mind is
whole, and entire for all this. So that it is the chiefest happiness of a
Christian to have his mind sanctified, and of all miseries this is the worst,
to have a carnal, unsanct ified mind.

But it may be you will say, what is the misery of fleshly mind?

Give me leave in a few short words to set it out The misery of a carnal mind
in 6 perticulars.
unto you, I will tell you what the Scripture says of a carnal mind, and I
desire you to consider of it, and O that God would help us to come out of our
formallity, that we may think of these things, and consider, does not the
Minister speak of me? and am not I the man? Now there are these expressions of
a carnal mind.

First, the Scripture says, the mind is blind, Secondly, that it is vain.
Thirdly, that it is rotten. Fourthly, that it is polluted. Fifthly, that it is
reprobate. Sixthly, that it is proud.
Let me open these a little.

First, it is blind, that is, it is darkness, that is the word in Ephesians. 5.
8. For ye were sometimes darkness; 1. It is blind.
you were not only dark but darkness it self. There is not the least spark
of spiritual light in thee, if thou be yet in the flesh, if thy mind be
fleshly.

Secondly, it is vain, What is that? The Gentiles that walked in the vanity
of their minds, 2. It is vain.
they became vain in their imaginations.

What is a vain mind?

Vain signifies empty in Scripture, as Solomon says, I saw all things under
the Sun that they were Vain, what.
vain; that is, they are empty, they have no good in them. So if thou be a
carnal man, thy mind is vain, that is, it is empty of all good; there are
none of those sweet meditations, and contemplations, and considerations of
spiritual things, it is quite empty. Christ says, thou shall not call thy
Brother Racha, that is, empty, but thou may say so of thy mind, thou may
say I have an empty mind, a mind that is Racha, that is, empty. Therefore
says Solomon, The words of the godly are as choice silver, but the heart of
the wicked is little worth: as one godly man says, his very heart is not worth
a halfpeny: so I may say of al thy thoughts, that art yet in the flesh, all thy
thoughts through the year are not worth one farthing.

Thirdly, they are rotten, or corrupt, Ephesians. 4. 3. It is rotten.


What is the meaning of that?

I shall it may be speak more of it by and by, but for the present, it is
rotten, that is, it is not only empty of good but full of putrefaction, it is
full of superstitious thoughts, full of Lusts, full of evil imaginations, that
are abominable to God, and that rott thy mind, and make it worse and worse,
and make it stink before the Lord. The plowing of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, the nearer you come to his heart, the more
abominable it is.

4. It is polluted: thy mind being carnal, every 4. It is polluted.
lawful thing, every indifferent thing, makes thy mind fouler and fouler.

And take heed, take heed poor soul, after all 5. Reprobate.
this, that thy mind prove not to be a reprobate mind, you shall have the word
in Romans 1. 28. you may find in that Chapter that the people had a little
natural knowledge of God, but they did not know him as God, but became vain
in their imagination; they did not delight to keep the knowledge of God, they
were sorry that they knew so much of God; because they could'not follow their
lusts so freely. Well, what says the Apostle? As they did not like to retain
God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, etc. A mind
void of judgment, as it is in your Margin, because they had a little
knowledge and regarded it not, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to a mind
void of judgment, that is, such a mind as never should have the knowledge of
God any more: you shall know no more, you are troubled that you have a little
knowledge of God; says God, I will take away your judgment, and you shall
know no more.

And then there is a thing worse then this, and 6. It is proud.
that you will think were very strange; it is not strange to say, there is one
thing in the mind that is worse then to be Reprobate: and yet thus it is; the
word is in Colloss. 3. 18. It is called a proud mind.

What is that?

That is, notwithstanding all the misery of thy mind (and so by consquence of
thy whole man) as it is blind, and vain, and rotten, and polluted, and it may
be reprobate (I fear it, I fear it) Proud mind what.
yet notwithstanding thou have a proud mind. What is that? If thou compare it
with Ezekiel. 28. 2. Thou do set thy heart as the heart of God; there is no
carnal man, but he thinks he is as God, he thinks he knows all things: that
a man which is a mad man, that is wild and has no knowledge, yet
notwithstanding, that he should conceive that he is wise as God, as full of
knowledge as God is in a manner; this is the thought that is in the hearts of
men; and therefore you shall see in that place, verse 9. says the Lord, Will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am God? Not that men say so with
their Tongues, but in their hearts, that they are wise as God. As there is many
a poor carnal man that thinks he is grave, and wise, that he knows as much
as all the Freachers in London can teach him, and yet he is rotten, and blind,
and polluted, and it may be reprobate too. And therefore learn this Lesson,
that if thou art a fleshly man, thy great misery lies in thy mind; and
therefore do not complain so much of the streams as the Fountain; go to
God, and desire him to write his Law in thy mind: desire God, not only change
thy memory, but to give thee a new mind, and a new heart.

And from this may follow another word, that Use 3. The mind cannot be good, if
the life be naught.
is, you may hence learn, you that are but yet simple, and ignorant, never
conceive that thy heart is good, when thy life is naught, when thy words are
naught, and when thy thoughts are naught, never say that thy mind is good, or
thy heart is good. For I told thee, thy mind is the fountain of all thy
actions, of all thy affections. And therefore do not say, Sir, though I can
talk but little, and though I swear, and be drunk sometimes, yet I have a
good mind to God; I say that cannot be, for if the Tree be naught, the fruit
cannot be good. If I see a few sparks at the topp of the Chimny, I am sure
there is a greater fire within: if wickedness be in thy Tongue, there is a
treasure of wickedness in thy heart. If a man has nothing but baseness and
wickedness, and sinfulness in his life and conversation, I will never believe
that that man has a good heart, for if the heart were holy, it would make the
whole man holy, and if the mind be naught it is impossible but that the man
should be so too.

Another word you may learn from hence Use 4. Christ dyed. not for all alike.
(if you will give me leave to show my judgment. For I speak against no man;
but show what God by his grace has showed to me) as I conceive that it is not
the will of God that we should conceive that Jesus Christ did equally dye for
all men, and redeem all men. To say nothing of other Scriptures; for it is a
great controversy, and diverse godly men do doubt of it from this Scripture,
If we say that Christ did die for all men equally, or alike, for those that
shall be damned, and those that shall be saved. Then it may be asked, who makes
the difference? how comes it to pass that he died for all, seeing there are
but some saved? You will answer, that some believe, and some do not. Then how
is it that some do believe, and some do not? Surely if Christ died for all
men alike, then it must follow that surely some men have power to believe and
some have not. But this Scripture says plainly, that the mind of a carnal
man minds carnal things, nay the mind of a carnal man, his best part is open
enmity to God, it is contrary to God: And the Scripture says, that we are dead
in sins, therefore a carnal man cannot do any thing that is spiritual, a man
that is dead, is altogether fleshly he cannot believe, or receive Jesus Christ.
Therefore I say, the Lord Christ he gives faith; it is he that gives repentance
unto Israel^ and Christ Jesus he has Purchased it, (consider of that) as
Christ Jesus has Purchased Salvation for the soul, so he has Purchased faith
for us, to lay hold upon that Salvation. And therefore besides all other
inconveniences in that doctrine (as I have told you before) in my apprehension
there is abundance of pride in it, that we cannot be content to take Salvation,
on Gods terms: so that it sets up a power in man, that if Christ died for all
alike, then this makes the difference, that one man beleives, and another does
not, and then a man has power in himself to believe: whereas this Scripture
says, that naturally we have fleshly minds, and can mind nothing but fleshly
things.

Therefore let us extol God, and go to him, and desire him to work on us,
and acknowledge that naturally we are blind, and dead, and can do nothing.

Then lastly, let me shut up this point (for I Use 5. Consider whether you be
fleshly minded or no.
shall omit somewhat more that I had to say of it) every one of you consider
your own souls, whither you be fleshly minded people or no; whither you mind
the things of the flesh. If you be, I have a word, a cold word from the Lord to
you; I say, if you do mind fleshly things (consider of it) the Lord says you
must die, They that walk after the flesh must die, whither you be profane
people (as that is the ordinary distinction) people that live in gross sins; or
whether you be Professors of godliness, that mind earthly things, as many
Professors do, you are in a terrible condition. For you shall find in Philip.
2. Even in, Paul's time, says he, I have no man like minded, who will naturaly
care for your estate, for all seek their own. All, what all is this? He does
not speak to carnal men; for he wrote to the Phillippians that were good
people, but he saw among them abundance of Professors that did seek their
own, as where will you have a Professor that does naturally care for the
things of Jesus Christ? that is, as you see a loving Mother cares for her child
naturally, that you need not force her to it; so where is there a man that
naturally does seek the good of the people of God, and how he may advance the
Name of God, and relieve the poor Saints, and the like? to do it naturally
and freely? For all seek their own, says Paul; that is, we can show you
Professors enough in every Parish, in every Congregation, in every Regiment, in
every Company, that seek themselves, there are but few that are otherwise,
there are but few that naturally seek the things of God. And that you may see
what a fearful thing it is (that you may look to it) you shall see in, Chap.
3. 18. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping.
And so in 2 Cor. 12. Beloved, I do not read that Paul did write weeping to the
Church about any thing but about this, and what was it he wept for? They are
enemies to the Cross of Christ. They were not profane men, but Professors,
Whose end is destruction, who mind earthly things, whose Belly is their God.
Who are they who mind earthly things, whose Belly is their God? They did not
fall down on their knees, and worship their Belly: but they were such as did
take more care, and pains for their Belly, and did rise earlier to look after
the things of this life, then after the glory of God: and their end is
destruction, notwithstanding all their Profession: and you shall know them by
this, they mind earthly things. But our conversation is in Heaven, from whence
we look for the Savior, etc. Therefore to conclude, this is my meaning, that
all that are Professors in this self-seeking age, wherein one may go with a
Candle (as the Prophet says) through Jerusalem: a man may go with a Candle
from Westminster to the Tower, to look for a man that naturally minds the
things of God, and the people of God, and the honor of God, and the like. And
if they be so scarce I beseech you consider what a fearful thing it is? and
how the holy Ghost sets it out here, that their end is destruction, and Paul
speaks of it weeping* Therefore let it be thy work now to look to thy mind,
though thou profess to be a Saint, whither it be natural to thee to care for
thy self, but to do for God, but now, and then; and it may be after many
persuasions thou may be brought to do something for God, and for the people
of God: but it is natural to thee to look to thy self, and to thine own
honor, and thy own place, and preferment, etc. The Lord help thee to look
to this.

SERMON VIII.
Romans 8. 5. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.
I Have spoken of these words in general, and now I will according to the
strength that God shall give me, speak of them a little in partiticular, that
seeing those that enjoy this great privilege to have the law fulfilled in them,
are those that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

That we may find, whether we walk after the flesh, or after the spirit, I
would urge it a little further, and that according to the Apostles method. He
pitcheth upon the mind, and the mind not simply considered, but as it is
acting, and setting forth, the mind, in minding: therefore as he takes the
chiefest faculty to judge the rest by, so I will take the chiefest act in that
faculty, that so you may judge of the rest by that one, and so keep to the
Apostles method.

Now the chiefest act of the mind (doubtless) The chief act of the mind.
is the reasoning part of the mind. There are many acts in the mind; as it
understands, it thinks, it imamagines; but especially the reasoning part, It
belongs to the mind to reason concerning things, and reason is the chiefest
part, and is called, and accounted by Scholars the chiefest part of man; and
therefore they say, that man is a reasonable creature: Now I say, if we will
find out by the Scriptures, what we are, whether we be according to the flesh,
or according to the spirit (for there is the hinge of it) we must examine it by
the mind; and not by the mind simply, as it is a faculty, but the mind acting,
and exercising. And if we speak of the exercise of it, let us take the
reasoning part of it, that is he best part, for of all the acts of the mind,
the reasoning is the strongest, and that that most immediately flows from the
understanding: therefore if the reasoning of the soul be carnal, the whole
soul is so, and if the reasoning of it be spiritual, the whole soul is
spiritual, that was one thing that did move me to pitch upon that, it being the
chiefest.

Besides, I find that the Apostle in 1 Cor. 5. 16. How Paul distinguishes
Saints and others.
he distinguishes those that walk according to the flesh, from those that
walk according to the spirit, by the reasoning part, for says he, Henceforth
know we no man after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the
flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. We do not says he, henceforth
walk according to the flesh; and we know it by our knowledge, we do know
things, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit; if Christ
himself were here, we would not look upon him with a fleshly eye. What this
knowledge is, you may see in the verses before: For the love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, we thus reason, that if one dyed for
all, then were all dead, and that he dyed for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose
again. We know says he, that we are spiritual, and not fleshly, by our
judging of things, by our reasoning of things: for thus we judge, or thus we
reason, that if one man dyed for all, that is, did dye for others, then surely
we all are dead: And we reason further, that if one man did dye for us, and we
are suffered to live, we should employ our life, not for our selves but for him
that dyed for us. This kind of reasoning we have, that walk after the Spirit,
and not after the Flesh, therefore I will pitch upon that. And the rather,
because the Lord has been pleased, for ends best known to him, to keep that
in my mind, and to fix it so on my thoughts, that I could not pass it by, and
I usually judge in such cases that God does often do it for your sakes.

And therefore according to this method, we shall observe this Doctrine, or
this lesson, that Doct. Carnal men guided by fleshly reasoning.
Those that are according to the flesh, or that walk according to the flesh,
are swayed, and guided by fleshly reasonings, and those that are according to
the Spirit, are swayed and ruled by spiritual reasonings.

True Gospel Beleivers are ruled and swayed with spiritual reasonings, and
all carnal, fleshly men are ruled by carnal, fleshly reasonings,



For such as the mind is, so is the whole man, and if your reasoning be right,
then I dare say that all the acts of your mind are right: for that is the
chiefest, you may judge of all the acts of your mind by your reasoning: and
therefore we cull out that for the trial of the rest. I say carnal men are
swayed, and led, with fleshly reasonings, and spiritual men with spiritual
reasonings. And this is the most distinguishing Character that I know in the
Book of God, between a Christian and another man.

And as the Lord presents it unto me I shall a little open unto you these
terms, reasoning, spiritual reasoning, and fleshly reasoning. That you may
understand these, you must conceive that there are three sorts of minds in the
World: and therefore there be three sorts of reasonings: Three sorts of minds.
For our Reasonings are according as the mind is.

There is first, a corrupt mind, as you have it 1. Corrupt.
Ephesians. 4. The old man that is corrupt, that is (to speak in your language, or
according to your thoughts) a sinful mind, a mind that is exercised about
sinful things. When a man's mind is an evil one, simply evil.

Secondly there is a natural mind, 1 Cor. 2. at 2. Natural.
the latter end, it is called there, the natural man. where I would have you
observe by the bye, that the mind is called the man there, the natural man,
that is, the natural mind. The natural man knows not the things of God;
that is, the natural mind, for a man is denominated by his excellentest part,
which is his mind, as I told you before.

And there is also the spiritual mind, which is 3. Spiritual.
called there, the spiritual man. The spiritual man judges all things; that
is, the spiritual mind judges all things, for it is the mind properly that
does judge, and the man is said to judge, because he has the mind, or the mind
is in the man: according Three sorts of reasonings.
to these three sorts of minds, flow forth; sorts of reasonings.

One is; corrupt reasoning, and that is, when men 1. Corrupt,
do reason merely sinfully, according to that in 1 Cor. 15. The Apostle uses
their carnal phrase, Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we shall die. Now
here was a kind of reasoning in this, here was an argument, to morrow we expect
to die, that is, shortly, therefore let us eat, and drink, and feed our lusts,
etc. Here was a reasoning, but it was corrupt. And so in Mat. 21. When they had
killed the Servants that came to gather the rents. Now say they, the Heir is
come, come let us kill him and then the Land will be ours. Here was reasoning,
but it was corrupt reasoning. So in Luke 9. 44. there the disciples did reason
Who should be the greatest in the kingdom of God. There are such reasonings in
our hearts: for man is called a rational man; and though some men be called
unreasonable men (as I shall show by and by) yet there is no man but has
reasonings in him, either corrupt, or natural, or spiritual. There is no act
that a man does, but there is such a nimblenesse in the understanding that it
presently draws some argument and reason for it: a man never does any thing
but he has some kind of reason for it, be it what it will be.

Secondly, there is a natural reasoning, and 2 Natural.
that we often find in the Scriptures, as in Mark. 3. 6. Christ had there told a
Leper that he had forgiven him his sins, the Scribes sitting there, reason in
their hearts, Why does this man speak blasphemy? who can forgive sins but God.
This was not properly corrupt reasoning; it was true reasoning. Who can forgive
sins but God? This man forgives sins, therefore it is blasphemy; they reasoned
right, and true, as far as natural light could go, but here is the
difference between natural, and spiritual light, natural light comes too
short, they did not see that he was God. None can forgive sins but God, but
they saw him not to be God. This was natural reasoning. Why? because it was
true according to their principle, had he been but a mere man they had
reasoned very well: but it was natural because it was lame, and low, and did
not rise up so high as to see that that man was God, and could forgive sins. So
Peter's reasoning was rather natural then corrupt. Master spare thy self: it
was natural, and not corrupt reasoning: because it is good for a Servant to
give good counsel to his Master. But this was but natural: because though it
were honest, in a natural way, yet it was lame, it wanted a principle that was
spiritual, to see that it was needful, and necessary that Christ should die
(according to the counsel of God) rather then that all the elect should perish.

Thirdly, there are spiritual reasonings. As 3. Spiritual.
there is a spiritual mind; so I say there are spiritual reasonings in all
godliness. For all godliness, and every piece of it (as I shall show) is
carried upon reason, only it is spiritual reason. Look upon the whole bulk of
godliness, you may divide it into three parts. It consists, Either in
beleiving, and doing. Or in obedience, and doing. Or in suffering, and doing.


All a Christians life is spent, either in beleiving, or in doing, or in
suffering. Now in all these three you shall see in Scripture that a Saint does
not all these hand over head, as being led by a fancy of them, but clearly
upon reason, and the best reason in the World, as I shall show you anon.

First, for beleiving, look to Abraham, who is 1. Spiritual reasoning in
beleiving.
our pattern, our coppie. In Heb. 11. 19. By faith Abraham when he was tried,
offered up Isaak, and he that had received the promises offered up his only
begotten son: of whom it was said, that in Isaak shall thy seed be called,
accounting that God was able to raise him up from the dead, etc. Accounting, or
as the Greek word is, reasoning, that God was able to raise him from the dead,
from whence he received him in a figure. It is said that by faith Abraham
offered Isaac, his only son, he that had received the promise, God had made
the promise to Isaac; In Isaac shall thy seed he called. Isaac was his son, and
a son that he had in a strong way, by an ancyent Woman, and his only son, and
a son of whom the Messiah should come. Now there must be a great deal of
reason to persuade such a godly Father to kill such a hopeful Child, to put
him to death, to whom God had given the promise of all blessings, to all
Nations. Surely there must be a great deal of reasoning before he could be
persuaded to do this, and yet he did reason that God was able to raise him
from the dead. The word reasoning in the Greek is a word taken from
Arithmetitians, that take two or three Sums, and put them together, and tell
you this is the result of them: so he did reason, this is my son, and all my
hopes lie in him, and I received him when I was as a dead man, and for me to
go, and kill him, will dash all the hopes of my salvation. But on the other
side, spiritual reason comes in, and says, that God that gave him me in a
figure from the dead, that is, as it were from a dead woman, and when I was an
old man, that God is able of his ashes, when I have killed him, and burned him,
to raise him up again, and therefore I will go, and Sacrifice him, and thence
it is, that the holy Ghost says, that God raised him fron the dead.

Beloved, there is nothing that seems to be more without reason then Faith, and
in faith there is nothing seems to be more without reason, then for a man to
go, and kill his Son, his only Son, and yet he reasoned, is said it. And so in
Romans 4. he looked not upon flesh and blood, but reasoned from that promise, So
shall thy seed be, What was that? God called him out in a clear night, and
showed him the Stars in the firmament, and said, so shall thy seed be, and he
reasoned, and staggered not, but looked upon God as one that was able to bring
it to pass, and therefore it is said, in hope, above hope, he believed.

What shall I speak of Moses? you have it in that Chapter, they say, old men
are twice children, but Moses being 40. years old, refused to be called the
Son of Pharaohs daughter: some might think what a madness this was? the
text gives the reason, he reasoned, or he, Esteemed the reproach of Christ,
greater riches, then the Treasures in Egypt; that is, he reasoned thus, here I
am in great honor, I may be called the Son of the Kings Daughter, and here I
have hunting and hawking, and riches, etc, and yonder are the poor people of
God making brick, and there they have burdens laid upon them every day, and are
sighing, and groaning, and making spiritual prayers, and says he, the
blessing of God is there, and these riches are but for a time, and there are
the riches that are abiding, and blessed, and therefore says the text, He
chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Thus you see in these instances that faith
goes all upon reason, upon spiritual reason. 2. In doing


And so for doing; for obedience as it refers to doing, I will give you that
one place, that I had even now 2 Cor. 5. 14. says the Apostle, We thus judge,
or we thus reason, That if one dyed for all, then were all dead. And further,
this is an other conclusion, He dyed for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him which dyed for them, and rose again.
There is no act of obedience, that a Saint under the Gospel does, but it
proceeds from Gospel, Spiritual reason, Christ dyed, God reveals this in the
Scripture to me, and he seals this to my soul, that he dyed for me, when I
was the veryest enemy in the world; why then there is all the reason in the
World, he dying for me, that I should live to him, and serve him all the days
of my life; he redeemed me, and paid a rannsome for me, there is all the reason
in the world, that I should live to him, you must not think that the People of
God take so much pains to deny themselves, and to be carried on in such hard
rough ways, but that they are carried on in a way of spiritual reasoning.

And then for suffering; which is another part of a Christians life. You shall
read in Romans 8. 18. 3 In suffering.
If we be children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ,
if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glrryfied together. For I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy of the glory
that shall be revealed in us. Reckon, or I reckon; for it is the same word in
the Greek, that is, he did put the two sums together, as one learned Expositor
says, he put all the sufferings on the one side as light things, as short
things, and the privileges of the Saints on the other, that we are sons, and
heirs and coheirs with Christ, and that if we suffer with him, we shall be
glorified with him, and so after all his reasoning, he saw it was better to
undergo sufferings with Jesus Christ, considering the gain, and the loss
putting them both together in the Balance, and therefore he resolved to suffer
any thing that God should lay on him. So if we compare this place with 3 Cor.
4. 16. For this cause (says the Apostle) we faint not, but though our outward
man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: for our light afflictions
which are but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. We have abundance of afflictions as it is known to you
Corinthians, as he says before, We are afflicted on every side, there was a
great deal of affliction, and yet notwithstanding he did not faint, he was
able to go on, and suffer; Why so? Not phantastically, or rashly, as many a
carnal man may do, for it is not so with a Saint, he will choose dishonor
when he may have honor, but it is upon good reason, I will tell you why;
because though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day: and therefore says he, our light afflictions which are but for a moment,
they work to us an exceeding eternal weight of glory. As if he had said, the
afflictions which are now upon me, however you may conceive them to be great,
yet in the Skales of spiritual reason, I see they are but light, and little in
comparison of what the wicked shall suffer, and of what I have deserved: and it
is but for a moment, it is but for a time, and it does work, an exceeding,
excessive weight of glory, and therefore I have all the reason in the World to
suffer afflictions: for if the outward man suffer, the inward man gets by it;
and if it be light, there is a weight of glory, and if it be for a moment,
there is an external weight of glory. And says he, We do not look at things
that are seen, for they are temporal, but at things that are not seen which
are eternal. We look at things in a spiritual way; and thus says he, I
bless God I do not faint: and thus we have opened the Lesson to you, that they
that walk according to the flesh, are led by carnal reasons, and they that
walk according to the spirit, are ruled by spiritual reasons.

Now before I come to prove the doctrine unto you, to make way for it, because
in my apprehension it is a spiritual thing (as I shall show you hereafter)
There is nothing that I know in this blessed Book, that may help you in a
clearer way to discover your estates to you in a spiritual way, for such as
the man is, such is his mind, and such as his actions are, such is his mind,
and we may better understand the acts, then the mind, and we may better
understand both, then the man.

And therefore that you may understand this, I will lay down three things
before hand, before Three things premised.
I come to prove the Doctrine, or to apply it.

The first is this, that there is in all godliness, in 1. Godliness has the
best reason
every part of it, excellent reasons, there is the purest, sublimest,
excellentest reason in godliness. Beloved, I may say, and say truly of
godliness in a spiritual sense, what ever you may say of Logic in a natural
way. Logic is the art of reasoning, that is the definition of it, it is the
right Art of reasoning, so godliness is the right art of spiritual reasoning.
There is not one dram of right spiritual reasoning but in godly people: and
there is not one act in godly people,, but it is carried on upon the purest,
and sublimest, and excellentest reasoning that is; it is such a kind of reason,
that the Apostle calls it demonstration, that is the surest reasoning in
natural Logic. Now in that you have other kind of reasoning, as conjectures,
and probabilities, and other topics; but godly reasoning is demonstration, as
the Apostle says. And therefore in 2 These. 3. 2. wicked men that have not
faith, they are said to be unreasonable men, he is a wicked man that has not
faith, let him be never so honest, or civil, yet in Gods language, if he have
not faith, he is a wicked man; Paul prays that he may be delivered from
ureasonable men, from absurd Absurd, what.
men as you have it the margin. Now what is it to be absurd? you say when a
man carries himself illfavouredly, that is absurd; properly then when a man
reasons not rightly, it is absurd, as to draw wrong conclusions from premises;
as to say such a Town is garrisoned by the King, therefore London has the
plague, this is absurd. Now all the actions and doings of wicked men, they are
absurd, there is no more hold of them, then of a rope of sand. A wicked man may
have natural reason, and corrupt reason enough, but he is an unreasonable man,
he has no spiritual reason. Ground of Saints constancy.


And hence it is, that godly spiritual men are so constant in their Spirits,
and in their ways; indeed they are not absolutely constant because they are
godly but in part, but so far as a man, is godly, so far he is constant. As you
may see in natural things, the difference between a man that is at full age,
and has reason, and a Child that is not come up to reason, as the Scripture
says, be not as little children, tossed too and fro, Now what is the reason
that a Child is so inconstant; he will love a thing to day, and have it to bed
with him; and to morrow he will cast it in the dirt? it is because his actions
are carried by fancy, and he has not reason to rule, and sway him. Now you
know a man does not do, and undo things like a Child. See what difference
there is in a natural way, between a man at full age, and a Child at three or
four years old; so much, and more difference there is, between a godly,
spiritual man, and a natural man: and that is the reason, that when a godly
man, hears a natural man discourse, and say he will do this, and that, he
will go to the Wars, and he will take this, and that garrison, he smiles at it,
because he knows, he will not be constant. Take men all along in these wars
for some years past, whither they were Commanders or others, you shall see how
many brave resolute men both went forth, and were here in the Parliament at
home, and where are they now? But now take a godly man either in the Army, or
elsewhere, and you cannot say of him, he was so; but he is so: because he has
some reason to carry him along, that the other has not; he went for the glory
of God, and the respect of that continues with him, the other went out for a
show, for a blast, and so are turned about with every wind like a Wether-cock,
and all this for want of spiritual reason. Why the Saints are comfortable in
the worst condition.


Moreover, it appears by this, why the Saints that are godly, and spiritual
are so comfortable, even in the worst condition; and why other men are so apt
to be dejected. Take a Saint, and put him into any condition, and he knows how
to rejoice in the Lord. Take a Paul, or a Sylas, and put them in Prison, and
let them be to be hanged to morrow, and yet they can rejoice, and sing, they
can rejoce in tribulation, as well as in prosperity, but now men that have not
faith, that are not spiritual, though they laugh loud sometimes when they are
in Prosperity, yet when affliction comes they are down again; and this comes
from hence, not beeause godly men are mad men that they can rejoice in Chains
as men in bedlome do; but it is from spiritual reasoning. When they are in
affliction they can reason. I am now in much shame, and poverty, but I know
that they that are in Christ, all shall turn to their good, they are Christ's,
and all is for their Salvation. And thus they will draw from the Scriptures by
the help of the Spirit of God such kind of arguments as will draw them up, and
fill them with joy, even in the worst condition, which because the others have
not, they are up, and down, though their laughter be louder as Solomon says,
yet it is but as the crackling of thorns, that end in smoke, and smother, and
ashes: O, the godly are endued with a great deal of spiritual reasoning.

And hence it was, because there is so much reason in godliness, that the
Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ by a few Fishermen, and contemptible
men, without any force of rme, without any Sword drawn, they have been able to
break the great Emperor of the World, and to plant Religion over a great part
of the World. It is true, there is no natural reason in it in the World, that
a hundred, or half a hundred should go forth, and tell a Story of a man that
was a Carpenters son, a poor man that was at last hanged upon a Tree by the
Jews, and buried in a Grave; and for a company of poor men that had no
oratorie in the world, to go and tell People, that by this man is salvation,
and that they must believe in him, and that they had no power in themselves to
do it; and that if they did believe in him, they must deny themselves, and
Father and Mother, and Lands, and Life; and then they should have a Reward,
they knew not where, nor whence, hereafter in Heaven, but nothing in this
World; which there was no natural reason to persuade them to, and there was no
Sword to Command them; for their Commission was only to tell men, that if they
believed, they should be saved, and if they did not believe, they must be
damned, and yet we see the Gospel has prevailed in many Kingdoms of the
World, more or less. Now when Mahomet came, he comes as a great man, and when
he was asked, how will you prove your Religion to be true? He takes a Sword
and says by this: Such is the Doctrine of the Turks, and Persians; but the
Doctrine of the Gospel came not so.

Now you must not conceive that the Gospel works like a charm, that it works
upon men like mad men, but hence it comes to pass that though there be no
natural reason in it, nor the wisdom of men yet they speak in demonstration
of the spirit: they speak the wisdom of God to them that are perfect. There
is spiritual reason in every piece of that Doctrine that is able to satisfy a
man: and were there not stronger reason then any is in the World, men would
never yield to it. Thus I have given you a few hints, to show you that there is
abundance of profound reason in godliness.

Besides, when we see that godly men are so meek, Gentleness in gody men
whence it is
so gentle, so easy to be entreated. Whence is this? From the strength of
spiritual reason that is in them. As it is in natural things, you know women
are the weaker Vessels, the Scripture says so, and they are more apt to be
froward then men. Why so? Because there is not such strength of reason in them.
Now men that are at full age, and have strength of reason, they will bear
unkindneses, it is the glory of a man to pass by an offense; it is the wisdom
of a man to pass by an injury. Now as it is in natural things between a Man
at full age, and a Child, such a difference there is between godly, spiritual
men, and natural men; most natural men are froward, and peevish, and very
ungentle, and hardly to be entreated: but the godly, as far as they are godly,
as far as they have the wisdom that is from above, they are made gentle, and
easy to be entreated; because they have spiritual reason. As for instance,
suppose a man offer another a great deal of unkindnesse, and speak very ill
of him; natural reason will say, why should he do this? or why should I bear
it? But spiritual reason comes in, and says, When they curse, do you bless,
and the Scripture teaches me, that Christ loved me when I was an enemy, and so
should I do to others. There is nothing that may provoke a godly man, but if
he has the use of spiritual reason, he may keep his heart meek, and calm
as may be. Now you must not think that the Saints are stocks, or stones, for a
Saint has as much apprehension as a natural man has; but he has spiritual
reason, that he can shape the wrong done him, in a spiritual Mold, and so
carry himself meekly, and quietly.

Moreover, there is reason in godliness, and Godly men see their way in
confused times.
hence it is that the godly in times of confusion they can see their way in the
midst of the mist, when all others are at a loss, and know not which way to
go: a godly man can by spiritual reason seek out his way, as there is a full
instance in these times, all carnal men are at a loss, and think that all
Religion is gone into confusion, and one Governor is gone, and another come,
and one man is of this opinion, and another of another; the whole World, even
those that are mere Spectators, they know not which way to go, yet now the
Saints that are spiritual they can serve God, as fully, and as sweetly as
ever. Why so? Because though the others are at a loss, yet A Saint looks with
comfort on his life past.
they have eyes in their heads, and can see their way.

And hence it is, by this spiritual reasoning, that the veiw and contemplation
of their lives past is so sweet to them, and affords them so much comfort, as
far as it was Religious, whereas they remember their sinful actions with
shame, and natural actions with sorrow. When we come to be men, we cannot
endure to think of our carriage when we were Children, as making little houses
of strawes, and of clay, etc. When a man comes to be a man he rejoices more
that he has gotten such a house, and purchased such land, and he rejoices in
his Wife, and Children. There is more pleasure in the remembrance of a
rational act, then of a fantastical, though when we were Children there was
more pleasure in a fantastical act then in a rational, as a Child has more
pleasure, and will, to make Pies of clay, then a man has to purchase a House
and Land. So look to your lives past, you shall see abundance of corrupt acts,
that you are ashamed of, What profit had you (says the Apostle) in those
things whereof you are now ashamed: Comfort of spiritual duties, lasting.
you are ashamed to think of your drunkenness, and cozening, etc. and you
look upon natural acts with sorrow, but look upon any spiritual godly act,
what you have done for Christ, or the Saints, the comfort of them is as much at
the present as when you first did them, and that is a sign that they were
spiritual, otherwise the comfort of them would vanish away. Those things that
we do out of reason, have a more lasting sweetness, and comfort then those
that we do out of lust; that is the reason that if a man did a thing for God,
though it were forty years ago, yet the sweetness of it is fresh now, it is
not so in natural or corrupt actions, you befoole your selves in the one, and
blame your selves in the other; but spiritual actions, you rejoice in them.
Godly men not taken with temptations.


Again, from this it appears that there is reason in godliness, because
godly men are not caught with chafe, they are not caught with lusts, as
natural men are: you know little Children, how you may catch them with a
Babie, or a top, and a scourge, all the year about, you may feed their fancy
by bringing them some new toy home, but a man of forty years old you cannot
please him with a babie, or with a Horse of wood, etc. Such is the difference
between a natural man, and a Spiritual man, you may please a natural man,
and catch him with a good Office, or some such thing, but take a through, full
grown, spiritual man (as we have blessed be God some instances, in the Army,
and in the Parliament, and City) you offer him chafe when you offer him
these things, when you would tempt him to leave God, and to embrace the World.
That Germane beast, as it is said of Luther, will not be caught with Gold, such
a man will not be catched with a bribe: a Saint can outreason all such lusts,
he sees they are but the pleasures of sin for a season. Thus it appears to you
that in godliness there is agreat deal of reason.

Nay let me add this before I go further, there The best reason in godliness.
is the profoundest, and most excellent reason, and reasoning that can be in
godliness, and I will demonstrate it to you in three things. That there is
reason you have heard: Now I shall show you that there is the profoundest, and
the best reason, and that there is no reason to be compared to it.

First, because that in godliness there is a light 1. There is a new light in
the soul.
put into the soul, whence a man may reason: for man cannot reason without
light put into the mind. That is the reason why a Horse cannot reason, because
there is not light in him, understanding to deduct one thing from another. Now
the light we have in natural things is very uncertain, and dim and dark, by
reason of Adams sin, you see in natural things how imperfect Arts are, as
Physic, etc. Why? because the principles are few, we gather some things from
herbs, etc. the principles are not clear, but such men have tried such, and
such conclusions, and so they make up an argument, but this is but dim.

Secondly, there are in nature but dark, and confused principles: for reason
is a deducting of 2 Natural principles dark.
one thing from another; reason is a dividing, as if you should see the river
Nilus, they draw the river from the maine Channel to a lesser, and from that
to another: So reason is nothing but the drawing forth of the light that is in
a man, to this or that use, according as there shall be occasion. Now in
nature, we have but dark principles, and therefore we cannot draw things
certainly: but in godliness, there are such principles, that every thing in the
Gospel, is called clear demonstration. Demonstration, that is, when a man
sets forth a thing, when he proves a thing essentially, and infallibly:
demonstrations are infallible, if they be truly and clearly drawn: So then the
meaning of it is, that all the principles of the Gospel they are clear, and
plain; they are demonstrations, infallible to a spiritual mind: a carnal man
may doubt of them, but we speak wisdom to them that are perfect.

Thirdly, and lastly, the faculty of the soul whereby we do apprehend this
light, and in which we retain these principles, it is a great deal more exlent.
I say the faculty, that is the spiritual mind: for I told you before, there
were three minds, This spiritual mind is nothing else but the new Spiritual
mind what.
Creature; there is in a Christian the old Creature and the new Creature; and
the Scripture ordinarily calls it the old man, and the new man.

What is the new man?

Nothing in the world, but God puts as it were a new understanding in him; that
is, he puts a new light in his understanding, and frames his understanding to
be capable of that new light. For the mind we have naturally cannot receive
spiritual things. Therefore it is not only a new quality, there is something
more, or else God would not call it the new man, but the new quality, which he
does no where in Scripture; the Lord frames in the soul a capabillity, a
faculty to apprehend and reason upon Spiritual things; and this is called the
new man, and this comes from Jesus Christ, and his holy Spirit, and is upon the
growing hand more and more.

Now the other faculty, the natural faculty, is corrupt with lusts. The old
man is corrupt. And when I say the old man, you must take the natural Old man
what.
man, as well as the sinful man. The old man is corrupt; what is that? he is
corrupt, that is, he is rotten, How comes he to be rotten? He is corrupt by
reason of the lusts of it: As it is with Timber, it would continue a long time,
if it have not rain come upon it, but if rain fall on it, it makes it decay:
so the natural mind, the natural Sin corrupts the natural faculties.
faculty in Adam before he sinned was great deal more clear, and therefore
Adam was a better naturalist then any man, then all the men in the world; Adam
was a better Navigator, a better Physician, a better any thing. But as sin
raised the Law of God out of man's heart, so sin begun to rot, and corrupt the
natural excellencies of man, as his mind, etc. and that right reason that Adam
had before his fall, you see how he did name all the creatures, and what
wisdom he had, but after his fall, sin had not been long in him, but he was
more corrupt. As you see in a house where there is a hole in the thatch, if the
rain come in but two or three days, the Timber will not be much rotted, but
in time it will spoil it, So we see after, when sin came to increase more
in the days of Cain, man was more tainted; and yet surely, then natural
knowledge was more excellent then now it is, for you see what inventions they
had Genesis 4. of music, and building, and Tents, and many things that they
invented in Arts.

But you will say, it is an easy thing to make Tents, and Organs.

It is an easy thing to perfect a thing that has been 5000. years finding
out, but were you now to find out the thing, it were not easy. Now I say that
sin does rott, and rust the nature of man more, and more; and as sin gets
head more; so more, and more it will rot the faculties of man: but the faculty
we have in the new man, it is new, it was never tainted; never any drop came
into it, to corrupt it: for when God creates the new Creature, he makes it a
more excellent piece then he did the old; and this grows more and more: and
therefore seeing there is clearer light, and excellenter principles and a
profounder faculty, there must needs be a more blessed, and glorious way of
reasoning in a spiritual way then in a natural way. I had thought to have
gone over the other two things premised; but the time is past, and therefore I
will only now conclude this with one or two short words of use.

And first of all, I will here in love admonish Use 1. Not to reject all reason
in godliness.
you that are the people of God, to take heed of that devise of Satan whereby
he would persuade the Saints that there is no reason in godliness. Reason is a
word that is much prejudiced among Professors: and if a man speak of reason,
they are ready to slight it, and say, show me Scripture; as if sound spiritual
reason, and the Scripture, were contrary one to another; they are ready to
say, what do you talk to me of reason, show me a Text for it: It is true, we
must not talk of carnal, corrupt reason, that is abominable, nor of natural
reason, that is too short; but we may, and must in any thing belonging to
godliness, take in spiritual reason, and if it hold not with spiritual
reason, do not admit of it, let it be what Opinion it will.

Most of your wanderings and mistakes do arise from want of observing
spiritual reason: we reject reason, and go and take a place of Scripture, and
so hand over head go along, and not deduct things, as Paul, and Abraham did.
But beware of this, for there is nothing in godliness, but thon may find
sound reason in it; there is no absurdity in godliness; absurdity belongs to
wicked men that have not faith. Take heed of rejecting all kind of reason in
godliness; reject carnal reason, and expect godliness to be above natural
reason, but if there be not spiritual reason in what thou do, it is not of
God.

Secondly, it is a word of exhortation, or invitation Use 2. Invitation to come
to Christ.
to you that are carnal, that you would come in, and receive Jesus Christ,
that you would embrace Christ, and godliness by him.

Why so?

Because there is nothing in nature that may take with man, but there is that,
and that in a more excellent way in grace, if men had grace to heed it. You
know what takes with men in nature ordinarily, most of mankind, are weak, and
come not up so high as to action, and contempldtion; but you know what takes
with them, Riches, and Honor, etc. Now the Scripture tells us, in Christ we
shall in herite all these things: some affect Liberty, here is that also, If
the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. And whatsoever men can fancy,
says Christ, Come, and buy of me gold, and Raiment, and milk, and honey, and
Kingdoms, and Crowns, and whatsoever the nature of man is capable of. But
there are some that feed not upon sensual things, and to tell them of
pleasures, and Honor, and Riches by Christ, does not so much take them: but
thou art it may be an intellectual man that studiest the contemplation of
things that belong to the understanding if thou Godliness has that that will
exercise the intellectuals.
wilt come to Christ thou shall find such matter for thy understanding to work
on, rational things that thou wast never acquainted with before. There are
some men if you should give them all the contentments in the World, yet if they
had not rational company, and Books suitable to their understanding, you
could never content them: for indeed that is a greater delight by far which is
suitable to the understanding, then that which fits the fancy; and therefore
when that is fastened on, the other will be gone. As a child, when he is a
child, he loves tops, and trifles, and the like, but when he comes to be a man
he slights them. So a man that loves Riches, and Profit, etc. in a natural
way, if he come to study the Arts, he will slight riches. So if ever you will
draw the man to godliness, you must give him something that will delight him,
delight his intellectualls. Now I say, there is that in godliness, which all
that is in humane Books, is not to be compared to it, it is but solly in
comparison. I will instance in one place, Pro. 8. 10. 11. 12. Where wisdom
does cry cut in the Streets. The meaning is, Jesus Christ, who is called
Wisdom, is inviting poor sinners to come to him, Receive my instruction,
(says he) and not silver, and knowledge rather then choice gold. Solomon, or
any wise man would prefer Instruction before gold, and silver. For wisdom is
better then Rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not to be
compared to it. These are sensual things, what is there more in a rubie, then
a pebble but only the fancy. Now Wisdom is better then rubies. And would
thou know where to have this wisdom? I wisdom dwell with prudence, or with
suttlety, as some read it, and find out knowledge of witty inventions: there
are not in all the World such witty inventions, as there are in godliness.

A Christian finds out more witty inventions in a spiritual way in a day, then
a hundred natural men do in all their life time. And inventions in a
spiritual way, are far more taking with a man, than those in a natural way,
come to me, and I will give thee knowledge of witty inventions, such matter for
thy invention to work on, as thou never had before, I will discover such as
shall satisfy thee. I have known one once, that was ready to be distracted,
because he could see nothing in the world that could satisfy his
understanding, he saw all the world was but a whirlpoole of vanity, and
vexation, and just as he was going to turn mad, God let the manifestation of
Jesus Christ into his soul, and that satisfied his understanding, there was a
fit Christ only can satisfy the understanding.
subject, there was all the choice reasonings in the world to work on: there
was enough to satisfy his will, and to keep him in his wits, and to make him
comfortable, and joyful, or else he was confident he should have been
distracted.

For in natural things there is a little comfort, but always a man looks upon
the back of it, he looks behind it, and says, what shall I do when this is
gone?

Now when Jesus Christ comes in, he satisfies the soul; a man looks not behind
Christ's back to say what shall I do, when Christ is gone? but he and he only,
is enough to satisfy a man: therefore art thou a man given to contemplation,
and study Arts, be advised by Jesus Christ, this is the way to find out rare
inventions, to come to Jesus Christ, and study the deep things of the Gospel,
and there thou shall find out witty inventions, and devises world without end.

One word more, and I have done; lastly, hence it does follow clearly, that
godly men that are Use 3. Godly men the wisest men
truly godly, and spiritual. I do not say every paltry hollow-hearted
Professor, but a godly spiritual man, is the wisest man. Why so? Because he
has the most excellent, and profound reason, he has a mass of rationallity,
that the world knows not of: we may say of a godly man, as the Heathen said of
a learned man, a learned man has four eyes, and the vulgar have but two, so a
godly man has three eyes, and a natural man has but two, and scarce that; a
natural man can reason things, but it is with a corrupt, or a natural eye;
but a Saint can reason with a spiritual eye. Natural men have but a little
dark light in natural things, but a spiritual man can reason in natural
things, and in spiritual too, Wisdom is justified of her children. If a
Plowman should come to Oxford, and hear their disputes in Logic, or
Mathematics, he understands not the terms, and would think that they were
mad, yet wisdom is justified of her children; they that know what those Arts
are, they will say they disputed very well. So the world condemns godliness,
and thinks that godly men are mad men: but Wisdom is justified of her
children. You call it foolishness, says Paul, but We speak wisdom to
those that be perfect. And therefore you shall have the godly usually when they
are described in Scripture, they are called wise men, as it is often Wise men
in Scripture who.
in the Proverbs, the wise man and the Fool are put in opposition, the one to
the other; the wise man is the godly man, and the fool is the sinful man, let
him be as wise as he will be. And excellent is that word, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
methinkes it is a word that Spiritual man judges all things.
should take with us, He that is spiritual, judges all things, yet he himself
is judged of no man. What is the meaning of that? that is, put a spiritual
godly man, with any natural man in the world, let him be never so wise, he is
able to see through the natural man, and to know his principles, by which he
goes all along, and the end he aims at, and what he is like to do, but the
natural man is not able to judge of his principles. As you see he that has a
dark Lantern, he can see every body as he goes, but no body sees him; and
that is the reason Why natural men in place do little good.
that natural men do so little good in their places, because they cannot
discern other men. We have seen brave men employed about actions and designs,
but they cannot judge spiritually, and therefore they do not prosper; Why?
because some Flatterer comes, and cheats them; they want their dark Lant
horn, a godly man is able to see through a natural man, and to see his
principles and ends, and as a wise man, will fetch it out. He can judge of
things naturally, and corruptly, because he has been so himself, and he knows
how to judge spiritually, which the other cannot do. That is the reason that a
godly man in a Committee, or a few in the Army or Parliament, they can tell how
far other men will go, and how far their principles will carry them toward
God, or any good work; Who sit to be imploid in public matters.
therefore I would to God this poor Kingdom would be wise at last, that if
there be any business that requires wisdom, either in Parliament, or Army,
or Committee, or City, that they would put in godly men; they have their dark
Lanthornes, they can see through things, and will not be taken with chafe as
others may: you see how God has prospered and blessed them, and how they have
continued constant. Therefore I say henceforth let us not in any place or
business look so much to our kindred, or Neighbors, or carnal relations,
but that God would teach us to choose godly men in all places, they are the
only wise men, and can judge of all others, and are judged of none; if we do
not thus, I fear we may repent it when it is too late.

SERMON IX.
Romans 8. 5. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.
YOU know the last point we named to you from these words, was this: that True
Gospel Beleivers are ruled, and swayed with Spiritual reason, and all
carnal, fleshly men are ruled by carnal, fleshly reason.



I opened it to you. I told you there are three minds spoken of in Scripture.
And as there are three minds, so there are three sorts of acts, or reasoning.
Corrupt, reasoning. Natural, reasoning. Spiritual, reasoning.


I premised three things, before I could come to prove the Doctrine.

The first was this, that there is excellent reason in all godliness; there is
reason, and the best reason, as I showed you at large, and made two or three
uses of it.

Now to go forward a little, the second thing, briefly that I must premise,
before I prove this lesson, it is this: that, The reasonings of the Soul, are
the highest, Second thing premised.
and excellentest acts of the mind.



As the mind or understanding is the highest faculty of the soul; so the
reasonings of the mind The reasonings of the mind are the highest acts of it.
are the most excellent, and most immediate acts of the mind. The mind is
Christ's, or the Devils chief Throne. If Christ be in the soul, he keeps his
Palace in the mind: if the Devil be in the soul, he keeps his Garrison in
the mind. So the reasonings of the mind are the chief strength of the mind,
the immediate flowings of the mind. The whole acts of the soul are like the
New River: it comes to LONDON, and then you have Conduits to receive it, and
those send it to Wooden Pipes, and those send it to Leaden Pipes, and so to
your Kitchins, and Sellars: so the soul, the mind is as the New River, the
reasoning of the soul, that is the Conduit that receives it first; from the
reasoning it comes to the will, and affections, and then it goes out into the
actions: so the reasonings of the mind are the first, and chiefest, and
supreme part of all the actions thereof. Therefore if the mind be naught, the
whole soul is naught, if the reasonings be naught, the whole soul, and life
is naught also. But, because I would pass from that, the use of it in a word
is this, that

Hence we see the reason, why the wisest men, the most rational men, are
usually the worst men; because Use. The most rational men without grace the
worst.
they have more strength of reason then other men; the reason being corrupt and
naught, the stronger that reason is the worse the man is. Therefore if I have a
child or a friend that is a wicked man, if he be not made a good man, I wish he
may never be very rational, or reasonable, because the stronger his reason is,
being corrupt, the man ill he is in his will and affections. When men are mad
with reason: many of the vulgar are mad without Men mad with reason.
reason, they will hate a thing upon here say, O such a one is an Independent,
and this, and that, but when men are mad with reason, when they have wicked
reason, they are mad to purpose, they are mad with a vengeance as we say.

And that is the reason that the Apostle says that the Lord has not chosen
many wise, nor many Noble, but simple people, and simple things, God does not
ordinarily do it. As now in the Army fighting abroad, usually they do not
take great, strong Garrisons, but little petty ones are taken to and again,
daily. So, not many wise men are called, God takes some great strong Garrisons:
for it is a strong Garrison of the Devil, when a great Davils strongest
garrisons.
learned man is without the spirit of God; it is like Ports mouth, etc.
fortified strongly, God may take away the weapons of the Devil, and the
Principal Ordnance he has, is carnal reasoning, but God does it not
ordinarily.

It was a saying of a godly man, and a rational one too, he shook his head
and said, I wish many times in the year, that I were deprived of this reason
that is in me, that I might be wholly without reason, that there might be
liberty for faith to work. He meant that natural reason comes in, and hinders
faith, and crosses spiritual reason.

Reason is so troublesome, if it be carnal, and natural, and unsanctified,
that the more any man has of it, the more enemy he is to God. Therefore, O
that God would unbewitch, and undeceive you, and all the people of England,
that you would not make men your guides, as they are endued with Learning, or
reason, but the spirit of God. Go to any Parish, or Town, or place, and talk
with any man about Heavenly things, and ask him why he does think thus? He
will say, we have a Learned Doctor in the Parish, and he says so, and he does
so. The Lord has said that our Sun shall be turned into darkness, and our
Moon into blood. That is, all these glorious natural things shall be dashed
in the last times, and God will exalt his spirit; since God has promised it,
let us expect it, observe what man in the parish has most of the spirit of
God, and of spiritual reason, and hear him, and be advised by him; and say of
your great Doctors, and learned men, if God be not in them by his spirit, the
more Learning, and the more reason they have, the more enemies they are to God,
and therefore I will have nothing to 3. The reasonings of the mind the chief
distinguishing Character.
do with them. There you have two things.

The third thing I shall premise, is, that the reasonings of the mind are the
chief distinguishing Character of a man, by which principally above all things
one is distinguished from another, good men from bad: for the Apostle does not
reason here, from a known thing, to a darker; for he reasons from the mind, and
the acts of it, as if he had said, that is the chiefest maine way, whereby to
know the whole man whither he be fleshly, or Spiritual.

In natural things, the more essential the difference is, the more certain,
and sure it is, and rationality is essential to a man, you may distinguish a
man from a beast otherwise; a man has but two Legs, and so may be
distinguished from a Horse, that has four; but this is not so certain a
Character; but when you say man is rational, that distinguishes him from all
birds and beasts. So there are many things in godliness that you may partly
know a Christian by, by his works, and affections, and actions, and by his
company, and carriage, you may know him a little from another man, but these
things are outward, and external; but his reason is essential to him, you may
know him above all these by his reasoning in his soul, that is the most
essential thing to a Christian, as reason in it self considered, is most
essential to a man.

Consider this, for this is a thing by which you may understand clearly, what
you are made of and what you are. There is nothing in godliness but an
hypocrite, and a wicked man may come up to it, unless it be this, to be
carried on by spiritual reason. As for instance, a wicked man may know God, he
may have a great deal of knowledge of godliness, and (to our eyes) of the
spiritual estate of godliness. Heb. 6. He may be enlightened, he may discourse
well, and Preach excellently, and Carnal men may go far in Religion.
Pray spiritually, he may have much knowledge, and all the Saints in the
Country may account him constantly a chief Professor, and a most excellent
Christian. Nay he may love all good things in a sort, or for the most part; a
natural man that is but commonly wrought on by the spirit of God, he may love
prayer, and hearing, and Reading, and giving to the poor, and other good
works, he may love, and delight in it, as Herod did to hear John speak, he
may love it for some carnal circumstances about it, and though he love it, yet
all runs upon the Wheel of carnal reason. As for instance, I love very much
to give to the poor, because the pride of my heart will be much satisfied in
it. I would be held an emynent Professor, and I invite Saints to my House, and
I quarrel with them if they come not, but it is to hold out my vaineglory, not
out of spiritual Love in my soul. So there is no piece of godliness, but it
may be clothed with such circumstances, that a natural man may love it, an
hypocrite may do every thing in godliness, and be an Hypocrite when he has
done.

But here is the difference, a Saint loves good, Ground of Saints loving good
things.
and that flows from spiritual reason, and he does good from spiritual
reason. As for instance; I do not give to the poor to keep correspondence,
and to be well thought of, and because I would be accounted such a Professor,
no; but I do it from spiritual reasoning, Christ loved me, and therefore I
will love my Brother. So whatsoever a Saint does, spiritual reason draws him;
and this is the most essential Character that distinguishes an Hypocrite from
a true Christian. It is not loving or knowing, or doing of good, but it is the
Wheel that it goes on, whether it be spiritual or carnal reasoning.

But may not a good man do some actions, from natural or corrupt reasoning?
how is that then a

A good man may do an action from carnal reasoning; How a good man may be
moved with natural or carnal reason.
but a carnal man can never do good from spiritual reasoning: as that speech
of Peter in advising of Christ not to go to Jerusalem, it was partly natural,
and partly corrupt reasoning. But that you may see this clearly
notwithstanding this, you may discern him hereby, that

In the first place a Christian is moved by spiritual reason, and in the
second place he may be moved by natural reason: as suppose there be a good
Minister that is full of grace, that desires to do good, and yet he and his
Family is ready to starve. The first thing that he blesses God for, is, that
he has opportunity to teach Christ to the souls of poor people; that is the
first, but next he says, and blessed be God that there is a way to support my
Family; natural reason is tied to spiritual, as the little boat is to the
ship.

Secondly, though a Saint may be carried to an 2 A Saints general course by
Spiritual reason
action with corrupt reason (that he pays dear for) yet the whole course of
the life, and actions of a Christian flow from spiritual reasoning. O! that
the Lord would give you to examine your selves, by this, It is not by what thou
accountest of, or what thou esteemest or love, but what mooves thee? what is
the Wheel that sets thee on work? Is it a spiritual mind, that gives
spiritual arguments, that moves thee all the day to good toward God, or man?
I desire that you would carry this with you, this is the essential difference
between an Hypocrite, and a Christian. Ask when thou do an action, not how
much thou do, or what men conceive of it? though it be but a small action,
as suppose thou art a Maid that art sweeping the house, or any such mean
thing, ask, why do I this? what moves me? what is the maine spring? Is it
that my Master or Mistress may not chide me? This is natural reasoning, but thou
should say, I do it that I may obey Christ, he has called me, and has
reedeemed me to live to him: and so it may be, a man may do thee an ill turn,
and thou would not do him a mischief again, it is a good resolution: but
why do thou not do it? it is not because thou art ashamed, or afraid to do
it? But if there be a little spring within to think, Christ loved me when I
was wicked, and therefore I will love him, O! this is excellent.

The next thing I should come to show you is, how it comes to pass that
Christians that are right, are swayed, and ruled by spiritual reasonings, all
their life. I shall not have time now but must wait on God till he give another
opportunity, only I shall conclude now with two short Use 1. Trial what grace
or corruption is in us.
Uses.

First, hence you may see; by this rule you have a Standard by you to try how
much grace, and how much corruption there is yet in your souls; this is the
perfectest Standard that I know. Take it by a day, or a week, or an hour, or
an action, see how much in that action, or day, or hour, or week, thou art
carried clearly upon spiritual reasoning. So much of godliness, so much of
true, pure grace there is. Look into thy life, and actions, good, or evil,
that is not a jot matter, so much of thy life as is carried upon spiritual
reasonings, so much godliness there is. It is not how much thou fastest, or
prayest, or the like, but how much thou art carried by spiritual reasoning. As
in Egypt they have a Pillar, and Figures upon it, and when Nilus flows up,
they know by those Figures how far the River rises, higher, or lower, and
accordingly they set their rates on things, and accordingly things will be
dearer, or cheaper. Or as by your Weather-glasses, you know whether it will be
rain, or fair weather. So this rule would be a Weather-glasse, a
Grace-glasse, and a flesh-glasse, that is, if thou lay up this in thy soul,
hereby thou may know the ebbings, and flowings of thy soul, whether thou
walk better this week then before. It may be lust may drive a man to Lust may
drive to good.
a good thing, but go to spiritual rationality, that is the essence of a
Christian, as the other rationality is the essence of a man. Hereby thou may
know whither thou be nearer to God this week, then thou were the week before,
or whither thou be further from him.

The other lesson, and a special lesson for you Use 2. Why good men miss the
will of God.
to remember from what I have told you concerning spiritual Reasoning, is
this, hence learn why wise men so often miss the will of God, It is a blessed
lesson, why do we see godly men many times miss the will of GOD; and are
quite out in matters of judgment, and action, and yet are holy, and godly men:
It is not because they reason not rightly concerning such things, but because
the reason whereby they reason it is more carnal then spiritual. As for
instance, I could name a Book that was Written about the Common Prayer, not
long ago, a Book of admirable reason, full of rationality, and by a godly man
too, and yet he mist the will of God in it. How came it? Not because he did not
reason rightly, but because the reason he reasoned it by was natural, and not
spiritual. And so among Ministers, they reason things thoroughly, and rightly,
and draw deductions from them, but here they miss, they look not what reason,
they reason by; it may be it is natural reason, and that may lead to
naturalls, but it cannot to Spiritualls.

This is a rare rule for Christians, when thou art reasoning, and thy thoughts
are busy about a case, and thou deductest one thing from another; but ask thy
self, I reason, but what is this reason I reason by? is it carnal, or
spiritual? As men that weigh gold, or other things, they first heave up the
skales to see if they be right; we do not do so, and therefore we ordinarily
miss in this. As when a man is in anger, he thinks he never speaks better
reason than then; he speaks powerfully, and he thinks every word is Gospel,
and every word is reason, but it is corrupt reason, and so it appears to him
the next day. Now any lust may transport a man so, let a lust set natural
reason on work, and a man will reason bravely, and rightly; but he does not
take up the Skales before, and say, I judge right, but what is it that I judge
by? A man may say he can judge well of the color of Cloth, by the light of a
dark-shopp, but is that light right? a man should examine that. And so in the
Synod and other places we should see that the reason that we judge things by,
be spiritual, but we take any reason, and if it prove natural reason, we
shall have things go naturally, but if it be not spiritual reason we go by,
we shall never attain to judge of spiritual things.

SERMON X.
Romans 8. 5. For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.
BEloved I would willngly end what I had to say to this text at this time, and
I doubt not but by Gods assistance I shall do it, and therefore I would but
only lead you a little, because we were driven to break off abruply that you
may understand which way we have been going, when the Lord has been teaching
us hitherto from these words.

I told you the Apostle in the 4. verse had laid down a great privilege, and
then he shows who are the partakers of this privilege; They that walk after
the spirit, and not after the flesh; but this is but general, and therefore he
shows it more particularly, by the best part of the man, the mind.

Beloved I have spoken a little in general concerning the mind, and to follow
the Apostles method, I have culd out the chief thing in the mind, the chief
act of it is the reasoning. The mind, that is the reasoning of the mind, from
whence I have taught you this Lesson. That, those that are fleshly, they are
led, and swayed with fleshly reasoning, and those that are spiritual, they are
led and swayed by spiritual reasoning.



My end is to discover to you, whether you have this privilege or no, and
therefore in the Apostles method, I would bolt it out as far as I could. I
told you man is a rational creature, and no man does any action, but there is
some reasoning about it, and though the action be never so sudden, yet the
mind is so quick, that it has some kind of reasoning or other.

Now for the explication, I told you there was three minds, carnal, corrupt,
and spiritual; and from those three minds, flowed three reasonings, corrupt,
natural, and spiritual.

Now for the further prosecution of it, I told you there were three things I
had to premise before hand, before I came to prove it.

One is, that there is the best reason in the world in godliness, and
religion; godliness has in it, all along, the excellentest, the best, the
profoundest reason that can be, this I prooved at large: godliness is not as
some carnal people account it, a vain giddy thing, but goes all upon reason,
it is the act of reasoning, as they say of Logic, and not like our natural
Logic from probabilitis, and the like; but it is all upon demonstration:
that is one thing I opened to you, and we had diverse Uses then, with which I
will not now trouble you.

Now the second thing I was to premise, was this, That the reasoning of the
soul, it is the highest act of the mind.



As I told you the mind is the highest faculty in the soul: so the reasoning
is the first, and strongest and most immediate act of the mind, and therefore
as the mind is the chiefest seat of Christ, if he dwell there; or the
chiefest garrison of the Devil if he dwell there: So the reasonings of the
soul, are the chiefest weapons of the mind, because I told you that these
they do come immediately from it.

The third thing was, that the reasoning is the chief character of a man as
reason in a man, considered in a natural way, is the most proper way of
distinguishing of him from other things, because it is most essential to him;
for you cannot distinguish a man so properly from a horse because he has two
legs, and that a horse has four, but by his essence, he is a rational
creature, and therefore I told you a man may know good excellently, a man may
love good, and godliness, and a man may do good, and suffer for good, and yet be
an hypocrite, yet be a carnal man. Why? Because he may do good and love good,
and suffer for good, and all out of carnal reasoning, he may love the good
because of some fine circumstantiall things.

And therefore I concluded last day with two words of use, but I must endeavor
to make good my promise. Now the last thing is, how it comes to pass, for I
have as in reference to the Doctrine you heard, That spiritual men are swayed
3. How it comes that Saints are guided by spiritual reason.
with spiritual reasons. How comes it to pass that they are enabled so to
reason, and to be so guided by such Reasons.

Beloved, in general, certainly it is only by the same spirit of God, for I
must advance the spirit still. Not in opposition to the Scriptures, mistake me
not, for the spirit takes of the things of By the spirit.
Christ, and in the Scriptures, shows you them; but it is the Spirits
teaching you. And therefore it is said they are after the spirit that do mind
spiritual things, because it is the spirit that does work them to mind
spiritual things, ye would never mind spiritual things else. All the
Learning in the World, and all the wit in the World, will never teach a man to
make one sincere argument, to do good, or draw him from evil.

But you will say, how does the Spirit do this?

Beloved, I told you heretofore that I do not approove of those that do
endeavor to show you too particularly and disbiastly, how the spirit of God
works in the soul, as many men have done, and many a godly man, but they have
lost much time, and have puzelled the souls of poor people, for thou know
not how a Child is formed in the Womb, how his eye is made, and how his Nose
is made. And how are we able to discover how the Spirit of God works grace in
the soul, which ordinarily is done that he does this first, and then that, and
will not do this, until he has done that, which has brought forth a deal
of curiosity and needless distinctions troubling the People of God.

But I will give you some particulars how he does it. The ways whereby he does
it, without curiosity, not saying he does this first, or that first.

He does it by a Creation, by spiritual Creation, 1. By a creation.
he does make a Caeation in the soul, which is called the new man.

Thou that art there now sitting in the Pew, that creature, that old creature
cannot reach the spirit of God. It cannot be mended, for we have hearts of
stone, that will not be cobled nor mended, but taken out wholly: our natures
are so naught that they cannot be mended: but God comes, and by his Holy spirit
makes a new Creature in the soul,

As man is said to be a man and has not his denomination from the grosser
part, as his Legs, or the like; but from the more noble part, his soul, and
his mind, for where as in one place it is said, What will it avail a man, to
get the World and loose his soul; in another it is loose himself: So as my
soul is my self. So there is an old man not according to outward age, but
according to the inward. Now he makes thee a new creature, not New legs, and
hands, but new mind, new affections, and new powers in thy soul.

Now most people say, that the Lord does infuse new qualities into the soul,
that whereas thou have an under standing and it is rotten, and all is full of
bad qualities, thou shall have new qualities, thou shall have an under standing
that will mind More then new qualities in Saints.
Heavenly things. Beloved, that is true, but I very much doubt whiter there be
not something more, because the Lord calls it a man, and we never Read in the
Scripture where he will work new qualities; but a new man. We are created a
new Creature. Now that is the way, and therefore if ever thou will be a
spiritual man, thou must have the Lord to make thee a new creature. Now the
Saints heretofore (pray understand me) did not look upon things as we do, we
have had so many false distinctions, and subdistinctions: we have not the same
notions, and distinctions they had. They always looked upon the inward man, or
the new craature. Now we look without, says Paul, my inward man gains
daily. If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature.

Beloved, that ye may understand this, bear with me a little, I do find in
the Scripture that a man is made a Saint, made spiritual, and holy, two ways.

One is by renewing a man to that which he was in Old Adam.

Secondly, by creating things in him that were never there before. And we have
these two expressions A Saint made spiritual, how
in Scripture. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and created unto good
works. So that a Saint he is made up unto that condition two ways. Either God
has renewed in him those things he had in Adam. Or else God has created in
him, that which was never there before. As for instance, God reveals in him
Sobriety, and continuance, and the like. These things were in Adam, and now
when a man is made a Saint, they are renewed only upon a new Foundation. And
withal the Lord creates some things that were never in Adam; as for instance,
he creates faith there, that is, the the faith of the Gospel: There was a
faith in Adam without doubt; but that faith of the Gospel, to believe in
another, to renounce his own righteousness, this was not in Adam, because it
was pointblanke contrary to his own condition, for he was to have
righteousness in himself, and to renounce it was contrary to his condition.
Now God Creates such a faith in us.

And Beloved, there is another thing and it may be there are many things more.
I have had many thoughts of it with submission to the godly, and wise, I think
that Gospell-goodnesse, is a piece of the new man, which was not in Adam; Some
thing in Saints that was not in Adam.
as to do good to Enemies, to love them that hate us; to give drink to a
thirsty Enemy; When one is wicked, and ungodly, and does deal despightfully
with us, as Christ says, then to do him good; and bless when he curses, and
pray for him that injureth us. Beloved, this is Gospel goodness. I have had
many thoughts of it, had I time to prove that this Gospel goodness is a
piece of the new Creature, that was not in old Adam.

There was goodness in Adam, but not this; as for instance, there are diverse
things we find among Professors that in the last day will be found to be
nothing but the Old Adam, but Ishmaells, that are humbled to the height, and ye
shall see in them a great deal of diligence in Gods service, but where will
you find a Professor, one of 500. and I speak with the least, that you may
clearly read Gospel goodness in him; that you may say, younder is a man,
that if you curse him, he will love you, and if you do him hurt, and that
despitefully, he will pray for you. It is an easy thing to kindle a brand that
has been once lighted, to do that which Adam did, but to do this is a higher
matter.

As man was created after the Image of God: so the Creatures (in a sort) were
created after the Image of man: Now as in Creatures, in a Dog there is love
and the like. But where is there a Creature that if you do him mischief, will
not endeavor to do you the like again, or at least wise run away.

But where is a piece in the Old creation that does l^ve his enemies. And
whereas it is said, Adam was created after the image of God, and God loves his
enmies. I answer, God then in that Covenant was not in a disposition to love
his enemies, but to hate his enemies, and sinners, and curse them, and damn
them; but now in Jesus Christ he loves his Enemies, and therefore according to
his mind, he revealed to Adam, it was not so; and many other reasons I had,
but this I present to you with submission, I do not speak curiosities, but I
find and see very little of this, scarcely any; there was a candid goodness
in the primitive Church, which is not now to be: which is not now to be found;
now nothing but biting, and teareing, and devouring one another, well there is
one word, he does it by a spiritual Creation. 2. By spiritual illumination.


Then Secondly, he brings the soul to this way of spiritual reasoning, by
spiritual illumination, he created faculties before, and now he casts in
light as he did in the old creation; you know he made Heaven and Earth in the
lump, and then said let there be light.

Now that is the reason when the Gospel is Preched, and there is the spirit of
God going with the Word, and thou are dark, and can not receive this light;
the new creature is not framed in thee, if thou have no eyes, thou can not
see, and if a man have eyes, he cannot see in a dark room. Now when the new
man is made, then the Lord sends in light, and it is not every light, for there
are many lights, a blind man (as it were) has an Hypocrite has them: but it
is a powerful light that God Saints have a powerful light.
puts in, for we do find that there is a kind of light in Hypocrites; but
yet there is not power in them, there is not light to bring them to such kind
of reasoning, as will bring them to any good or from any evil, they will talk
of drunknesse, and Whoredom, and the like, but have not power to bring them
off from any of these things: Indeed a Saint may be overcome of his lusts that
war in his Members, but there is a law in his mind^, that is, there is a
light that is like unto a Law, that has power in it, that he sees Christ
doing them away. I am sorry I have not time to open this unto you farther, but
remember it.

Thirdly, the Lord will do it by suggestion, that is, the spirit of God puts
light into the soul, he puts a measure of light to dwell in every new
creature, and that powerfully. But because the way of of the Saints are so
dark in this World, and through so much difficulty, the spirit of God prompts a
Saint always, when he is at a loss. As among Scholars, we shall see,
sometimes a man is almost borne down, and then another gives him an Argument,
or distinction to help him, and then he carries it: and so the flesh has
reasons and arguments as we are going along, and now though there be a measure
of light, a stock of light dwelling in us, yet we are nonplussed by the flesh,
and then the spirit of God suggesteth somewhat to us, and we are carried through,
as you have it in, Mat. 20. When you are brought before Governors, it is not
you that speak, but the spirit of God that prompteth you.

Fourthly, the spirit does it by Conviction, that 4. By conviction
is another way, we have it, Joh. 16. Says Christ, when I go, I will send my
spirit, and my spirit shall convince the World of sin; reproove you have it, he
shall convince the World, of sin, of righteousness, and judgment. The word
signifies, when he says the spirit will convince, that is, by way of Argument,
the meaning is, that in every carnal man's heart, there are arguments against
faith, and for his own destruction, and strong ones too And when we Preach to
you, ye bring reason against reason, and so go away unconvinced, unconverted:
but the spirit will ronvince you, that is, he will bring such strong arguments
(as Doctor PRESTON says) from Heaven, that will convince you. As when a
stronger man comes, he disarmeth the other: as before we thought godliness
nothing but Heresy, and Puritansme, and the like; but now the spirit
convinces you, you see this is the only way, and out of this way I shall never
see God, and the like.

Another way I find the spirit does it by, is, by 5. By commemoration.
commemoration, by minding us of what we have heard, or something we have known
before; it is our remembrance. Therefore says Christ, I will send my spirit,
and he shall bring to your remembrance, what you have heard, not that you shall
remember a whole Sermon, and Repeat it every word; but thus it is, he will
either suggest thoughts, Nenever had before, or bring to our remembrance, a
word we have heard of such a Preacher, in such a place, or Read in such a
place, or thought in such a walk, or the like: and so sets on, and carries
on the work.

And he does it by consolation, he is the Comforter, 6. By consolation.
the consolation of the spirit. Beloved, this is certain, that ye know trouble
of mind exceedingly hinders the acts of reason. That Is the reason men are madd,
because some fumes rise up in the brain and trouble the mind, that they cannot
reason, but are madd. Beloved our troubles of mind, and soul, they are like
fumes that come up into the brain and distract us. A spiritual man is many
times, as it were, a distracted man; there are so many fumes, such horror and
guilt; that he is almost starck mad; he can talk of natural things, but in
spiritual things he is, as it were, mad; the Chain of spiritual reason is
broken, and now the spirit is the Comforter, and he quiets the spirits: and
when a man is in a quiet temper, the disease is gone and reason comes into the
mind, and as the Philosopher said, ye know in natural things, a man can reason
when he is not troubled, so is it in the spiritual.

Another way is by sanctification, by the spirit, 7. By sanctification.
he is the spirit of Sanctification, it makes the soul holy it takes away
lust, and sin from the soul. This I find in Mat. 6. 22. 23. I would open that
place, but cannot, therefore pray consider it: says Christ, the light of the
body is the eye, if therefore thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be full
of light. He does oppose singleness unto evil, if thy eye be single, that is,
if thy eye be purged from all guile, that there is no sin there, not when a man
has one eye to God, and the other to sin, to the World. But if thy eye be
evil, that is sinful, then thy whole body is full of darkness. Therefore
blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God.

Well Lastly, there is another way, there are 8. By excercising.
diverse more, but I will name but one more. And that is, the spirit of God
does teach the Saints thus to reason, by excercising, that is, helps them to
exercise and improove that light that they have. There is a little light,
natural light, and there is a kind of spiritual light that an Hypocrite has:
but the spirit of God does not help him to improove that light, and therefore
that light dies, he blows not up the sire, you know men come to reason, by
reasoning, and exercise of reason makes men rational, I mean makes them know
how to reason. Now Hypocrites do not thus, as you may see. Romans 1. There they
knew God, and because they glorified him not as God, they became vain in their
imaginations, or in their reasonings, as it is in the Original, God gave them
up to a reprobate mind, because they glorified not God.

Beloved, I have three or four uses but I fear Use. The Fountain of all good
and evil in the soul.
I shall not reach them all, I am overloath to tire you and my self. Therefore
I will conclude with one word, and that is this. That from hence, from this
that has been said, you may see what is the Fountain of all goodness, and of
all evil in the soul.

Of all good as I have at large looked upon it, but 1. Of good.
can but touch: take any good, and you shall see it is carried on by spiritual
reasoning, as take faith Abraham reasoned, he that gave him a Son at a
hundred years old, could raise him up again. Take your consolation it comes
out by spiritual reasoning, take Paul and Silas, they were in Prison, and
ready to be brought out the next day to die, now one would think they were
madd there to sing, but they did it upon spiritual reasons, for they accounted
themselves blessed to suffer for Christ, and if they die they shall then be
with Christ, -- for hating of evil you shall see whence is it as pulling out
the right eye, or cutting off the right hand; that is one would think, a most
unreasonable thing; but Christ gives a reason for it, It is better to go into
Heaven, it is better to enter into life halt or maimed, rather then having two
hands, or two feet to he cast into everlasting fire. So a Saint can reason
spiricually, and thus he loves the Saints, and hates sin, and denies himself,
and performs every duty, he so reasons that it is the blessed will of God
he should do it. 2. Evil.


And so for evil; whence comes sin, from the vanity of the mind whence comes
persecution, they think they do God good service. There is reason, it is a
good thing to suppress these Schismatiques say some, and to have Conformity
and be all of one mind, and to banish them and let them all go, whence is
this? it is either from corrupt or natural reason. And so when men hear the
Word of God, and forget it, they like it well; as a man does, that sees his
face in a glass: but they go away, and forget it, and whence is it? why James
tells you, Deceive not your selves. Deceiving your selves; the word in the
Original is, by false reasonings. A man hears the Word, and thinks surely I
am in this evil condition, and I am out of the way, and I must look after
Christ, and the like. But afterward, comes natural reason, saying, these are
but new denies, and what is become of our Fathers, and the like? Beloved, all
good is carried into the soul upon the wings of spiritual reason, and all
evil upon natural and corrupt reason, and therefore I conclude all,
beseeching you that you would study and endeavor to get up your souls, To
labor to be swayed by spiritual reasoning.
and your conversations accordingly to be swayed, and carried on by a
spiritual mind, by spiritual reasoning, for here we speak of your
Consciences, not of your lives so much, as of your hearts, and minds. And that
you may so do, take the motive which follows in the Text, which I did
purpose, had God given me strength, and time to open but take it in the gross.

For to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded, is life and
peace.

Be persuaded to go home and pray the Lord to create this in you, yea and
enlighten you, For to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded
is life and peace.

Two things I have here to say; To be carnally Carnal reasoning brings death.
minded is death, you must expound it by the other that opposes it; its
contrary to life and peace, it is death and trouble, and the other is life and
peace. Death and trouble, if thou will be a carnal man, and go on so, there is
nothing in all thy course but death and trouble; that is, there is death at the
end of it. Remember that the end of thy Journey is death. Remember as the
Apostle says, Phil. 3. they mind earthly things,, and I write weeping that
there end is destruction. It is a fine thing to be carried all our life long,
from one carnal thing to another, and provide for my Honor, and wealth, and
preferment, and the like; and do this and that good action upon carnal
reasons, and with a carnal eye, but God has put a sad end to it, it is Death.
Spiritual reasoning life.


And now the other it is life, it is eternal life though it be rough for me
every day to dispute with my carnal heart, and not only carry on good, but
deny my self in good, upon spiritual reason, this is a warrefare, but the end
is life, and it is peace too.

This is a hard work you will say, and therefore we will take the easiest and
smallest work.

Beloved, I say there is more ease, and sweetness, and contentedness, in
going on in the ways of God spiritually, upon spiritual reasons an hundred
fold, than in the other; for the other will be rough, and God has cast it so,
God has put a curse upon all Old Adam, he curses it with death, and therefore
he must dye that walks carnally, and that is the reason all your natural
thoughts and actions are so bitter; God has cursed them, they must dye, and
now all the ways of Holiness, have enough to induce thee to endeavor to
walk holily: as one says, the gleanings of the Saints, are better than the
harvest of the wicked men, if there were no Hell nor Heaven hereafter, but only
the wicked to have the pleasures of sin here, and the Saints to have the
consolations of the Spirit dwelling in them, it is more an hundred fold; the
one is nothing but crackling of Thorns under a Pot, and the end is smoke, and
stink, and the other is sweet here, and in the end blessed eternally; if it
were not, suppose though the way to Heaven be bitter here, yet it is sweet in
the End; and the way of the world sweet here, and bitter in the end, yet you
should choose holiness; as a Philosopher said, if a man were to take a bitter
and sweet thing, which were he best to take first? says he to take the sower
or the evil first; and the sweet for the hope of the good to come, will
sweeten the present evil: but when a man has the good first, the fear of the
evil to come will mar al; but therefore seeing there is a reward in the way,
in Holiness as well as in the end, for holiness, it should move us to labor
after holiness.

THE TABLE.
A
Abraham ABraham juflified, how, page 231
Absurd Absurd, what. 369
Act The chief act of the mind. 358 See Reasoning.
Action Actions carnal, denominate men. 323
Adam Two things from Adam. 252 The best have somewhat of old Adam. 270 All from
old Adam condemned. 28^ Something in Saints that was not in Adam. 405 See please.
Adoption Spirit of adoption. 280
Affliction Carriage of a humble heart in affliction. 124 Ten Instances of the
carriage of a humble heart in afflictions. 126 See fire.
All Christ died not for all. 107 Saints willing to know all Gods truths. 110
Amiable Sight of God to Saints amiable. 16
Another Saints content with the righteousness of another. 102
Antinomians Antinomians, who.
Apprehensions Sight of God known by our apprehensions. 31 Apprehensions of
God how to try them. 40 See clear, precious, perpetual.
Assurance Assurance in the apprehensions of Saints. 32 Assurance wanting to
ordinary Professors, why. 106

B
Beleivers, Beleiving None satisfy the law but Beleivers. 249 Spiritual
reasoning in Beleiving. 363 See righteousness.
Blind Mind of a Carnal man blind. 349
Bondage Spirit of bondage, what. 280
Books three uses of other books besides the Scriptures. 311
Borne again He that will see God must be borne again 62 To be borne again,
what. 69 To labor to be borne again. 312
Bribe God such a Lawgiver as cannot be brided. 209

C
Change A true sight of God changes men 54
Carnal Men merely carnal are called flesh. 323 See actions.
Christ Saving sight of God only in Christ. 11 A Saint in the worst condition
repents not of taking Christ 137 The law fulfilled by Christ. 210 Motive to
come to Christ. 214 Invitation to come to Christ. 381 See example, father,
coming, meek, lycenciousnesse, rule, unyon.
Clear Apprehensions of God clear to Saints. 31
Coachman The mind the coachman of the soul. 347
Coare The coare of a natural man's heart fleshly. 335
Commands A proud heart dissobeys Gods commands. 117 A proud heart weary of
Gods commands. 118 Who offer violence to Gods commands 119 A Saint in
affliction neglects not Gods commands. 142
Comfort The godly more careful of benefit then comfort in afflictions. 142
why Saints have comfort in the worst condition. 371
Coming Upon what ground to long for Christ's coming. 292
Communion Communion with sinners wherein forbidden. 169
Condemn See Adam.
Condescend A humble Saint will condescend to the weak. 186
Conscience Conscience purified, what. 49
Consolation consolations of the spirit. 409
Conversation Unnecessary conversation with sinners forbidden. 171
Constant Sight of God in this World not constant. 17 Ground of Saints
constancy. 369
Conviction Conviction of the spirit. 409
Correction Wicked men see not God in corrections. 96
Corporeal Corporeal sight of God. 4
Corrupt, corruption Saints pure notwithstanding their corruptions. 52
Corruption how discovered. 149 Saints called fleshly because of their
corruptions. 322 Mind corrupted. 360 Reasoning corrupted. 361
Covenant Saints stick close to the covenant in afflictions. 143 Covenant in
man to keep Gods law. 208 Ishmael, and Isaac, types of the Covenants. 266 See
works.
Creation Sight of God in works of creation. 4 New creation by the spirit. 403
Creature Creatures resemblances of spiritual things. 55
Curse Sin a curse in Hell. 288

D
Darkness Satan's Kingdom darkness. 64 Natural principles dark. 377 Day,
See son of man. Death, die
Hypocrites why ^oth to die. 38 Why godly men die. 287 Carnal reasoning brings
death 413 See sin, works.
Deliberation Deliberation wherein excluded. 215
Deliverance Saints desire something more then deliverance. 140
Discretion Sadness of Christians in Discretion. 74 Devil, see God
Divinity Divinity mistaken. 289
Doing No man can fulfill the law by doing. 212 Spiritual reasoning in doing.
365
Draw How God draws men's hearts. 92
Duty In what duties we may converse with sinners. 170 Men proud of duties,
why. 290

E
Earthly, earthlynesse Wicked men live on earthly things. 72 Earthlynesse
troubles Christians. 294 Things of the flesh, things on earth. Enjoy, see God
Envy Prosperity of the wicked not to be envied. 73
Escape No escape from Gods law. 209
Eve How the DEVIL tempted Eve. 302
Evil Fountain of evil in the soul. 412
Example Christ's example to be looked on. 242
Exercise Exercise of spiritual reasoning by the spirit. 410 Extol, see
learning.

F
Face Christ the face of God. 11 Saints live by seeing Gods face. 72
Faculties Natural faculties corrupted by sin. 378
Faith Faith the life of it. 237 Justification known by faith. 258
Fall Not to fall from the liberty of the Gospel. 304
Father The Father shows Christ. 13 Christ shows the Father. 14
Fellowship Fellowship of Saints, whence. 59 Ground of fellowship with others.
272
Few Few shall be saved. 267
Flesh Flesh what meant by it. 252 Walking according to the flesh, what. 255
Why walking after the law is after the flesh. 265 Not to use liberty for the
flesh. 298 Who mind the things of the flesh. 319 To be after the flesh, what.
321 see works, weakness, spirit, corruptions, actions, carnal, righteousness.
Fire Afflictions as fire. 125

G
Garrison The Devils strongest Garrison. 389
Gentleness Ground of gentleness in the godly. 373
Giving To look to God in his giving. 92
Glory, glorious Saints condition glorious. 235 Glory in Heaven unspeakable,
294 Expectation of glory in former Saints. 295
Glosses. Scripture to be studied without men's glosses. 310
God. The Devil, God of this world, how. 65 True humiliation known by our
carriage to God. 100 What hinders from enjoying of God. 239
Godliness. See Reason.
Good. We are not more justified for the good we do. 220 Natural men in great
place do little good. 385 The fountain of all good in the soul. 411
Gospel. Preaching of the Gospel to be highly prized. 24 Excellency of the
Gospel, why not seen. 25 See rules, liberty, fall.
Grace. Saints rejoice at grace in others. 198 See nature, undervalue, greater.
Greater. Saints not discouraged by greater grace in others. 193
Grow, Growth. A pure heart labors to grow in purity. 52 See grace.
Guilt. Saints dead to sin, in regard of guilt. 275 See conscience.

H.
Happy, happiness. Foundation of a Christians happiness. 297 See World.
Heart. Saints thankful for a heart to receive mercy. 159 See pure.
Heaven. Christ's ascending to Heaven, shows God is satisfied. 228 See joy.
High. A humble heart has High thoughts of God in affliction. 128
Hypocrite. Difference between saints and Hypocrites. 54 See satisfy, dye.
Holy, holiness. Those that have seen God should be holy. 67 Holiness wrought
by seeing of God. 87 Best motive to holiness. 244 Saints more holy then
others. 277
Hope. Hope of glory in saints. 281 Humble, humiliation. Causes of humiliation.
2 Sight of God in Christ, the true way to humiliation. 75 Difference in working
humiliation, and other graces. 79 Unregenerate Men not truly humbled. 93
Wicked men may do acts of humiliation. 94 Wicked Men shall one day be humbled.
96 True humiliation how known. 100 Ground of humility. 232 Saints to walk
humbly. 301 See Ministers, afflictions, Revelations.

I
Jealous, see Truth. Jerusalem. Jerusalem, from above. 291
Illumination. Sight of God by common illumination. 5 Saints illumination by
the spirit. 407
Impression. True sight of God known by the impressions of it. ^1
Imperfect. Sight of God in this world imperfect. 8
Infirmities. Saints gentle to others infirmities. 197
Instruct. Saints willing to be instructed by others. 189
Intellectuals. Godliness has that that will exercise the intellectuals. 382
Job. Why Satan desired to tempt Job. 125
Joy. Saints apprehensions of God full of joy. 38 Joy of Heaven, what. 39
Judge, Judgment. Sight of God at the day of judgment. 5 How godly men judge
of things. 337 A spiritual man judges all things. 385
Justice. Justice of God how thought of by Saints in affliction. 129
Justification. A humble Saints carriage to God in Justification. 101
Justification, upon what it is built. 219 See good, faith.

K.
Kingdom. He that will see God must be delivered from Satan's Kingdom. 64
Know, Knowledge. A misery in the knowledge of Saints. 33 Of such as think
they know more then others. 185 Carnal men know not spiritual things. 320 See
Saving, Licentiousness.

L.
Lasting. Comfort of spiritual duties lasting. 375
Law. Saints content that God make Laws for his mercies. 160 Law fulfilled
three ways. 210 Vanity of such as think to fulfill the Law. 211 See
Righteousness, Believers Spirit.
Learn. Humble Saints, readier to learn then teach. 192
Learning. Learning too much extolled by some. 306 Learning of what use it is.
307 Learning of Christians, and others different. 311 Led, see Spirit.
Least. A humble heart thankful for the least mercy. 158 A humble Saint thinks
himself the least. 181 How a Saint judges himself the least. 183
Liberty. Liberty not to be abused. 298 Liberty brought by the Gospel. 299
Danger of abusing Liberty. ibid.
Life. The mind not good if the life be naught 352 A Saint can look with
comfort on his past life. 374 Spiritual reasonings bring life 413 See Vision,
earthly, face, faith.
Light. Those that have seen God, desire to bring others to the light. 59 A
humble Saint will abate of his own light. 196 A new light in the souls of
godly men. 376 Saints have a powerful light. 407
Licentiousness. Knowledge of Christ no ground of licentiousness. 315
Love. Love to our Brethren, how wrought. 56 How Saints should be loved. 57
Love of God, how esteemed by Saints in affliction, 130 True Saints can love,
though not loved. 199 Ground of Saints loving good things. 392
Low. Why Christians spirits are so low. 236
Lust. Worldly men's lust, their rule. 240 To fulfill sinful lusts, called
flesh. 332 Lusts may drive men to duty. 395

M.
Man. True humiliation known by our carriage to Man. 166 Things of the flesh,
called the things of a Man. 324
Means. Saints humbled in regard of the means they have had. 183
Meek, Meekness. Humble hearts are meek to sinners. 166 Christ's meekness to
sinners. 167 Cautions in meekness to sinners. 169 Ground of meekness to
sinners, 173 see mind.
Mercies. Mercies abused humble saints. 21 Carnal men cannot see God in his
mercies. 95 Carriage of humble Saints to God for mercies. 148 See least,
denied, wait, heart.
Mind, minding. Saints meek to those of another mind. 188 Minding the things
of the flesh, what. 334 Best thing in a carnal man, his mind. 344 Misery of a
carnal man in his mind. 345 God inflicts the greatest punishment on the
mind. 347 Greatest happiness of a Chrstian in his mind. 348 Misery of a
carnal mind in six particulars. ibid. Mind, of three sorts. 360 Spiritual
mind, what. 378 See Throne, Life.
Ministers. God humbles his Ministers before he sends them 1 Mystery, see
Knowledge.
More. Those that see God, desire to see him more. 37 Saints, what humbles them
more. 182
Motions. Motions of the spirit neglected humbles Saints 148
Mourn. The right way to mourn for sin. 232

N.
Nature, natural. Grace crosses not principles of nature. 153 Sinners may be
conversed with in natural things. 170 And in natural duties. ibid. Prayer a
natural duty. 171 Natural mind. 360 Natural reasonings. 362

O
Offend. A humble Saint will not offend others. 106 Liberty Not to be used to
offend others. 300
Old. How Saints of old spoke of the spirit. 308 Things of the flesh, old
things. 327 Old man, what, 378
Ordinances. Carnal men see not God in Ordinances. 95 In what Ordinances we
may converse with sinners. 170 Why people care not for Gods Ordinances. 340
Others. Saints humbled to see more good, and less evil in oaths.
Outward. A Christian may provide and care for outward things. 334

P.
Patience. Patience wrought by seeing God 87 Why Saints bear injuries with
patience. 341
Part. Saints see God but in part. 15
Perpetual. Sight of God to his Children, perpetual. 40
Persecution. Ground of persecution. 313
Please. Nothing from natural Adam, can please God. 284
Power. Pure hearts cleansed from the power of sin. 51 Sin dead in the godly in
respect of power. 276
Pray. A humble heart apt to pray in afflictions. 144 See natural.
Precious. Saints apprehensions of God precious. 34
Preparation. Christ's righteousness to be taken notwithstanding want of
preparation. 109
Principle. Two principles whence all men work. 253 Professors to be judged by
their principles. 270 Every thing works according to its principle. 319 See
Dark.
Prison. Christ being out of prison shows God is satisfied. 227
Privilege. Jewish privileges how taken. 258 Outward privilege boasted of by
the Jews. 259 To get the comfort of our privileges. 303 Carnal Privileges
called flesh. 331
Prize. The spirit to be prized. 306
Prosperity. Prosperity of others not envied by Saints. 135 See Envy.
Proud. Carnal mind proud. 351 See commands, ridgednesse, truths, unthankful.
Public. Christ a public person. 226 Two public persons. 25^ Adam to dye as
a public person. 285 Who to be employed in public affairs. 385
Pure, Purity. Purity of heart an effect of seeing God. 48. 66 Pure heart,
what. 49 See conscience, corrupt, grow.

Q.
Qualities. More then new qualities in Saints. 404

R.
Rational. The most rational man without grace, the worst. 389
Real. Impressions of God upon Saints, real. 43 Miseries of this life, real.
ibid.
Reason, reasoning. Reasoning of three sorts. 361 Godliness has the best
reason. 368 Not to reject all reason in godliness. 380 Reasoning the highest
act of the mind. 388 Men mad with reason. 389 Reasoning of the mind, a
distinguishing character. 390 How a good man may be moved with natural, and
carnal reasoning. 393 How Saints come to be led by spiritual reason. 402 To
labor to be swayed by spiritual reasoning. 412 See believing, doing,
suffering.
Reforming. Hindrances of reforming our ways. 234
Religion. Carnal men may go far in Religion. 392
Repeal. The Law of God not repealed. 209 Repent, see Christ.
Reprobate. Carnal mind reprobate. 350
Revelation. Saints to walk humbly for abundance of Revelations. 301 Spirit of
revelation to be prayed for. 313
Reward. Proud men obey GOD only for reward. 121
Ridgednesse. Ridgednesse to sinners from pride. 176
Righteousness. True humiliation known by submitting to Christ's
righteousness. 101 Men naturally cleave to their own righteousness. ibid.
Righteousness of our own to be renounced. 108 Righteousness perfect required
by the Law. 208 Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in believers. 217 We are
saved by Gods righteousness. 225 Fleshly men stablish their own
righteousness. 330
Rotten. Mind of a Carnal man rotten. 349
Rules. Three rules that all men conform to. 240 Rules of Christ to be looked
to. 242 Several Gospel rules. 243

S.
Saint. Carriage of a humble heart toward Saints. 180 How to judge who are
Saints. 271. 274 Saints and others, how distinguished. 358 See sight, old.
Sanctification. How the Spirit works by Sanctification. 410
Satan. See Kingdom, Darkness.
Satisfy. Saints apprehensions of GOD satisfy them. 25 Apprehensions of
Hypocrites satisfy not. 36 God the Father satisfied in Christ. 227 See Spirit,
Saving. Saving knowledge. 185
Savor. Fleshly men savor fleshly things 335 Scripture, see Gloss.
Secret. Secret works in nature, and grace 91
See, seen, seeing, The privilege of Saints to see God. 3 Several ways of
seeing God. 4 Order how Saints come to see God. 61 All graces wrought by seeing
God. 87 Why God will humble men by seeing him. 91 A wicked man may see his
sins. 93 Carnal men cannot see God. 95 Trial of seeing God aright. 100 A
humble heart sees God in afflictions. 126 Things of the flesh are things that
are seen. 325
Service. Saints humble though they do God more service. 183 Humble Saints
glad to do service for others. 197 Shift, see truths. Shrink, see trouble.
Sight. Saints have a peculiar sight of God. 6 True sight of God how known. 30
Signs. Christians may make use of signs. 103
Simplicity. Saints to walk in simplicity. 302
Sin. Sight of God should preserve from sin. 23 Sin, what. 102 Not to comply
with others in sin. 172 Justification not broken by sin. 233 Who are dead to
sin. 275 See Guilt.
Sinners. Carriage of a humble heart to sinners. 166
Son of Man. Two sorts of days of the Son of man. 26
Sovereignty. Sovereignty of God to make a Law. 208
Spirit, Spiritual. Saving sight of God by the spirit. 12 The Spirit shows
Christ, and the Father. 15 The privilege of those that walk after the spirit.
250 To walk according to the Spirit, what. 255 How to know we walk according
to the spirit. 274 Fruit of walking according to the spirit. 279 How those are
to walk that have the spirit. 298 How men may come to walk spiritually. 305 To
labor to be lead by the spirit. 309 Things of the spirit, what. 333 Mind
spiritual. 361 Reasoning spiritual. 363 A Saint made spiritual, how. 404
Stream. Stream of a Saints heart pure 52
Submit, Submission. A humble heart submits in affliction. 133 Ground of true
submission to God. 154
Suffering. True sight of God enables to suffering. 60 Law fulfilled by
suffering. 210 Law cannot be fulfilled by suffering. 213 Spiritual reasoning
in suffering. 366
Sweetness. Sweetness in humble Saints to others. 194

T.
Take A humble heart content that God should take mercies. 154
Teach. Christians should be ready to teach others. 59
Temptations. Godly Men not taken with temptations, why. 375 See Job, Eve.
Terms. Proud men obey God upon their own terms. 120
Terrified. Wicked men may be terrified. 93
Testaments. Difference between the two Testaments to be studied. 305
Thankful. A humble heart thankful for mercies. 161
Themselves. Why Saints sometimes differ from themselves. 73 Saints measure not
themselves by themselves. 199 Who build Justification upon themselves. 230
Things. What meant by things of the flesh. 324
Throne. The mind the throne of Christ or Satan 346
Through. Right impressions of God through. 44
Troubles. Why professors shrink in troubles. 44. 61 What keeps men in inward
troubles. 104
Truth. Saints carriage to Gods truths 110 Proud hearts cavil at Gods truths.
113 Proud men shift off Gods truths 114 Saints jealous of the truths they know.
187
Time. Saints humbled in regard of the time they have had. 184

V.
Vain. Carnal mind vain. 349
Various. God shows himself to his Children variously. 16 Violence, see
Command.
Vision. Beatificall vision in this life. 18
Visitation. Day of visitation, what. 176
Understand. Why most people understand not spiritual things. 338 Christ only
can satisfy the understanding. 383
Undervalue. A humble Saint undervalues not grace in others. 153
Union. Too near union with sinners, forbidden. 172 The Law fulfilled by our
union with Christ. 224. 227 To look on our selves as united to Christ. 236
Unregenerate. Unregenerate men how far they may go toward humiliation. 93
Unspeakable. Saints sight of God unspeakable. 10
Unthankful. Proud hearts unthankful. 161
Universal. Impressions from the sight of God universal. 45

W.
Waiting. A humble heart not weary of waiting in affliction. 145
Waiting for mercies. 156
Walk. To walk, what. 251
Way. Godly men see their way in confusion. 374
Weak. Weak Saints in Christ satisfy the Law. 224 Flesh put for weakness. 267
Weakness of Saints the cause of it. 215 Weary, see Commands.
Wicked. Misery of wicked men 20 Winning, see Ordinances.
Wise, Wisdom. Saints in affliction have high thoughts of Gods wisdom. 131
Two wisdoms great in the eyes of Saints. ibid. Godly men the wisest. 384
Will. Our hearts and lives to conform to Gods will. 240 Will of God, when
known. 307 Why good men miss Gods will. 395
Word. Saving sight of God by the word 12 Christ's righteousness to be taken on
his bare word. 104 Works. Many besides Papists seek Justification by Works.
213 We are dead to the Law, as a Covenant of works. 218 Good works by whom to
be done. 231 Flesh taken for the Covenant of works. 260
World, Saints see God in this world. 3 Happy estate of Saints in this world.
17 The rule of most men in the world. 241

FINIS.

