The four Ages OF ENGLAND OR, The Iron Age. With other select POEMS. Written
by Mr. A. Cowley.

Cantabit vacuus, etc.

LECTORI.
Qui legis ista, tuam reprehendo, si mea laudas
Omnia, stultitiam; si nibil, invidiam.
Owen Ep. page 1. Printed in the Year 1648.

To the truly worthy, and Worshipful, Mr. I. S. of P. Esquire.
Honored Sir,
IT is not the worthiness of the Work, nor Workman, can whisper any
confidence of your acceptance of this trifle; but only the seasonablenesse and
truth of the subject (of which you are more then an eyewitness) gives it
boldness to kiss your hand. This Poem was calculated only for the Meridian of
some private friends, not daring to gaze in the face of the World, because it is
near kin to truth, and therefore to danger. Nor did the Author desire so to
strumpet his Muse, as to prostitute her to the embraces of every one, being not
ambitious of the airy title of a Poet. Neither let it present it self to your
eye the less worthy, because now martyred by the Press, though it be become
now so adulterated with false and scandalous Pamphlets, that it is a dishonor
for a legitimate fantasy to derive a title from thence. My humble request to
your Worship is, that you will vouchsafe to enrich these lines with your view,
and pardon the forward ambition of him, whose glory is to be known of you, at
the becoming distance of

Your Worships most humble Honourer, (...)

To the Reader.
Reader,
WHether courteous or not, it is all one to me; Thou have here the moderate
observations of one, that neither is nor desires to be engaged in either party
of these Wars, till he sees both honester. Thou have here the verdict of a
Spectator, who has beheld this Military Game, played by both Gamesters, and
has seen pelting on both sides. Thou have here Truth, painted in her own
Colors, (that is, in none) and justling Vice, wheresoere, and in whomsoere she
meets it. Thou have here the Causes, Effects, and conjecturall consequences of
these unnatural Divisions: the times Looking-glass, wherein (be what thou will) thou shall see thy face, and find something that concerns thee. And (if
thou will lay aside aside thy (...)) here thou shall read thy own self a main
cause of this War. Thou have here other things, which I will not,
Mountebank-like, set out beforehand; because I would have thee take some pains
to read, what I have took pains to write: perhaps some pleasure; ( Olim haec
meminisse juvabit) Only take this lesson in thy hand, before thou read, thou
must resolve to un-conceit thy self, and to be moderate, and yield to truth:
on that condition I am

Thine: Farewell.
The Proem.
HOw idle is the idolatry of those,
That on their fancy can no Theme impose,
Till they Apollo, and his Train invite,
To be propitious unto what they write!
It Is but our folly (folly may b'in wit)
To make a god, and then to worship it.
I Have often writ, and never yet found odds,
Whether I writ with, or without those gods.
I care not for the Poets Hill, nor Spring;
Losers may speak, and empty men may sing.
Sorrow's my Helicon, if poverty
Makes Poets, Troupers Pegasusses be.
Inspire me grief! let Phoebus and the Nine
Help amorous Verse; they are too soft for mine.
I mean to weep the murders, rapine, rage,
That are synaeris'd in this Iron Age.
For who can sing? An airy mirth belongs
To mirthfull Theames, these days are not for songs.
Reader, prepare thy faith: for I shall tell
A story (that transcends a miracle)
Of vices, that so great, so many be,
That they are beyond the reach of Poetry.
Behold a populous Nation, powerful too;
And her own self does her own self undo:
The Phoenix of the world, which is become,
(Who was the pride) the scorn of Christendom.
That stood like Atlas while it stood together,
But now divided, 's wrested any whither.
The Golden Age.
CHAP. I.
GOne are those golden Halcion days, wherein
Men uncompell'd, for love of good, fled sin:
When men hugged right and truth, whose souls being clear,
Baffled the threats of punishment or fear.
No Laws, no penalties, but there did rest
A Court of equity in each man's breast;
No trembling prisoner to the Bar did come,
From his severer Judge t'xpect his doom;
No need of judge or Executioners,
To keep by Law that which by right was theirs.
The Pyne not then his mother-mountaines leaves,
To dance Lavalto's on th'unconstant waves.
Walls clothed not Towns, nor did men's safety stand
In moving Forts by Sea, on fixed by Land.
They understood not Guns, nor Spears, nor Swords,
Nor Cause, nor Plunder, and such Martial words;
No armed Soldier stood for their defense,
Their chiefest Armor was their innocence.
Man's quiet nature did not feel that fire,
Which since inflames the world, too great desire.
Kings did not load their heads with Crowns, nor try
By force or fraud, t'invade the liberty
Of their obedient Subjects; nor did they
Strive with Anointed Sovereigns for sway;
But Prince and people mutually agree
In an indissoluble Sympathy.
Religion flourished, and the Laws increase,
Both twined in one, the Gemini of peace.
An universal concord tuned then
Th'unjarring thoughts of many-minded men
In an unblemisht harmony. Then right
Spurned the proud thoughts of domineering might;
And lawrell'd Equity in triumph sat,
Upheld by virtue, which stood candidate,
And curbed the power and craft of vice, maintained
By the instinct which in men's nature reigned:
Th'unspotted soul could not attainted be
With Treason against the highest Majesty;
Vice was a stranger to it, nor could it 'bide
To club with Avarice, or converse with Pride.
Nor was it plun'gd in the whirlpool of those crimes,
That have inthral'd now these degenerate times.
The Imprisoned will then durst not whisper Treason,
But cring'd to the Dictates of its Rectresse, Reason.
Friend was the soul of friend, and every man
Fed, like a stream, the whole, its Ocean.
CHAP. II.
THe pregnant Earth untilled did yield increase,
And men enjoyed what they possessed in peace.
The Winter plundered not the leaves from trees,
Nor skurf'd the ground with hoary Leprosies.
No scorching Summer, with Canicular heat,
Parboild their bodies in immoderate-sweat.
What ever Autumn plucked, the Spring did bring,
An endless harvest wed an endless Spring.
The quartered Year mixed in a bunch did come,
And clung it self t'an individuum.
Then floods of Milk, then floods of Nectar, flowed,
And on the fertile Earth all plenty grow'd.
Th'enamell'd fields with Tapestry were crowned,
And floating Honey surfeited the ground:
Of purest blessings men enjoyed their fill,
And had all good, 'cause they did nothing ill.
The Silver Age.
CHAP. I.
Man's nature not content with this, did range
To further things, fancy is prone to change.
Then domineering Will began to stir,
And scorned that Reason should rule over her.
Active ambition would not be content
To keep its self within its Continent;
But, being unsatiable, does aspire,
Like oil; enjoyment makes the flame blaze higher:
And Appetite, the servant to each Sense,
Would not obey, but have pre-eminence.
CHAP. II.
ARts were invented, studi'd, men began
T'instruct the ground, to plough the Ocean.
The year's quadrangled, People did begin
T'erect them houses to inhabit in:
Coffined their limbs in clothes, (clothes first were meant
But for necessity, not ornament:
But pride, the child of plenty, made them grow
From warmth to comely, thence t'a gaudy show:)
Then such magnificence in them begun,
That glittring vestures seemed to stain the Sun;
Houses to Babels swelled, and were baptized
With their own Founders names; and men devised
All ways to write their names, that they might be
Read in the Rolls of vast Eternity.
Turrets on tiptoe stood, to kiss the Skies,
And Marble Pillars to the Spheres did rise.
Towers did periwig their heads in clouds,
As if those were their bases, these their shrouds.
Men decked their walls, and dressed their spacious rooms
With costly excrements of Persian Looms;
And guiltless Aras was condemned to be
Hanged, for no crime, but its imagerie.
CHAP. III.
SHips crossed the angry Seas, with Billows hurled,
And in their race begirt the spacious world,
Rifling it of its treasur^s, to delight,
With rarities, the craving Appetite.
The ransacked Indies brought in weekly rates,
To feast their curious taste with delicates;
The burdened fields brought in centuple crops,
Dischannelling themselves into their laps;
Yet having stripped the earth of what she wore,
They not content with this, dive still for more.
And the imbowell'd earth is brought to bed
Of treasures, which within her nature hid.
Music, the soul of pleasure, still prepares,
To breath delicious Accents in their ears;
Arabia contributed her gums,
And wanton Zephire from all Gardens comes
With odorifrous smells, which did so vary,
The Phoenix soil did seem ubiquitary.
And in all these the touch and sight did meet,
For what was bliss to touch, 'twas bliss to see it.
CHAP. IV.
THen with what pomp they feasted, with what state
Each several course wallowd in antique Plate;
Dish followed dish, and course succeeded course,
Still chimneyes took Tobacco by the force
Of a continued fire, which was heapt on
For a new meal, ere the other scarce was done.
All outward blessings were in one conjoined,
That might delight or satisfy the mind.
Each place was plenties Magazine, to fill
Their hearts, yet they had a plus ultra still.
Men bathed in plenty, and in pleasure rolled,
Then they found out that strife-begetting Gold.
Now men stretch their estates wide, that they might
Like their desires, be boundless, infinite,
Wide as the Horizon; the careering Sun
Scarce in a day their limits could outrun.
Big-belli'd chests uncatechised lay,
Waiting a general accounting day;
Un-Eunuch't purses precious stones did wear,
Nor did they then the gelding Troopers fear:
Yet having all these riches, they were poor,
Cause, having much, they still desired more.
Dropsi'd desire did teach men to be vile,
From hence did flow the seven-headed Nile
Of deadly sin. This gave sinister birth
To injury; but Justice on the earth
Had yet some being, Laws enacted were,
Men must do right, though not for love, for fear.
Just equity fettered the hands of might,
With both hands armed, and yet both hands were right.
Then vicious minds were bridled by the Law,
And judgments kept disordered men in awe.
Times trod on the heels of times, but as they grew,
The old were still out-stript in vice by new.
The Brazen Age.
CHAP. I.
THen men so vile did grow, so prone to sin,
The bonds of Law no more could keep them in;
They strived to imbark themselves for hell; then shame
And modesty were banished, and the name
Of faith and truth grew odious, in whose room
Fraud, coz'nage, force and treachery did come,
Boldly out-staring virtue; and that vice
Of sword, plague, famine, spawning avarice,
Teeming with Legions of sins; with these
Men did commit Adultery, to increase
Their Progeny, and thus at length did raise
As many newborn sins in the year, as days.
So pride and avarice became the twins
Of general mischiefs, Colonells of sins.
Ease taught men sloth, sloth ushered in excess,
Excess nursed pride; pride, lust; lust, wantonness;
That rapes; rapes, incest; incest, Sodomy;
This brings unnat'rall bestiality.
And thus our sacred bodies, that should be
Gods holy temples, built of purity,
Are now profaned by sacrilegious sin,
And become dens for thieves t'inhabit in.
Yea Garrisons of Rebels, and by these
Men so abused that crown of blessings, peace;
That it was so corrupt, so full of sin,
It must be lanc'd; thus did our woe begin.
CHAP. II.
THe Angels of the Church did soar so high,
Like Lucifer, they lost their Hierarchy;
They first from grace, and then from glory fall;
Some turning Devils brought disgrace on all.
To all new fashions they their zeal translate,
And Disciplined the Church by rules of State.
Hetrodox Tenants did the Truth invade,
And men's inventions grounds of Faith were made.
One Ceremony did another send,
Nor did Will Worship know a bound or end.
Their Canons were as various as the winds,
Nay (which is more) unconstant as their minds.
Choked with their great Revenues, they become,
(Who, being empty, sounded well) quite dumb.
Nay they did hold it an extreme disgrace
To execute the office of their place.
Well said a fool, who does a Bishop fear,
May fly t'a Pulpit; for he will not come there.
Like Weathercocks, on Churches tops, they stood,
To over-see them, not to do them good:
Yet being Lords, they fain would higher be,
And guild their Lordships with a Deity.
CHAP. III.
ANd the crammed Clergy t'imitate their Masters,
In pride and sloth, grew most Episcopasters.
The Pulpit rusted, some had got a trick
(As if their Sermons had been lunatic)
To preach by the Moon, some but at Quarter-day;
And then their Texts were Summons to their pay.
Some were so costive, they required a year;
Like Elephants, some ten; then one might hear
(To the amazement oth'expecting house)
The groaning hill delivered of a Mouse.
Dumb Dogs, that wallow'd in excessive store;
While those poor souls that all the burden bore,
Could hardly get by their continued pain,
A stipend that might them and theirs maintain.
And though one serve a cure, nay two, or three,
He must a Scriv'ner and Schoolmaster be;
Yet all these trades will scarce so much allow,
As a good time may get, that goes to plough.
Instead of this, they studi'd Law, and read,
Not what God says, but what the Judges said.
Their care of bodies choked their care of souls,
They more frequented Westminster then Paul's;
They praid in the Temple often, but it was,
That their fee'd Lawyer would maintain their cause
Others, to pleasure, pride and ease inclined,
Studi'd to pamper their luxurious mind,
With wine and banquets; but in most of all,
The Golden Number was Dominicall;
So that it was become a common speech,
The way to spoil a Priest's to make him rich.
If one preached well, he was in life so evil,
A Saint in Pulpit, out of it a Devil.
Their lives confute their Doctrines; for they strove,
Which most should act the sins they did reprove,
The one might think, that whatsoere they say,
Were to be done the clean contrary way.
CHAP. IV.
ANd the vain people, always prone to ill,
Follow not precept, but example still:
For they disgraced themselves by what they do?
And taught the people to disgrace them too.
Thus that soul-saving Function 'gan to be
A public scandal, and an obloquie,
By the base vulgar, who were glad, for this,
To blaze their spiritual Fathers nakedness.
The Office so abused, men scorned to do it,
Unless bare need, or gain did force them to it:
And men unfit, unusefull for the State,
Yet were accounted good enough for that.
And why? the sordid Gentry, in whose hands
They Would got the Church-Revenues, and her Lands,
Turned Publicans, and stood at Churches door;
None Must come in, but who paid well therefore.
These were Church-merchants, and by them did gain,
As those by warrres, though they dealt not so plain.
He that would buy a horse, or take to's Bride
A daughter, got a Benefice beside.
If Sacrilege to steal from Churches be,
What Is he that steals a Church, nay two or three?
Well did a Herald their base nature note,
That gave a Wolves head to them for a coat,
Swallowing a Church, the steeple stuck in's throat.
CHAP. V.
Tied to the tail of Levi, was the Tribe
Of Many-Asses: some that will not suscribe
To God, nor King, nor State, nor Law; but still,
Do vow Allegiance only to their will:
That to be cross to theirs, did bend their course
Into a contrary extreme, far worse.
Men of vertiginous brains, still running round,
That, Cymball-like, from emptiness do sound;
That abhor Learning, and don't hold it fit
For Christians to pollute their brains with it.
They say it is vain for holy men to seek
For language of the Beast, or Heathen Greek.
Unbenefic'd and poor, that have no way
To get a stipend, but to preach and pray
Against Church and State, and 'cause they cannot be
Famous for Learning or Divinity;
Yet they will do something to enrole their name
In the large Catalogue to blab-tongu'd Fame.
And though their doctrine be nor sound, nor true,
They Will have't approved, because it is strange and new.
There were some upstart Levites, hot and young,
Active and proud, whose interdicted tongue
Imprisoned in the Dungeon of his mouth,
For Sacrilege, is now broke forth, and grow'th
More violent; or such, whose ears of late
Have both been circumcised by the State:
Whose sufferings spread their fame from far and near;
The giddy people flock in sholes to hear
These zealous Saints, those pious Martyrs prate,
With their impoyson'd tongues against Church and State,
Who in their preachments tell them, such as we
(Beloved) suffer for our purity;
Because we will not follow Popish lies,
We fall by the ears with profane Pillories.
It Is for our good, who open our ears to take
The pious whispers which the nails do make.
Peripatetick Teachers, Journy-men,
That trot t'America, and back again,
To get a Proselite, these dare make Kings
The Subjects of their talk, and handle things
Direct against form or order, as each lists:
Their Texts and Doctrines, both like Sepratists,
Run from each other; and their Uses loath
Their company, 'cause holyer then both:
And having named a text, like cowards, they
Straight from the unarmed words on it run away,
And thus excuse it, that it is a breach
Of Christian freedom, to be tied to preach
Upon one place; they make their Doctrines run
From Genesis to the Revalation,
And handle all alike, a wild-goose chase;
They run through Countries, a Curranto pace.
They straight divide a Text in parts; but then
^hey do not bring them to be friends again,
^ut fall to flat adultry with the sense,
^e getting spurious broods of Uses thence*
That such unnat'rall Children thence do spring,
They dare make head against the Text, their King.
These are State-Barrettors, and set by the ears
The Prince, and People, Commons, and the Peers:
These kindle first; and still foment the rude
Seditions of the cock-brain'd multitude;
Who, like themselves, are Planet-struck, and vary,
Prograde, and retrograde, never stationary.
Their heads, like Bowls, run round, unsteer'd by Reason
Their Bias Faction, and their Jack is Treason.
These ever rail at, and are discontent
At States and Churches present Government.
And why? not for defects do they withstand it,
Because it is bad, but 'cause the Laws command it.
Eve is their Mother; they think no fruits be
So sweet, as those on the forbidden tree.
Some do not hate it, nor find fault therein,
But 'cause they 've been neglected, and not bin
Employed with Hierarchy, since they suppose
Themselves more fit for Government, then those
That are instal'd; which, 'cause they cannot reach,
(Like Dogs at the Moon) they bark at, and still tea^^
The peoples reeling fancy to despise
Church-orders, and embrace what they devise.
Which always various and changeable be,
For naught more pleases, then variety.
These men are nine days old, and do begin
To look abroad upon another sin.
To other men they are as Argos-ey'd
As Heaven in spangled nights, when Sol does hide
In the Antipodes, and Stars begin
To execute his Office; to their sin
They are as blind as Moles; which least they might
Behold, they draw the curtain of their sight.
By the foul hands of these, dirt still is thrown
On others faces, yet never wash their own.
For he will soon'st epsy the Mote that is blown
In's Brothers eve, who has a Beam in's own.
These and the Romulists, although they bend
Their heads contrary, meet at last, and tend
Both to burn down Religion; which does stand,
Like Christ oth' Cross, with Thieves on either hand.
Extremes, both in a Circle set their feet,
And, though contrary go, at last must meet.
CHAP. VI.
THe many-empty-headed multitude,
Once moved, like Hornets, eagerly intrude
On all employments, and run forward still
Like Swine, steered only by their headlong will,
The zealous Cobbler pricks his leather-eares;
And in the Tubb (his Pulpit) he declares,
No Priest, no Doctrine can religious be,
That smells of either Universitie:
So Ignorance, the mother of each doubt,
Leads Faction in, and turns obedience out.
While he translates, and edifies the soul,
The two-ear'd Hatter does the Crown control;
He Peter scorns, himself will be a rock,
And sets men's heads upon a rounder Block.
He with inspired fury does declare
There Is no salvation unto those, whose hair
Transcend their teeth in longitude, his sheares
^ave razed the locks that did besiege his ears;
and lets his rampant ears grow up alone,
^he two supporters of his globous crown.
So each Profession, from head to heel,
Sets forth lay-Levites; and the old ones feel
Their just deservings, suffering their due;
They displaced old, and are displaced by new:
And all these simples make one Mithridate
To be a poison both to Church and State.
New Lords create new Laws; one brings a branch
From Amsterdam, some to new England lanch;
To Scotland Rome, Judea, Turkey some;
Some to Geneva: Back again they come
Fraught with Religions new, of each a feather,
All in a Chaos bundled up together;
Which makes our Church all part colored show,
Like Joseph's coat, or Aesops theevish Crow,
A Pantheon of Religions.
Mean time our guiltless prayers, which have stood
Writ in the Characters of Martyrs blood,
The grace of Christian Churches, the delight
Of God and godly men, are conjured quite
Out of the Church, b' extemporary stuff;
Which though three hours, yet are not long enoug^
To reach to heaven; And though their nonsense d^
Gore at the Clouds, yet never shall come there.
By these extremes Religion's from us flowne,
And our one Church grows many; therefore none:
CHAP. VII.
BUt Church and State being Twins, and none can
The one, but straight the other falls with it.
The Court that should a Sanctuary be
To virtue, and the Bourse of Piety,
The throne of Justice, and excel in right,
As't did in state, in dignity and might,
Became the Asylum of Ambition,
Envy and fraud, where vice does tread upon
O'reswayed virtue, and does seem to be
Virtue it self, veiled over by policy.
Injurious persons of all sorts resort,
As to the horns of the Altar, to the Court.
CHAP. VIII.
THe Laws themselves grew Lawless, and the Tribes
Of The Gown entayl'd their consciences for bribes,
Like cobwebs; Laws the lesser flies entrap,
But great ones might break through, and escape:
They were no more defense, but grew to be
A legal violence, licensed injury.
Courts were called Courts of Justice, but it is
Because there is none there by Antiphrasis.
The ambidextrous Judges bribed, rebrib'd,
And lesser gifts to greater still subscribed:
Queen-money made and un-made all decrees,
And Justice grew adulterate for fees:
It had a balance, but so falsifi'd,
That it inclined still to the weightiest side.
If bribes did plead, they must needs grant the Suit,
For gifts have power to move, although they 're mute;
They had got pearls within their eyes, that so
They scarce the truth from injury did know.
Instead of Judges, Pride, Oppression, Fraud,
Injustice, violence, the Bench invade;
Justice, the junior Judge, sat like a block,
Or puisne Baron, but to tell the clock.
What ere the cause be, whether bad or good,
It must be felt, ere heard or understood.
CHAP. IX.
THe under-Foggers, with their dagled gowns,
Like Sampsons foxes tails, inflame the Towns,
Make Suits, as Conjurers raise winds, and why?
That they might lay the same, and get thereby.
They did intaile their Clients, and their Suit,
From Term to Term, and every Term renew't;
Till the poor Client had no Suit but that,
And starv^d his purse, to make their pouches fat.
How slenderly a Cause is spun, when it is
Bandy'd between Clotho and Lachesis.
They must anoint their jaws with bribes, or else
Their venall tongue nor truth nor falsehood tells.
Their tongues Angelical, their consciences
Strung to their Clyents purse, where no pence is;
The Clyent is discharged of his pain,
Till to his cost, he do recruit again.
They hoise their Fees 'bove Statute, Law, or task,
As if it were Law to pay what they did ask,
Whose cheverle-Consciences, stretched far and wide
And they still wore them on the wrongest side.
Yet these dunce-Deskmen to such wealth did rise.
Their State nobilitates their families.
Who ere began a Suit, theyl'd draw them on
To the third and fourth Generation;
As if the were tenants in Fee-simple to them,
And they had power, by degrees to undo them.
They cannot a Cause for one year calculate,
Like Erra Pater 'twas nere out of date.
So he that has bin wronged, and comes to these
For help,'s like one that leaps into the Seas
To 'scape a storm: or like the sheep that goes
To a bush, for shelter from the cold, and lose
His wool; and so by that is rendered more
Unable to endure it, then before:
For so much cost and trouble there is in it,
That the poor Clyent, when he did begin it,
(Though he should have the best on it) he were better
Be overthrown, and would be greater getter.
What an eternal Term on it will they hold,
When Causes come, wrapped in a shower of gold!
There Is no Vacation then: Like mastiffs they
Destroy the Wolves, because they mean to slay
Or fleece the flocks themselves. The other twin
That did run round in the Zodiac of sin,
CHAP. X.
WEre spiritual Courtiers, these were more sublimed
In their injurious cunning, and they climbed
To a diviner style: what ere they do,
Though never so wrong, was Law and Gospel too.
Each Proctor at his pleasure could derive
TO himself the Churches power legislative.
Who not appears, or is behind in Fees,
The Church must, whensoere the Sumners please,
Excommunicate, give up to Satan, till
God gives him grace to pay his Lawyers Bill.
Bawdry was bought, and sold, and for a Fee
Men might have license for their lechery:
^f any had offended, the only curse
Was the dear penance of an empty purse.
And for a yearly custom, an old Bawd
Might have a Patent to set up the trade.
Upon the Sabbath they allowed to play;
But if one wrought upon a Holy Day,
Oh 'twas a crime that naught could expiate,
But the large bribing of an Advocate!
He Is in a wretched case, each Christian knows,
That has no better Advocate, then those.
CHAP. XI.
THe Gallenists, those Factors for our health,
Were so infected with this love of wealth,
That generally our wounds and all diseases,
Were slight or mortal, as the Doctor pleases:
And all our maladies were ever dated
By the purses strength, as if the were calculated
For all nativities, what ere they be;
The purse is still purged by Phlebotomie:
The poor's incurable, the rich must have
An endless gowt in's joints, that will not leave
Till all the money from the purse be done;
Then he that could not go before, can run.
Besides those Quacks, that strumpet to each slave,
For a small price, that smaller art they have,
Who, without Judge or Jury, basely kill
More then they cure, to exercise their skill:
Who need no plague but their own ignorance,
Accompanied with their Arts masters, wants.
The State-Physitians more perverse then these,
Cured bad diseases with worse remedies.
For sicknesses do usually fall
On Bodies politic, like natural
These proved right Empricks, and without all doubt,
Wrought the States end, to bring their own about.
For most that seemed to be the Kingdoms friends,
Tipped public Justice still with private ends.
These made the three Professions of the Gown,
(That were the grace) the odium of the Town.
CHAP. XII.
THe spring being thus corrupt, the streams can be
Nothing but currents of impuritie:
From this red Sea of sin a crew there came,
Differing in naught from Locusts, but in name;
Monopolists, that (Priest-like) had a share
In every trade, but more then Tithes they were.
These did so spawn, they got nine parts at least,
The right owner scarce was to his own a Priest.
Others were Rogues by Patent, and did draw
A power to pole the people from the Law,
Which they had made a stalking-horse to be,
A legal Warrant for their villainy.
Thus painful men, by taxes were, and rates,
Unjustly cheated of their own estates:
And this did make the transitory streets
Echo with poor men's cries, where Rapine meets
With rapine; guile with guile; and right became
An ayery title, and an empty name.
Cities composed of several streams, that ran
From hills and valleys, turn an Ocean;
Where sins meet sins, like Billows; and do strive
(As they with the Court) for the Prerogative.
Greedy desire is Mayor, and puff-past Pride
Aspires, as Mayoresse, to sit by's side.
Treason and cheating Sheriffs, and next such plenty
Of Capital sins, they are more then four and twenty.
CHAP. XIII.
ANd the tame Country, in its several Climes,
Practice to ape the Cities banefull Crimes:
The incestuous Us'rer with his own baggs does lie,
In gendring use by damned Adultery,
Till every hundred does survive to see
Himself centupled in his progeny;
While that cursed Barathrum still cries for more,
Beggars the rich, and does devour the poor.
And though he learning hates, and every Art
That Is liberal, yet he could find in's heart
To turn Logician, and does understand
To do all things with a Contracted hand.
He (like an Ass laden with various meats)
Bites not at all, or else but Thistles eats.
He cheats his Back of needful ornament,
And his poor Belly keeps perpetual Lent:
And all to cram a Chest, having an itch,
But while he lives, to be accounted rich:
Or leave to 's heirs, when he to death inclines,
(Got lawfully by him or his assigns)
An ample patrimony, which the sot
Consumes as fast, as ere his father got.
The Tradesman too, whose weights and measures were
Lighter then is wife, and shorter then his hair,
With his oiled tongue, and dancing Complements,
The engines of his cheating eloquence,
Gulled men by wholesale, though his wife and he
Both drove a retail trade, and did agree
To open their shops to all; whose gain did slide
Quick as 'twas got, by luxury and pride.
CHAP. XIIII.
DUll gluttony did reign, and strived to kiss
His the other sister, swinish drunkenness,
That nursery of sins; for there is no vice
So bad, but from this spring it takes its rise.
How many Swine does this make in a year,
If all were Sowes that wallow in the mire?
This Anti-god that uncreates a man,
Turns him to a beast, or to a lump again;
How does poor reason split it self, and sink,
When man lies floating in a sea of drink!
And yet they ran so violently to it,
As if they had been only born to do it:
'Twas manners, if a man his friend did meet,
With pint and quart they must each other greet;
Or if to's neighbors house a friend did come,
'Twas welcome styled to send him drunken home:
Men thought no shame to glory in this sin,
Who could drink most, as if their mouths had been
Made not to speak, but drink, and bellies were
But barrell-like, the continents of Beer.
Yet that is small cause to boast; did we but see,
That a weak Hogshead can hold more then we:
And yet we see how many a drunken Sot
Has drowned, and drunk all is fortunes in a pot,
Swilling his brutish soul in beer and wine,
While his poor family at home does pine;
And have no food to feed upon, but cares,
Nor any thing to drink (poor souls) but tears.
This is the Gulf that swalloweth a-whole
The wealth, the health of body and of soul.
CHAP. XV.
THE effect of luxury and ease is lust,
And this sets men on flame, so that it must
Be vented by base actions, men did do
Against Gods, against Nations Laws, and Natures too;
Great persons ranged like Goats, to slake their flame,
With all variety; yea they kept tame
Their Concubines, with costly motives fed;
Their handmaids served them both for board and bed,
By whom they issue got, and so might be
Indeed the Fathers of their family.
The Ladies kept preambles, men of might,
That stood them both for service and delight;
Men against the Grammar sinned, and did contest
The Feminine Gender is the worthiest.
Young men had hoary hairs, or else had none,
And when they had been satiate with one,
They'ld have fire-new-ones. Nay the spiritual part
Of Brethren loved the flesh with all their heart.
But 'cause 'twas grown so common, they would be,
Entwined with Sisters, but extempore.
CHAP. XVI.
ENvy, that hideous monster, meagre, fell;
That skeleton, is belch't up too from Hell;
She roosts in peoples minds, and greatly breeds
The bane of virtuous doers, and their deeds:
Its own tormentresse; both a plague and sin,
Oh! how it gnawes the bones, where it gets in!
And yet men were so chained to 't, that their eyes,
Waxt sore at other men's prosperities;
Malicious men did their own bodies pine,
To see their neighbors plentifully dine;
And be content, with all their hearts, to lose
An eye, to have another want a nose.
CHAP. XVII.
Honor became a Chattall to be sold
(To those that never were kin to it) for their gold:
Such whose unworthy souls did wear a style
But as a livery, and did exile
All noble thoughts out of their breasts, who be,
While they are alive, engraved in obscurity.
Men, like their Grandsires tombs, titled without,
And full of rottenness within, or naught:
The Garbage of the world, composed of mire
And slime, like frogs of Nile; if Gold inspire
Their purse with life, it clarifies their fames;
Promethean fire was nothing to those flames:
Fame was but wealth's Elixar; every Clown
That could get wealth, might quickly get renown,
Though they would intrencht their bodies with such crimes,
That they might be the scandal of the times,
And had a dearth of worth, or good; yet when
They Would paid for it, they must needs be gentlemen.
Nay this Almighty Gold such acts could do,
That Lords, nay gods, were made by Angels too.
CHAP. XVIII.
BUt threadbare Virtue, and lean honesty,
Were thought unworthy great men's company.
A man of learning, wisdom, breeding, wit,
And had all parts that did conduce to it;
Yet if his purse were ignorant of pence,
A fig for's learning or his eloquence;
But he must cringe and creep to each gilded Sot,
Whose purse is full, although his head be not:
Thousands per annum were the only glory,
And sweet-fac'd Gold the winning'st Oratory;
These favorites of Fortune, (that is, fools)
Whose ignorance did make them foes to Schools,
And Scholars, nay to all ingenious Arts;
That had a man nere so deserving parts,
And painful in a calling, two, or three,
All could preserve him scarce from beggarie.
They so disposed it, as if 'twere not fit,
One man should have at once both wealth and wit:
And yet these muck-wormes cannot be so wise,
To see how fortune does Eutrapelize,
And give them wealth to plague them; good men hold,
They Are fettered slaves, although those fetters gold.
CHAP. XIX.
HOw many slow-wormes had we in our Land,
'Twixt whom and beasts no difference could stand
That having wealth, lived here, and spent their own,
And having sucked out that (Leech-like) are gone.
Whose life (if 'twere a life) cannot be found
Guilty of one good Act, that might redound
Unto their kindreds, friends, or Countries good,
But even like Belly-slaves, provide for food;
Whose minds were not emblazon'd with those gifts,
That man above a brutish Creature lifts;
They wear no souls within, or if they do,
They count them burdens, nay and troubles too:
Their bodies do, like Sodomes Apples, stand,
And they but Pleonasmes of our Land.
Luxurious wantonness did still prevent
Their natural desire of nourishment;
They used Provocatives to eat, drink, sleep,
From hunger, thirst, and cold themselves to keep.
The Cankers and the Bellies of the State,
Whose limbs stand useless, as if out of date;
And when they die, this only may be said,
Here lies one that was borne, that lived, and 's dead,
By whom death lost his labor, he is no more
But a dead lump, and so he was before.
CHAP. XX.
OUr giddy phansy surfeited with pride,
In various habit even the French out-vy'd*
So great was our luxurious wantonness,
'Twas sin the Sun should twice behold one dress.
Fashions had still a Clymax, clothing went
From warm, to comely, thence magnificent.
Our natural hair not shed by Venerie,
Was shaved by Pride, and we our heads belie
With women's excrements; which might be known,
(Only because we bought it) 'twas our own;
Lech'ry first taught this evil to our Nation;
Now what it wore for need, we wear for fashion.
Women transformed to men, men women grew,
We by the shape scarce one from the other knew;
Such boldness those, these such effeminatenes
Possess^d, that both seemed one Androgenes.
Faces belied with paint, and York put there,
Where nature did at first write Lancaster.
When angry teeth fell out, and brake their sums,
By the pollution of their stinking gums,
Be got by sweetmeats, or that traitorous sauce,
The rebel to good stomachs; wholesome Laws
Women had Regiments of teeth in pay,
And drew out several Cent'ries every day,
To stop the Breaches, that should Poets write
Their teeth were Ivory; it may be right.
Their heads with massy-ruffs were bulwark'd round,
And yoked in bands, which scarce a measure found.
With such impostures, and a thousand more,
As if we were not proud, but pride all over.
This brings new sins, new sins new plagues draw on;
So Pride's preamble to destruction.
A Kingdoms bliss is but conditional;
When they from Grace, they straight from Glory fall:
For whatsoever unto vice does tend,
Begins in sin, and must in sorrow end.
The Iron Age
CHAP. I.
THe cup of trembling, which so often has bin
Quaft round about us, is at last stepped in,
And we must drink the dregs on it; we that be
Severed from other Nations by the Sea,
And from our selves divided by our sin,
Need now no foreign foes, wee've foes within.
What need an enemy the walls to beat,
When the defendents sins do open the gate?
God, who at first, did man to man unite,
Sets man against man, in a Cadmean fight:
Limb jarrs with limb, and every member tries
To be above's superior Arteries;
The Elements and humors, that before
Made up a compound body, now no more
Kiss in an even tempr'ature, but try
TO un-make themselves, by their Antipathy.
And 'cause divided Kingdoms cannot stand,
Our Land will be the ruin of our Land.
The State's now quite unhinged; the Ingineers,
That have been ham'ring it these many years,
Now ply it home, striking while the iron's hot,
And make our jarrs the ingredients of their plot.
Which b'ing contrived by some, whom Schism and pride
Had long ago inflamed; now when they spied,
The peoples minds inclining to their will,
Set on their work, and more, and more instill
Sedition, by themselves, and instruments,
To fill the peoples minds with discontents;
But privately at first, until, at length,
They had increased their number, power, and strength.
CHAP. II.
THen first a Meteor with a Sword breaks forth
Into this Island, from the boisterous North;
Darting ill influences on our State;
And though we knew not what they aimed at,
They went to make us Denizons of the Tombs,
While they religiously possess our rooms:
These, from the entrails of a barren soil,
On an imagined wrong invade our Isle,
Upon pretense of Liberty, to bring
Slavery to us, and ruin to our King:
Whose yelling throats b'ing choakt, at last, with that
Which cures all, Gold; they aimed at
A private project, to engage the rout
Of English Scots, to bring their ends about,
And spoil the Crown: so what they could not do,
By force; by fraud, they slily work us to.
They came to help us, that themselves might get,
And are dear Brethren; but we pay for it.
Hence, hence our tears, hence all our sorrow springs:
The curse of Kingdoms, and the Bane of Kings!
CHAP. III.
THen they in public meet, and 'cause they knew,
All their success upon the people grew,
They feel their pulses, and their cures apply,
Be It good or bad, still to their fantasy;
What e're they love to praise, and what they hate,
In every act to give a jerk at that.
What e're they would have done, must not b'impos'd
By humane Law, but with Religion gloz'd;
And when Laws penal are too weak to do it,
Then their Lay-Levites press the Conscience to it;
Who are maintained to preach, and pray, and pray,
As if they had Commissions of Array,
From Heaven, to make men fight; they cry, Arms, arms,
What e're's the Text, the Uses are alarmes;
Though they seem pale, like Envy, to our view,
Their very prayers are of a sanguine hue.
And though they have Jacobs Voice, yet we do find
They Have Esaus hands (nay more) they 've Esaus mind.
Their empty heads are Drums, their noses are
In sound, and fashion, Trumpets to the war:
These dangerous firebrarnds, of cursed sedition,
Are Emissaries, to increase division:
These make Gods Word their pander, to attain
The fond devices of their factious Brain:
Like Beacons, being set themselves on fire,
In peoples minds, they uproares straight inspire.
Or, like the Devil, who, since from heaven he fell,
Labors to pull mankind, with him, to hell:
In this beyond the Devil himself they go,
He sowed by night, they in the daytime sow.
He while the Servants slept, did sow his tares,
They boldly in Gods Pastors sight sow theirs.
They Have tongue-ti'd Truth, Scripture they have made a glass,
Where each new Heresy may see his face.
CHAP. IX.
THey make long speeches, and large promises,
And giving hopes of plenty, and increase;
Cherish all discontented men at hand,
To help all grievances; they crouch, and stand
Congying to all, and granting every Suit,
Approve all Causes, Factions; and impute
All scandalls to the Court, that they are unjust,
And negligent, given to delight and lust;
And what is done there (to give the more offense)
They still interpret in the worser sense.
In all they make great shows of what they will do,
They Will hear the poor, and help the needy too:
For in all civil Discords, those that are
Disturbers, always counterfeit the care
Of Public good; pretending, they will be
Protectors of the Peoples Liberty;
The Privilege of the State, the good of the King,
The true Religion; yet all is but to bring
Their own designs about: they will ruin all,
That they may rise, though the whole Kingdom fall.
By these delusions, used with dext'rous Art,
They drew all factious spirits to their part:
The childish People gazing at what is gay,
Flock to these shows, as to a Puppet-Play;
Like drunken men, they this way, that way reele,
And turn their minds, as Fortune does her wheel.
They long for noveltie, are pleased with shows,
And few truth, from truth-seeming Error knows.
Their love (like French-mens courage) does begin
Like powder, and goes out, as soon 's it is in.
The thing or person, whom they dearly love,
Within a moment hate, and disapprove:
They measure every Action by the event,
And if they are crossed by some ill accident;
Whoever serves them, nere shall recompense,
With all his virtuous deeds, one slight offense.
So wretched is that Prince, that Church, that State,
That rests upon their love, or on their hate.
They Will all be Kings, and Priests, to teach and sway
Their Brethren, but they cannot endure to obey,
Nor rule themselves; and that is the only cause,
Why they have plucked down Religion, and the Laws,
And yet will settle neither; that they might
Have fair pretenses to make people fight:
For, by this cunning, every factious mind
Hopes to find that, to which he is most inclined;
They like Miscellionists, of all minds be,
Yet in no one opinion can agree;
Their Planet-heads they in Conjunction draw,
As empty Skulls meet in a Golgotha.
Each head his several sense, though senseless all,
And though their humors by the ears do fall,
In this they jump, to disobey and hate
What ere's enjoined them by the Church or State:
And all strive to be Reformation-men;
Yet putting out one evil, bring in ten.
CHAP. XV.
GReat men, that would be little Kings, did come:
Some led by discontent, b' ambition some:
Others of ruined fortunes, but a mind
To pomp, to sloth, and luxury inclined;
Who longed for civil wars, that they might be
Instal'd in wealth, or we in misery:
These bobtail'd Bears, would feign like Lions reign,
And Clownes would drive, or ride in Charles his Wain.
These, by their greatness, were the heads of Faction:
The Commons must be hands, and feet of Action,
That must by force defend, if they had need,
Their grand design; Thus on their plots succeed.
All humors stirred, none cured; jarr, yet conspire,
To be all fuel, to begin the fire;
Some go in wantonness to see, and some
Must go, because they cannot stay at home;
Villains, that from just death could not be free,
But by the Realms public calamity;
They 're like the Milt, which never can increase,
But by the bodies ruin or disease;
That with our money must recruit their chests,
And only in our trouble, have their rests;
Such as in luxury, in lust, in play,
Have prodigally thrown their states away;
Convicted persons, Bankerupt Citizens,
That spend their own, and long for other men's:
Servants, which from their Masters hither flee,
And change their bondage for this liberty:
Men of high thoughts, and of a desperate mind,
Wild Gallants, whose vast thoughts were not confined
To'th' Circle of the Laws; and all, whom want
Or guilty Conscience made extravagant,
Flocked in to make up this new Colonie,
Where heinous Crimes had got a Jubilee:
And as in this, so it is in every state,
Men of low fortunes envy still and hate
The good, extol the bad, they disapprove
All ancient Laws, and novelties do love:
Disdain their own estates, and envy those,
Whose wealth above their ruined fortune goes.
These are secure from troubles, for they are poor,
And, come what can, they cannot be made much more.
Nor was it a small incentive, to behold
How the poor Skowndrells wallowed in Gold;
How Kingly in their diet and array,
And how they do their betters daunt and sway,
To whom they had been vassalls heretofore,
And been perhaps relieved from their door.
This made the Peasant, who did work for's hire,
Or beg, or steal, leave ploughing, and aspire
To imitate the rest as well's he can,
First steals a horse, and then is a Gentleman.
A young Physician well may guess the events,
Of medicines, made of such ingredients;
For how unlikely is it, things should go right,
When the Devils Soldiers for Gods cause do fight.
Amongst these they stole the hearts of some that be
True meaning men, of zeal and piety,
Though ignorantly zealous, still possessed
By their strange Doctrine, that none could be blessed
That were not Actors, who did neuters stand,
God would spue out; Opposers out of hand
Should be cut off; No mercy, they decreed,
To the Enemy, though Christ should intercede:
No pardon: but their goods, moneys and all.
As guerdon of their facts to them should fall.
Wealth, pleasure, honor, that were wont to be
The general spurrs to all Activitie,
Were largely promised unto every one,
Just as they found his inclination.
It was esteemed an ordinary grace,
For broken Citz to get a Captains place.
The wealthy Citizens, whose glut'nous eye
Gazed on the public faith, that Lotterie,
Though they for fear or shame were loath to do it,
They Would cut down Boughs, and cry Hosanna to it:
They brought their plate and money to this Bank,
Hoping for Prizes, but draw forth a Blank.
Themselves reserve the Prizes, and this stands
Still gaping, like the bottomless Quicksands.
You might track plate, like beasts, to the Lions den,
How much went in, but none came out again?
Here was our Primum mobile of woe!
This was the Mother and the Nurse on it too!
Thus many were drawn in: But those that were,
Not moved by love, were driven on by fear.
CHAP. VI.
THe adverse part, perceiving their intents,
Prepared them powers for their own defense.
The Gentry for the baseness they did do,
Were quite discountenanced, and justly too:
They grew degenerate, and Gentility
Was but a Nickname, or a livery,
Which every wealthy Clown might have, and wear,
And be styled Worshipful. They took no care
To keep their blood untainted from the stain
Of vulgar sordidnesse, and so maintain
The glory of their Ancestors, that be
Derived to them from vast eternity;
But mixed the Blood that had enriched their veins,
With each ignoble Slave, or Trull, for gains.
Learning, wit, virtue, birth, report, that be
Essential bases of Gentilitie,
Veiled all to wealth; and that is the Cause we find,
So many rich in purse, so few in mind.
How many Justices did wealth advance,
That had nothing to show, but ignorance?
They lived, like Cedars, and their drops from high
Made the poor, like under-woods, to starve and die:
That in what place we saw so many poor,
Some great man lived not far, we might be sure.
Now these that so imperiously did awe,
When they perceived men did not care a straw
For their commands, but that the shrub began
To be as stately as the Gentleman;
Then they (though not for conscience sake) oppose
Them, that to infringe the Kingly power arose.
The truly noble Heroes (for there be
Two contrarieties in each degree)
Are by the blindfold people made to bear
In suffering (though not in sin) a share;
For when the vulgar to be Judges come,
Then all must suffer for the fault of some.
They quickly saw, when the bold Subject dares
Usurp Kings Rights, it is time to look to theirs.
The vulgar, knowing little, but b'ing led
By the Priests, or Gentry, join to make a head
Each as his fancy leads him.
Some ambidextrous villains took one part,
And yet held with the other in their heart:
Such men desire our Wars may still increase,
And fear of nothing but a needy peace.
Mean while the Newters, Jacks of both sides stand,
Poysing themselves, on both, yet neither hand,
Like Goddesses of victory attend,
To take the Conquerors part in the latter end.
Those that are wisest, were they Argos-ey'd,
And ( Bythian-like) had every eye supplied
With double sight, yet they could hardly see
Which side to take, and save their Bacon free.
So betwixt both, these civil wars ore-whelm
The whole superficies of this wretched Realm:
This land that was a Canaan, while 'twas good,
Is now the sad Aceldama of blood.
CHAP. VII.
ANd now the great State-gamesters plainly find,
All, either stirred in body or in mind.
The instruments prepared, to work they fall,
Ambiguous oaths (Treasons Original)
They now invent, impose; First men are made
To swear amiss, and then they do persuade,
Those oaths bind them to do what these intend,
Stretching poor souls to bring about their end.
Now jealousies and fears, which first arose
From the polluted Consciences of those
That were the first contrivers; these divide
The limbs from The Head, nay from themselves beside
One will not confide in the other; this, although
It rose from nothing, to a world did grow.
Nor did it lose by the way; like Balls of snow,
It bigger still, as it did go, did grow.
Both separate themselves, and each intends
Distance, a great advantage to their ends:
Those, that had active bin on either side,
Are mutually accused, sent for, denied:
This makes both stick to what they had begun,
And each his course more eagerly did run.
First they fall to it by pen, which did incense
Both parties with a greater vehemence;
From hence names of disgrace at first arose,
And each to other made more odious:
And the amazed people did invite
To lay aside their tedious peace, and fight.
They plainly saw the war, before they could
Discern the Cause on it; and they might behold
The effects, though not the quarrel; they well knew
That they must feel the war, and end it too.
War, like a Serpent, at the first, appeared
Without a sting, that it might not be feared;
But having got in's head, begins to be
The sole Monopolist of Monarchy.
Thus by degrees we ran from peace; to go
Downward, was easy; but b'ing once below,
To re-ascend that glorious hill, where bliss
Sits throned with Peace, oh what a labor it is.
Our floating eyes, in seas of tears, may see
The heaven we 're fallen from; but our misery
Does more increase, to Tantalize to the brink,
In happiness, when yet we cannot drink.
Now we must fight for peace, whose worth by most
Was not discerned, till utterly 'twas lost.
None know the good of peace, but such as are
Broiled in the furnace of intestine war.
CHAP. VIII.
NOw having used the effeminate war of words,
Which did enlarge the jarrs, at length the swords
Apparelling themselves in robes of blood,
Sat Doctors of the Chair, which never stood
To hear the Cause, but quickly does decide
All that comes near, and without skill divide
All individuums. It Is a fearful Case,
When undiscerning swords have Umpires place:
That have two-edged to wound, but have no eye
To sever Justice from iniquity.
When rage and Ignorance shall moderate,
That understand no Syllogisms, but straight
Turning all method into cursed confusion,
Majors to Minors, bring both to Conclusion.
And now the great Reformists only care
Is how to help those miseries which were
Of their own rearing Faction, like a Snake,
Stings those, from whom it did a quickening take.
First, all the Kingdom to a need they draw:
Then make that need, they 've brought, their only Law
This Mint of Laws stands not on observation
Of Statutes fixed (the Birthright of our Nation)
It Is turned a warlike Council, and no more
A legal Senate, as it was before.
Now S^lus Populi begins to be
The general Warrant to all villainy,
Of which themselves are Judges; lawless need
(The conquering Rebel to all Laws) does plead
A privilege, what e're they say or do,
New need still make them act contrary too.
When any injured Subjects did complain,
These two Laws paramount could all maintain.
Religion too, and fundamental Laws
Are both o're-ruled by a Law, called Cause.
CHAP. IX.
OUr quarrel is a working jealousy
Fixed in a severed Kingdom, both sides be
So diffident of each, they will rather die,
Then trust each other: such Antipathie
Springs from this ground; Subjects dare spill the blood
Of their anointed Sovereign, for his good.
The ungrateful Son, forgetting natures Laws,
Dares kill his Father for the good of's Cause.
Fathers their sons; and Brothers, Kinsmen, Friends
Do seek their Brothers, Friends, and Kinsmens ends.
Arms, that long useless lay for want of war,
Are now called forth, more summoned from far.
English to English are become a terror;
One wicked action is a seconds mirror.
Each strives in mischief to transcend another,
And every Christian is a Turk to's Brother.
Blows seldom fall upon a barren ground,
But bear centuple crops, they still rebound.
Rage begets rage, men do in vice climb higher,
And all bring fuel to increase the fire.
Conscience rejected, men their forces bend,
Which shall the rest in height of sin transcend.
Now faith and loyalty grow out of date,
And Treason is the Gole that is aimed at.
The sacred league 'twixt body and the soul,
Which Laws preserved inviolate, and whole,
Is daily broke, and that sweet Bridegroom forced
From his beloved Spouse to be divorced.
Each man is drunk with Gallus, and grows mad;
Nor can there Hellebore enough be had,
To re-instate our reason in its throne;
Nor have we sense enough to feel we have none.
The Age was so vile; the Iron Age of old
Compared with ours, may be an Age of Gold.
We in the times of peace, like the Ocean, were
Impenetrable, till Divisions tare
Us from our selves, and did divide us quite,
As the Red Sea was by the Israelite.
And we, like walls, facing each other, stand
To guard our foes, while they devour our Land.
We are like those that vainly go to Law,
And spend their Corn, while they defend the straw;
We sue for Titles, Castles in the air,
Egged on on both sides by the Martial Lawyer,
Who says, the Cause is good: but what is the fruit?
We spend the substance to maintain the Suit.
At last, we purchase at so dear a rate,
A larger title of an empty State.
But oh! the general Law-Case of our Nation,
Does know no Term, nor yet our woes Vacation.
CHAP. X.
NAy we cannot soon enough our selves undo,
But we call others in to help us too.
They bring their pocky Whores, and do desire
To drive us from our Land by sword and fire.
These serve as Umpires, not to work our peace,
But that their wealth may with our Wars increase:
For Foreign aids, and Contributions are
Not to conclude, but to prolong the War,
All for their own advantage; not t'expire,
But (fuell-like) to increase the fatal fire.
We (like the steel and flint) do fall by the ears,
And each by mutual blows his fellow wears:
Mean while the Soldier (like a wily Fox)
Purses the golden sparkles, which our knocks
Strike forth: so we must all expect no less
Then certain ruin, or a sudden peace.
These Journey-Souldiers will expect a pay,
Nor can fair promises their stomachs stay:
Plunder but blows the flame; they will so far
Engage themselves in our unnat'rall War,
That when they end it, it shall be so well,
They Will take the fish, and give both sides a shell.
They ( Phoenix-like) will from our ashes rise,
And it is our ruin only satisfies
Their bloody minds; and we may justly fear,
They will have all, not be content to share.
CHAP. XI.
HOw direful are the effects of Civil War!
No Countries, Cities, Corporations are,
Nor Families, but their division's so,
That their own selves will their own selves undo.
One's for the King, and the other for the States,
And the poor Soldiers, like the Andabates,
Fight blindfold, shoot, are shot, are wounded, die,
Only because they do, not knowing why.
Yet those whom rage had hurried on to stay
Each other in the Exodus of the day,
Breath with their souls their anger out, and lie
Kissing, or hug each other when they die:
And though in life they had such enmity,
Meet in one death, and there they both agree.
Two Armies now against themselves do fight,
For the public good, so equal both in might,
That betwten both the Kingdom's like to fail,
And both to fall, but neither to prevail:
Yet both in disagreeing do consent,
To be the Realms continual punishment.
While some, like Camells, take delight to swill
Their souls in the troubled waters of our ill,
That are on foot oth' Kingdom, and do rise
When that does fall, and on our miseries
Do float, like Arks, the more the waves aspire,
The more they dance, and are exalted higher.
That (Leech-like) live by blood, but let such know,
Though they live merry at the Kingdoms woe,
It Is a sad Obit, when their Obsequies
Are tuned with Widows, and with Orphans cries.
Woe be to those, that did so far engage
This wretched Kingdom in this deadly rage!
That both sides being twins of Church and State,
Should slay each other in their fatal hate.
This mountain sin will clog their guilty souls,
Whose poisonous breath has kindled all these coals;
And when their souls do from their bodies fly,
If they have burial, (which they so defy,
And it is more fit their carkas meat should be
To Beasts, whom they transcend in cruelty)
Posterity upon their tombs shall write,
Better these men had never seen the light:
It Is just that all Achitophels of State,
That have his policy, should have his Fate.
CHAP. XII.
THe Sun four times, and more, his course has run,
Since we began to strive to be undone;
Since millions, heaped on millions, do concur
To Increase the sinews of this too strong War:
The glutted ground has been parboild in blood
Of equal slaughters, victory has stood
Indifferent Arbiter to either side,
As if that heaven by that had signified,
Both were in fault, and did deserve to be
Both overthrown; not crowned with victory.
While Saw-pit Warriors blind the peoples eyes,
On both sides with mock-victories, and lies;
And tell us of great Conquests, but they be
Total defeats given by Synechdoche:
When one side is the Master of the field,
The Other strived to recruit, but not to yield;
And which soever won, was sure to lose,
The Conquests being the Conq'rors overthrowes:
Skirmishes every day, where Soldiers get
Salmatian spoils, with neither blood nor sweat:
To overcome by turns both sides agree,
Horses are taken, but the men go free.
Towns have been lost and won, and lost and won,
Whole Counties plundered, thousands been undone,
All to no purpose: wars still keep their course,
And we instead of better, grow far worse:
War does the nature of the Abeston hold,
Which being once made hot, grows never cold.
We have a Lease of lives on it, our heirs be
Entitled to our plagues, as well as we,
By lineall succession. Peace is quite
Ejected from possession of her right;
Passion's like heavy bodies; down a hill
Once set in motion, do run downward still:
The Quarrell's still inflamed, Jealousies
And Fears increase, Malice does higher rise:
Want comes upon us armed: Humanity
Dissolves to savagenesse; Friendship does lie
Trod underfoot; neither can Natures force,
Or consanguinity, beget remorse,
Or un-inrage men's fury; now the Sword
Is Lord Chief Justice, and will not afford
Law the copartnership; for none must be
Primate or Metropolitan, but he.
Laws are but ligaments of peace, which are
Broken (like threads) by all in time of War.
CHAP. XIII.
PLundring, that first was licensed by that Cause,
That turns even lawlessenesse it self to Laws,
Spurred on by need, and sweetened by the gain,
Grows Epidemicall, and spreads amain.
It slights the difference of friends and foes,
And like an uncurb'd Torrent, over flows.
That which before was Fellonie,'s the same
Only new christened with a German name.
This violent killing men, which was ere while,
Condemned for murder, now they valor style.
Opposing of a Parliament, they bring
Now to be due Allegiance to the King.
And who the Kings Prerogative do hate,
Are now called faithful Servants to the State.
The King (a syllable that used to be
Sacred; a name that wore Divinity)
Is banded on the tongue of every slave,
And most by those to whom he quickening gave.
The Cobblers Crow has now forgot to sing
His (...), but cries, kill the King.
He, on whose health, wealth, safety do depend
Our health, wealth, safety, and with whose they end:
He, whom the everlasting Potter chose
A Vessel for himself, is by his foes
Scandall'd, despised: those Phaetons of Pride,
Would pull him down, that they might up and ride.
Our wealth, the excrement of all our toil,
For which, in days of peace, we did so moile,
And care to rake together, ^s quickly gone,
Like a scrap't portion on a scattering son.
Gold, which we made our God, and did adore,
Is but a cause to make our Plagues the more;
The worldlings Mammon, which (he did suppose)
Made him nor love his friends, nor fear his foes,
Is now his snare; nay it is become a sin,
Now to have wealth, which heretofore has been
Our only virtue. We call those good men,
That swelled with goods, not goodness; now it is grown
Our only innocence, if we have none.
The idle Soldier does devour the store
That painful men have labored for before;
Unstock the grounds, and clean deface the fields;
Th'untutor'd ground scarce any harvest yields.
The grass for want of Cattle, dries away,
And without labor turns it self to hey:
Corn while it grows, is eat or trodden down;
Of if it happen to be reap't or mowne,
Right owners do but toil the more about it,
To bring't to them, themselves must go without it:
They work, fare, lie hard, all to maintain Knaves,
So that at best, they are but Troopers slaves;
And now in them is Adams curse made good,
They with much labor get a little food.
Some men will toil no more to till the ground,
Because no profit of it does redound
Unto themselves, or (which is worse) for want
Of Horse or Hinds, those that would do it cannot.
CHAP. XIIII.
ALL which do usher in a famine, that
Comes seldom unattended; Graves grow fat,
When Captain Lack comes with his hungry Troop
Of fell diseases, and takes people up
To victual death a Garrison; then all
That 'scape the Sword, must by the Famine fall.
We, to our grief, shall find that Axiom true,
Who die without the sword, die by it it too.
Need will create new foes, for hunger grows
A warrant to all villainy, and knows
No Property nor Right; wrongs legal be
By that authentic Law, Necessity.
Spurred on by this, no man will pass or care,
So he may have't, from whom, how, when, or where.
Commanders make a mizmaze of the War,
And all their battles subtle motions are.
If one remove his men, the other will
Move after him, and so they follow still;
But yet they have a Precept, that confines
Each in the compass of their mutual Lines,
And not molest each other; they agree
To share our goods, and set each other free,
By mutual change. Thus that great Idol Cause,
To whom they have sacrificed the mangled Laws
Of God and Man, is but a cunning paint,
To make a Devil seem a heavenly Saint.
While we like Turkish slaves, are bought and sold,
Imprisoned and released, and all for Gold,
From one to the other: Now we need not fear
Algier abroad, we have too many here;
And what ere they pretend their quarrels are,
They only fight which shall have greatest share
In our estates, by rapine, and by stealth;
And thus they mean they fight forth'Commonwealth.
This lacks a house, and that desires a field,
And new enjoyments new desires do yield;
The Victors know nor modesty, nor measure
Of their desires, but their gain, pomp, and pleasure:
No moderation bridles or keeps in
The headstrong force of a prevailing sin.
And the Commanders too, that ought to be
The Remora's to the Soldiers cruelty,
Sometimes transcend the rest in vice, as far
As they b' Authority above them are.
Beggars on horseback, that no art can do,
Whereby we may them from inferiors know,
But by their injuries, and those do stand
As a sure Argument of their Command.
Nor fight they as our Ancestors did fight,
By force, to get our Law-denied right;
But cauponate the War; they sell and buy
A Town, a Castle, or a Victory.
What ere an Enemy shall do or say,
Is all for given, if he will but pay,
These Garrisons are Sanctuaries still,
To shelter those, that do, and maintain ill.
They Are Purgatories too; we go about
To bring in Popery, while we drive it out.
CHAP. XV.
ANd yet these Soldiers go to undo us quite,
And steal our reason, as they have our right:
Both say they fight for our Religion,
And Laws, which all our safety stands upon;
Yet they'ld bewitch us so, we should not see,
That by this war both violated be,
Unless we take profaneness for the true
Religion, and injury for due.
If prisonment be liberty, and peace
Be made by open wars: if truth increase
By new broach't heresies; then Churches are
Maintained by blood, and Kingdoms ruled by war,
If in those two a Gordian knot were knit,
It Is fit that wisdom then should open it,
And not the sword. War is the Common nurse
Of Barbarism; Soldiers add curse to curse:
Those rude Profeffors of the reforming Trade,
How unfit instruments will they be made
To rectify the Church, that hardly name
God, but in Oaths, when wine or wrath in flame
Themselves above themselves: or if there are
Men of more conscience, then the rest, or care,
It Is but to gloze their Actions; we all see
Their courses are full of impiety.
How can we exercise Religion now,
When want of Laws does liberty allow
To all profaneness? Such lewd men as they
Have made the War a Common Holiday
To all licentiousness. We hardly can
Serve God aright (so vile is every man;)
Nor live uprightly in such times as these,
Being so wicked in the days of peace.
Is this Religion, when each Soldier dares
Become a Bishop, to correct our Prayers,
And new-coine all our orders? each retains
A public Synod in his factious brains.
Temples which pious Fathers have erected
For Divine Worships, how are they rejected?
Made stalls for horse and men (more beasts then they)
Where God did feed his flock, horse feed on hey.
Garments to Churches given by Saints, to adorn
The Sheep, by sacrilegious Wolves are worn:
And harmless Railes, which stood in the defense
Of The Table, from irrev'rent violence,
They have thrown down; as if they would allow
No railing, but such as from Pulpets flow.
Who e're but sees these acts, must needs allow
Gods House was n'ere more den of thieves, then now.
Such bad effects, or more pernicious far,
We must expect, when an eternal War
Cures a divided Church; the victory
Will prove more pestilent then the War can be.
CHAP. XVI.
OLd Laws cannot be used, or new ones made,
When general lawlessenesse does all invade,
Custom and Liberty have made men's mind
Incapable of curbs; that should we find,
Laws reestablished with a power to sway;
Men are more prone to suffer, then to obey.
The eylesse Sword 's unable to decide,
But with it is two-edged skill it does divide
The Client, not the Cause; Our Liberties
Which they pretend to save, before our eyes
Are still infringed; they every day divorce
Us from our livings, by that law called Force.
Nor have we Judges, to appeal for right,
Nor law to live by, but a greater Might:
That should we by such courses purchase peace,
'Twould be dear bought at such high rates as these.
Nor would I thank their bounty, that present
Food, when my body is by famine spent:
And all these woes (the more t'augment our Curse)
Are but sad Prologues to an Act that is worse.
Yet though our woes be great, and still increase,
We Are not desirous, nor prepared for peace;
But so bewitched with their fawning knavery,
We bind our selves to an eternal slavery:
For if that any peaceful Treaties are,
Those manage them that have begun the war;
And how unlikely is it, it should succeed,
When Malefactors judge, and Traitors plead.
CHAP. XVII.
THe loyal Subjects mourn, and grieve to see
The Realm destroy it self by policy,
To prevent ruin; and will be as far
From blowing, as from kindling this our war;
Not out of cowardice, or fear to die,
But they desire to have a reason why
This Realm is not better preserved by peace,
Then by such ruine-bringing wars, as these:
They see no cause so great, why 'twas begun,
As now they do, why it should soon be done.
They love the King in earnest, and believe,
His presence does a perfect essence give
To Parliaments; which though they don't adore,
They duly honor, and do wish for more,
Though not for such: and they think them to be,
If right, the Kingdoms sole felicity.
They think them not omnipotent, but be
Men, Subjects, prone to err, as well as we.
They love Religion, and don't hold it fit,
To have it altered by each Cockscombs wit.
They would not have it puppeted with shows,
Nor rudely stripped start naked of its Cloths;
As if there were no better way to cure
A Lethargy, but with a Calenture.
The Surplice, which so much is railed upon,
And termed by some the Whore of Babylon;
Wise men will not believe it is so; or were,
Whores smocks will serve to make a Rogue a shirt.
Or if whores do wear smocks, we do not know,
Why honest people should not wear some too.
It is not zeal of those that rob us of it,
But 'cause 'twas whorish, therefore they do love it.
Often Preaching is not counted an offense,
Least Treason and Sedition flow from thence:
For it is known; they that do Faction teach,
May (what do you called) but neither pray nor preach.
Good Preachers are as contrary to these,
As is our Zenith to the Antipodes.
Those like not peace, that go about to draw
The Gospel from agreement with the Law.
And would have so much difference betwixt
These two, as 'tween their Doctrine and their Text.
It Is our desire to make them friends again,
That so the Gospel may the Law maintain.
They are (though two) one Word, and should agree,
As their two Authors, in one unity.
We hate Court-lazy-Clergy, and withal
The new State-Levites, too pragmaticall.
We pray for peace, the Physic of our Nation,
Not sprung from War, but from Accommodation.
CHAP. XVIII.
WHy then? you tottering Bases of our Land,
Who at this wave-tost Kingdoms Stern do stand,
Why did you first begin? why do you still
With all your force strive to prolong our ill?
Cannot all our sad Petitions? can our charms
Of people, groaning under the Alarmes
of bloody broiles, nor slaughtered Subjects cries,
Move you to end our endless miseries?
Sheath up your Swords, and let your quarrels cease,
Or drown themselves in a desired peace.
The King and State are individual,
And both must needs decay, if one do fall.
They Are like the twins of old Hypocrates,
Both live together, both together cease.
And what a glorious triumph it is to see
Both Prince and People kiss in Unity!
Our God is all-sufficient, and as far
In peace he is to be trusted, as in war;
He can as well wisdom bestow, and skill,
To treat, as power to fight; and as he will,
Both have success. It Is man-like to contest
By disputation; force is for a Beast:
Those that do save a State from perishing,
Do truly love the Kingdom and the King.
And as much honor will to those accrue,
That save a Kingdom, as that gain a new.
You that are called divine; nay Gods, why then
Do you degenerate to worse then men?
And have no share of what should in you be,
The chief of Attributes, just Clemency?
Is It not as great a glory, to forget
An injury, as take revenge for it?
The injured Subject would be glad to hear
That mutual love might triumph over fear.
What if we have been injured heretofore?
Must we, to help us, make our wrongs the more?
If we were wet before, shall we desire
No remedy, but a consuming fire?
And can there be no temperate Region known,
Betwixt the Frigid, and the Torrid-Zone?
War is a pleasant Theme to those that do
Not what it is, nor what it brings, know.
But they will get as much that first began
These broiles, as he that ploughs the Ocean;
Nothing but stormy Billows. War's a Play,
Which both the Stage and Actors will destroy.
It Is like an Estridge, hot, and can digest
Men that are valiant, men of Iron breast.
Would you have Religion? it is no godly course
To write upon men's consciences by force.
Faith is destroyed, and Love that cemented
The Head and Members, now from both is fled.
Where Is then our hope? God did not hold it good,
That hands which had bathed themselves in blood,
(Though in a lawful war) should ever build
A Temple to his name: men's brains are filled
With Faction so; that all who lent a hand
To uncreate Religion, which did stand
Established by Law; now each is left
To his own fancy, how he please to hav't.
Now here will be no Church, each pate will be
A Cross to Christ, a second Calvarie.
Nor can the earth bring any fruit that is good,
When it is dung'd with its own Childrens blood.
But how melodiously the accents sound
Of Peace, when full-chapt plenty does rebound,
And answer like an Echo!
Peace is the Nurse of Truth, the strength of Laws;
Law, Truth, and Peace, are all Synonoma's.
This is the good man's darling, from this springs
The wealth of Subjects, and the grace of Kings.
CHAP XIX.
BUt an unbias'd reason may suppose
Which side, by the Sword, does prove victorious;
Will so insult over his inslaved foe,
That whatsoever does but make a show
Of leaning to it, though in it self most good,
Will without Law or Reason be withstood.
Which side soever does rise by to'thers fall,
Will still remain too great, and that too small:
And such a victory it self will be
A greater war, a longer misery.
For should the King prevail, it is to be feared,
We justly are from Parliaments cashiered:
And without those what can we look for, less
Then an untrue, or else a slavish peace?
So while we pole away his natural power,
He Is periwig'd with greater, then before.
It Is the best conquest, when the Prince is Lord
Of's peoples hearts, by love, not by the Sword.
For what is the King with a full power to sway,
When there are left no Subjects to obey?
And if the war to the States a conquest brings,
Have at Prerogatives, and power of Kings.
For when the Realm is in confusion run,
(As it must be, when ere the war is done,)
The people, being victors, we shall find,
As various in desires, as they are in mind:
They Will be controlling still, and still aspire
To limit Legal Power, not their desire:
And when their Votes are granted, are as far
From b'ing contented with it, as now they are.
Both King and Magistrate must look to reign
No longer then they do their wills maintain:
And that Great Council (if they did intend)
Cannot bring the stubborn people so to bend
TO authority, that any King shall sway
By fixed Laws, they loyally obey;
No more then Pilots on the stormy seas,
Can guide their cap'ring vessels, where they please.
So we (like fools) while we do Scylla shun,
Do headlongly into Charybdis run.
For if we cannot endure to obey one King,
What shall we do if we a thousand bring?
CHAP. XX.
HOw sad our Case is now! how full of woe!
We may lament, but cannot speak, or know:
Our God, in whom our peace, our plenty lay,
In whom we lived, on whom we fixed our stay.
Who being pleased, our foes became our friends,
(All their designs conducing to his ends)
Is highly now incenc'd, and will no more
Own us for's people, as he did before;
But has delivered us to the hands of those
That are our Gods, our Kings, our Kingdoms foes.
And we are involved in so many evils,
That men turn Soldiers, and the Soldiers devils:
It Is he that all this variance did bring,
The King against us, and we against the King.
A King, so good, so gracious, so divine,
That (if 'twere possible) he does outshine
The glory of his Ancestors, yet he
Is bundled up in our Calamity.
Better ten thousands of his Subjects fall,
Then he whose life's the Enchiridion of all.
Our Councell's thwarting, and our Clergy heady,
Gentry divided, Commonalty unsteady;
That always to the rising party run,
Like shadows, Echoes to the shining Sun.
Religion rent with Shismes, a broken State,
Our government confused, and those, that hate
The Realm, still undermining, those that brought
A civil war, which all our ill has wrought.
The King in danger; and the Kingdom roul'd
Into inevitable ruin, sold
Unto her foes.
Commerce and trade, the sinews of a State,
The bane of poverty, grows out of date;
Learning's neglected; and the Heptarchy
Of liberal Arts, all unregarded lie.
Our wealth decaies, yet Soldiers still increase,
The more we fight, the farther off from peace;
United Kingdoms jarring, and our foes,
Laugh at, and labor to increase our woes:
A general jealousy, intestine hate,
'Twixt several Membess of one wretched State.
Both pretend Peace and Truth, yet both oppose;
Which, till both do agree on it, no man knows.
Truth is the Child of peace; the golden mean
'Twixt two extremes, which both sides part from clean.
The poor, that begged relief from door to door,
Are like to pine; each rich man to be poor,
And many Christians are exposed (we see)
Unto the more then barbarous Cruelty
Of the remorselesse Soldiers, who run on,
Like torrents, uncontrolled, and are grown
Quite prodigal of the guiltless blood they draw,
Emboldned by the silence of the Law.
Streets ring with swearing, one oath brings another,
As if one were the Echo unto the other.
Nor age, nor sex, nor quality they spare,
They 're not allured by love, nor awed by fear.
The Carolists, and the Rotunditie
Both must be blended in one misery.
They rack, hang, torture men on either side,
To make them tell where they their gold do hide.
And lovely Ladies cries do fill the air,
While they are dragged about the house, by the hair.
Some ravished, others robbed of their attire,
Whose naked beauty 'flames their ba^e desire;
And when they have deflour'd those spotless souls,
They butcher them: Whole Towns calcined to coals:
Children that from their mothers first came hither,
Are with their mothers by them nailed together.
From wounded hearts a bloody ocean springs,
The King bleeds in our wounds, we in the Kings.
Slain bodies naked lie, and scarce can have
A Christian Burial, Kings scarce a grave.
Nor have we Zoars to fly to, from ill,
But must stay in this Sodom, come what will;
Where we in floating blood surrounded lie,
Like Islands in a sea of misery:
Nor have we either Bulwarks, Forts, or Arms,
To stand betwixt our senses and our harms,
But our bare skulls; no Trumpets, but our cries,
And those cannot help, though ease our miseries.
Complaint's an easement to a burdened soul,
That vents by retaile, what we feel in whole;
So on the Hydraula's of our dropsi'd eyes,
We (Swan-like) sing at our own Obsequies.
We power out tears, and having spent our store,
We weep again, 'cause we can weep no more:
Yet all in vain, our griefs do still extend,
And know no measure, nor our sorrows end.
Nay, which is more, those that should help all this,
Labor to make it more woeful then it is.
Peace we may labor for, but nere shall see,
Till men from pride and avarice be free.
Which since we so desire, and cannot find,
Let Us make a ladder of our peace of mind,
By which we will skale that Throne, where peace does dwell,
Roab'd with such joys, which none can think nor tell;
Which neither vice can break, nor time decay;
Nor Schism, nor Treason ever take away.
O det Deus his quoque finem.
Postscript. To his judicious Friend, Mr. J. H.
FRIEND,
I Have anvil'd out this Iron Age,
Which I commit, not to your patronage,
But skill and Art; for, till '^ be fyl'd by you,
'Twill seem ill-shap't in a judicious view:
But, having past your test, it shall not fear
The bolt of Critics, ^or their venomed spear.
Nay (if you think i^ so) I shall be bold
To say, it is not an Age of Ir'n, but Gold.
A. C.

Eidem.
HIc Liber est mundus, homines sunt (Hoskine) Versus;
Invenies paucos hic, ut in orb, bonos.
Owen. Ep. To my Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
HOw much you may oblige, how much delight
The wise and noble, would you die to night;
Would you like some grave sullen Nictor die,
Just when the Triumphs for the Victory
Are setting out; would you die now to eschew
Our Wreaths, for what your wisdom did subdue:
And though they 're bravely fitted for your head,
Bravely disdain to wear them till you are dead?
Such Cynick glory would outshine the light
Of Grecian greatness, or of Roman height.
Not that the wise and noble can desire
To lose the object they so much admire:
But Heroes and Saints must shift away
Their flesh, ere they can get a Holy Day:
Then like to Time, or Books feigned Registers,
Victors, or Saints, renowned in Calenders,
You must depart, to make your value known;
You may be liked, but not adored till gone.
So cursed a Fate has humane excellence,
That absence still must raise it to our sense:
Great virtue may be dangerous; whilst it is here,
It wins to love, but it subdues to fear:
The mighty Julius, who so long did strive
At more then man, was hated whilst alive:
Even for that virtue which was raised so high,
When dead, it made him straight a Deity.
Ambassadors, that carry in their breast
Secrets of Kings and Kingdoms Interest,
Have not their calling full pre-eminence,
Till they grow greater by removing hence:
Like Subjects, here they but attend the Crown,
Yet swell like Kings Companions when they are gone:
My Lord, in a dull calm the Pilot grows
To no esteem for what he acts or knows,
But sits neglected, as he useless were,
Or con'd his Card, like a young Passenger:
But when the silent winds recover breath,
When storms grow loud, enough to waken death,
Then were he absent, every Traffiquer
Would with rich wishes buy his being there.
So in a Kingdom calm you leave no rate,
But rise to value in a storm of State.
Yet I recant; I beg you would forgive,
That in such times I must persuade you live:
For with a storm we all are over-cast,
And Northern storms are dangerous when they last.
Should you now die, that only know to steer,
The winds would less afflict us then our fear:
For each small Statesman then would lay his hand
Upon the Helm, and struggle for Command,
Till the disorders that above do grow,
Provoke our curses, whilst we sink below.
A SATYR AGAINST Separatists.
I Have been Sir, where so many Puritans dwell,
That there are only more of them in Hell:
Where silenced Ministers enough were met
To make a Synod; and may make one yet.
Their blessed liberty they have found at last,
And talked for all those years of silence past.
Like some half-pin'd, and hunger-starved men,
Who when they next get victuals, surfeit then.
Each Country of the world sent us back some,
Like several winds, which from all quarters come,
To make a storm: As't haps, it is Sunday too,
And their chief Rabbis preach. To Church I go,
Where, that we men more patiently may hear
Nonsense, to God at first he speaks it there.
He whines now, whispers straight, and next does roar,
Now draws his long words, and now leaps them over.
Such various voices I admired, and said,
Sure all the Congregation in him praid.
'Twas the most tedious Soul, the dullest he,
That ever came to Doctrines twenty three,
And nineteen Uses. How he draws his Hum,
And quarters Haw, talks Poppy and Opium!
No fever a man's eyes could open keep;
All Argus body he would have preached asleep
In half an hour. The Wauld, O Lawd, he cries
Lukewarmnesse: And this melts the Women's eyes.
They sob aloud, and straight aloud I snore,
Till a kind Psalm tells me the dangers over.
Fleshed here with this escape, boldly to th'Hall
I venture, where I meet the Brethren all.
First there to the grave Clergy I am led,
By whatsoever title distinguished,
Whether most reverend Batchellors they be
Of Art, or reverend Sophs, or no Degree.
Next stand the wall-eyed Sisters all a row,
Nay their scald-headed children they come too:
And mingled amongst these stood gaping there,
Those few Laymen that not of the Clergy were.
Now they discourse; some stories here relate
Of bloody Popish Plots against the State:
Which by the Spirit, and providence, no doubt,
The men that made have found most strangely out.
Some blame the King, others more moderate, say,
He Is a good man himself, but led away:
The women rip old wounds, and with small tears
Recount the loss of the three Worthies Ears.
Away you fools, 'twas for the good o'th men;
They nere were perfect Roundheads until then.
But against Bishops they all rail; and I
Said boldly, I Would defend the Hierarchy:
To th'Hierarchy they meant no harm at all,
But root, and branch for Bishops; to it we fall;
I like, a fool, with reason, and those men
With wrested Scripture: a sly Deacon then
Thrust in his Ears, so speaks the Apostle too:
How speaks he friend? not in the nose like you.
Strait a She-zealot raging to me came,
And said, o'th what d' you call it party I am;
Bishops are limbs of Antichrist, she cries:
Repent, repent, good woman, and be wise,
The Devil will have you else, that I can tell,
Believed, and poach the eggs of those eyes in hell.
An hidious storm was ready to begin,
When by most blessed Fate the meat came in,
But then so long, so long a Grace is sed,
That a good Christian when he goes to bed,
Would be contented with a shorter prayer:
Oh how the Saints enjoyed the creatures there!
Three Pasties in the minute of an hour,
Large, and well wrought, they root and branch devour,
As glibly as they would swallow down Church-Land;
In vain the lesser Pies hope to withstand.
On Geece and Capons, with what zeal they fed?
And wondering cry, A goodly bird indeed!
Their spirits thus warmed, all the jests from them came,
Upon the names of Laud, Duck, Wren and Lamb,
Canons and Bishops Sees; And one most wise,
I like this innocent mirth at dinner, cries,
Which now by one is done; and Grace by two;
The Bells ring, and again to Church we go.
Four Psalms are sung, (wise times no doubt they be,
When Hopkins justles out the Liturgy)
Psalms, which if David from his seat or bliss
Does hear, he little thinks they are meant for his.
And now the Christian Bajazet begins;
The suffering Pulpit groans for Isreal's sins:
Sins, which in number many though they be,
And crying ones, are yet less land then he:
His stretch'd-out voice sedition spreads afar,
Nor does he only teach, but act a war:
He sweats against the State, Church, learning, sense,
And resolves to gain Hell by violence.
Down, down even to the ground must all things go,
There was some hope the Pulpit would down too.
Work on, work on good zeal, but still I say,
Law forbids threshing thus of the Sabbath day.
An hour lasts this two handed prayer, and yet
Not a kind syllable from him can Heaven get,
Till to the Parliament he comes at last;
Just at that blessed word his furie's past:
And here he thanks God in a loving tone,
But Laud; and then he mounts: All Is not yet done:
No, would it were, think I, but much I fear
That all will not be done this two hours here:
For now he comes to, As you shall find it writ,
Repeats his Text, and takes his leave of it;
And straight to his Sermon, in such furious-wise,
As made it what they called, an Exercise.
The Pulpit's his hot Bath: the Brethrens cheer,
Rost-beefe, Minc't-py, and Capon reek out here.
Oh how he whips about six years ago,
When superstitious decency did grow
So much in fashion! How he whets his fist
Against the name of Altar, and of Priest!
The very name, in his out-ragious heat,
Poor innocent Vox ad placitum how he beat!
Next he cuffs out Set-prayer, even the Lords,
It binds the Spirit, he says, as 'twere with cords;
Even with-Whip-cords. Next must authority go,
Authority's a kind of binder too.
First, then he intends to breath himself upon
Church government; have at the King anon.
The thing's done straight, in poor six minutes space
Titus and Timothy have lost their place;
Nay with the Apostles too it even went hard,
All their authority two thumps more had marred;
Paul and S. Peter might be sure of the doom,
Knew but this Lion Dunce they would bin at Rome.
Now to the State he comes, talk an alar'm,
And at the malignant party flings his arm;
Defies the King, and thinks his Pulpit full
As safe a place for it, as the Knight does Hull.
What though no Magazine laid in there be,
Scarce all their Guns can make more noise then he.
Plots, plots he talks of, jealousies, and fears.
The politic Saints shake their notorious ears;
Till time, long time (which does consume and wast
All things) to an end this Sermon brought at last.
What would you have good souls? a reformation?
Oh by all means; but how? o'th newest fashion;
A pretty slight Religion, cheap, and free,
I know not how, but you may furnished be
At Ipswich, Amsterdam, or a Kingdom near,
Though to say truth, yon paid for it there too dear:
No matter what it costs, we will reform though;
The Prentices themselves will have it so.
They Will root out Popery whats'ever come,
It is decreed; nor shall thy fate, O Rome,
Resist their Vow: They Will do it to a hair; for they,
Who if upon Shrove-Tuesday, or May Day,
Beat an old Bawd, or fright poor Whores they could,
Thought themselves greater then their Founder Lud,
Have now vast thoughts, and scorn to set upon
Any Whore less then her of Babylon.
They Are mounted high, contemn the humble play
Of Cat, or Football, on an Holiday
In Finesbury Fields: No, it is their brave intent
Wisely to advise the King, and Parliament:
The work in hand they will disapprove or back,
And cry in the Reformation, What d' you lack?
Can they whole Shopbooks write, and yet not know
If Bishops have a Right Divine or no?
Or can they sweep their doors, and shops so well,
And for to cleanse a State as yet not tell?
No; study and experience makes them wise,
Why should they else watch late, and early rise:
Their wit so flows, that when they think to take
But Sermons notes, they often new Sermons make:
In Cheapside-Crosse they Baal and Dagon see,
They know it is gilt all ore as well as we.
Besides, since men did that gay Idol rear,
God has not blessed the Herbwives trading there.
Go on brave Heroes, and perform the rest,
Increase your fame each day a yard at least,
Till your high names are grown as glorious full
As the four London Prentices at the Bull:
So may your goodly Ears still prickant grow,
And no bold hair increase to mar the show;
So may your Morefields Pastimes never fail,
And all the Towns about keep mighty Ale;
Ale your own spirits to raise, and Cakes to appease
The hungry coinesse of your Mistresses:
So may rare Pageants grace the Lord-Mayors show,
And none find out that those are Idols too.
So may you come to sleep in Fur at last,
And some Smectymnuan, when your days are past,
Your funeral Sermon of six hours rehearse,
And Heywood sing your acts in lofty verse.
But stay; who have we next? mark and give room,
The women with a long Petition come;
Man's understanding is not half so great,
The Apple of knowledge 'twas they first did eat.
First then Pluralities must be taken away;
Men may learn thence to keep two wives, they say;
Next Schollership and Learning must go down;
Oh fie! your sex so cruel to the Gown?
You don't the kindness of some Scholars know;
The Cambridge women will not have it so.
Learning's the Lamp of the Land, that shines so bright,
Are you s'immodest to put out the light?
This is a Conventicle trick. What Is next?
Oh with the Churches solemn forms thei'r vexed,
The sign o'th Cross the forehead must not bear,
'Twas only you were born to plant signs there.
No Font to wash native concupiscence in,
You like that itch still of original sin.
No solemn Rights of Burial must be shown,
Pox take you, hang your selves, and you shall have none.
No Organ; Idols to the ear they be:
No Anthemes; why? nay ask not them, nor me:
There Is new Church Music found instead of those,
The women's sighs tuned to the Teachers nose.
No Surplices; no? why none, I crave?
They Are of rags Rome, I think: what would you have?
Lastly they would preach too; let them, for no doubt,
A finer preaching age they will nere find out:
They Have got the spirit, fiery tongues they have, that is true;
And by their talk those should be double too.
OH times! oh manners! when the Church is made
A prey, nay worse, a scorn, to every Cade
And every Tyler: when the popular rage
(The ages greatest curse) reformes the age;
When reason is for Popery snppress'd,
And Learning connted Jesuitism at least;
When without books Divines must studious be,
And without meat keep hospitality;
When men against ancient Fathers reverend days
That many-headed beast Smectymnuus raise,
That Hidra which would grow still, and increase
But that at first it met an Hercules;
When the base rout, the Kingdoms dirt, and sink;
To cleanse the Church, and purge the fountains think,
They who whilst living waters they might take,
Drink Belgian ditches, and the Lemnian lake;
When the Liturgy, which now so long has stood
Sealed by five reverend Bishops sacred blood,
Is left for nonsense, and but pottage thought;
Pottage from Heaven, like that to Daniel brought,
Their broaths have such weeds mixed, and are so hot,
The Prophets sons cry out, Death's in the pot.
Oh times, oh manners! but me thinks I stay
Too long with them; and so much for to day:
Hereafter more, for since we now begin
You Will find we have Muses too as well as Pryn.
FINIS.

