A TRANSLATION Of the Sixth Book of Mr. Cowley's PLANTARUM. BEING A Poem upon
the late Rebellion, the Happy Restoration of His Sacred Majesty, and the Dutch
War Ensuing.

Bella per Angliacos plusquam Civilia Campos
Iusque datum sceleri canimus --
Lucan. -- Crimine ab uno
Disce omnes --
Virg. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Walsall, at the Golden Drying Pan in
Leaden-Hall-Street, 1680.

The Preface.
THis little Poem I have Collected and Translated from the Sixth Book of Mr.
Cowley's Plantarum, being intermix't with other Matters and Circumstances. I am
very sensible how ill this Piece represents the Life, for if no Copy was ever
so good as the Original, (as the Divine Cowley himself says) how imperfectly
must the greatest Master perhaps that ever the world knew ( Virgil excepted) be
copied by the Pencil of a Dawber? However this Translation may give you a
tolerable Prospect of the Sense of the Author and the Beauty of his Thoughts,
though divested of their Ornaments, and perhaps these ill-dress't Lines may at
least be acceptable to those who have not the advantage of seeing them in their
rich Habiliments. I have avoided a servile, verbal translation, observing that
noted Rule of Horace: Non verbum verbo reddere sidus
Interpres. --
the only way an Author can be rendered perspicuous, and (I may say)
intelligible in another language.

By a verbal Translation nothing almost can be rendered well, and some things
not tolerably; As Mr. Dryden in his excellent discourse of Translations before
Ovid's Epistles, observes.

I will produce an instance out of the Sixth Book of Mr. Cowley's Plantarum
here translated: Tergeminique eadem fratres in morte Jacentes.


The greatest Favorite of Apollo (I doubt) cannot render this well into
English any way, much less by a literal translation.

In some places of this Poem the sense is not determined at the end of the
Stanza, which (tho improper in Original Poems) I think an ill natured Judge may
excuse in a Translation, where a man has, at the best, but a limited, and no
absolute power, being confined to the sense of the Author; which rather than
pervert, I choose sometimes to be a little irregular in inconsiderable matters.

1.
WHen Charles the Pious, Son of James the Wise,
In Peace and Plenty Britain's Scepter swayed,
His Subjects happy (if they knew to prize
Their happiness) by his just Reign were made.
2.
Happy above all Kings, while Fate permits,
Till the cursed Tempest of Rebellion came,
Now he 'bove Envy blessed securely sits
Among the Gods, crowned with immortal Fame.
3.
For while the dreadful Storms of cruel War
Did all the rest of Europe rudely spoil,
Peace over the Ocean flew disturbed with fear,
And built her warm Nest in the British Isle.
4.
Nor did the fruitful Goddess sit in vain,
For strait, Faith, Justice, Plenty, (who is full Horn
A Cure for most Diseases does contain)
The golden Offsprings of rich Peace were born.
5.
Such I believe was Saturn's Golden Reign.
So smoothly passed his quiet years away,
Till Fortune her own weight could not sustain,
Envied by Gods, by Men contemned, she lay:
6.
And rash inconstant men too happy made,
Tired with the kindness of a lovely Wife,
Exchange her for an ugly painted Jade
Fickle and lewd; O blessed Change of Life.
7.
A seeming vigorous and luxuriant Health
Death or Disease approaching still portends,
When without cause apparent, and by stealth
Languishing nature with it is own weight bends:
8.
Such was the Britans fair and sickly State,
Happy, if Happiness they could have known.
Impute not yet their ignorance to Fate,
Since it was wilful, and the crime's their own.
9.
Fore-warning Prodigies, alas! in vain
The fatal Anger of the Gods proclaim;
So is fierce Thunder (which big Clouds contain)
Before it breaks, known by fore-running Flame.
10.
I saw, (and still, methinks* the horrid Sight
I plainly see) sad Signs over all the Skies;
Heaven seemed the Tragic History to write
Of all our sad approaching Miseries.
11.
The Heavens (which I tremble but to tell)
Which a bright Fiery Tempest did infold,
Did represent the Burning Face of Hell,
And about waves of Flaming Sulphur rolled.
12.
Strait then appeared within a broken Cloud
A horrid beauteous Scene, two Armies placed
And Marshalled in rare Order, ready stood
For Fight, with shining Armor nobly graced:
13.
Not Monck himself, that Hero Monck, the Grace
And Pillar of his falling Country named,
In better order could those Armies place,
Monck above all in War so justly famed:
14.
Who perhaps in some Figure then expressed
In the Celestial Army fiercely rode,
High mounted on a Noble, Fiery Beast,
Gracing the Heavens, looking like a God:
15.
I heard (unless fear did my senses cheat)
The Trumpets sound the Charge; here Wings of Horse
With bodies bended forwards fiercely meet;
The Foot their Spears brandish with mighty Force,
16.
They from aetherial Guns true Thunder send,
Involving in dark Clouds the Heavenly Field,
Which did the Cloud-begotten Men defend
From mortal Eyes, and their brave Acts concealed.
17.
Yet a confused Prospect of the Fight
And of the Sky with Bloody Rivers swelled
We had by the Armours Brightness, and the Light
Of the dire, threatening Flames the Guns expelled.
18.
At length the Army which the better showed,
And Nobler both in Men and Armor, flies:
But from the rest a dismal gloomy Cloud
And Darkness of the future sealed our Eyes.
19.
But nor these Prodigies, nor many more,
Which at that time by Pious Men were seen,
Did stupid England to it is Sense restore,
Careless, as if it had Lethargic been;
20.
Who then the Murmurs of the foolish Crowd,
Or hidden Seeds of Zeal Phanatic, feared?
Or Monsters of the Caledonian Wood?
And impious Cromwell had not then appeared.
21.
First rose a Cloud from Caledonian ground
Which did the North and gentle Tweed invade,
Forgetting once he did two Kingdoms bound
He thinks of one he is the Center made:
22.
By popular Winds fiercely impuls't it flies
To frighten England with it is deadly Shade,
First to move terror only Scotland tries,
And in cool blood a Scene of War is played.
23.
A Silver shower soon put the Foe to flight,
A sort of Weapon never understood
By our Forefathers, who alone in Fight
Profuse, bought Peace with the sole price of Blood.
24.
And yet this people prodigal and vain,
Who did so dearly a short Peace create,
Lasting Rebellion purchas't and Profane
Dire Civil War at a much dearer rate:
25.
Now Peace it self with the first Blood was stained,
(O dreadful Omen of ensuing Fate!)
A purple Fountain opening she profaned,
And in the Senate with the Furies sat.
26.
A great man falls by the Envy of the Great,
A just by the unjust hatred of the Crowd,
Noise does the wise and Eloquent defeat:
Rivers of Blood ( Strafford) thy sacred Blood
Must expiate, which Miseries will bring
Both to the guilty People and the guiltless King:
27.
Worcester condemned for the first seat of War,
A mournful Victor her good fate deplores,
Her Severn's Tears and Murmurings declare
Her Grief; she rages, foams, and beats the shores;
28.
But she that now with so much grief and care
The opening of the War does apprehend,
(Who can believe it?) of this fatal War
With much more sorrow shall behold the End;
29.
Methinks I Am mounted high on Kinton Hills,
The Vale beneath with a red Sea of Blood
Is overflowed, and dire Bellona fills
With heaps of slaughtered Men, the sanguine Flood.
30.
What a prodigious Harvest through the Field
Is reap't by Fiery Rupert's conquering Sword?
What heaps are by the Pious Monarch killed?
A mourning Conqu'rour: If the Fates afford
31.
Still a propitious Course, but this one Day
To all that kind of Ills will put an End,
The over hasty Conquest stumbling in the Way
Fell e're it had the Neighboring Goal attained.
32.
Then Mars through all the British Empire raged;
From the Lands-End to Orkney by the Sun
Coldly obliged, no place is disengaged;
Posses't with Fury all the Ruin run.
33.
What cruel Serpent of the Furies Brood,
Unhappy England, did thy Health confound?
All thy sick Members flow with poisoned Blood
That thy whole Body seems but as one Wound.
34.
Thrice were thy Fields, unlucky Newberry,
With Slaughter and Destruction covered over;
And thy sad Fame in horror does outvie
Philippi's Fields twice-dy'd in humane Gore:
35.
Long was the Balance even held by Fate,
Who did of Both the nodding Ruin poise
With mutual Slaughter, and alternate Weight
Of damage; Equal were their Griefs and Joys.
36.
First Yorkshire's cruel Fight severely shakes
And turns the Scales of War, and Naseby's Field
At last a VVound profound and mortal makes
Never by Art or Fortune to be healed.
37.
The rest (ye Gods) permir me not to write;
But Lo! a wondrous and deformed Heap
Of Miseries at once invade my sight;
What Spoils of War the Impious Victors reap.
38.
The King in a Poor rustic Habit dress't
( 'Twas the first time he ever used Deceit;
Though greatness still his sacred Looks expressed,)
Flying the Foe, flies to a Foe as Great.
39.
What place will to the Conquered help afford?
A King, a Guest, a Suppliant in vain
Of his own-Country-Subjects aid implored:
Ungrateful men, perfidious and profane!
40.
So does the self-wrack't Pilot freely leap
Into the threatening Waves he feared before,
From out the fierce Flames of his burning Ship,
Whom cruel Waves again to Flames restore.
41.
With Prayer's and Threats the Conquerours demand
The King as a just Spoil of War, detained
By fraud; such Seeming proofs of Love they give
You Would think without their King they could not live.
42.
No less the Scots their zealous Love declare,
They to restore their Royal Guest deny,
And stiffly urge and claim their right and share
He Is not so vile, but England yet must buy,
43.
Or not possess him. O unheard of Shame,
Which will in vain to Future Times be told!
The Potent Lord, of Sea, and Land, became
A Slave; the Master's to the Servant sold.
44.
Far be it that this great and horrid Crime
On your whole Nation ( Scotland) should be thrown;
Your Virtue did the Sin of part redeem;
And with much Blood for Crimes of Few atone.
45.
Scarce did the Arms hung up in houses rest
But a long Course of Civil war returned;
Who by base Tyrants saw the King oppress't,
And made a Prisoner, but with Anger burned?
46.
Scotland, though late it did thy Anger move,
And the just Rage of Generous Kent inflame
Which above life it self does Freedom love;
And Wales which still maintains the Britains Fame.
47.
Why should I mention the unhappy Fights,
The trembling Ribla stained with humane Blood,
Or routed Scots who in their hasty Flights
Did stop the very Current of the Flood?
48.
Why should I Medway swelled with Slaughter name
Or Colchester's long cruel Seige relate,
Whose Courage greatest Mis'ries never could tame
And who deserved a more propitious Fate?
49.
Why should I recollect the Glorious Fate
Of Lords who bravely fighting died in Field?
Or their sad ignominious Death relate
Who to the cruel Victors Mercy yield?
50.
After such Ruins, and such Miseries,
So many VVounds by advers Fortune given,
So much the Pious King did Life despise,
That he thought Death the greatest gift of Heaven.
51.
But Oh! the impious and tremendous Deed
Can n're be curs't enough by aftertimes;
It Hells most sharp Invention does exceed
To find a Torment equal to their Crimes.
52.
In The Peoples sight, the King from Prison led,
On a High Scaffold, just before the Gate
Of his chief Palace, bows his Sacred Head
To the Hangmans hands --
53.
Wounded on all sides now poor Britan dies
Drowned in the Blood which from her self did flow,
A Headless, nameless, deformed Carcass lies,
A Monstrous, Lifeless, Trunck which none could know.
54.
Who would not hope (tho there was nothing less)
In Death soft Quiet, and eternal Rest!
Lo! numerous vile Souls in Tumults press,
And ('stead of One to rule) the Limbs infest.
55.
Vile Sons of Earth by base Corruption bred,
Worms, poisonous Insects, and black Serpents crowd,
And Cromwell, greatest of the Serpents fed
Upon the very Marrow and the Blood.
56.
A noisome Odor's through the World diffused.
Sin and Injustice Justice then became,
No Rains Impiety now Reigning used
To Fury, having passed the Bounds of Shame.
57.
'Twas counted Sport to see the Scaffolds fixed
In every Street bedewed with noble Blood;
To see in Pairs hangmen and Worthies mix't
O Gods! as Shows presented to the Crowd.
58.
The good man's standing Mansion was the Gaol,
The Access to which with Crowds was early press't;
But wearied Cruelty at length did fail,
And was compelled a while to breath and rest;
59.
Insatiate Avarice no Cessation makes;
No Limits to it is violent Rage appear;
The Warrior often willingly forsakes,
But the Proscriber hardly quits the Spear.
60.
All that preceding glorious Kings had heap't
With a Magnificent and Sparing hand,
The noble Spoils in bloody Battle reap't,
And all the Riches by long Peace attained;
61.
What our Forefathers generous Piety,
And rich Religion in a splendid Dress
Did to the Sacred Altar's Use apply;
All the Estates the Nobles did possess;
62.
And those whoever of Loyalty and Lands
Were Guilty found, O wretched Avarice!
Not all these Riches could the Harpy-hands
Of the Tyrannic Sons of Earth suffice.
63.
Nor is it enough alone to take the Spoils
Of Gods, and the Kings Houses; these unjust
And impious Men destroy the stately Piles.
Of very Ruin there is a wicked Lust.
64.
In every place the groaning Carts are filled
With Beams and Stones, so busy and so loud
Are the proud Victors, as they meant to Build,
But they to Ruin and Destruction crowd:
65.
Timber, which had been buried many Years
Under high Royal Towers, they invade.
It Is sure that Hand the Living never spares
Which is so wicked to disturb the Dead.
66.
Then all the Woods the barbarous Victors seize,
(The noble Nursery of the Fleet and Town,
The hopes of War and Ornaments of Peace)
Which once Religion did as Sacred own.
67.
Now Public Use and great Convenience claims
The Woods from private Hands inviolate;
Which greedy men to less devouring Flames
Do for sweet Lucre, freely dedicate.
68.
No Age they spare, the tender Elm and Beach
Infants of thirty Years they overthrow,
Nor could old Age it self their Pity reach,
No Reverence to hoary Barks they know.
69.
The unhappy Birds, an ever-singing Quire,
Are driven from their ancient shady Seats,
And a new Grief does Philomel inspire
With mournful Notes, which she all night repeats
70.
Let them the Woods and Forests burn and wast,
There will be Trees to hang the Slaves at last;
And God, who such Infernal men disclaims,
Will root 'em out and throw 'em (...)es.
71.
Mean while expelled his cruel Country's Shores
The great Carolides through foreign Lands
Wanders, and Aid, alas! in vain implores;
Still cruel Fate his Happiness withstands.
72.
How did he suffer both by Sea and Land,
That Pious Son of an immortal Saint!
Cheerful he bears the troubles Fates command
Till they grew weary, though he never did faint:
73.
The Reverend Young Man made Fortune yield,
And in due Course of time by Fate designed
His Scepter which so fast a Tyrant held
At last was gently to his Hands resigned.
74.
But before Fate the happy Signal makes,
Fierce and impatient unto Arms he flies,
Despising Life, and courting Fame, he breaks
Through Seas block't up with hostile Ships and Ice.
75.
To a late hostile, still suspected Land
He goes; The Oliverian Powers of Hell
And Furies trembling and confounded stand,
To see great Charles to his own Kingdoms sail:
74.
Impetuous Waves and raging Storms they raise,
In vain to sink the Sacred Ship they strive,
Their Thunder cannot violate his Bays,
In vain they stop the Ship which Fate does drive:
77.
Vain is their Fear, since Caesar it Conveys
Safely conducted by the Almighties Hand,
But yet not Caesar's Fortune; which to raise
Does other Arm's (and yet scarce Arms) demand.
78.
In vain the Scots (now changed) invite the King,
Though They some Honor for that Action bore,
And thence a Man (by happy Stars) did spring,
Who did in Arms with Peace the King restore.
79.
In the mean time Great Fergus greater Heir
(Who Is Right is from a hundred Kings derived,)
Did to the Reverend Church of Scone repair,
And there the Ancient Scottish Crown received,
80.
With an unlucky Sign, though great Applause,
The Crown not being in due manner placed;
The Insulting conquering Foe did rage, and cause
Disturbance, and the Solemn Rights infest.
81.
But now his Royal Father's Murder fires
Charles with Revenge, Just Indignation stings
His Breast, Virtue incens't a Soul inspires
Worthy the Offspring of a hundred Kings.
82.
He scorns to be by an inglorious Siege
In the utmost Limits of his Kingdom shut
Nor shall the coming Winters Aids oblige
Him, whose great Faith is not in Mountains put.
83.
Wholly resolved for War, He gives the Rains*
To Fortune and his Courage, distant Tay
As his Confinement nobly He disdains,
But even with Death to Thames designs his way.
84.
The amazed Enemy is left behind,
Who of the Horror of this Action speak
With Trembling and Confusion of mind;
But Valor is without good Fortune weak:
85.
At length arrives the long, long wished for Day
For which with Prayers and Tears the Britains sue'd*
The King through thousand Dangers of the Way
On Severn's Banks with a good Army stood;
86.
Thus far a Victor, better had it proved
If He Advances to the Thames had made;
The King himself this sounder Counsel moved,
But powerful Votes, with Counsels mixed, dissuade.
87.
Now, Warlike England, now is the time; To Arm's,
Defend the Son, revenge the Father killed,
(If Piety has yet prevailing Charms)
And your poor ruined Country now rebuild.
88.
England's ill Genius now alarmed with Fears,
Who on the Ruin of Good men did dwell,
More vigilant than Cromwells self, prepares
A Cruel Poison by the Arts of Hell;
89.
One of the sleepy, cold, and fearful Snakes,
Sloaths Opium, which binds the Nerves with Cold,
Poison of griping Avarice he takes,
Which close ( Torpedo-like) the Hand does hold:
90.
He Drops of Lethe mixes, every Breast
With these he sprinkles, strait moist Poison came
Upon them, and deep Lethargy posses't
England forgetting her own Health and Fame.
91.
Yet here true Courage did not Charles forsake,
Whom Fortune and his People now desert;
Innumerous Foes surrounding could not make
Him yield, or Conquer his Heroic Heart;
92.
Witness, Ye Hills, not since called Red in vain,
And Severn's Waters stained with humane Blood,
And fatal Worcester which did first sustain
The War, and to it is Course a Limit stood.
93.
The last unwillingly he quits the Field
After a cruel Slaughter and the Flight
Of the Army, last the Captive Town does yield;
And from near Hills looks back with Rage and Spite*
94.
In haste he recollects his scattered Men
(But few so great a Shipwreck escaped) to try
His extreme Fortune, and at last regain
The Day he lost, or in it Nobly dye:
95.
The Valiant Derby, faithful Wilmot famed
For Arms, who both the King and Charles did love,
And Buckingham with Honor always named
Prepared for both, this Generous Vote approve.
96.
Buckingham Valiant, Beautiful and Young,
A benign Star at home, and in the Field
Like violent Lightning, an Achates strong
Worthy to bear his great Aeneas Shield.
97.
There Is no Delay, with Fury they return;
Nor is it Hope so much their Minds alarms,
But a brave generous Despair does burn
Their Hearts, and drives them to unfortunate Arm
98.
Thus does the King with a Few more, who know
(By Glory taught) that Death can never prove
Or to the Wretched or the Brave a Foe:
The rest such Noble Knowledge could not move;
99.
Trembling their King and Leader they forsake,
Who in vain the Deaf does court and animate,
In hasty Flight they all disperse, and take,
Inglorious Life before a Glorious Fate:
100.
Now, brave young Man, alas! in vain so brave,
Who can preserve Thee every where beset?
What God himself can extricate and save
Thee ( Sacred Charles) from Fortunes Cruel Net?
101.
Yes, this great Miracle to Charles the Saint
The Eternal God who is Omnipotent
As a Reward for Martyrdom will grant,
And even his Prayers for Mortal Charles prevent.
102.
There stands in the utmost limits of the East
Of rich Salopia, a Wood fair by Name;
Now (though 'twas once obscure and humbly blessed)
No place is Brighter with the Beams of Fame:
103.
Hard by, a sacred and auspicious Pile,
White Ladies called, did the poor King invite
To Bread and Refuge (mighty gifts!) a while,
And here his growing Fate became more Bright.
104.
But not before he had put off the King;
Here weeping he dismiss't his weeping Friends,
No Tears do from his own Misfortunes spring,
Upon their Dangers all his Grief depends.
105.
The Gems and Gold which did so much adorn,
The Garter, and all Objects of Delight
He leaves, nor is St. George's Image worn,
The Dragon vanquishing the Sacred Knight.
106.
His long, black, graceful Curls by Scissars fall,
Nor is it enough his Crown fell from his Head.
A poor Cloth Suit he wears, nor is that all,
He acted Poverty, and was poor indeed.
107.
Alas! too strictly the great Monarch bears
The old Slavery of this House; for he forsakes
All worldly Pomp, poor sordid Clothes he wears,
He cuts his Hair, of Friends sad leave he takes.
108.
Now he is a Monk; soon after cruel Fate
Not even a House to cover him allows;
Then he is a Hermit; in a wretched State,
Alone, he hides among the shady Boughs;
109.
Yet even this curs't Fortune too denies;
From him the very Earth the Tyrant takes,
Scarce to the Fugitive a Tree supplies
A Seat, and in the Air safe Harbor makes.
110.
Under a cruel Sky in Wind and Rain,
With sordid Hair and a more sordid Dress
He sits; great signs of Grief, but more of Pain
And extreme Labor his sad Looks express;
111.
His Face a little too with Smutch is died,
Yet in his Looks does Sacred Brightness dwell,
Nor can his Majesty disguises hide,
Whose Beams all Darkness and vain Clouds dispell.
112.
Some body comes, ye Gods, preserve the King;
O all is well! the Gods to men are just,
No Traitor, but a Royalist they bring,
The valiant Carlos, faithful in his Trust;
113.
He happily with Want and Danger press't
Is on this Coast by the same Shipwreck cast.
O happy! O much more than Cromwell bles't,
On whom ill Fortune so much Honor placed!
114.
He informs the King, that all the Country's filled
With the Enemies Troops, in every House and Grove
His Sacred Head at a set Value held
They seek, and near, now very near they move;
115.
What should they do? They from the Danger ta
Rash, hasty Counsel, yet from Heaven inspired.
A spacious Oak he did his Palace make,
And safely in its hollow Womb retired.
116.
The Loyal Tree it is willing Boughs inclined.
Well to receive the climbing Royal Guest,
(In Trees more Piety than Men we find)
And it is thick Leaves into an Arbor press't.
117.
A rugged Seat of Wood became his Throne,
The bending Boughs his Canopy of State;
With bowing Tops the Trees their King did own,
And silently adored Him as He sat:
118.
Hail, Heaven's Care, and greatest now of Kings,
A horrid Crowd of saddest Miseries
From Thee no undecent Tears or Sorrow brings,
Or makes thy Reason Captive by Surprise.
119.
He Is truly Great, who could at such a time
Neither fear Death, nor yet of Life despair.
This is a Work so Noble and Sublime,
It chiefly does a Royal Soul declare.
120.
If Fortune did your Kingdom basely seize,
You Fortunes Kingdom from her Nobly gain.
A Just Revenger: she will now have Peace
With him who conquered Triumphs does obtain.
121.
The Gods are pleased so great a Pair to Join
But you will be discharged the happy Birth
Of that fair Year is nigh; from Heaven it will shine
Lighting with happy Stars the peaceful Earth.
122.
That glorious Star the shining Pomp does lead
Than all the starry Host more gay and bright,
Which thirty Years before did Wonder breed,
And signalized your Birth with sacred Light.
123.
Daring at Noon to exert the Lamp of Night
Boldly in the open Face of Day it rose,
New Light portending by unusual Light
Did at Midday Phoebus himself oppose.
124.
Now once again with wondrous Light adorn
The Heavens, rise at noon, Auspicious Star,
Behold! your Royal Charles again is born
To vital Life, and to a pleasant Air.
125.
Behold! how gently Monck's strong artful Hand
The laboring Prince delivers, and removes
All Stops, he best this Art does understand,
And to deliver troubled Monarchs loves.
126.
Great generous Prince, return to life again,
The beauteous golden May does now arrive
And your Birthday, so long desired in vain;
Live, Generous Prince; again, Great Monarch, Live.
127.
O Joyful, Charming, and Propitious Day!
Triumph of conquering Peace! when you most blessed
Of Kings, through London made your glorious Way,
Mids't of three great Heroic Brothers placed,
128.
Attended by a Noble splendid Train;
So many came this Triumph to behold
You Would think the whole World London did contain;
Numberless Leaves in Woods as soon are told.
129.
First all cry out, He comes; with one Consent*
Long live, King Charles, then the vast Tumult cries;
Methinks their Joys (which with such noise they vent)
In Whirlwinds drove, should Foreign Lands surprise.
130.
Joys make us mad; Stoics, permit our Cares
Now to be drowned, and let short cheerful Folly
At length impose an end to twenty Years
Of wretched Rage, and dismal Melancholy,
131.
Nor will the Island, which all over does burn
With festival bright Flames, now suffer Night
Succeed this Great Day in it is usual Turn;
All the Island burns, the Seas a round are light.
132.
I omit the Peoples Banquets, Songs and Sports
Their boundless Laughter and their Tears to write,
For extreme Joy, which not it self supports,
With Pleasure gently sheds Tears sweet and white.
133.
The Wines which from the Conduits freely run
Why should I name? Rivers themselves should pour
(Since the true golden Age is now begun)
God Wine, far richer than Jove's golden Shower.
134.
Now golden Months, and a bright Chain of Years
Advance. Behold! from part of Heaven serene
Peace scattering the Clouds at length appears;
Long Peace which had so long an exile been,
135.
Clapping her white Wings Albion she embraced,
With her returned Shame, Plenty, and Good Fame,
And Piety in decent Habit dress't,
And Justice, which did Britain long disclaim,
136.
Wit, and Good Arts, and charming Liberty
Which best does flourish under Pious Kings.
To these the Royal Mother does apply
As great a Blessing; for Her Self She brings.
137.
Great Mary comes after a Banishment
In her own Country long and sad, it is strange;
Love to her Husband was the Crime they meant,
Now Heaven does Her reward, and Him revenge.
138.
Hail, Queen! your Sexes Ornament and Pride,
And Shame of ours, you both in prosperous Fate
And adverse decently your Passions guide;
Your pious Tears Envy in Gods create,
139.
Your Husband Charles alone they envy, Heaven
Thinks him to highly with those Offerings bless't;
You (while the Worlds Wheel is a round you driven)
Remain unmoved, in Virtu's Center placed.
140.
Now the most just of Kings applies his Mind
To Government, the gaping Wounds of Wars
With a sure gentle Hand to close and bind,
And by degrees to hide the very Scars.
141.
To restore Laws their Force and Majesty,
To polish rusty Manners, and redeem
The ancient Faith, and sincere Honesty,
And the old Glory of the English Name:
142.
Such is the lately returned Masters Care
Of his neglected Garden, which he finds
O're-run with Ruin, he does gently pare
Luxuriant Plants, the Loose and Wandering binds:
143.
He the Dejected raises and sustains,
Much sets, and much extirpates, all is redress't,
Vast is the Work, but sweet; for all his Pains
By growing Beauties are repaid and blessed.
144.
Great King, your Gardens, Towns and Cities are,
To these you good and artful Culture give,
All in fair Order you dispose with Care,
And even the Woods your Favor too receive:
145.
You raise their Kingdoms wasted and oppress't
Young Plants the places of the Old supply,
Posterity beneath thy Shadows bles't
( Thou best Protector) will securely lie.
146.
To you with cheerful Gratitude they will owe
Their Winter Fires, their summer Shades and Ease;
Their fixed Houses too, and those which flow
In water, the Oceans wooden Palaces.
147.
You now perhaps for Future Ages lay
Of Towns and Fleets Foundations strong and deep,
Living great Triumphs you will reap, and may
Sow Triumphs which Posterity shall reap.
148.
You forcing first your Way to Honor's name
Up the steep Hill where Glory does proceed
To the bright Temples of exalted Fame
Your Britains, then from night exempt, shall lead.
149.
You shall the Watery World command, the Mild
And Quiet loose, and bind the raging Sea,
By the whole World the Ocean's Neptune styled,
And your three Kingdoms shall your Trident be.
150.
What Madness is it, Holland, to contend
With England for the Watery World's Command?
That Scepter nature did to her commend,
In vain you strive to wrest it from her Hand.
151.
With Waves by nature Sovereign Britain's crowned,
And Amphitrite, which another place
Only salutes in part, does flow around,
And her beloved Albion embrace.
152.
Can you to the Empire of the Sea pretend
Who scarce with artificial Banks resist
The insulting Ocean's Fury, and defend
Your Towns, with his continual Siege oppress't?
153.
The High and Mighty Lords of Bogs and Fenns
(See how Ambitions foolish Hopes aspire!)
Would on the Sea impose, but this Pretense
The brave Carolides with Rage does fire.
154.
Lo! a Dutch Fleet cutting the empty Main
Triumphs over the absent as a vanquished Foe:
He Will soon be there, ( fierce Dutch) and then in vain
That you rejoyc't, you to your Grief will know.
155.
No sooner did swift Fame the rumor raise
But Valiant James to Sea the Navy led,
(Profuse of Life, and only fond of Praise)
With as much Have as after Fight they fled.
156.
When first the English at a distance spied
The Belgic Fleet, they raised a mighty Shout,
As when they long in furthest parts reside,
At their return their Country they salute.
157.
The foremost squadron with a prosperous gale
Brave Rupert led, (his Valor long had won
Renown by Sea and Land) who did prevail
And break the Naval Horns of the Belgic Moon.
158.
Strait James opposes to his trembling Foes
The middle Squadron, standing high in Sight
In The Royal Charles, a round his Head he throws
His naked Sword, and Opdam calls to Fight;
159.
Nor does brave Opdam the dire Honor shun
Here fiercely the Dutch Admiral, and there
The English Admiral the Fight begun,
And horrid Shows for both the Fleets prepare.
160.
Why do you, Opdam, to your Ruin run?
This frantic Valor Heaven does not allow,
Is it Ambitious Pride that spurs you on
To 'a glorious Death by such a noble Foe?
161.
You by a greater Hand shall suffer Death,
Heaven a Reward for all your Crimes will send,
And will it self revenge your broken Faith,
Heaven which always does it is Charles defend.
162.
The great Ship which of Guns a Hundred bore
Of men Six Hundred, free from hostile Harms,
Blown up into the Clouds, did loudly roar,
Scattering Flames, burned Fragments, Legs and Arms.
163.
Perhaps Just Heaven with true Thunder struck
The perjured Wretches, with revenging Hand;
Amboyna's Crimes, and Peace so often broke
No gentler Expiations did demand;
164.
Or else some accidental Fire did move
The Powder with resistless Fury driven;
But Chance it self directed from Above
Must be accounted as the Act of Heaven.
165.
A Burning Shipwreck in the Sea does float,
Terrible even to a pious Foe,
And to be pitied; but they can denote
But little time to tender Pity now;
166.
Now in both Navies nothing does appear
But horrid Tumult, all Confusion seems;
They Board; and the Orange nothing moved with Fear
By Opdam's Fate, encounters Conquering James.
167.
Bold above all, and worthy Opdam's Fate
Did not the English Bravery require
The Action of it is own Revenge and Hate;
Down, down it sinks hissing with human Fire.
168.
Three Ships the Fame, much by the Goddess Fame
To be renowned, and three the Dolphin burns
With a fierce Shower of Sulphur and of Flame,
Which in a moment Ships to Beacons turns;
169.
There seems a Captive Town in Flames by night,
So many Fires from several Places broke
At once, such Pyramids of horrid Light
Pierced through the Clouds and Darkness of the Smoke
170.
Who would imagine Fire so great a Sway
Should in the Empire of the Water bear?
Justly for Shame concealed the Waters lay,
They hid with Heaps of scattered Ruin are.
171.
With Sail-yards, Masts, Planks, broken Beaks, and Sails
Ropes, Flags, and Arms, and Carcasses of men,
And men half dead, a Purple Dye prevails
(Where the Sea's open) and conceals the Green.
172.
It were an endless Labor to relate
All the Ships sunk and taken in the Fight,
To tell the many kinds of various Fate
Which were in that one Day exposed to Sight;
173.
In various ways Address, and Wit appear,
Almost Poetical Variety
Of ways, by which Chance uses Mercy here
To some, and there to many Cruelty:
174.
Three young men Noble both in Parts and Blood
A brave Example to the World did give,
Who at once fell as they together stood,
And by one Bullet did their Death receive;
175.
All three almost but the same Carcass were,
Three Brothers lying in Death's fertile Womb
Together; Now who would not Fate declare
Cruel, and Barbarous, in this monstrous Doom?
176.
But she is kind withal; for next 'em stood
(Joys so near Danger trembling I declare)
The Royal Admiral sprinkled with their Blood,
As free from Wounds, as he was free from Fear?
137.
With greater Vigor he the Foe pursues
Burning with Grief and new-excited Rage,
At length the Dutch though truly brave, refuse
The English, with just Fury fired, to' engage.
138.
The broken Remnants of the cruel Fight
Fly scattering through the Sea, whom Rhene admits
At length, and seeing ours pursue their Flight,
Trembles with Horror, and his Horns submits:
FINIS.
An Erratum.
PAge the 23d. For Sloaths Opium, read Opium of Sloth.


