THE Crafty Maid of the West: OR, The lusty brave Miller of the Western Parts
finely trapan'd. A merry new Song to fit Young Men and Maids. Tune of,
Packingtons Pound.


YOu Millers, and Tailors, and Weavers each one
I Would wish you to lissen unto my new Song:
Here a good example I open will lay,
Of a lusty brave Miller that late went astray:
He out-past the Cobbler, though he was so wild,
In one week to get nine wenches with Child;
Let Millers take heed how they mischief devise,
Or deal with young wenches that is crafty and wise.
This Miller was lusty* was stout, and was strong,
And to many Maidens he did much wrong;
If he met with a Lass was fair to the eye,
He Would have about with her, or he would know why:
He Would smooth up men's wives if he see them willing,
With a peck of Wheat, or else an odd shilling.
Let Millers etc.

There dwelt a young damosel both handsome and fair,
And may a Suitor to her did repair:
Among all the rest this Miller would be
A Suitor unto her, and her would go see:
An Innkeepers servant this Maiden she was,
But a Husbandmans daughter it so came to pass.
Let Millers etc.
He put on his best clothes, and he powdered his hair,
As if he had been some Gentleman's Heir,
With his boots and his spurrs, and his hanger so brave,
And a lusty brave Horse to carry this Knave:
Thus Gentleman like from the top to the Toe
Where this damosel did dwell the Miller did go.
Let Millers take heed how they mischief devise,
Or deal with young wenches that is crafty and wise.
The Second Part, to the same Tune.
HE called for his Chamber or a private Room,
To speak with this Maid quickly and soon:
But when he espied her he did admire
Her beauty at present set his heart on fire:
All hail thou fair Virgin the Miller did cry,
Grant me but your favor or else I shall die.
Let Millers take heed how they mischief devise,
Or deal with young wenches that is crafty and wise.
The damosel with modesty straitway replied,
What good I can do you its never be denied;
Why then I will tell you my fairest (said he)
It is but to have one nights lodging with thee,
No silver nor gold shall part us in twain,
Besides a friend to thee I will remain:
If thou do prove true I will marry thee,
Therefore my sweet Virgin take pity on me.
But first I must tell you I have made an oath
And now for to break it I am very loath:
The first man that ever in bed to I go,
He must be stark naked from top to the toe;
With all my heart honey the Miller replied,
I like well thy motion, its never be denied.
Besides (said the damosel) three pounds in my hand
I mean for to have if this bargain do stand.
The money he gave her unto her desire,
And all things she granted that he did require:
His bed she then sheeted both handsome and brave,
And finely trappan'd this cheating young knave,
She mistrusted what porrage this Miller did mind,
Which made the young maid to fit him in's kind.
Let Millers etc.
She got some horse hair and chopped very small,
And some Nettle-seeds to mix it withal:
She dressed them and sift them and put them in bed,
This was a good way to save her Maidenhead:
And when she had done it away she went,
And straightway sit by him as no harm she meant.
Remember your promise sweet Lady, said he,
Your Bed sir is ready, then strait replied she.
So this lusty brave Miller to bed then he goes,
According to his promise he doft all his clothes,
His breeches, his doublet, his shirt and his hat,
For he was in hopes to have a bit for his Cat,
But he was deceived as it does appear,
But now all the cream of the jest you shall hear.
Let Millers etc.
Long this brave Miller in bed did (...) lie,
But he thought that his sweetheart ^ould come by and by,
Instead of his sweetheart he rubbed his eyes
His sides, back and belly, yet loath for to rise,
He scratched and rubbed, his clothes tore and rent,
With fretting and sweating his breath almost spent,
At last out of bed he got and he swore
As if the Room in pieces he would tore.
The Tapster then seeing him naked to stand,
He chanced to have a Horse-whip in his hand,
For pity now help the miller did cry,
That I will (said the Tapster) anon by and by:
He whipped him about the Chamber so sore
Made him to bepiss all the Chamber floor,
Because he perceived his actions were base,
He never pitied the miller, but jeered him to's face.
The maid she laughed at him and thus did reply
Sir I was a coming why did you not lie?
But the miller he fretted, he cursed, and he cry^d
Must I lose my money and be punished beside?
You Are right enough served then straight replied she,
Your money you never shall have more out of me;
You'st pay for your wit, tho you thought me beguild
I have cooled his courage for being so wild.
The miller himself no answer could make,
But stood like a Bull that was baited at Stake:
At last in a rage away he did ride,
With his back all beblister'd and so was his side;
The maid was commended for serving him so,
But the miller is jeered by all that him know.
Let Millers take heed etc.
Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in P^-corner.


