A SUPPLEMENT TO Knowledge AND PRACTICE. Wherein the main things necessary to
be known and believed in order to Salvation are more fully explained, and
several new Directions given for the promoting of real Holiness both of Heart
and Life. To which is added a serious Disswasive from some of the reigning and
customary sins of the Times, viz. Swearing, Lying, Pride, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Discontent, Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness,
Anger and Malice, Idleness. By Samuel Cradock, B. D. late Rector of
North-Cadbury in Somersetshire. Useful for the Instruction of private Families.

Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, pari facilitate rejicitur, qua
accipitur. Hieron. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

To the INHABITANTS of NORTH-CADBURY in SOMERSETSHIRE.
My Loving Friends,
SOme years since, when I stood in the Relation of a Pastor to you, I wrote my
Book of Knowledge and Practice, aiming therein more especially at your benefit.
Which Treatise, I hope (through the Lords blessing) has been of some use to
you. I have since thought that it would not be a service unacceptable to you,
to add by way of Supplement, a more full explication of the Main Principles of
the Christian Faith, and some Further Directions for regulating of your
Practice, and to send them unto you to supply my Personal absence. God only
knows whether I shall ever see your Faces again in this World, Providence
having fixed my Habitation at so great a distance from you. However my hearts
desire and prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved; and if this poor
Book may in any measure contribute thereunto, I shall heartily rejoice. The
holy Apostles, no doubt, in writing their Epistles, aimed at the Spiritual good
of the Church in general; yet we may well suppose that those particular
Churches to whom their Epistles were directed, read them with more especial
regard, and possibly reaped more signal benefits by them than others did. So,
though I design these instructions for your Spiritual good, and benefit of all
those into whose hands they shall come; Yet I hope they shall be more
especially minded and regarded by you to whom they are particularly directed,
and in contemplation of whose necessities, and with an aim at whose benefit
they were particularly framed. I know many of you are such of whom the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 5.12. Who have need that one teach you the first Principles of the
Oracles of God, and have need of milk and not of strong meat. I should be glad
to have you all rightly instructed in the main fundamentals of Christianity,
and that not for your sakes only, but for my own, that I may give up my account
with joy and not with grief. Heb. 13.17. But yet I must tell you that it is not
enough to save any of you, that you are of the true Religion, except you be
true to it, and live agreeably thereunto. God has indeed made sufficient
provision by the obedience and death of his Son to save Mankind. But you must
earnestly leg of God to enable you to do your part, which is, unfeignedly to
repent of all your sins, savingly to believe in Christ and to accept him for
your Lord and Savior, and to deliver up your souls to him, that you may be
pardoned through the infinite merit of his active and passive obedience, and
sanctified by his Spirit, and enabled by his grace to lead a holy and good
life. And as I earnestly desire you all to have an especial care of your own
Souls, so do I with some importunity entreat all, that are Parents or Masters
of Families among you, that they would take great care to instruct their
children and servants in the main Principles of the Christian Religion. I have
often thought, that if ever real Piety and Christianity flourish in England,
more must he done by Parents and Masters in instructing those under their care
than is now ordinarily done. I hope this short Treatise (may with the blessing
of God) something assist and help you in performing that part of your duty. May
the God of all grace lead you and guide you in ways of truth and holiness and
enable you to live in love and peace one with another. And though I should
never see you again in this life, yet may the Father of Mercies (through his
infinite goodness) grant that I may meet your Souls in Heaven. This is the
earnest desire and prayer of him who was once your unworthy Pastor, and is
still your very loving and affectionate friend,

Wickham brook, November. 6. 1678. SAM. CRADOCK.

The CONTENTS of the FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Of God.
SECT. 1. Of the Nature of God and his Divine Attributes. page 1. SECT. 2. Of
the Trinity of persons in the unity of the Divine Essence. page 18. SECT. 3. Of
the works of God, page 31. 1. Creation, where Of good Angels, page 32. Of evil
Angels, page 40.
2. Particular, page 48.

CHAP. 2. Of Man. Page 62
SECT. 1. Of the happy State wherein Man was created and the Covenant of Works
made with him in that State, p. 62. SECT. 2. Of his Fall and the consequents
thereof, p. 66 SECT. 3. Of the Covenant of Grace made with Man immediately
after his Fall, which shows the only way of his recovery to be by Jesus Christ,
p. 73
CHAP. 3. Of Jesus Christ. Page 80
SECT. 1. Of his Titles which in the Creed are four, 1. Jesus, p. 80 2. Christ,
where, of his three Offices Prophet, p. 83 Priest, p. 86 King, p. 88
3. His only Son, p. 91 4. Our Lord, p. 93
SECT. 2. Of his Natures, Divine and Humane, p. 95 SECT. 3. Of his birth, p. 96
SECT. 4. Of his Life, p. 100 Here a short and methodical History of our
Saviors Life is exhibited; and the particular Times in which he instituted
Baptism and the Sacrament of his Supper are pointed at. Upon both which
Sacraments there are distinct discourses added at the end.
SECT. 5. Of his Death and Burial, p. 137 SECT. 6. Of that Article in the
Creed, He descended into Hell, page 131 SECT. 7. Of his Resurrection, and ten
several appearings after it in the space of forty days he continued on the
earth, p. 143 SECT. 8. Of his Ascension and sitting on Gods right hand, p. 149
SECT. 9. Of his coming to judge the World. p. 154
CHAP. 3.
SECT. 1. Of the Holy Ghost, p. 162 SECT. 2. Of the Catholic Church, 166 SECT.
3. Of Communion of Saints, p. 175 SECT. 4. Of forgiveness of sins, p. 178 SECT.
5. Of the Resurrection of the body, p. 193 SECT. 6. Of Life everlasting Of
Baptism, p. 200 Of the Lords Supper, p. 205 Of the Lords Prayer. p. 220

The second part contains a serious disswasive from some of the reigning and
customary sins of the Times. viz.

Swearing, Lying, Pride, Gluttony, Drunkennness, Uncleanness, Discontent,
Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness, Anger and Malice, Idleness.
ERRATA.
IN page 267 after the eighth Direction, add, Ninthly, Take heed of saying ^s
many frequently do in their ordinary communication, I swear I will do such or
such a thin^, or I swear I never savv such a man, etc. Which words (I swear)
are by some supp^sed to have the import and signification of an Oath in them,
though they have not the form of it. And if any think there is no hurt in using
such words, I desire them to tell me when they say ( I swear I will do such
a thing) whether they do indeed Swear or no. If they do Swear, they do
heinously ill to svvear in ordinary communication, as we shevved before. If
they do not swear and yet say they do swear, I desire to know of them whether
they do no^ lie, and that they know is a griev^us sin also. So that let them
t^k^ it vvh^ch way they will, I suppose their own Reason (if they will
listen to it) will tell them that it is a thousand times sa^er for-them to
forbear such a form of words than to use it.

Page 5. line 20. read so incomprehensible an, p. 7. l. 12. r. God, p. 8. l. 4.
after help us, r. now the lessons that we may learn from hence are these. p.
17. l. 6. r. in Christ, l. 32. r. comfortably, p. 23. l. 28. r. testimonies, p.
24. marg. r. he, p. 25. l. 35. r. resisted, grieved, p. 26. l. 32. r. needs, p.
30. l. 33. r. at any time, p. 32. l. 5. marg. r. humi limus, p. 32. l. 25. r.
preservest, p. 35. l. 10. r. named, p. 37. l. 11. r. Angel, p. 40. l. 3. r.
Christ's, p. 41. l. 19. r. the, p. 45. l. 25. r. Secondly, l. 30. r. fearful
looking for of. p. 46. l. 16. r. so, p. 49. l. 28. r. disappointeth, p. 51. l.
25. r. obstructions, p. 53. l, 32. r. notions, p. 54. l. 13. r. conversion, l.
15. in Marg. r. a Deo, l. 17. r. within, p. 57. l. 21. r. Gods, p. 59. l. 29.
r. has, l. 31. r. so far forth, p. 61. l. 16. r. especial, p. 64. l. 37. r. in
it, p. 65. l. 16. r. Secondly, p. 67 l. 37. blot out a, l. 38. r. an higher, p.
68 l. 8. r. affectation, p. 69. l. 10. r. of the will l. 36. r. help himself,
p. 70. l. 17. r. be, l. 36. r. in us, p. 71. l. 18. r. utterly, p. 74. l. 24.
r. Seal, p. 90. l. 27. r. be set, p. 91. l. 21. r. First, p 107. l. 18. r. from
46 to 51. p. 108. l. 2. r. Luke 8. p. 110. l. 29. r. 18. p. 111. l. 16. leave
out the, p. 118. l 8. leave out to, p. 121. l. 5. r. too dear, p. 123. l. 10.
r. sometime, p. 124. l. 22. r. held, p. 130. l. 14 r. potion, p. 132. l. 15.
and l. 21. r. counsel, p. 133. l. 25. r. Sacrifices, p. 136. l. 9 r. that, p.
148. l. 29. for Acts r. Colos. p. 153. l. 23. r. improvement, l. 37. put out
them, p. 154. l. 24. for to r. the, p. 160. l. 34. leave out they, p. 16^. l.
13. blot out and, l. 24. for a r. the p. 170. l. 3. put out and, l. 5. r.
succession, l. 6. after Church put in which. p. 172. l. 32. r. Catholic, p.
173. l. 13. leave out more, p. 177. l. 5. r. offices, p. 179. l. 17. r. needs,
p. 182. l. 7. r. their l. 18. put out against, l. 18. r. in after is, p. 191.
l. 19. r. would not have, p. 192. l. 19. after 2 put in as, p. 209. l. 31. r.
position, l. 33. leave out sition, p. 210. l. 29. r. Apostle, p. 211. l. 8. r.
1 These. 2. 7. p. 229. l 7. r. chap. 6. p. 223. l. 14. r. fitness, p. 250 l. 32.
r. duty, p. 251. l. 9 put in Thirdly, after enjoined, p. 252 l. 35. r. swear
not at all, p. 262 l. 37 for and r. add. p. 285. l. 32 r. which renders, p.
286. l. 30. r. unreasonable, p. 288. l. 29. ult, for who r. how, p. 290. l. 32.
blot out (^) p. 305. l. 33. r. another man's liberty, p. 319. l. 9. r. to this
sin, p. 332. l. 13 for twenty r. forty, l. 16. for ten r. twenty, p. 334. l.
35. for sorts r. sects, p. 3^0. l, 24. for this r. the, p. 342. l. 22. for it.
r. them, p. 343. l. 1. r. far, p. 345. l. 36. after Philadelphia add Rev. 2.
and l. 37. r. by which, p. 349. l. 3. r. is, l. 13. r. of, p. 352. l. 33. r.
Matthew. p. 359. l. 4. for Heb. r. Habac. p. 388. l. 37. r. given. p. 390. l. 35.
r. in a year;

CHAP. I. Of God.
SECT. I. Of the Nature of God, and his Divine Attributes. I believe in God the
Father Almighty.

THere is nothing more necessary, and essential to true Piety, than a clear and
distinct Theolog^a est Scientia aff^ctiva.
Practical and affective Knowledge of God. That there is a God, a Supreme and
Sovereign Being (who was always what he is,) the very Light of Reason is able
to manifest: For that it is utterly impossible for any Being to raise it self
from nothing to be something, we shall pass for an undeniable Principle; seeing
otherwise it should act and work, and be a cause, before it was, or had a
Being; which is a plain contradiction. From hence it will unavoidably follow,
that there was some Being or Entity always, and from Eternity; and that there
never was a moment whereof it may truly be said, that then there was no Being
at all.

Now if it be clear and evident, that there is a Being, that was Ever and
Eternally, (for else there never had been any Being at all) it will hence
follow, that this ^eing is a necessary Being, and is absolutely First, and
before all other Beings, and had no Cause, or Author of its own existence.
There was an absolute necessity of this First Being's existence, and an utter
impossibility of his not Being, or not being always what He is, and as He is.
And this necessary, this Eternal, this First, and absolutely independent Being,
is the Being we call God. When therefore we are well assured and satisfied that
there is a God; our next work should be to labor to knew this God aright.

In order to this, I shall First, Show what apprehensions we ought to have of
God. Secondly, What impressions those apprehensions should make upon our
hearts, and what effects and fruits, they should produce in our lives.


It Is true, God does not require we should exceed the measure of our w^^k and
f^eble understandings in apprehending of him. But yet we should labor to
attain to as clear and distinct a knowledge of him as we are capable of.

And He has been pleased of His infinite Goodness, graciously to consider our
frame and weakness, and seeing our Natural light is not sufficient to discover
and find out what may be known of him, he has vouchsafed in his Holy Word, to
reveal and manifest himself, Of the Nature of God.
and his glorious Nature to us. And First, He has revealed himself to be a
pure, simple, immaterial, invisible Being, a Spirit of transcendent glory, Joh.
4.24. not having any matter or corporcity, nor being compounded as bodies are.
And therefore we should not Picture him to our Eyesight, nor represent him to
our Fancies, under any bodily shape, or figure whatsoever; but should raise our
apprehensions to the highest and holiest, to the purest and most Spiritual
conceptions of him that we can possible frame: We should labor to see this
invisible God by the eye of Faith, and observe his power and efficacy working
in all his Creatures. It Is He that enlightens us by the Sun, and warms us by
the fire, and makes our food to nourish us, and his other Creatures to do us
good.

The Schoolmen say, There are Three ways of knowing God; First, Per viam
eminentiae, when we ascribe all possible perfections to him. Secondly, Per viam
negationis, when we remove from him all imperfections whatsoever. Thirdly, Per
viam causationis, when we see, and acknowledge that all things that are made,
are made by him, and receive their being, and all their powers, and perfections
from him.

Secondly, God is an infinite Being; for whatsoever has no cause of being, can
have no bounds or limits of being set to it. For the reason why any Being is
bounded, limited, and confined to such a measure and degree of Being only; is
because the Author of its existence communicated and bestowed only so much
being, power and efficacy upon it, and no more. He that made it, set limits and
bounds to it; that hitherto its Essence should go and extend, and no further.
All things that receive their Being, (as all things Created do) can have no
more of being, life, power, or virtue, than is given them by the Author of
their Nature. And as they received their Being from him; so they received their
limitation to this, or that set kind of Being also. The First Being therefore
that has nothing to give it Being, has nothing to give it limits, and, as it
were, to confine it to this, or that kind, form and degree of Being. As
therefore the First Being could not be the cause of existence to it self, so
neither could it limit, confine, or bound it self. And there was nothing else
without it that could set bounds or limits to it. It remains therefore that it
must needs be an Essence unbounded, unlimited, and so absolutely infinite and
immense: Infinite in Life, and so Eternal: Infinite in Wisdom, and so
Omniscient: Infinite in Power, and so Omnipotent; and infinite in Goodness, and
all perfections.

That Being therefore that has more Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, than all the
World beside, that is the Being we call God. That Being that has communicated
to all things else, the Being, Power, Life, Virtue, and all such perfections as
they have, is the God whom we acknowledge, adore and worship.

We come now to consider the Attributes of God more Particularly, which are
those glorious excellencies, Of the Attributes of God.
and proprieties of his Divine Essence, which declare and manifest his Nature
to us, and whereby we are enabled (in some measure) to conceive aright of him.

And these are of Two sorts, Incommunicable. Communicable.


First, Incommunicable; which are such Attributes as agree to God alone, and
cannot belong to any Creature. Such as are His Eternity, Omnipresence,
Omnipotence, Omniscience.

Secondly, Communicable; which are such Attributes, which though they be
infinite perfections in God; yet some resemblances of them are found in the
Creatures. Such are His Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Mercy, and Faithfulness; I
begin with His incommunicable Attributes, And

God is Eternal.
I. God is an Eternal Being, and none is Eternal but himself, Psalm. 90.2. From
everlasting to everlasting thou art God. That which had no cause, had no
beginning, and that which had no beginning is Eternal. Time (which is a
duration, that has beginning and end) is competible to man, and other visible
Creatures. A^viternity (which is a duration that has a beginning, but no end)
is competible to good, and evil Angels, and to the Souls of men. But Eternity
(which has neither beginning nor end) belongs only to God, Isai. 57.15. He is
called, The high and l^sty one, who inhabiteth Eternity; that is, who alone is
Eternal. He speaks of Eternity, as a House, or Palace, which a King inhabiteth,
or dwells in, as his own peculiar Possession; in which no other man has any
right but himself. And 2 Pet. 3.8. The Apostle says, A Thousand years with him,
are but as one day; and this is the first of his incommunicable Attributes, He
is Eternal. Let us now consider what improvement we should make of this
Attribute.

Gods Eternity should fill our Souls with admiring thoughts of him. Who can
think of Eternity without amazement? Man is a Creature of few days, and ere
long shall be no more here. Our Bodies are perishing, but our Souls must last
to Eternity. Let us therefore mind things Eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. Whatever we
neglect, let us labor to secure to our selves Eternal happiness; Zeuxi^, that
famous Painter said, He did pingere aeternitati; he drew his Pictures with such
care, that they might last (if it were possible) and be famous to Eternity. Let
us all so pray, so read, so live, and do all that we do, as those that desire
to obtain a happy Eternity. Nulla satis magna securitas ubi periclitatur
aeternitas. We can never be over careful to secure our Eternal state in Bliss
and happiness.

II. God is Omnipresent, Omnipresent.
or every where present. He is not confined or limited to any place, Jer.
23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says
the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? The sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm.
139.7, 8, 9, 10. Cries out, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither
shall I free from thy presence? If I ascend up to Heaven, thou art there; if I
make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there; if I take the Wings of the Morning,
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea; even there shall thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand shall hold me; if I say the darkness shall cover me, even
the night shall be light about me; yea the darkness hides not from thee, but
the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

Gods Omnipresence should imprint a constant awe of his Majesty upon our Souls.
We should always behave our selves, as those that believed he stood by. He is
neither shut up in, nor excluded out of any place, nay he is beyond all place
or space where any Creature is. He is every where, for his Essence is
unbounded. And further this should convince us that he is incomprehensible, and
that we cannot have a full, adaequate, and comprehensive knowledge of him. Non
esset Deus magnus nisi esset major captu nostro.
Can thou by searching find out God. Can thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection, says Zophar, Job 11.7. We may as well think to take up all the
Waters of the Sea in a Spoon, as with our narrow understanding fully to
comprehend God. Stop then thy bold enquiries, O vain man! And remember that
thou art a finite worm, and God is infinite. Do not go about to measure God by
thy narrow apprehension; nor to Question, much less deny that of God, which
thou can not understand. Do not suspect what his word reveals of him, but
suspect thy own muddy understanding, that can conceive no better of so an
incomprehensible Essence.

III. God is Omnipotent, Omnipotent.
Mat. 19.26. With God all things are possible. His Essence being infinite, his
power must needs be infinite also. His Omnipotency consists in things simply,
and absolutely possible, not in things that are not possible to be done. God
cannot make contradictions true, he cannot lie, he cannot deny himself; for
these things do not speak perfection, but weakness. Convenientius dicitur ea
non posse fieri, quam quod Deus ea non posset facere, says Aquinas warily; It Is
more convenient to say, That these things cannot be done, than that God cannot
do them. Now Gods Omnipotency should make these impressions on us,

First, We should stand in fear, and tremble at his Judgments. Shall the Lion
roar, and shall not the Beasts of the Field tremble? Shall Omnipotency shake
his Rod over us, and shall not we humble our selves? The dread of the Heavenly
Majesty, of his infinite greatness and power, should be still upon us. Indeed,
we should not be under a slavish fear of God (that is void of love) as men fear
an Enemy; but we should fear sinning against, or displeasing so great a God.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Prove. 16.6, By it men depart
from evil.

Secondly, We may see from hence what ground we have earnestly to seek unto him
in all our difficulties and distresses. The ground of all the Petitions in the
Lords Prayer, is this, For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory. Let the
Enemies of the Church be never so strong, God is stronger than they. He has
promised that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church, Mat.
16.18. Nothing encourages more to fervent Prayer, than a due apprehension of
Gods Omnipotence.

Thirdly, This Attribute should imprint upon our hearts a strong and steadfast
confidence in God, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name will trust in thee. O
what an encouragement is it to the Saints, that they have Omnipotence engaged
for them! O what a shame is it that ever we should distrust an Almighty God. He
can supply our greatest wants; He can mitigate or remove our greatest pains; He
can deliver us from our greatest distresses. Dan. 3.17. What will vain man have
confidence in, if he distrust Omnipotence? Where can we be safe, if not in the
hands of the Almighty, Mat. 8.26. Why fear ye, (says our Savior to his
Apostles) O ye of little Faith. Remember O Christian in thy lowest estate, and
in the Churches greatest dangers, the Almighty is able to raise his Church, or
thee again, even in a moment. Take heed of saying in thy heart, Can God furnish
a Table in the Wilderness? Psalm. 78.19. Read and consider these Scriptures,
Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare, but who-so puts his trust in
the Lord, shall be safe. Psalm. 56.3, 4. What time I am afraid, I will trust in
thee. In God I have put my trust; I will not fear what Flesh can do unto me.
Jer. 17.5. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and
makes Flesh his Arm; and whose heart departs from the Lord.

Fourthly, Gods Almightiness should possess us with a holy admiration of him,
and cause us in heart and voice to magnify him. O what a power is that which
made the World of nothing, which hangs the Earth in the Air, and upholds it
without any Foundation? What a power is that which stretches out the Heavens
as a Curtain, and has so bespangled with Stars that glorious Canopy.

What a power is that, which at first placed, and since maintains all things
in their Order; which causes every part of Nature to do its Office; which
makes the Sun and Moon constantly to keep their course? Jer. 31.35. The Lord
gives the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the Moon, and of the
Stars for a light by night. He divides the Sea, when the waves thereof do
roar; the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Isa. 4.22. It is he that sits upon the
Circle of the Earth, and the inhabitants there of are as Grasshoppers; it is he
that stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent
to dwell in.

Fifthly, and lastly, God's Almightiness should be a great comfort and support
to all that have an interest in him. Woe to those the Almighty is against; but
happy, thrice happy are they, that have the God of Israel for their refuge.

IV. Gods is Omniscient, Omniscient.
Psalm. 147.5. His understanding is infinite, 1 Chronicles. 28.9, The Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts, 1 Samuel
^6.7. Man looks on the outward appearance, but God looks on the heart, Jer.
17.10. I, the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, to give every one
according to his ways, and the fruit of his doings. And Chap. 20.12. He is said
to see the reins, and the heart.

Now if God be Omniscient, how watchfully and carefully should we carry our
selves in all places? How should we fear to sin in secret against him whose eye
is always upon us? How sincere and upright should we be in all our duties? How
should this Motto be ever in our minds, Cave, Deus videt, Take heed, God sees.
If our Breasts were Crystal Glasses, and men were able through them to see all
the workings of our hearts; how careful should we be what thoughts we
entertained? Alas, that we should be no more sensible, that God always sees us.
He sees hearts, as we see faces. How many are afraid to commit a sin before
men; that are not afraid to sin before the all-seeing eye of God. If God be
Omniscient, this should teach us to be sincere, and upright, and
Conscientiously to endeavor both to avoid secret sins, and to perform secret
duties, Mat. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have
shut the door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. And thus much of Gods incommunicable
Attributes

I come now to speak of his communicable Attributes, which though they be
infinite perfections in Him; yet, there are some resemblances of them found in
the Creatures.

I. God is infinitely wise, I^finitely wise.
1 Timothy 1.17. He is called the invisible and only wise God. He administers the
World, and the affairs of it with infinite wisdom, though many of his Ways and
Providence are obscure, and intricate. God knows what is fittest for us, and
what is the fittest time to help us.

First, We should labor to be wise, that we may be like unto God. To desire,
as Adam did, any of that knowledge which God has reserved to himself, and is
unnecessary for us: is indeed not to be wise in our desires. We ought to labor
to know the Lord, and his revealed will, and the way to Eternal life, and to
endeavor to walk in it; and this is true wisdom. True Piety is the greatest
wisdom; and sin is the greatest folly. There is not any Soul in Hell, but was
brought thither by its own sinful folly. Therefore the Apostle exhorts us, Ephesians.
5.15. That we walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. Certainly to save
a man's Soul, is a work of the greatest wisdom, and requires our best care and
industry.

Secondly, we should humbly beg wisdom of God. We should seek to him as our
principal Counselor, and Director in all our undertakings. Jam. 1.5. If any of
you lack wisdom, let him ask of God who gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

Thirdly, We should take heed of trusting in our own wisdom. The way of man is
not in himself, Jer. 10.23. We should read the Scriptures much, for they are
able to make us wise unto salvation. We should often consider what the wise man
says, Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto
thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct
thy paths.

Fourthly, The Infinite wisdom of God should teach us to rest in all his
Determinations and Dispensations. Shall dust and ashes, judge the Lord who is
only wise? We should learn to submit to his infinite wisdom, as well as to his
Holy will.

Fifthly, The consideration of the infinite wisdom of God should encourage the
People of God in their greatest straits, and against all the cunning subtilty
of their enemies. They should labor faithfully to do their duties, and then
humbly rest in the infinite wisdom of God, who knows better what is good for
them, than they know themselves.

II. God is infinitely Holy. Holy.
He is many times styled the Holy One of Israel, and glorious in Holiness,
Exodus 15.11. Fearful in praises; that is, who is to be praised with great fear
and reverence. Rev. 4.8. He is styled Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come. The consideration of Gods transcendent
Purity and Holiness should teach us,

First, To endeavor to imitate God in this perfection. 1 Pet. 1.15. Be ye
Holy, (says God) for I am Holy. Holiness should have an universal influence
upon our whole man. There should be Holiness in our thoughts, Purity in our
hearts, Sincerity in our intentions, Truth in our words, Justice in our
actions; Sobriety, Chastity, Temperance, Humility, Modesty in all our outward
manners and conversations. Heb. 12.14. The Apostle advises us to follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. It Is not
said, without peace, for a man may follow after that, and may not be able to
obtain it. But the Greek Article relates to holiness, [(...)] without which no
man shall see the Lord. Into the new Jerusalem nothing enters that defiles,
Rev. 21.27.

Secondly, We should look to it, that we do not merely act a part of holiness,
but do really endeavor to be so. Nothing in the World is better than real
holiness; and nothing more detestable than the counterfeit of it. As there is
no face in Nature more comely and majestical than that of a man; so none more
ugly and ridiculous than that of an Ape, which has some show of it, but falls
so far short of it. Simulata pietas, duplex iniquitas: Counterfeit Piety, is
double Iniquity.

Thirdly, we should be very far from being ashamed of holiness, which we see is
the Image of God. The Devil and his Instruments labor all they can to
disparage holiness; and by several nicknames and such artifices, to keep
People off from esteeming of it, or endeavoring after it. Sir Simon D' Ewes
Primitive practice for preserving Truth.
It Is an Observation of a Learned Author of our own, that among the Turks,
Jews, Indians, Persians, and the Papists themselves at this day; the most
Zealous and Holy in their several Religions, are most esteemed and honored.
But in the greatest part of the Protestant World, the most knowing, and
tenacious of the Evangelical truth, and the most strict, and godly in their
lives, are hated, nicknamed, disgraced, and vilified. Thus does the Devils
malice, and the corruption of man concur to bring dishonor and disesteem upon
that which is a participation of the Divine Nature, and makes a man most like
unto God.

III. God is just; Just.
Justice in God is that perfection of his Nature, whereby he is just in
himself, and exercises justice toward all his Creatures. Shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do right? Cen. 18.25. and Ezekiel. 18.29. Are not my ways equal,
says the Lords Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day: Gods Ju^^ice and Righteousness is
Essential, and Natural unto him, and to likewise is his Mercy. And these Two
properties as they are Essential in God, are not opposite one to another.
Indeed the effects of Justice and Mercy, are sometimes opp^site, but the
Attributes themselves are not so. When therefore we pray that God would not
d^^l with us according to his Ju^tice, but his Mercy; we pray not against the
Attribute of his Justice, but the effects of it, which are subject to the
liberty of his will. God is always just alike, but the effects of his Justice
may be more manifested at one time than at another. When therefore it is said,
James 2.13. Gods Mercy rejoices against Judgment, and that he is slow to
anger, ready to forgive, etc. It must be so understood that He is more ready to
manifest the effects of his Mercy, than of his Justice.

Justice some may be apt to Object this, that it often goes ill with the
Righteous in this World, and the wicked pro^per; and how can that consist with
Divine Justice? To this many Answers may be given.

perfectly Righteous here; therefore no wonder if Gods own Children have the
Rod sometimes upon their backs, for their sins.

Secondly, God may tenderly love his Children, though he do afflict them, Heb.
12.6. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives. Psalm. 119.57. I know O Lord that thy Judgments are right, and that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. God sanctifies the afflictions of his
People to their good. Their afflictions are profitable unto them for the
increase of their Graces, and so for the furtherance of their glory.

Thirdly, They have good assurance that all things shall work together for
their good, Romans 8.28. And therefore no cause to complain.

Fourthly, Though godliness has the promises of this life, as well as of that
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Yet those promises of Temporal blessings must be
understood with this limitation, viz. That they shall be made good to them, so
far forth as God shall see it good and convenient for his Children in this
life, and no further.

Fifthly, The prosperity of wicked men in this World is many ways very
hurtful, and extremely disadvantagious to them, in reference to their Eternal
condition. Outward sufferings with Spiritual blessings are ordinarily the Lot
of Gods Children here on Earth, as outward prosperity with Spiritual calamity
is very frequently the Lot of the ungodly. The prosperity of fools destroys
them, says Solomon, Prove. 1.32.

Sixthly, There will be a day of Judgment wherein all things will be set right,
though here things oftentimes seem to be out of course.

Seventhly, Eternity is long enough to punish the wicked, and reward the Godly;
therefore let us not take our measures either of happiness or misery, from the
outward dispensations of this life.

The Consideration of this Attribute should make these impressions upon us,

First, if God be just, then this should make all impenitent sinners tremble.
Except men repent, it is not consistent with Gods justice, they should be
pardoned. What great cause have ungodly impenitent sinners to tremble at the
Justice of God, which engages him to deal so severely with them, and to punish
them everlastingly as his Enemies. O wretched sinner what aileth thee to make
this just God thine enemy! What folly? What madness possesses thee that thou
should make a mock at sin, and laugh at Hell and Damnation? Shall not the
Justice of God terrify thee, and keep thee off from those sinful courses
which expose thee to so certain a vengeance?

Secondly, Gods Justice, is a great consolation to the Righteous. He will
justify them whom his Gospel justifies, because he is just, 1 John. 1.9. If
thou break off thy sins by repentance, and apply thy self to Him for pardon; in
and through the merits of his Son; He is just, and therefore will make good his
promise of pardon to thee.

Thirdly, God being just; let us bless his name for finding out a way whereby
his Justice may be satisfied; and so we poor sinners pardoned. His Justice
might have taken every one of us by the Throat, and said, Pay all thou owe;
and then what should we have done? We could not have paid one Farthing of the
Debt. O let us for ever bless his Holy Name, that he has provided so good a
surety for us; who has undertaken the payment of our Debt; and to satisfy his
justice, in our behalf.

Fourthly, Let us labor to imitate God in this Attribute of his Justice; that
is, let us give to every one what of right is due to him. Let us labor to give
to God his due; and to man his due. Let us not rob God of his time allotted for
his service. Let us give him our Hearts, and serve him with the best of our
affections. Let us give to man what is due to him, not injuring any man
wittingly and willingly. And in case of wrong done, let us labor to make
satisfaction. Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. Remember, that
the sin is notre mitted except that which is taken away wrongfully be restored.

IV. God is Merciful. Merciful.
He is called, The Father of Mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. Abundant in Mercy, 1. Pet.
1.3. Rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. And says the Psalmist, Psalm. 145.8, 9. The Lord
is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger and of great mercy. The Lord
is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All the Attributes of God are glorious; yet, he rejoices most in the
manifestation of his mercy and goodness, Exodus 33.18, 19. When Moses desired
the Lord to show him his glory; He said, I will make all my goodness pass
before thee, and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee: and will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious; and will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy. Isai. 63.7. I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the
praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed upon us; and
the great goodness toward the House of Israel, which he has bestowed on them,
according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving
kindnesses. He delights not in the death of a sinner. His mercy is so great to
all, that he will destroy none, but for their wilful sin.

The consideration of this Attribute should teach us these Lessons,

First, Gods mercy should lead sinners to repentance. It should shame them from
their sins. It should encourage them to repent, as well as engage them to it. O
sinners remember we have to do with a merciful God, who has not forbid any to
come in, but continues to invite them, who have often refused, and will
undoubtedly welcome, and pardon all that will return and come in. But mercy it
self will have no mercy on the Impenitent, Isai. 27.11. It is a People of no
understanding; therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them; and he
that formed them, will show them no favor. Woe to all them, against whom mercy
it self shall rise up in Judgment; There is mercy with thee, that thou may
be feared, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.4. Were there no hope of pardon, Men
would be as desperate as the Devils themselves. But God is merciful; He
delights not in the death of a sinner.



voluntas Dei, Antecedens, and Consequens.
that is, the Antecedent, and Consequent will of God.

By the former, as a Lawgiver, He gives just and good Laws, and wills that Men
should obey them, that they may be happy in so doing.

By the other, if they will not obey, as a just Judge, he wills they should be
punished. So that their ruin is from themselves, and not from God.

Secondly, The Mercy of God should be the matter of our daily praises. The
meditation of God's Mercy should produce in us delightful thoughts, and should
keep (as it were) a continual sweetness upon our hearts, and cause us to study
the most grateful returns unto God. They that live continually upon Mercy,
should be as it were turned into love and thankfullness. It should become as it
were their Nature, and Constitution, as the food men live upon, will be seen in
their Temperature, health and strength. O how unspeakable is the Mercy of God,
that provides so well for his Servants in this their Warfare and Pilgrimage
through this World! O what sweet Meditations should we have of Gods Mercy?
Love, thankfulness and praise should be our daily exercise. Had we David's
heart, what Songs of praise would the consideration of Gods Mercy teach us to
indite? How affectionately should we recount the Mercies of our youth, and
riper years? Yea, of every state and condition we have been in, to the honor
of our great Benefactor. But especially, if God has touched our hearts with
his saving grace, if he has effectually called us, and enabled us to repent of
our sins, and believe in his Son? O then how should we bow down our heads, and
adore his free grace, as the cause thereof. If we have received any grace
tending to our own sanctification, or the edification of others, Let us say as
Paul did, 1 Cor. 15.20. By the grace of God I am that I am.

Thirdly, The meditation of Gods goodness and mercy to us, should possess us
with a superlative love to God. Most certainly the prevailing love of God is
the surest evidence of true sanctification. He that has most love, has most
grace. And if you truly love God you will be loath to offend him. The love of
God does not reign in that soul where the love of the World, or of the Flesh,
or Pleasure reigns.

Fourthly, The Mercy of God should teach us to imitate him in this Attribute.
We should labor to be merciful, as our Heavenly Father is merciful; that is,
as to the manner, though we cannot reach to the measure. The goodness of God
should possess us with a desire to be conformed to his goodness in our measure.
Summae Religionis est imitari quem colis.

Now God is merciful two ways especially, in Giving, Forgiving.


First, In Giving. O how does the Lord supply our wants daily! Let us therefore
show mercy to those that want our help.

Secondly, In Forgiving. O what a vast number of debts does the Lord forgive
us! Gods mercy to us lays the greatest Obligation imaginable upon us to
forgive others. A Christian may remember offenses in cautelam, though not in
vindictam.
Matthew. 18.23. Shall not we forgive an Hundred Pence, who have had Ten Thousand
Talents forgiven unto us?

Fifthly, We should especially observe and take notice of the mercy of God, so
highly manifested in the design of our Redemption, 1 John 4.10. Here is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
propitiation for our sins. Was there ever Mercy like this? We have reason to
cry out, O the depth of the riches of the mercy of God! O Lord, what is man
that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of man, that thou thus visitest him
with thy favor and mercy.

Sixthly, Gods goodness and mercy should encourage our Souls to trust in him.
How many friends have some men with whom they dare trust their Estates or
Lives, because they are confident they truly love them. And shall we not trust
God who is love it self, 1 John. 4.16.

I come now to the last of Gods communicable Attributes, which I shall speak
unto, which is His faithfulness in keeping of his Covenant and Promises.

V. God is Faithful. Faithful.
One letter of Gods glorious Name is abundant in truth or faithfulness. The
Scriptures abundantly bear Testimony unto this. Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore that
the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps Covenant and
Mercy with them that love him and keep his Commandments, to a Thousand
Generations. Isai. 49.7. The Lord who is faithful. Romans 3.4. Let God be true;
that is, owned and acknowledged for such, though all mankind should be false
and deceitful.

Now Gods Faithfulness is manif^sted Two ways In fulfilling his promises, In
accomplishing his Threatenings.


God cannot in any case fail of his word. It is impossible for him to lie, Heb.
6.18. Tit. 1.2. As God is light and in him there is no darkness, 1 John 1.5. So
he is truth, and in him there is no falsehood. The strength of Israel will not
lie. 1 Samuel 15.29. And Numb. 23.19. God is not a man that he should lie. God
has promised to them that repent, and believe in his Son that they shall be
saved. He has promised to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11,
9. And we have reason firmly to believe these promises. As for Temporal things,
he has not promised them to any of his Children absolutely, but with a tacit
condition; if he, in his infinite Wisdom, see it good and expedient for them.
So that as to these, we must humbly refer our selves to his infinite Wisdom.
It Is true, we are required to pray for these Temporal things in faith; but not
with an assured particular persuasion, that God will give us the very
particular things we ask, but with a faith of dependence on God, and submission
to his Holy will. When we act faith on the All Sufficiency and Power of God,
and humbly resign our selves to his Holy will, we may be said to pray in faith.

I come now to the Lessons which we are to learn from the consideration of this
Attribute.

First, We should learn from hence, that the commands of God are serious, and
his promises and threatenings will certainly be accomplished. There is nothing
of reason or sense can be spoken against an Holy life by any one who believes
the veracity and faithfulness of God, and the truth of his Word. Has God said
(and do you believe it) that he will come in flaming Fire to take vengeance on
all them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ? 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. And can you continue in ignorance and disobedience? Has he said
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. And can
you continue in unrighteousn^ss? Has he said, Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no
man shall see the Lord; and can you slight Holiness? And mock at serious Piety?
If you believed God to be faithful and his Word true, how could these things
be so?

Secondly, Gods faithfulness is a great aggravation of the heinousness of the
sin of unbelief. He that believes not God, has made him a liar, faith the
Apostle, 1 John 5.10. And this is the rather to be heeded, that we may stir up
in our selves a diligent watchfulness against this sin, which with many is
accounted but a mere infirmity. O what matter of humiliation does our proneness
to this sin, (namely to distrust God) justly minister unto us? Many men hardly
trust the promises of God so much as they would the word of a mortal man, whom
they account honest and just. Certainly Gods faithfulness and truth should
teach us to hate every motion to unbelief. Unbelief is the very bane of all
Religion, so far as it prevails. Let it be our great care therefore to
extirpate all remainders of this sin of Infidelity out of our hearts.

Thirdly, If God be faithful, this should be a great encouragement to us to
trust in him, and in his promises. It should be the solid ground of our faith,
the stay of our Souls, the foundation of all our hopes. Faith is animated by
Gods veracity and truth, and from thence all other graces are excited in us. O
Christians, what life should it put into our hopes to think that all those
words that God has spoken are most certainly true; that all those descriptions
of the everlasting Kingdom, all those exceeding precious promises, that concern
this life, or that which is to come, will certainly be made good; that all
those expressions of the exceeding love of God to his poor Servants, are
certain and sure. O how should our faith live upon this truth of God, and by it
be daily more and more strengthened! And particularly that none of his promises
concerning his Church, will fail or fall to the ground.

Fourthly, How thankful should we be to God for giving us such gracious
promises to encourage us in the ways of our obedience. He has promised that he
will never, never leave nor forsake those that are in Covenant with him, Heb.
13.5. We have good assurance That all things shall work together for good, to
them that love God. Romans 8.28. That he will give grace and glory and no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. And what
can we desire more?

Fifthly, We should labor to get an interest Christ, in whom all the promises
of God are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. That is, have their foundation, firm
establishment and unalterable ratification.

Sixthly, We should learn the Divine art of living upon the promises of God,
and fetching comfort, for the support of our lives from them. Most men live on
their present enjoyments, not on Gods promises. Whereas the Prophet tells us,
Habak. 2.4. The Just shall live by his Faith. Certainly nothing makes us so
humble, lowly; and puts us into so much ease, and quietness of mind, as to live
by Faith on God. Isai. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee.

Seventhly, The truth and faithfulness of God should engage us to be true and
faithful to him. Have we not engaged in our Baptism to forsake the Devil, the
World and the Flesh; and to devote our selves to the sincere service and
worship of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost? Are not his Vows upon us? that
is, Vows to serve him faithfully, Psalm. 56.12. And shall we be like those false
Israelites of whom it is said, Psalm. 78.36, 37. Nevertheless they did flatter
him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their Tongues. For their
heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. And
have we not in the course of our lives made many particular promises to God in
our particular distresses? And shall we expect that God should perform his
promises to us, when we take no care to perform ours to him? Shall we expect
that God will perform his promise of pardon to us, when we take no care to
perform the conditions required of us; upon the performance of which, we may
comfortly expect to have the Divine promises made good to us?

Eighthly, We should endeavor to imitate God in this Attribute of his
faithfulness. Let us be true to God, and true also to man. Remember you serve a
God of truth; and it is the glory of his servants to be like him. The Devil
indeed is the Father of lies; but God hates all lying, as contrary to his Holy
Nature. If you would be like God, labor to imitate him in his truth and
faithfulness.

SECT. II. Concerning the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence.
TO prevent all misapprehensions concerning God and the Divine Nature, it will
be requisite that we carefully attend unto the Declaration or Revelation that
God has been pleased to make of himself in the Holy Scriptures. For surely we
have all the reason in the World to assent to those assertions or testimonies
that God is pleased to give unto us concerning himself, and that according to
their natural and genuine sense. The Sum then of this Revelation held forth to
us in Holy Scriptures, is this, That God is one: That this one God is Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: That the Father is the Father of the Son, and the Son, the
Son of the Father; and the Holy Ghost the Spirit of the Father and the Son; and
by reason of their mutual respects and relations to each other, and their
peculiar properties arising from those particular relations, they ( viz.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) are distinct each from other.

This one God is set forth to us in the Scriptures as the only true God, whom
we are to believe in, adore, worship and obey. This is the first cause,
Sovereign Lord, and ultimate end of all. For the proof hereof, we shall produce
Divine Testimonies whereon Faith may safely rest. And first we shall prove God
to be one. Secondly, The Father to be God, the Son to be God, the Holy Ghost to
be God, Thirdly, We shall show that the explanations usually made of this
Doctrine are according to truth, though we make use of some words or
expressions which are not literally or Syllabically contained in the Holy
Scriptures; but are such as do not teach any other Doctrine than what is
therein contained; and are (to our apprehensions) fairly expository of them.
And surely if Ministers may not set forth the sense of the words of Scripture
in such expressions as they apprehend do most clearly convey the true and
genuine meaning of them to the People, to what end serves that great Ordinance
of preaching the Word? I shall begin therefore with the Original Revelation,
and show you what is delivered to us by Divine Testimony; and this I shall give
you in these particulars following.

First, We are assured by Divine Revelation that God is one. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Isai. 44.6.8. Thus says the Lord, the
King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am
the last, and besides me there is no God. Is there any God besides me? Yea,
there is no God, I know not any. Isai. 45.5. I am the Lord, and there is none
else, there is no God besides me, 1 Cor. 8.4. As concerning therefore the
eating of things Offered in Sacrifice unto Idols, we know that an Idol is
nothing in the World, and that there is none other God but one.

Secondly, That the Father is God. He is often so called, only in reference to
his Son. And if he had an eternal Son; (as we shall prove presently) He is an
Eternal Father, and his Paternity was from Eternity co-existent with his Deity.
The Father is a person subsisting of himself. This is denied by none. Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all Spiritual blessings in Christ, Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. Ephesians. 3.14. For th^s cause I bow
my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things and we in Him. Joh. 17.5. And
now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the World was, Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the World that he
gave his only begotten Son: That whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life, Joh. 20.17. Jesus says unto her, Touch me not: For
I am not yet ascended to my Father.

Thirdly, That Jesus Christ is God, the Eternal Son of God, and did prae-exist
in the form or Essence of God (having all the properties of the Deity) before
his Incarnation, which was effected by voluntary actings of his own, which
could not be without a prae-existence in another Nature. Let us consider the
Divine Testimonies whereby this truth is confirmed and established, Psalm. 45.6.
Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever: The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
Scepter. This is applied unto Christ, Heb. 1.8. But unto the Son he says, Thy
Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, etc. Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. Of old thou
have laid the Foundation of the Earth: and the Heavens are the work of thy
hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them shall wax old
like a Garment: as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed,
But thou art the same and thy years shall have no end. This is declared by the
Apostle to be meant of the Son of God, Heb. 1.10. And, Thou Lord in the
beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth: And the Heavens are the works
of thine hands, etc. Prove. 8. from the ^2. to the 31. The Lord possessed me in
the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. When there were no
depths, I was brought forth: When there were no Fountains abounding with Water.
Before the Mountains were settled; before the Hills, was I brought forth. He is
called the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14.

Angels and Adam were the Sons of God by Creation.

The Worshippers of the true God, are called the Sons of God by profession,
Genesis 6 1.

All true Believers are his Children by Adoption, Joh. 1.12. But Christ is the
Son of God by Nature, by Eternal Generation.


Whilst as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the Fields, nor the highest part
of the dust of the World. When he prepared the Heavens, I was there: When he
set a compass upon the face of the Depth. When he established the Clouds above:
When he strengthened the Fountains of the Deep: When he gave to the Sea his
Decree, that the Waters should not pass his Commandment: When he appointed the
Foundations of the Earth: Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: And I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him: Isai. 9.6. For unto us a
Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his
shoulder: And his Name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God,
The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace, Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a
King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice in the
Earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: And
this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. Joh.
1. v. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God, v. 2. The same was in the beginning with God, v. 3. All things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, v. 14. And
the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth, v. 18. No man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten, which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, Joh. 3.13. And no man has ascended up to Heaven,
but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven, Act.
20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over the
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood, Romans 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of
whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever, Amen. Col. 1.15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born As
being from all Eternity begotten of the Father before any Creature was made or
created, and so Lord, and Heir of all the Creatures, as the Firstborn was
among his Brethren, Genesis 49.3.
of every Creature. v. 16. For by him were all things Created that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: All things were created by him, and
for him, v. 17. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist, 1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy, great is the Mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory. 1 John 5.20.
And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding,
that we may know him that is true: And we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and Eternal life. And thus much of the
Divine Testimonies that prove that Christ is God.

The Socinians indeed acknowledge that Christ is God, but they say he is not so
by Nature, but by Office. They say He is not the most high Eternal God. This
therefore we shall labor to prove by several arguments.

First, He had a Personal prae-existence unto the whole Creation. And nothing
can prae-exist Quod ante omnem creaturam suisse dicitur simpliciter aeterrum
est. Gloss.
to all Creatures but in the Nature of God, which is Eternal. In the beginning
the Word was God, and so continues unto Eternity. Joh. 1.^^ In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Yet he was so
God that he was distinct in something from God the Father, by whom afterward
he was sent into the World. The Word was with God, and so distinct from him,
and was God, and so one with him. And he was so from the beginning, before the
Creation, that he made all things, even the World, viz. All things in Heaven
and Earth. To which we may add our Saviors own Words, Joh. 17.5. And now O
Father glorify thou me with the glory I had with thee before the World was.

Secondly, Let us consider this, All the ways whereby we can come to know God
are either by his Name, or his Properties, or his Works, or the Divine worship
given unto him. Now all these belong to the Son. He therefore is God, or we
cannot tell either who, or what God is. And

First, The proper Name of God (viz. Jehovah) is given to Him, Jer. 23.6. This
is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. And Romans
9.5. He is called The most high God, who is over all, God blessed for evermore.
A Title peculiar to the most high God.


Secondly, Divine Properties are ascribed to him, and such Divine excellencies
as naturally and necessarily appertain to the Divine Nature. Particularly these
Four,

First, Eternity, Joh. 1.1, 2. In the beginning was the Word. (...). Sic Mos
Hebraeis aeternitatem populariter exprimare. Grot.
In the beginning when the World began to be created then was He. And so Prove.
8.23, 24. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth
was; when there was no depths, I was brought forth. The Essential Wisdom of the
Father was from everlasting, Col. 1.17. He was before all things, viz. All
things created, And Revel. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning, and the
end, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty. That this place is meant of Christ may appear by comparing with it,
Chap. 2.6. and 22.13. of this Book.

Secondly, Omnipresence, Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are met together in my
Name (says our Savior,) there am I in the midst of them, viz. By my Eternal
Spirit, Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down
from Heaven, even the Son of man, which is in Heaven. And Mat. 28.20. And so I
am with you always even to the end of the World.

Thirdly, Omnipotency. Philip. 3.8. It Is said of Christ, that He shall change
our vile bodies, and make them like to his own glorious body, according to the
mighty working whereby He is able to subdue all things unto himself. Joh. 1.3.
All things were made by him and without him was not any thing made, that was
made, Heb. 1.10. And thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the
Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thine hands.

Fourthly, Omniscience. Joh. 21.17. Lord thou know all things, says Peter.
And Joh. 2.25. It Is said of our Savior, that He needed not that any should
testify of man, for he knew what was in man. De animis hominum certo judicare
solius est Dei.


Thirdly, Divine actions or works are ascribed to him. As

1. Creation, Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him. So that there must needs
be granted unto Christ a prae-existence in his Divine Nature antecedent to his
Incarnation.

2. Providence, Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things by the Word of his power, And
Col. 1.17. He is before all things and by him all things consist. He is not
only before all Creatures, and their Creator, but together (with the Father and
the Holy Ghost) their Up-holder, powerful Preserver and Governor.

Fourthly, Divine Worship is given to him. Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God
worship him. The Angels themselves refused Divine Worship, Rev. 19.10. See thou
do it not (says the Angel there) that is, See thou do not worship me, I am thy
fellow Creature, Joh. 14.1. You believe in God (says our Savior) believe also
in me. Now to be believed in, and rested on, is an honor or homage peculiar
unto God alone. Indeed the Socinians say that though Christ be not the most
High God; yet, he ought to be worshipped with Divine and Religious worship. But
surely they do not well consider, that only Divine and Essential excellencies
are the formal Object of Divine and Religious worship, and to give such a
worship to one that is not God by Nature, is plain Idolatry. Where the Divine
Nature is, there is the true, proper, formal Object of Religious worship; and
where that is not, it is Idolatry to ascribe it to, or exercise it toward any
other. So that if the Word and Testimony of God be able to decide a difference
among the Children of men, I see not but that the Testimony given to the
Godhead of the Son, are as clear and unquestionable as those which are given
concerning the Deity of the Father. And thus we have spoken to the Third thing,
viz. That Jesus Christ is God.

Fourthly, It is delivered to us by Divine Revelation that the Holy Ghost is
God. This will plainly appear if we consider what is revealed to us concerning
the Divine existence, the Divine excellencies, and the Divine Operations of
this blessed Spirit.

Such things are ascribed to him in the Scriptures which do uncontrolably
evidence him to be a voluntary Divine Agent, an Eternal Divine existing
substance, a Person or intelligent subsistence, the Author of Divine
Operations, and the Object of Divine and Religious worship. There are some that
hold he is a mere emanation of virtue or power from God and not a Person.
Others grant indeed his Personality, and that he is a distinct self-subsisting
Person, but deny his Deity; they deny him to be a participant of the Divine
Nature. A Created, finite Spirit they will allow him to be, and the chiefest of
all Spirits that were created, and the Head of all the good Angels. But they
will not allow him to be a Divine Person. We shall therefore endeavor to prove
from plain Testimonies of Scripture,

1. That he is not a mere emanation of virtue or power from God, but an
intelligent subsistence, or Person.

2. A Divine Person.

3. A Person distinct from the Father and the Son.

4. A Person proceeding from the Father and the Son.

First, It will appear, he is a Person because he is endued with Personal
properties, and Personal actions (such as are peculiar and proper to a person)
are Attributed to him. As namely,

1. To make intercession. Romans 8.26. The Spirit also helps our infirmities.
For we know not how to pray as we ought, but the Spirit makes intercession for
us, v. 27. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God.

2. To come to men, being sent to them, Job. 15.26. But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth,
which proceeds from the Father, he shall te^tifie of me.

3. Our Savior says, He shall receive of mine, (That is communicate nothing to
them b^^ what t^^y r^c^iv d from him)
and show it unto you, Joh. 16.14. which is a personal action.

4. He is such an one against whom a sin may be committed, and therefore surely
he is a person. Matthew. 12.31. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
shall not be forgiven unto men.

5. His appearing in and under a visible sign argues his Personal existence.
This is related, Matt. 3.16. And Jesus when he was Baptized went up strait way
out of the water: and lo, the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. He took the form
or shape of a Dove, and nothing but a Person can assume a shape wherein to
appear.

6. He is placed in the same rank and order with other Divine Persons, and is
set forth as the proper Object of Divine and Religious Worship, Matthew. 28.19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

7. To him is ascribed Understanding, 1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God. Searching is a Personal action and
undeniably argues him to be an understanding Agent.

8. To him is ascribed Will; Understanding and Will are most eminently
distinstuishing Characters of a Person, 1 Cor. 12.11. But all these things
works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to every one as he will.

9. He is said to teach, Luke 12.12. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the
same hour what ye ought to say. Joh. 14.26. But the Comforter, which is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you. And those that pretend to be Teachers of others, and neither seek nor
regard his guidance or assistance had need consider what they do.

10. He calls men to the Ministry, Act. 13.2, 3, 4, And the Holy Ghost said,
Separate unto me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.
Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the Flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God which
he has purchased with his blood.

11. He is spoken of as the Object of such actings and actions of men as none
but a Person can be the Object of. Thus he is said to be tempted or provoked,
Acts 5.9. Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together, to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord? He is said to be resisted, Act. 7.51. Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye. He is said to be grieved, Ephesians. 4.30. And
grieve not the Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
Redemption. Compare this with Isa. 63, 10. But they rebelled, and vexed his
holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against
them. Now to be tempted, provoked, gresisted, rieved, (though improperly spoken
of God,) yet are such affections as a quality is not capable of. And these
expressions declare what effects they would produce in a Nature capable of such
Affections. And so much of the first particular, the Holy Ghost is a Person.

Secondly, He is not a Created but an Eternal Divine Person, having one and the
same Divine Nature with the Father and the Son; and so is truly and properly
God. This I shall prove by these Arguments.

1. He is expressly called God. Act. 5, 4, 9. Then Peter said unto her, H^w is
it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? You have n^^
lied unto men but unto God.

2. Divine Properties are attributed to him, which none can be endu^d with to
whom the Divine Nature belongs not, and which ^vi^^ (...) d^^l^re him to be the
most High God; Such are first Eternity, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the Eternal spirit, offered himself without spot
to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God?
Secondly, Immensity, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or
whither shall I flee from thy presence. Thirdly, Praescience, Act. 1.16. Men
and B^eth^e^, This Scripture must needs be fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by
the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that
took Jesus. Fourthly, Omniscience, 1 Cor. 2.10.11. But God has revealed them
unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God. For what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man
which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of
God.

Thirdly, Divine Works are ascribed to him, and which are only proper to God.
Such as are Creation, Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me. And the working
of Miracles, Matthew. 12.28. If I by the Spirit of God cast out Devils, then the
Kingdom of God is come unto y^u And thus we have proved that the Holy Ghost is
a Divine P^rs^n.

3. He is a Person distinct from the Father and the Son; I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, says our ^^viour to his
Disciples, Joh. 14.16. Now the Person sending, and the Person sent must need be
distinct the one from the other. And this same reason also proves the Son and
the Holy Ghost to be two distinct Persons, b^c^use the Holy Ghost is also sent
by the Son. Joh. 15.26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the
Father, he shall testify of me. Joh. 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth,
it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto y^u: but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

4. He is a Person pr^ceeding from the Father and the Son. The Father proceeded
from none, the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost from both. First, from the
Father, Joh. 15.26. The Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father.
Secondly, From the Son: For he is called the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father, Romans 8.9. Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he his none of his.

Thus we have proved that there is but one God, and yet Three distinct Persons
or Hypostases distinctly subsisting in the same Divine Essence or ^eing. Now a
Divine Person is nothing but the Divine Essence considered with an especial
property, and subsisting in an especial manner. As in the Person of the Father
there is the Divine Essence with its especial Properties of begetting the Son,
and subsisting in an especial manner as the Father. And because this Person
has the whole Divine Nature, all the Essential Properties of that Nature are
in that Person. The like may be said of the Persons of the Son and Holy Ghost.
Each Person having the understanding, will, and power of God, becomes a
distinct intelligent, voluntary, Omnipotent Agent or principle of Operation.
These Divine Persons are so distinct in their peculiar subsistence In the
Divine Essence th^re is alius not aliud and aliud. The Persons several, the
Essence of all Three the same.

The Persons are distingui^hed by their incommunicable Properties.


, that distinct Actions and Operations are ascribed to them. And these actions
are of two sorts; First, ad intra, Such are those internal acts in one Person
whereof another Divine Person is the Object. And these acts ad invicem or ad
intra are natural, necessary, and inseparable from the Being, Existence, and
Blessedness of God. Thus the Father knows the Son and loves him; and the Son
knows and loves the Father. In these mutual actings one Person is the Object
of the knowledge and love of the other, Joh. 3.35. The Father loves the Son,
and has given all things into his hand. Matthew. 11.27. All things are delivered
unto me of my Father: And no man knows the Son but the Father: Neither
knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him. This mutual knowledge and love of the Father and Son we find
expressed, Prove. 8.30. I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.
And in these mutual internal actings consists much of the ineffable blessedness
of the Holy G^d.

Secondly, There are distinct actions of these Divine Persons ad extra which
are voluntary effects of will and choice, and not natural or necessary. And
these are likewise of two sorts.

1. Such as respect one another; for there are external acts of one Person
toward another; but then the Person that is the Object of these actings, is
not considered absolutely as a Divine Person, but with respect to some peculiar
dispensation, or condescension which he voluntarily submitted unto. Thus the
Father gives, sends, commands the Son, he having condescended to take our
Nature on him, and to be Mediator between God and man. Thus the Father and the
Son do send the Spirit, he having condescended in an especial manner to the
Office of being the Sanctifier and Comforter of the Church. Now these are free
and voluntary acts depending upon the Sovereign Will, Counsel, and Pleasure of
God, and might not have been, without any the least diminution of his Eternal
blessedness. Secondly, Such as have respect and reference to the Creatures; of
which some are ascribed peculiarly to the Father, some to the Son, and some to
the Holy Ghost. Though these works ad extra be common to all Three; yet, the
manner of working is proper to each Person. Thus Creation is attributed to the
Father, Ephesians. 9.14, 15. Redemption to the Son. Ephesians. 1.7. Sanctification to the
Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.

Every Person does work, S^cundum distinctam rationem suae subsistentiae,
according to the distinct manner of his Personal s^bsistence.


Yet all their actings ad extra toward the Creatures, being the actings of
God, are undivided, and are all the works of one and the same God,

Having thus far explained the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and I hope sutably
to the Revelation made of it in the Scriptures; I shall now lay down some Rules
or Propositions for the further understanding of it.

First, Each Person has its own substance; for the one substance of the Deity
is the substance of each Person, and so is still but one. But each Person has
not its own distinct substance (separate from the substance of the other
Persons) because the substance of them all is the same. Where therefore Christ
as the Son is said to be another from the Father, (or from God spoken of
Personally as the Father) it argues not in the least, that he is not partaker
of the Divine Nature with him. It Is true, in one Essence there can be but one
Person, where the substance is finite and limited, but it has no place in that
which is infinite.

Secondly, Each Person is infinite as he is God. For all Divine Properties
belong not to the Persons on the account of their Personality, but on the
account of their Divine Nature which is one; for they are all Natural
Properties. And therefore as the Nature of each Person is infinite, so is each
Person because of that Nature.

Thirdly, The only true God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But when we say the
Father is the only true God, we respect not his Paternity, or Paternal relation
to his Son, but his Divine Nature, Essence, or Being. And the like may be said
of the Son, that He is the only true God; and so of the Holy Ghost. For the
Divine Nature though absolutely singular and one, yet is communicated to more,
and has a larger signification then either the Term Father, Son, or Holy
Ghost. So that though each Person be the only true God, it does not follow that
one Person must be another; namely, that the Father must be the Son, or the Son
the Father. For though the Father be the only true God, yet it does not follow
that every one who is the true God is the Father. For the Son is the only true
God, and so is the Holy Ghost, because they are equally participant of the
Divine Nature. But to say, whoever is the only true God is the Father, is false.

Fourthly, Distinction, and inequality in respect of Office, in Christ and the
Holy Ghost, does not in the least take away equality and sameness with the
Father in respect of Nature, and Essence, Phi. 2.6, 7, 8. Christ Jesus being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; yet made himself
of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.

Fifthly, The advancement, and exaltation of Christ as Mediator to any Dignity
whatsoever, upon or in reference to the works of our Redemption and Salvation,
is not at all inconsistent with the Essential honor and Dignity which he has
in himself as God blessed for ever. Though he humbled himself and was exalted
as to his Office, yet in Nature he was one and the same, he changed not.

Sixthly, Gods working in and by Christ as he was Mediator, denotes the Fathers
Sovereign appointment of the things mentioned to be done. Not his immediate
efficiency in the doing of them.

Seventhly, That must be remembered which Zophar says, Job 11. 7. We cannot by
searching find out God, we cannot find out the Almighty to perfection.

Some things may be above the comprehension of reason Observe the words of a
learned man Dr. H. in his Comment on the Creed p. 20. I thank God I can say
with a very good Conscience that I b lieve the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity,
according to the Catholic Tradition of the Church of Christ; yet I confess
withal (such is the weakness of my understanding) that I am utterly unable
(and indeed who is not?) To look into the death of so great a Mystery; and
cannot bu^ cry out (...) (as the Apostle did in another case) O the
unsearchableness! O the depth of this Heavenly Economy. in matters of so high
a Nature, I believe more then I am able to understand, the gift of Faith
supplying the defects of my understanding.
as considered in this or that man, which are not all absolutely against it. We
grant that nothing contrary to the reason of things must be admitted. But
reason as it is in this or that man may be very weak, and imperfect, and very
short of a ju^t and a full comprehension of the whole reason of things.
Therefore that is no fit measure to try this Divine Doctrine by. Certainly it
is the highest reason, that in things of p^rely Divine Revelation, we should
captivate our understandings to the Authority of the Revelator. Let us
therefore earnestly pray unto God that it may be given unto us to know the
Mysteries of his Kingdom. The Apostle Peter knew Christ to be the Eternal Son
of God (which is a part of this Mystery of the Trinity) and our Savior tells
him, Matthew. 16.16, 17. That Flesh and Blood had not revealed it unto him, but
his Father. A man ought not presently to desert his persuasion grounded upon
Scripture, because he cannot answer every Objection that the subtle Wit of man
can make against it. For though this or that private Person may not be able to
Answer such Objections; yet others (more learned and knowing) may easily do it,
and to them he ought to betake himself for satisfaction. Thus I have showed
what is the Original Declaration, or Revelation of this Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity contained in the Scripture, and how the same is explained by Pious and
Learned men very sutably to that Revelation. And it will not be amiss to give
my Reader these two further directions. First, If at any he be attaqued by any
adversary of this Divine doctrine, I advise him in the first place to hold him
strictly and peremtorily to the Original revelation, and to put him to disprove
(if he can) that God is one, that the Father is God, the Son God, the Holy
Gh^st God, understanding by God the most High God, Sovereign of all the World.
If he cannot do this (as you may see by the Testimonies forecited he cannot
with any show of reason do) then suffer him not to quarrel at the explanation,
and fall foully (as their manner is) upon the terms Trinity and Personality,
and such like expressions, which though they be not literally and syllabically
found in the Scriptures, yet are agreeable to the Original Revelation of this
Doctrine therein contained and fairly Expolitory thereof.

And having given this hint or admonition (which I think very needful at this
time) let me in the closing up of this Discourse advise all those that have any
true desire to walk in the narrow path of Truth and Holiness (which leads to
everlasting bliss) to labor in the first place judiciously to understand this
Sacred Doctrine according to the Original Revelation thereof, made in the
Scriptures. When this is done, the explanation thereof (as we have here
delivered it) will not seem harsh to them, nor to contain any thing unsuitable
to that Revelation. And let me add this one word more, that I fear the failing
of so many men's profession (as we have seen of late years) has begun with their
relinquishing this Foundation. This has been the fatal miscarriage of those
poor deluded Souls called Quakers, and I am afraid of some others more learned
than they. If they could be brought to a right understanding of this Doctrine
of the blessed Trinity as it is in the Scripture revealed, I suppose their other
fond imaginations would quickly vanish, and come to nothing.

SECT. III. Of the Works of God.
I Have spoken of the Nature of God, Maker of Heaven and Earth.
and his glorious Attributes, and of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the
Divine Nature. I come now to speak of his works, Viz. Creation. Providence.


And First of Creation.

The Apostle Heb. 11.3. Of Creation.
tells us that by Faith we understand that the Worlds (namely the inferior,
middle and superior, as the Jews were wont to distinguish them) and all the
Creatures in them, were made and framed by the Word of God. And certainly this
goodly Fabric of Heaven and Earth was not from Eternity, (as Aristotle that
great Philosopher, destitute of Scripture Light, was inclined to believe,) but
was created and made at that time when it seemed best to the infinite Wisdom of
God. And the special Motives (as we may humbly conceive) which inclined him to
make it, were a desire and purpose to express his infinite Power, to declare
his transcendent Wisdom, and Goodness, and to exercise his all-wise Providence;
all conducing to the manifestation of his own glory and praise.

Some Creatures he made immediately out of nothing (as the terminus a quo) by a
proper Creation, giving them a real being which before they had not. Other
things he made out of some prae-existent matter, (which matter he had before
made out of nothing) by a mediate and improper kind of Creation. As he made
Adams body out of the dust of the earth, The remembrance of this should be an
Antidote against Pride in all his Posterity.

Abraham Genesis 18.27. acknowledges himself but dust and ashes, cum sis
humillimus, cur non es humillimus, says Bernard.


and Eves of Adams Ribb.

When Solomon was to build a Magnificent Temple for God, he needed many
Materials, Ex nihilo nihil fit, id est, Physice and a Creaturis. Sod non va^^t
regula si intelligatur i^ Deo.
and many Workmen, and they many Tools: But God did not so. He made all without
any Coadjutor, or any Instrument, by the sole word of his command. And when he
looked upon every thing he had made, behold all was very good, Neh. 9.6. Thou
even thou art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all
their Host, the Earth and all things that are therein, the Sea and all that is
therein, and thou preserved them all and the Host of Heaven worshippeth thee.
Colos. 1.16. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers: All things were created by him and for him. Rev.
4.11. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power; for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

The chief of the Creatures God created were Angels and Men.


All the Angels were at first made holy and happy Spirits. Some of them
continued in their obedience to God, and are still Angels of light; others of
them fell from God by pride and disobedience and are become Devils of darkness.

First, I shall speak of the good Angels, Of good Angels.
and then of the Angels that fell. There are Four things the Scripture holds
forth to us concerning good Angels.

1. Their Number. 2. Their Titles. 3. Their Nature and Properties. 4. Their
Functions and Ministry.
First, Their Number. The Scripture teaches us that they are very many, Dan.
7.10. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him, Thousand Thousands
ministered unto him, and Ten Thousand times Ten Thousands stood before him; the
Judgment was set and the Book was opened. Rev. 5 11. And I beheld and heard the
voice of many Angels round about the Throne and the Beasts, and the Elders, and
the Number of them was Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand, and Thousands of
Thousands. Matthew. 26.53. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and
he shall presently send me more then Twelve Legions of Angels. Heb. 12.22. But
ye are now come unto Mount Sion and unto the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem and to an innumerable company of Angels. Psalm. 68.17. The
Chariots of God are Twenty Thousand, even Thousands of Angels; 2 Kings 6.17.
And Elisha prayed, and the Lord opened the Eyes of the young man, and he saw
the Mountain was full of Horses, and Chariots of Fire round about Elisha; that
is, that a great multitude of Angels were sent from God to defend and protect
the Prophet.

Secondly, Their Titles. Their general name is Angels or Messengers. Sometimes
they are called Cherubim, and when they appeared in a visible shape or were
pictured, they had the resemblance of a young man in the excellency of his
beauty, vigor and strength, and had Wings, as we read, Exodus 25.18, 20.
Sometimes they are called Seraphim, importing their fervent Zeal in executing
the will of God.

Sometimes Sons of God, Job. 38.7. When the morning Stars sang together, and
all the Sons of God shouted for joy.

Sometimes, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, as we read, Col. 1.16.
And so much of their Titles.

Thirdly, Their Natures and Properties.

1. They are Spirits of great Knowledge and Wisdom. 'Twas said of David, 2 Samuel
14.20. That he was wise, according to the Wisdom of an Angel of God. They are
admirable in knowledge both natural, experimental and revealed.

2. Of spotless purity and integrity. Our Savior says, Mark. 8.38. Whosoever
shall be ashamed ^f me and of my words, in the adulterous and sinful
Generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory
of his Father with the Holy Angels. When they appeared to the World, their garb
(wherein they appeared) represented their innocence. As at Christ's Sepulcher
there appeared two Angels in white, the one sitting at the Head, the other at
the Feet, where the body of Jesus had lain, Joh. 20.12.

3. Of exceeding great power and strength, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his
Angels that excel in strength.

4. Of great celerity and quickness of motion, in which respect they are said
to have wings, Isai. 6.2. Above it stood the Seraphims: each one had six wings;
importing their cheerfulness and readiness and celerity in the service of God.

Fourthly, Their Function and Ministry; which is of Three sorts, 1. In
reference to God. 2. In reference to Christ. 3. To the Saints and People of God.


I In reference to God.

1. They attend his glorious presence. They are his chief Servants and
principal attendants, the bright Courtiers of Heaven. They are called the Host
of Heaven, 1 Kings 22.19. They are called the Chariots of God, viz. Such as
attend him, for his service, Psalm. 68.17. The Chariots of God are twenty
Thousand, even Thousands of Angels.

2. They are especial Instruments to praise and magnify him. Rev. 7.11, 12.
And all the Angels stoood round about the Throne and fell before the Throne on
their faces and w^rshipped God, saying, Blessing and glory and wisdom and
thanksgiving and honor and power and might be unto our God for ever and ever,
Amen.

3. They are Messengers to carry and reveal his mind and will. By the glorious
ministry and proclamation of Angels, God delivered his Law on Mount Sinai. Act.
7.53. Compared with Gal. 3.19. Christ the Head of Angels proclaimed his Law by
the voice of an Angel, as a Herald in presence of the King publishes his
Proclamations. And so on sundry other occasions God used to make known his will
by Angels, Dan. 9.21. Whiles I was speaking in prayer, says Daniel, the man
Gabriel, (whom I had seen in the Vision at the beginning) being caused to fly
swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening Oblation. And Luke 1.11.
There appeared unto Zacharias an Angel of the Lord, standing on the right side
of the Altar of Incense, and said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the
presence of God: And am sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad
tidings. And v. 26. in the Sixth Month, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God,
unto a City of Galilee name Nazareth to the Virgin Mary. And Luke 2.9, 10. An
Angel was sent to the Shepherds keeping watch over their Flock, by Night to
bring the joyful tidings of the Birth of the Messiah.

4. They are Ministers to execute and perform what God will have done in the
World, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that excel in strength, that
do his Comma^dments: They bring Lot out of Sodom, Genesis 19.1. They bring Israel
out of Egypt, Numb. 20.16. They stop Balaams course, Numb. 22.22. They stop the
Lions Mouths, Dan. 6.20, 22. They execute the Judgments of God upon wicked men.
Thus we read how Two Angels destroyed Sodom; and that an Angel defeated the
Host of Sennacherib, 2 Kings 19.35. And that an Angel smote bloody persecuting
Herod, Acts 12.33.

And thus much of their Ministry in reference to God. I come now to consider.

II. Their Ministry in reference to Christ. It Is said Joh. 1.51. That the
Angels ascend and descend on the Son of man: That place has relation to Genesis
28.12. Where Jacob dreamed of a Ladder set upon the earth, whose to preached to
Heaven; and the Angels of the Lord ascended and descended on it: by the Ladder
Christ is meant, who by his humane Nature touched the Earth, and whose Divine
Nature reached up to Heaven. The Angels ascending and descending imported the
continual service they are re^dy to perform unto him; and that they are deputed
thereunto of the Father, as the Apostle proves, Heb. 1.6. When he brings his
first begotten into the World, he says, Let all the Angels of God worship him.

But to d^scend to Particulars.

1. They foretell his conception, Luke 1.30, 3^. And the Angel said unto her,
fear not M^ry; for thou have found favor with God. And shall conceive in thy
Womb; and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus.

2. They declare his Birth, Luke 2.9, 10, 11. And lo, the Angel of the Lord
came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them and they were
sore afraid. And the Angel of the Lord said unto them, fear not: for behold, I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People. For unto you
is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

3. They prevent danger to him from Herod, Matthew. 2.13, 14. And the Angel of
the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream, saying, arise, and take the young
Child, and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring
thee word: For Herod will seek the young Child to destroy him. And he arose,
and took the young Child and his Mother by Night, and departed into Egypt.

4. They minister to him in his temptations, Mark 1.13. And he was there in the
Wilderness Forty days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild Beasts, and the
Angels ministered unto him.

5. They comfort him in his agony, Luke 22.43. And there appeared an Angel from
Heaven, strengthening him.

6. They open his Grave at his Resurrection, Matthew. 28.2. And behold there was
a great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven, and came
and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.

7. They witness his Resurrection to them that looked for him, Luke 24.5, 6.
And as they were afraid and bowed down their face to the Earth, two men in
shining Garments said unto them, why seek ye the living among the dead? He is
not here but is risen, remember how he spoke unto you when he was yet in
Galilee. Verse. 23. And when the Women found not his body; they came saying that
they also had seen a Vision of Angels, which said that he was alive.

8. They attend and attest his Ascension, Acts. 1.10, 11. And while they looked
steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went up, behold Two men stood by them in white
apparel; which also said: Ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing up into Heaven;
this same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

9. They attend and magnify him in Heaven, Rev. 5.11, 12. And I beheld and
heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts, and the
Elders, and the number of them was Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand, and
Thousands of Thousands; saying with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and
Glory, and Blessing. 1 Pet. 3.22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right
hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him.

10. They reveal what he will have done on Earth, Rev. 1.1. The Revelation of
Jesus Christ which God gave unto him, to show unto his Servants things which
must shortly come to pass, and he sent and signified it by his Angels unto his
servant John, Rev. 22.16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you
these things in the Churches.

11. They will attend him at the last judgment, Mark 8 38. Whosoever therefore
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
Generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory
of his Father, with the holy Angels. Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
Throne of his glory.

12. They will sever the wicked from among the just, and execute Christ's
righteous sentence on the ungodly, Matthew. 13.49.50. So shall it be at the end
of the World: The Angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from the just,
and shall cast them into the Furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

Thus much of their Ministry in reference to Christ. Next follows,

III. Their Ministry in relation to the Saints and People of God, Heb. 1.14.
Are they not all Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall
be Heirs of Salvation, Matthew. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones; for I say unto you that in Heaven their Angels do always behold
the face of my Father which is in Heaven.

They are not only ministering Spirits, but their Ministry extends to such
things as are most needful and useful for the Saints.

1. They are appointed Guardians and Protectors of the People of God. The
protection of holy ^ngels is invisible, yet true and real, Psalm. 34.7. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them, Genesis 32.1.2, when Jacob journeyed, it is said, the Angels of God met him.
An Army of Angels was his Convoy, and therefore he called the place Mahanaim,
that is, Two Hosts or Armies, they appearing on either hand of him, or before
and behind him to secure and defend him.

The holy Angels do the People of God many more good Offices then they are
aware of.

They help us against our Spiritual enemies, as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians.
6.12. For we wrestle not only against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, and P^wers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World,
against Spiritual wickedness in high places.

Good Angels (as it is probable) are more in number as well as stronger in power
than the wicked, and defend the People of God against many evils, and direct
them in difficult cases what to do. Dan. 6.22. My God, says Daniel, has sent
his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths that they have not hurt me. ^en.
24.7. The Lord God of Heaven who took me from my Fathers H^use, and from the
Land ^f my Kindred and which spoke unto me saying, unto thy seed will I give
this Land, he shall send his Angel before thee, and thou shall take a Wife unto
my Son from thence, says Abraham unto his servant. Acts 16.9. A Vision
appeared to Paul in the Right: There stood a man of Macedonia and prayed him,
saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. Matthew. 1.20. But while he
thought on these things, behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a
dream, saying, Joseph thou Son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife: for that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost.

2. It Is probable they suggest Holy thoughts to us. If the Devil can suggest
filthy sinful thoughts, and incite the heart to wickedness, surely good Angels
can sugg^st good thoughts, and incite the heart to holiness. Christ spoke of
Judas that Satan had put it into his heart to betray him, John 13. And Peter
said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart (...) lie to the Holy Ghost.
The Nature of good Angels is as fit to deal with our Spirits, as the Nature of
evil Angels can be. That of the Apostle se^ms to hint, if not to prove this 2
Cor. 11.14. Where he tells the Cor^^thians, that deceitful work^rs transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marve^, for Satan himself is
transformed into an A^gel of light, namely when he suggests good for evil ends,
or evil for good ends.

3. Good Angels comfort, strengthen and support in times of distress and
trouble. Thus they ministered to our Savior after Satan had fiercely assaulted
him with Temptations, Matthew. 4.11. So like wise when he was in his agony. Luke
22.43. There appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven, strengthening of him. And
what they did for Christ the Head, they do for his Members in measure and
proportion, and as far forth as God sees good for them.

4. They convey the Souls of the departed Saints into Heaven, Luke 16.22. And
it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom.

And thus much of their Ministry in relation to the Saints.

There are many useful instructions that arise from this Doctrine of good
Angels.

1. Hereby we may see the great privilege of the Saints of God. They have the
Guardianship of the Holy Angels. Whether every Saint of God, every Heir of
Heaven have a peculiar and proper Angel to attend him, is much disputed and
canvassed by the Schoolmen. But there seems no ground in the Word of God to
appropriate a single Angel to every single Saint. It Is surely a greater dignity
and benefit that every one of the Faithful have many Angels appointed by the
Lord for his Guard, whereof the proof is manifest from the 91 Psalm 11. For he
shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways: and from
34 Psalm 7. The Angel of the Lord, encampeth round about them that fear him,
and delivers them. As for that place, Acts 12.15. Where they said concerning
Peter, It is his Angel, the meaning of it probably is this, they hearing the
Maid persist in it that Peter was at the door, they apprehending that very
unlikely, thought some Holy Angel had assumed his shape and voice, and stood at
the door in his resemblance. But this proves not that every Saint has a
peculiar Angel Guardian. The Angels indefinitely have charge over Gods People
as God is pleased to assign them their Province, and to employ them in that
Ministry. But yet they execute this Ministry, as superior Guides, not as
inferior Attendants. Properly they are not Servants to us, but to God for us.
There is no ground for our worsh^ppi^g of them, they being our fell^w
Creatures, Rev. 19.10 I ^ell at his feet to worship him. But he said, See thou
do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy Brethren that have the Testimony
of Jesus; worship God.

2. We may take notice of Gods wonderful goodness in so graciously providing
for his Saint^ and Servants. Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful^ of
him! Ther^ is more in Holiness than the World does see. The Saints have Gods
Power, Christ Med^ation, the Spirits conduct, the Ministry of Angels, all
engaged for their benefit.

3. We may observe the great humility and condescension of these Holy Angels,
and their great love to mankind. They rejoyc^d when the World was made for man,
Job 38.7. They rejoiced at the coming of Christ for man's Redemption, Luke 2.13.
They rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. Luke 15.10.

4. We should labor to imitate these Holy Angels in their readiness and
willing obedience to Gods will. If we would be like Angels h^reafter in glory
and bliss, let us labor to imitate them here in a cheerful service of God.

5. Let us labor to secure our interest in Christ, that so we may be under the
Protection of these Holy Angels. For they Minister only for the good of them
who are Heirs of Salvation.

6. Let us take heed of depriving our selves of their help and Ministry; Pride,
Lust, Vanity, are offensive to them. And so are all impurities and indecencies
in Gods Worship, as the Apostle intimates to us, 1 Cor. 11.10. Let us therefore
take heed lest by any of these ways we grieve or drive from us these blessed
helpers and Assistants.

Of Evil Angels.
Of Evil Angels.
Having thus spoken concerning good Angels, we come now to speak concerning the
Angels that fell. Concerning whom these things are to be inquired into.

1. The Names and Titles by which they are set forth in the Scripture. 2. Their
sin. 3. How they came to sin, being created pure. 4. The time when they sinned.
5. The number of them that sinned. 6. Their nature, properties, and employment.
7. Their punishment Present and Future.
8. What instructions their fall, wickedness, and misery do afford unto us.
1. The Names and Titles by which they are set forth in the Scripture.

The general and comprehensive Name of evil Angels in the Scripture, is Devil
[Diabolus,] which signifies an accuser or slanderer.

He is called also the wicked One, the old Serpent, the Adversary, the roaring
Lion, the Abaddon, Appollyon, or destroyer, the great Dragon, a liar, and the
Father of lies, a Murderer, a Murderer from the beginning, the god of this
World, 2 Cor. 4.4. The Prince of the power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. The Angel of
the bottomless Pit, Satan, Rev. 12.9. The Spirit that works in the Children
of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. The Tempter, Psalm. 78.49. And Ephesians. 6.12. We read of
evil Angels, that they are called, Principalities, Powers, Rulers of the
darkness of this World, Spiritual wickedness in High places.

2. Let us consider what was their sin.

The greatest evidence of the Nature of their sin we find in that place of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.6. where he shows that a Person to be ordained should not be
a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, he fall into Condemnation of the
Devil; that is, be guilty of that sin, viz. Pride, (which young men are so
prone unto) for which the Devil was Condemned and rejected of God.

Pride therefore seems to be (as I may so speak) the Original sin of those
Apostate Angels. But envy, malice, slandering, etc. are their actual sins.

Yet what kind of pride it was, and how it discovered it self; is not easy to
determine. Whether it was an affectation to be as high as God himself, or a
seeking to be higher than God had made them, is not easy to be resolved.
Certain it is the Temptation they spread before our first Parents was, ye shall
be as Gods. Or whether they refused the Work, Office, and Ministration God
designed them unto in reference to Men. Or whether it was too great a
confidence and glorying in their own gifts, and received excellencies; or
whether it was an affectation of Worship from men, (as we see they now delight
in it) or whether it was any other Rebellion against Gods Majesty and Empire,
it is hard to determine. Some learned men make it a compounded sin. For as there
were many sins in that sin by which Adam fell, viz. Unbelief, Pride,
Ingratitude, Disobedience; so this first sin of the Angels might be compounded
of many other sins, though Pride were chief in it. Whatever their first sin
was, this is manifest they abode not in the truth: They kept not their first
Station; they sinned against God, and by sin fell from their happiness.

3. Let us inquire how they came to sin. Being created pure: they had no lust
within to incline them to it; and being in Heaven they had no Object without to
draw or allure them to it; neither had they any ^emp^^r before one or more of
their own number fell) to entice them to it. Some late Divines conceive that
the great Angel ^ow called Beelzebub first fell, and then drew others by his
t^mpta^ion and seducement, into the same rebellion and disobedience with
himself. For Matthew. 25.44. we read of the Devil and his Angels, and Matthew.
12.24. of Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. From whence we may probably
conjecture there was some Prince or Chief of the Apostate Angels, who was the
Ringleader in this faction and rebellion against God.

And if any shall further inquire how sin came into the Angels at first, all
that we can say is this, They were created good yet mutable; and they
voluntarily chose not to abide in their first estate. It Is Gods Prerogative
only to be immutable. All Creatures, though never so pure, if not assi^ted by
grace, are mutable, and may sin. Job 4.18. Behold he put no trust in his
Servants, and his Angels he charged with folly. The Angels being mutable
Creatures might fall from their righteousness, (if left to themselves) and some
of them did fall, and God charged them judicially with folly for it. They were
created in a blessed state, and from that, they might, and some of them did
fall.

But however it was, we may assure our selves God was not the cause of their
fall, by infusing any evil into them. Neither is he to be looked upon as
consenting to their sin, (in that he did not hinder them from it) or in that he
did not support them by his Grace. For he owes his Grace to none, and gives
it when and to whom he pleases. And in the Angelical Nature as well as the
humane, he would discover his Justice and his Mercy, and the freed^m of his
dispensations.

4. Let us consider the time when they fell. How soon they fell we cannot
certainly determine. It Is probable they fell very soon. For Joh. 8.44. Satan is
called a Murderer from the beginning: and 1 John 3.9. It Is said the Devil
sins from the beginning; that is, soon after the Creation: That these Angels
were created plainly appears from Col. 1.16. And probably they were created on
the second day, when the Heavens (the proper place of their residence) were
created. It Is certain they sinned before Man fell; For the Devil in and by the
Serpent seduced Eve, Genesis 3.1.2 Cor. 11.3.

5. Let us consider their number. It Is certain that the number of these
Apostate Angels is very great, and that there are very many of them going up
and down in the World, as may appear by this, that an whole Legion of them was
in one man, Luke 8.30. Legio apud Romanos continebat 12500 mi^ites, num^rus
certus pro incerto, ut ipse Demon explicat.
But how great their number is, cannot by us be certainly determined.

6. Let us consider their Nature, Properties, and Employment.

1. They are Spirits of great knowledge, cunning, and subtilty. They are subtle
by Nature, and by long experience in tempting (since the beginning of the
World) their subtilty is much increased. They can transform themselves into
Angels of light. 2 Cor. 11.14. But this is observable, they never move to good,
as it is good, but as it may have some evil consequent upon it. And further they
know how to suit their temptations to the several tempers of men. They have
much Natural, and Experimental knowledge, so as they can discern hidden causes,
and virtues, which man's reason cannot reach unto. They know how to apply
actives to passives; they can guess notably at future events, but as for a
certain knowledge of them (unless of such things as depend upon necessary
causes, or have been some way or other made known unto them by God) that they
have not. That knowledge is proper to God, and accordingly he challenges it
unto himself, Isai. 41.23. Show things that are to come hereafter, that we may
know ye are gods, says he, of the vanities and Idols of the Heathen. They are
of wonderful sagacity to judge of men's hearts by their outward gestures, and
carriage. In a word they are wise enough to do evil, but to do good they have
no knowledge.

2. Their malice is very great. This is set forth to the life, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be
sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil like a roaring Lion goes
about seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the Faith. His malice
is so great, that he goes about doing mischief, though he knows that he gets
no good by it; nay though his punishment will be so much the greater, for the
mischief he does.

His malice is great against all mankind, but principally against the Saints,
and Servants of God. First, Because they bear the Image of God. Secondly,
Because they (through grace) resist his temptations here, and shall as
approvers of Christ's righteous sentence, judge him hereafter, 1 Cor. 6.3.

3. They are Spirits of great Power, though it be limited by God, so that it
cannot be exercised, but when, and where, and how it pleases him. The Devil
does exercise his power as far as he is able to the hurt of the Children of
men, but especially to the hurt of the Saints obstinately endeavoring to
hinder them from enjoying that happiness which he lost.

4. They are Spirits of great industry to do mischief as we may see Job 1.6.7.
The Devil not only does all the outward mischief he can, but he tempts also by
inward suggestions. For being a Spirit, he has communion with our Souls and
Spirits, and can dart evil thoughts into us; thus he filled the heart of Judas
to betray his Lord and Master. Thus he provoked David to number the People, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. His temptations are many times sudden, impetuous, importunate.
And his suggestions may oftentimes be known from those that arise from our own
corrupt hearts, by the suddenness, violence and unnaturalness of them. Those
that arise from our own corrupt Natures are usually pleasing unto us. But if
the temptation be against the light of Nature (as for one to kill a friend whom
he dearly loves) and do fill the Soul with horror (as blasphemous thoughts do)
those may be reckoned as Satan's fiery Darts. For they torment the mind as
poisoned Arrows do the body. And by an humble recourse to Christ for help we
should labor to quench these fiery Darts. Our Savior himself was tempted by
the Devil to most hideous things, Matthew. 4. And having been tempted himself he
knows how to succor those that are tempted. Heb. 2.18. The Saints of God
therefore should encourage themselves from these considerations,

1. A restraint is put on Satan in all his temptations. 1 Cor. 10.13. He cannot
tempt further then God permits.

2. His temptations tend to the increase of their graces. Satan's temptations
increased Job's patience, Paul by Satan's buffeting was humbled, 2 Cor. 12.

3. They tend to promote the fervency of their prayers.

4. Their wisdom and watchfulness will hereby be the more quickened.

5. The resisting of these temptations shall tend to the increase of their
glory hereafter.

7. Let us consider their punishment Present and Future.


Their present punishment may be considered, first, in respect of loss.

1. Upon their sin they fell from the place of happiness, and glory which
before they enjoyed, Rev. 12.8. Neither was their place found any more in
Heaven. Though that place in a mystical sense may speak of the overthrowing of
Satan in this present World, and casting him out of the Church, yet here is a
plain allusion to Satan's first fall from Heaven, as the ground of that
expression, and therefore it may serve as a proof in this matter. Their place
of innocence was Heaven; they stood round about the Throne of God where the
Angels do continually behold his face. Their happiness was to enjoy God, their
duty to glorify him. From this place they are now driven into the lower parts
of the World as a place more fit for sin and misery. Sometimes they fly up and
down in the Air: therefore is Satan called the Prince of the Power of the Air,
Ephesians. 2.3. And exercises the power that God permits him in the Regions of the
Air, by raising Tempests, etc. Sometimes he compasses the earth too and fro,
Job. 1.7. And 2 Cor. 4.4. He is called the god of this World; that is, whom the
World generally serves, and who by the just Judgment of God has got such a
Dominion over Multitudes, that they serve him as their God.

1. Their present punishment may be considered in respect of sense. They are
kept in Chains. That is,

1. They are under guilt and horror of Conscience. Cehennam suam secum portant.
They carry their Hell about them.

2. They are under an utter despair of deliverance; to them there remains
nothing but a certain looking for judgment and fiery indignation.

3. Their malice, spite and power is curbed and bridled, and held in by the
Almighty power of God, so that they cannot vent it as they would, which is no
small vexation to them. And thus much of their present punishment, both of loss
and sense.

2. Let us consider their future punishment, which at the day of Judgment will
be greater than now it is. They are not yet in that Prison and Place of torment
where they shall abide for ever under the wrath of God. They are now entered
into some degrees of Hellish torments, but they are in expectation of greater.
And therefore they cried out to our Savior, Matthew. 8.31. Art thou come to
torment us before our time? There is a time coming when the wrath of God shall
be increased upon them. Hell is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew.
25.41. Though for the present they are under Gods wrath, yet they do not taste
the dregs of it. Therefore they besought our Savior, Luke 8.31. That he would
not command them into the deep; that is, the place of full and perfect torment.

8. I come now to show what improvement we are to make of all that has been
said.

1. Let us meditate with trembling on the fall of Angels. If they fell, how
should we look to our standing? If such excellent Creatures fell, and fell do
dreadfully, how should we look to our selves?

2. Let us observe the evil Nature of sin, especially of Pride. If Pride threw
the Angels out of Heaven, and laid the foundation of Hell, we had need labor
to maintain a great abhorrence in our hearts of that sin.

3. We should often consider and it should deeply affect us, that we lost our
first estate as well as the Angels, we lost our Original state of holiness and
happiness as well as they. As they fell soon so did we. As they fell by Pride
so did we.

4. Let us meditate with astonishment on the wonderful goodness of God who of
his infinite mercy provided a Redeemer for us, but none for them. Let us admire
the freeness of Gods love to the Children of men.

5. Let us tremble at Gods Justice; Angels, Creatures of the highest excellency
are not spared when they sin. O admire at his patience that he has yet spared
thee.

6. Remember the Devil and his Angels are in the World. O how watchful ought
we to be and sensible of our continual danger from those evil Spirits.

7. Let us remember that Spiritual Judgments are the most dreadful. The Devils
are given up to an obstinacy in sinning. Let us take heed of imitating them in
their obstinacy and willfulness.

8. Let us remember for our comfort that the Devil is in Chains. He had not
power over an Herd of Swine without leave, Matthew. 8.31. So Luke 22.31. He could
not sift Peter till he had a Commission. He could not touch Job's Estate or
Skin till he had leave; nay, he could not deceive Ahab (a wicked man) till God
said, go, 1 King 22.21, 22. He is but Gods Executioner. And therefore the
Psalmist showing how God punished the disobedient Israelites, Psalm. 78.49,
says, He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation,
and trouble, by sending evil Angels among them.

9. Let us take heed of being of the Devils faction, or promoting his work and
interest.

10. Let us resist Satan as a Tempter here in this life. As a Tormentor in the
other life, he cannot be resisted, James 4.7. Resist the Devil and he will flee
from thee.

11. Let us daily seek help from God against Satan's malice and power, and
humbly commit our selves to his especial protection.

12. Seeing there are so many Devils and evil Spirits in the World; this may be
a mighty argument to assure us that there is a ^od, a spirit of infinite
goodness and power, who restrains the malice of Satan and all his instruments;
else we could never be safe one moment.

13. We should often meditate on the glorious Attributes of God. His
transcendent power, his infinite wisdom, and mercifulness. For the deeper
impressions are made upon our hearts by these Attributes, the less we shall
fear Satan. They that know thy Name, says the Plasmist, Psalm. 9.10. That is,
thy Nature and Attributes, will trust in thee.

14. We should exercise faith on the merits and intercession of Christ, for the
quenching of the fiery Darts of Satan, when ever he casts them into our Souls,
Ephesians. 6.16. Above all take the Shield of Faith wherewith ye shall be able to
quench the fiery Darts of the Wicked One.

15. Consider it is the Devils sin not thine if he force evil thoughts upon
thee, which thou defiest and abhorrest.

16. Meditate on the promises of God for thy support, Romans 16.20. The God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful
who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able.

17. Consider the experiences of Gods faithful servants who have been so
assaulted, and how they have been delivered. Scarce any of Gods Children but
have been more or less assaulted at one time or other. Let their experiences of
Gods support and help be thy encouragement.

18. Instantly repel the Devils temptations, do not muse or think too much upon
them. Divert from them; turn thy thoughts if thou can possibly to something
else.

19. If the Devil still follow thee with his Temptations, take the advice of
some faithful friend or Minister, to whom impart thy case, keep not the Devils
counsel. If thy House be on fire, call for help. Climacus in Scala Paradisi
makes mention of one who was tempted Twenty years together; his mind being
infested and turmoil'd with most grievous blasphemous thoughts, who by
revealing his condition at last to a faithful friend, was suddenly delivered
from them.

20. If none of these ways will do, then (not in a proud manner, but) holily
despise the Devil, as Travelers use to do barking Dogs. This is Gersons
counsel who says he knew one suddenly cured thereby; And adds this as the
reason thereof; spiritus quippe superbissimus non diu patitur se contemni. For
this proud Spirit, the Devil, will not long endure or suffer himself to be
contemned.

Of Providence.
Of Provid^n^e.
Having spoken of the first of Gods works, viz. Creation, I come now to the
second, viz. Providence, concerning which I shall make these inquiries.

1. What Providence is, and wherein it consists.

2. How it may appear there is such a Providence.

3. What is the extent of this Providence.

4. What are the Objections usually made against this Doctrine.

5. What are the Uses, and Practical improvements we should make hereof.

1. For the First,

Providence is a work of God, whereby he sustains, governs and orders all the
Creatures according to the good pleasure of his will, to his own glory.

It consists in two things. 1. Conservation. 2. Gubernation.


1. Conservation. The Providence of God manifests it self, in preserving the
Creatures he has made, Col. 1.17. In him all things consist, Heb. 1.3. He
sustains all things by the word of his Power. All the Creatures as they were
made by God, so they continually depend upon him for the supporting and
continuing of their Being, their Virtue, and Activity. Psalm. 39.6. Thou
preservest Man and Beast. Neh. 9.6. Thou even thou art Lord alone, thou have
made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all their Host, and the Earth, and all
things that are therein, the Sea, and all that is therein, and thou preservest
all, and the Host of Heaven worshippeth thee.

2. Gubernation. Gods Providence reaches all, rules over all his Creatures,
Psalm. 22.28. The Kingdom is the Lords, he is the Governor among the Nations,
Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things according to the counsel of his own will, Lam.
3.37. Who is he that says it comes to pass, and I the Lord command it not.
Joh. 5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work. Una eum Patre continue
operor, etiam Sabbatis, mundum portans and regens, mi^acula faciens, and cum eo
hoc ipsum saenitatis opus efficiens.


But Secondly, How may it appear there is such a Providence?

Answ. 1. From Scripture. 2. From Reason.


1. The Scripture clearly bears Testimony to it, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil
in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Jer. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the
way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps. Isai. 45.7. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and
create evil: I the Lord do all these things. Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord
are in every place, beholding the evil and the good. James 4.15. For that ye
ought to say, if the Lord will we shall live, and do this, and that, Job. 5.12.
He disapppointed the Devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise.

2. Reason plainly shows it. There are several Arguments from Reason, that may
persuade us to the belief hereof.

1. The Regular order, and wise contrivance of all things in the World, with
their mutual reference, and subserviency of one to another, together with their
exact fitness, and commodious aptness for the several uses and purposes, for
which they were designed; the beauty, the elegance, the regularity, that
appears in the several parts of the Universe; the regular Motion of the
Heavenly bodies, the vicissitudes of day and night, and of the Seasons of the
Year, Winter, Spring, Summer, and Autumn; the production of Minerals; the
growth of Plants; the generation of Animals according to their s^veral species
and kinds, the gathering the Inhabitants of the Earth into several Nations
under distinct Policies, and Governments; their mutual commerce for the
supplying the necessities of each other with such things as their several
Countries afford; the giving to so many Millions of People a different face,
whereby the Husband knows his Wife, the Father his Child, the Master his
Servant, the Creditor his D^btor, the subject his Prince, are so many Arguments
to prove that there is an all-wise Providence, that presides over and governs
the World; and to conceive otherwise, must needs be extremely irrational.

2. The Natural instincts, that God has put into unreasonable Creatures which
direct and move them, to do things very wise and rational, for their own
preservation, is another argument of Providence, Prove. 6.6, 7, 8. Go to the Ant
thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise: which having no guide, Overseer,
or Ruler provideth her meat in the Summer, and gathers her food in the
Harvest. Jer. 8.7. Yea the Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed times, and
the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming.

3. The suitable provision that God has made for all his Creatures, is another
argument to prove a Providence. He provideth food for all, Aves sine Patrimonio
vivunt. Minut. Fael.
and conveyeth it to them, in that quantity and Season which is fittest for
them. Psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their
meat in due season. Matthew. 6.26. Behold the Fowls of the Air: for they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into Barns; yet our Heavenly Father feeds
them. Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the Beast his food, and to the young Ravens
which cry.

4. It cannot consist with the infinite wisdom and justice of God, not to
preside over and govern the World which he has made. To conceive this great
ship of the World to be left without a Pilot to govern it, and all things here
below to be neglected, and suffered to run at random without any wise Agent to
superintend over them, and to order and regulate them, surely is very
irrational.

5. Gods manifest appearing sometimes in executing visible and remarkable
punishments on bold and notorious sinners: and rescuing from their malice pious
and good men, in answer to their prayers, is another argument of Providence,
and must needs force impartial men to say, Doubtless there is a God, that
rules, and judges in the Earth. The Histories of all ages bear Testimony to
this, so that I need not add any particular instances.

6. The restraining of the rage and power of Devils and infernal Spirits, and
such as are employed by them, is another great and convincing argument of
Divine Providence. These Fiends of darkness and perdition are acted with
extreme rage and fury against all that are good; and if God did not restrain
them they would quickly pull the World about our ears. We could never be secure
in our Houses, or abroad one moment for them.

7. Events and issues very often are not correspondent to the designs and
intents of the contrivers. As Joseph told his Brethren, Genesis 50.20. Ye thought
evil against me, but God meant it for good. Who could have thought that Haman
should have been a means of advancing Mordecai? And yet so it came to pass,
what ever the World thinks, the actions of men and their successes are under
the Regiment and guidance of the Divine Will and Providence, that invisibly
governs and overrules. Have we not often seen how in one moment a pitiful
small unexpected occurrence has broke in pieces a design laid with long
deliberation, with huge prospect and forecast of difficulties, and with great
reserves and preparations against all imaginable obstraites; I say one poor
unthought of accident, has on the sudden cracked and broke to shivers all this
long elaborated project. That sudden and unexpected discovery of the
long-elaborated Hellish Gund-powder Plot in our Nation, is a pregnant instance
of this; and many more might also be given.

8. The Miracles and extraordinary things that Sometimes happen in the World,
contrary to the course of Nature, loudly proclaim a Providence. It Is true, God
does seldom alter the regular course he has settled among his creatures. But
sometimes he does it, to acquaint the World with his Power and Prerogative,
lest otherwise the arrogance of men should question his Omnipotence, and be apt
to suspect he could not do it. Thus he made the Sun to stand still at the
prayer of Joshua. Thus he commanded the fire not to burn the Three Worthies
when thrown into the fiery Furnace. Thus he stopped the mouths of the Lions, that
they should not devour Daniel. Who can bind the hands of the Almighty or hinder
him from doing what he pleases, both in Heaven above and in the Earth beneath.

9. The horrors of Conscience that wicked men sometimes feel upon their
commission of very secret sins, is another argument of Providence. Psalm. 39.11.
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to
consume away like a Moth. God makes men's own Consciences oftentimes chastise
them for such secret s^ns as the World knows not of.

10. The exact fulfilling of what was foretold, promised or prophesied of in
the Scriptures is another great argument of Providence.

And thus much for proof both by Scripture and reason that there is a
Providence; I come now to the Third thing I propounded to consider, viz.

The extent of this Divine Providence. Under this head I shall show these two
things.

1. That the Providence of God extends to all his Creatures. 2. That in a more
special and singular manner it manifests it self for the good of his Church and
People.
1. The Providence of God reaches all his Creatures and all their actions. I
shall labor to prove this by an induction of particulars.

1. It reaches things casual, Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but
the whole disposal thereof is from the Lord. God is said to deliver him to a
man's hand whom we suppose to be killed by chance; compare Exodus 22.13. with
Deuteronomy. 19.4.5.

2. It reaches to things inanimate, viz. Natural Agents. The water rises to
that height that it drowns the Old World, when God commands it. The fire will
not burn the Three Worthies, if God forbid it, Daniel 3.25.

3. It reaches to Creatures that have only the lowest life, viz. Vegetables,
and Plants, How wisely has God ordered those things. Some Herbs he has made
good for food. Into others he has put excellent Medicinal virtues, and has
made them good for Physic. Some Flowers have glorious outsides, Solomon in
all his glory was not clothed like one of them. Others of them have rare
qualities, and virtues beneficial to mankind.

4. It reaches to Creatures that have only sense. Who can sufficiently admire
the wise Economy, of Bees, and Ants, and Silkworms? Flies, and Lice and
Frogs, the very corruption of the Earth, when they have received a commission
from God, are too strong an Army for Pharaoh a mighty Prince. When all Egypt
besides was pestered with Flies, the Land of Goshen (a little spot in the midst
of it) was not molested with any; no not with Flies, which cannot be kept out
of any place. What Walls, Rivers, or Armies can hinder their motion, or prevent
their entrance? And yet those active sprightly Creatures did not invade Goshen,
though they were round about it, when God forbade them.

5. The Providence of God reaches unto Angels. Good Angels he makes use of as
his instruments in the government of the World, and sends them abroad to serve
and minister for the good of his People. As for Devils and evil Angels, he has
them under restraint, so that they can do no more then he permits them. And the
curbing and restraining, such malicious Spirits is a mighty argument of Gods
Providential care over us.

6. It reaches unto men. That will evidently appear if we consider these things.

1. The first thing that speaks Gods Providence and Government over mankind is
his giving them Laws.

1. The Law of Nature which he gave them in their first Creation, which
directs them how to discern good from evil, truth from falsehood, right from
wrong. It Is true, by the fall of our first Parents these common and universal
principles are much weakened and darkened. Yet God has so ordered it by his
Creation at the first, and his provident care over man since, that those
principles are not, nor can be rased quite out of man's Soul, but there are
still some Natural motions of good and evil, of right and wrong; some rules of
right practice left in their minds, if they will attend to them.

2. He gave unto his people the Jews the moral Law on Mount Sinai which as to
the main is an epitome or abstract of the Law of Nature.

3. He does now in these Gospel times (as he promised) write his Law on the
hearts of his people and inclines them to observe it: That so they may not only
have a Law without them, but an inward living Law of holiness and purity within
their Souls. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

2. The second thing that speaks Gods Providence over man is his governing and
over ruling their inclinations and actions; and that both good and evil. Under
this head, I shall first show, how the Providence of God is exercised upon the
good inclinations and actions of men; and Secondly, How it is exercised about
sin and evil.

For the First of these observe these Rules.

1. God assists and co-operates with men in the doing of all good, Aristotle
does in his Ethics acknowl^dge that for a man to have a Soul virtuously
inclined is (...), the gift of God. Tu^ly in his Second Book, De Natura deorum,
says, Nemo vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam suit. And the Learned
among Christians say, Orsus bonae voluntatis sunt Deo. Voluntas tum libera est
quando per gratiam est liberata.
he works in him both to will and to do that which is good, Phil. 2.13. It Is
from God that men have any heart, or will, or power to do any thing pleasing in
his sight. But Gods cooperating with, and assisting man in the doing of good
is not in any thing more remarkable then in the coversion of a sinner. He
savingly inlightens the mind, he freely bows and inclines the will, he
circumcises the heart as we find, Deuteronomy. 30.6. he gives a new heart as it is,
Jer. 24.7. He takes away the heart of stone, and gives a heart of flesh, he
puts a new Spirit with them, as it is, Ezekiel. 11.29.

2. As to sin and evil, God neither is, nor possibly can be the Author or
Approver of it. Yet his Providence is exercised about it, as may appear by
these particulars.

1. He permits sin. Without his permission and sufferance it could not be in
the World. God is so good that he would never permit sin, but that being
Omnipotent he knows how to bring good out of it.

Now he may be said to permit sin in these respects, First, By way of Negation,
not giving grace to prevent it (which he is not bound to do being a Debtor to
no man) or by not giving a People softning means, or by denying his blessing on
the means, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Moses says of the hardened Israelites. Yet the Lord has
not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this
day. God is said to harden (says Austin) when he saftens not, and to blind when
he enlightns not. He does it not by imparting evil or wickedness, but by not
imparting grace.

2. By way of privation, by withdrawing (upon provocation) the restraining
grace before given. Time was when Pharaoh had a restraint upon him; and while
that lasted, there were no violent hands laid upon Moses or Aaron, by whose
ministry all the Plagues were brought upon him. But this is no sooner withdrawn
from him, but his cruelty vents it self and Moses is threatened with death if he
came again into his presence.

3. By presenting Objects which man's corruption makes a bad use of: Thus Psalm
78 from 27, to 31. The Israelities abused their Quails, (which God so
mercifully gave them) to the pampering of their lusts, and so brought his wrath
upon them.

4. By delivering them up to Satan, to be by him blinded and misled because
they refused to be guided by the good Spirit and word of God. Thus John 13.2.
We read that the Devil put it into Judas his heart to betray his Lord and
Master.

5. By delivering them up to their own lusts, Psalm. 81.11.12. God says, my
People would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. So I gave
them up unto their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels.

6. By way of punishment. One sin is very often the punishment of another. Thus
Pharaoh when he saw that the Rain, and Hail and the Thunders were ceased, he
sinned yet more and hardened his heart, he and his Servants, Exodus 9.34. And
Austin speaks very pertinently to this purpose, Expedit superbo, ut incidat in
peccatum. God often suffers a proud man to fall into a shameful sin, to punish
his pride, and to bring him to a sober sense of himself.

2. God limits sin and sets bounds to it. Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of men
shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath thou will restrain. Thus Genesis 31.42.
He withheld, Laban from his wicked purpose of hurting Jacob. He that sets
bounds to the Sea: sets bounds also to the sins of men.

3. He makes sin it self serve to his own glory, and so overrules it, that he
brings good out of it. Thus the unnatural usage which Joseph received from his
Brethren; God ordered to his high advancement and his Family's preservation.
Thus the Jews malice in persecuting the Disciples, and sending them out of
Jerusalem, (by Gods overruling) tended to the propagating, and dispersing of
the Gospel.

Having thus showed the extent of the Divine Providence to the several Beings
in the World, it remains now that I speak something of his special Providence
which he exercises in a more singular way over his Church and People. Which
will plainly appear if we consider these particulars.

1. Sometimes he hinders and prevents evil intended against them. And this he
does sometimes by weak means, sometimes by strange means, and sometimes without
means. See a remarkable instance of this 2 Chronicles. 14. from 9. to the 14. An
Army of a Thousand Thousand Aethiopians came out against Asa, and Verse the
11th. he cried unto the Lord saying, Lord it is nothing with thee to help
whether with many or with few: we have no power: help us O Lord our God, for we
trust in thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O Lord thou art
our God, let not man prevail against thee. So the Lord smote the Aethiopians
before Asa, and before Judah, and they were overthrown. Thus also 2 Chronicles, 20.
When the Children of Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir, came against Jeh^shaphat he
proclaimed a Fast and cried unto the Lord. Verse. 12. O our God, we have no
might against this great Company that comes against us, neither know we what
to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Then upon Jahaziel came the Spirit of the
Lord, and he said unto the King and the People, Be not afraid by reason of this
great Multitude; for the Battle is not yours, but Gods. To morrow go down
against them; you shall not need to fight in this Battle; set your selves,
stand ye still, and see the Salvation of the Lord. For the Lord will be with
you. And Jehoshaphat said unto the People, believe in the Lord, so shall ye be
established, believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. This done, the Lord
immediately sent a Spirit of division or strife among their enemies, whereby
those Nations falling out among themselves, destroyed one another, and sheathed
their Swords in one another bowels. See also to this purpose the whole 124
Psalm.

2. Sometimes he moderates and takes off the rage of Enemies, and makes them of
Enemies to become Friends. Thus when Esau had resolved to slay his Brother
Jacob, Genesis 27.4. Jacob wrastles that night with God in prayer. Chap. 32. Verse.
11, 24, 26, 28. And Chap. 33. Verse. 4. We find God had so changed the heart of
Esau, that instead of killing his Brother, he most lovingly embraces him, and
fell upon his neck and kissed him.

3. Sometimes he snares the wicked in the work of their own hands when they
have designed mischief against his People, Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known by the
Judgment he executes: The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. The
whole Book of Hester is a sufficient proof of this. And we read Job 5.12. That
he dissappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprises. Achitophel also is a remarkable instance of this, whose
counsel against David God turned in foolishness.

4. Sometimes he makes the wicked against their own will to fulfill his will.
See what God says to the Assyrian, Isai. 10.5, 6, 7. O Assyrian, the Rod of
mine anger, and the Staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him
against an Hypocritical Nation, and against the People of my wrath will I give
him a charge; to take the Spoil and to take the Prey, and to tread them down
like the mire of the Streets. Howbeit, he means not so, neither does his
heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and cut off Nations not a
few. Joseph's Brethren little thought when they so wretchedly sold him, they had
been advancing of him. But this is the Chemistry of Divine Providence to bring
good out of evil.

5. He usually converts the outward evils that befall his People to their
Spiritual good. Paul had a sad Messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, 2 Corinthians. 12.7. But this Messenger proved a means to prevent pride in him.
Wicked men are God Scullions (as one calls them) and employed by him to scour
his Children, and to brighten their graces. Physic though it be not good to
the Palate, yet it may be very good for the Patient. David found it so when he
cried out, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, before I was afflicted
I went astray, but now I have kept thy word, Psalm. 119.67, 68. And Isai. 27.9.
Says God, By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit to take away his sin.

6. And Lastly, God very often qualifies the outward troubles of his People
with inward comforts, and consolations. Though the outward man smart, yet God
can cause the Conscience to smile. Though the outward estate be peeled, yet he
can cheer the heart. Those Saints in the 11 of Heb. took joyfully the spoiling
of their goods, remembering they had in Heaven a better and more enduring
substance. Hear what the blessed Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5, ^2. Blessed be
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the
God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be
able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort whereby we our
selves are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation also abounds by Christ. For our rejoicing is this, the
Testimony of our Conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, b^t by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the
World, and more abundantly t^ ^^^-wards.

And that Gods Providenc^ is in so singular a manner, watchful over his Church
and Pe ple, may yet further appear if we consider these thi^^s.

1. They (...) in Covenant with him. He has taken them to hi^^^^^ ^or h^^
p^^ul^^^ People, he has formed them for himself, and (...) th^^r God, and that
comprehends all blessings in it, Jer. (...). And Ezekiel. 16.8. I entered into
Covenant with th^^e says (...) ^^d thou becamest mine.

2. He has pu^ (...) indearing relations toward them, viz. Of a Father, and
of a Husband, J^r. 31.9. I am a Father (says God) to Israel, Psalm. 103.13. As
a Father pu^^th his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. And Isai.
54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband.

3. He sets a high value upon them, as may appear by the Titles he gives them.
He calls them his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. And Zach. 2.8. The Apple of his eye; and
Psalm. 16.3. The Excellent of the Earth.

4. He has made many gracious promises to them, Heb. 13.5. He has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. And Psalm. 84.11. He has promised to be
a Sun and a Shield unto his People. He will give grace and glory, and no good
thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly.

And thus much of the Third particular I propounded to speak to, viz. The
extent of Divine Providence. I come now to the Fourth, viz. to consider.

4. What are the Objections that are usually made against this Doctrine.

1. Object. Some think that to assert that the Providence of God reaches to all
his Creatures, is a diminution or aviling of his Majesty and Greatness.
Therefore Epicurus, and some of the Ancients thought that God confined himself
to the highest Heavens, as to his Royal Palace; that his Majesty was too
Sublime and August, to mind the actions of inferior Creatures. And Aristotle
himself (it s^ems) was of this opinion, that the Providence of God reached no
further then the Orb of the Moon.

Answ. For answer to this we need only say, that those men spoke like Heathens
not knowing the Scriptures, which teach us that the Providence of God is so
particular, that the very hairs of our heads are said to be numbered, and that a
Sparrow does not fall to the ground without Gods knowledge, or permission.
Matthew. 10.29. And certainly it is no diminution to the infinite Majesty of God
to govern those Creatures, (how small and inferior soever) which he in his
infinite wisdom thought good to create and produce. Deo probrum non est ^i
utissim^ qu^q^e se^ ss, multo min^s regere.


2 Object. Another Objection against Providence is this, if the Providence of
God governs the World, Cur malis been, bonis male? Why fares it many times so
well with the wicked? Why do they flourish like a green Bay Tree? While those
that are righteous, and good men meet with hard measure, and are miserably
harassed and afflicted. This matter we find debated by Job, in Chap. 21.7. And
in Chap. 24.27. The Psalmist also insists on it in Psalm. 37.73. And the Prophet
Jerem. Chap. 12.1.

Answ. That this oftentimes so happens, is plain and undeniable. And the
Providence, Wisdom and Justice of God in this dispensation is many times a
mystery and riddle to the Children of men. But the difficulty is soon
dissolved, if we will but attentively consider these things, which we spoke
something to before, in answer to an Objection made against Gods Justice.

1. None are perfectly righteous here. Therefore even in the very best God may
find something for which justly to correct them.

2. God may love his Children with a great love even then when he does sorely
afflict them.

3. Though godliness have the promises of this life, and that which is to come,
1 Timothy 4.8. Yet this is to be understood with this limitation, so far for thas
to the infinite Wisdom of God seems fit, and good and convenient for his
People, and no further.

4. The prosperity of the wicked is but a seeming prosperity. It Is many times
really hurtful to them, Eccles. 5.13. I have seen Riches (says Solomon)
reserved for the hurt of the owners thereof. Yea not only for their own hurt,
but for the hurt of many others round about them.

5. The outward calamities of the People of God, (through his sanctifying of
them) tend to the prosperity of their Souls, to the increase of their graces,
and furtherance of their glory: It Is good for me (says David, Psalm. 119 71.)
that I have been afflicted.

6. Eternity is long enough to punish the wicked who most prospered in their
wickedness, and to reward the righteous who suffered most deeply for their
righteousness.

Having thus spoken of the Nature of Divine Providence and the extent of it,
and answered the Objections usually made against it, let us now consid^r what
improvement we ought to make of this Doctrine.

1. Let us all own and acknowledge and take notice of the Providence of God
actually working in the World. Let us not impute events, to chance, or fortune,
or fate; but labor to see and take notice of an all-wise and Sovereign
Providence, overruling, ordering, and disposing of all things here below. God
is King and Lord of the World, and does and will govern the Creatures he has
made.

2. Let us earnestly beg Gods Providential care over us, and humbly trust our
selves and our concernments to his disposal. Let us stir up and excite our
selves to depend on his Providence from such considerations as these,

1. There is no better way to obtain any good thing we desire, than by an
humble depending on God for it, and referring our selves to his holy will; no
surer way to miss any good thing we desire, than to be peremptory, and
inordinate in our desire of it.

2. Why should we not depend on God now, who took care of us in the Womb, and
when we hung on our Mothers Breasts, and has all our life hitherto taken care
of us?

3. How easily can God help us, in our greatest difficulties?

4. Why should we not depend on God for accessaries on whom we must depend for
the main?

3. It the Providence of God governs the World, let us not disquiet our selves
upon any of these accounts.

1. Because we are at present under many and various afflictions. For let us
consider, First, all afflictions have their commission from him, Job 5.6.
Affliction comes not out of the dust. It Is God that brings us and our
afflictions together; Secondly, He suits and proportions our afflictions. He
knows the strength of the Disease, and what Physic is necessary to remove it.
Successive afflictions are his c^urse of Physic to remove a stubborn malady;
Thirdly, He sanctifies afflictions to his Children and betters them by them,
and so they tend to their great advantage.

2. Let us not disquiet our selves in reference to our Posterity. We are apt to
be very thoughtfull, what will become of our Children which we shall leave
behind us. But let us consider though we must go hence, yet the Providence of
God never dies. Genesis 48.21. Behold I die (says Jacob to Joseph) but God shall
be with you, and bring you again to the Land of your Fathers. Let us commit our
Children to the care of that gracious Providence, which has watched over us,
for our good all our days.

3. Let us not disquiet our selves in reference to the Church of God. Let us
remember what our Savior has promised, viz. That the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against his Church, Matthew. 16.18.

4. Let us labor to get an interest in the Essential love and favor of this
God who governs the World by his Providence, if he be our reconciled Father in
Christ, we need not fear what Men or Devils can do unto us.

5. Let us study the promises, especially those that are made to assure us of
Gods caring for us: Such as Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together
for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose. See also Psalm. 84.11. And Heb. 13.5.

6. And lastly, let us reflect upon our former experiences of Gods merciful
care over us, and his gracious ordering our affairs and concerns for us when we
humbly trusted in him; and thereby let us encourage our selves to trust in him
with a Holy confidence for time to come.

CHAP. II. Of Man.
SECT. I. Of the happy state wherein Man was created.
Maker of Heaven and Earth,
COncerning Man we are to consider Three things.

1. The happy estate in which he was created. 2. His fall. 3. The way and means
of his recovery.
1. The happy estate in which he was created. This I shall labor to clear in
several Propositions.

1. God made man at first after his own Image. The Image of God in man
consisted principally in these Three things.

1. In the Nature of man's Soul, which being a Spirit represents God who is a
Spirit. And this I may call his Natural Image.

2. In the gracious qualities wherewith it was at first endued, viz. Knowledge,
Holiness, Righteousness; which I may call his moral Image: So that man's
Original moral rectitude may be understood to consist in these particulars.

1. In the perfect illumination of his mind, whereby he understood the Will and
Law of God, and whatever concerned his duty.

2. In the ready compliance of his heart and will therewith.

3. In the obedient subordination of his sensitive Appetite, and his inferior
faculties to the guidance of his enlightened mind, and holy will. And every part
of this Original righteousness was con-natural and con-created with the Nature
of man, and a qualification which fitted and prepared him for communion with
his Creator.

3. In the Dominion God gave him over the Creatures here below. Genesis 1.26 Psalm.
8.6, 7, 8. Thou mad^st him to have Do^inion over the works of thy hands; thou
h^^t put all things under his feet, all Sheep and Oxen, ye^ ^^d the B^^ts of
the Fi^ld, the Fowl ^f the Air, and the fish of the Sea, etc.

Further his b^dy was so exactly framed at first as to be a habitation for so
excellent a S^ul, a fit instrument for its Op^^ions; and in it there were some
traces of the Divine Majesty, (...) ^orth as a body is capable of representing
the Sove^aign of the (...), viz. In the Majesty and comeliness of man's face and
(...) ^^^nance. Therefore God says, He that sheds man's blood by man (...) blood
be shed. For in the Image of God created be him, Ge^. 9.^.

Having thus showed how God made man after his own Image, I come now Secondly
to show what Laws he gave him.

The Law given to Adam in innocence was t^^fold.

1. Natural, which was written or imprinted upon his Soul in his first
Creation.

2. Positive, given (as is probable) by some external discovery or revelation,
and imposed on man to try whether he would be obedient to his Creator, or no.

The Law of Nature as subjected in man's mind, consists in certain practical
Notions, or Rules about good and evil, right and wrong, true and false, just
and unjust, honest and dishonest. And man's will was disposed and inclined to
conform to the Dictates of this Law.

So that these Natural Laws (by which Man was to be governed, and which were at
first stamped on his Soul,) were such as were exceeding agreeable to his
Reason, and suitable to the inclinations of his will, and not at all
contradicted or opposed by any principle within him, which might make him
doubtful about his duty, or disincline him to the performance of it. So that
Adam in innocence was endued with sufficient ability to conform to the whole
Law of God, both Natural and Positive. He was furnished with particular
Principles inclining him to comply with whatsoever the Law of Nature
prescribed, and with a general Principle disposing him to yield obedience to
whatsoever any positive Law, as the declared will of God, should injoin,

Thus much of the Law of Nature, I come now to show what positive Law God gave
Adam in innocence.

Of the Covenant of Works.
God having placed our first Parents in Paradise, besides the Law of Nature,
which he wrote on their hearts, he gave them also a positive command to assert
his right and dominion over them as their Creator, that they might be obliged
to do something because it was their Creators will, as well as other things,
because they appeared in their own Nature reasonable and fit to be done.
Somethings God commands because they are in themselves and in their own Nature
just and fit to be done, and other things are therefore fit to be done because
God commands them. God therefore gave Adam a positive Law as a test or proof of
his obedience, and to try him how he would behave himself toward his Maker,
Genesis 2.16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every Tree of the
Garden thou may freely eat: but of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall not eat of it, for in the day that thou eatest thereof of thou shall
surely die.

In these words is contained the Covenant that God made with man at first and
which is commonly called the Covenant of Works, or Covenant of Nature, being
made with man in the time of his innocent Nature. And this is
contradistinguished to the Covenant of Grace, (which was made with man after
the Fall) of which we shall speak more afterward.

Now a Covenant between God and man is not to be considered as between man and
man, where consent is mutually requisite. For man was bound to accept the terms
God offered him, being in themselves exceeding reasonable. God is an absolute
Lord, and has full power in his hands to give and impose what Laws he pleases
on his Creatures, and to require what duties, and impose what conditions he
sees good, and man is bound to accept, and submit unto the Law or Covenant so
propounded, and imposed. And in a dutiful performance of the conditions on his
part required, he may expect the benefits promised.

Here therefore it will be requisite,

1. To show that this was a Covenant.

2. To show the Nature of it.

Now that the command included in a Covenant may appear.

1. Because God promises Adam life if he obey. As if he should have said, Till
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely live. So much must needs be
included.

2. He threatens him with death if he disobeyed. In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely dye.

3. We find our first Parents did so understand it, by Eve's words to the
Serpent, Genesis 3.2, 3. The woman said unto the Serpent, We may eat of the fruit
of the Trees in the Garden. But of the fruit of the Tree which is in the midst
of the Garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch
it, lest ye die.

4. He appointed the Tree of life as a Sacrament Erat homini in lignis aliis
alimentum, in hoc v^ro Sacramentum, Aug. de Genesis
or Symbol of this Covenant, Genesis 2.9. Which Tree did signify to them, that
they should always enjoy that happy estate in which they were made, upon
condition of their obedience, viz. A most blessed life, free from all misery,
and flowing with all manner of good things, that were agreeable to the Soul and
Body of man in that perfect state.

Having thus showed that those words, Genesis 2.16, 17. contained a Covenant, we
come now to consider,

1. The Nature and Tenor of this Covenant. And for the clearing of that let us
observe these particulars.

1. The great honor that God put upon man by entering into Covenant with him.
It Is a great honor to a mean man to have a King enter into Covenant with him.
How much greater honor is it unto Man to have the great God of Heaven and
Earth to enter into Covenant with him?

2. Observe the great goodness of God in laying upon man no harder a command,
then the forbearing of one Tree, which he must needs judge easy and reasonable.

3. Ob^erve Man's great advantage by this Covenant. Before this, God had not
engaged himself to man to continue him in that happy estate in which he had
made him. Nothing hindered but he might have annihilated him. But by this
Covenant God freely bound himself, and gave man a right to expect the things
promised in this Covenant. God now promises to continue man's life and
happiness, if man continued his obedience.

4. Under this Covenant man was furnished with sufficient ability to stand, but
was left in the hand of his own counsel. He was left in a mutable state; he
might stand, or he might fall.

5. Observe Gods great care of man, in arming his mutable will against falling
both by promises and threatenings. He encourages him to obedience by the reward
promised; he deters him from disobedience by the danger threatened, What greater
good could man expect than what was here promised? What greater evil could he
fear than what was here threatened?

6. This Covenant required on man's part perfect personal and perpetual
obedience as the condition of it. It required perfect obedience to the moral
Law stamped on man's heart, and to this p^sitive precept which God had given
him. A curse and death was to be the w^ges of the least transgression thereof.
But if he were obedient he might expect a reward answerable to his works, and
thereupon it was called a Covenant of works.

7. Under the Coven^^t man had no need of a Mediator. Till man had by sin mad^
God his enemy he needed no Mediator to mediate or intercede for him.

8. This Covenant, in case of disobedience, afforded man no relief, no not upon
his repentance. And thus the case stood with man in the state of his Innoc^nce.

Of Ma^s fa^^.
We come now to the second thing I propounded to treat of concerning man, and
that is his fall from his Original happiness, by disobeying the precept and
command of God, and forfeiting the privileges of the Covenant contained in it,
Genesis 3. from 1. to 7. Now the Serpent was m^re subtle than any Beast of the
field which the Lord God had made, and he said unto the woman, Yea, has God
said, Ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? And the Woman said unto the
Serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the Trees of the Garden: But of the fruit
of the Tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, Ye shall not
eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. And the Serpent said unto
the Woman, ye shall not surely die. For God does know, that in the day ye eat
thereof, then your eyes shall be opened: and ye shall be as gods, knowing good
and evil. And when the woman saw that the Tree was good for food, and that it
was pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise; she took
of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unt^ her Huusband with her,
and he did eat. And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked: and they sewed Fig Leaves together and made themselves Aprons. Romans
5.12, 19. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin,
and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous.

And that I may speak more distinctly of the matter; I shall inquire in to
these particulars.

1. Who were the first sinners among men, and by whom sin entered into the
World.

2. What was the first sin.

3. What were the causes and occasions of Adams first transgression.

4. What were the sad effects and consequents of this sin and breach of the
Covenant. First, Upon our first Parents. Secondly, Upon us, their Posterity.

1. We shall inquire who were the first sinners among men, and by whom sin
entered into the World.

Adam and Eve, the first Man and first Woman, were certainly (among men) the
first transgressors, as may appear by those places before cited, Genesis 3. And
Rom 5.12. And the Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 2.14. Adam was not deceived (that
is, First, and by the Devil and so as to draw Eve into transgression) but the
woman being deceived was first Th^^gh Eve was first in the trangression yet
Adam was the chief, and therefore Adam is sometimes taken collectively both for
man and woman.
in the transgression, and drew Adam into it, Hosea 6.7. God says of the
unfaithful Israelites; They like Adam have transgressed the Covenant. And 2
Cor. 11.3. We read that the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, viz. To
eat of the forbidden fruit, and she persuaded Adam to eat also. It therefore we
trace corruption and depravation to the wellhead, we shall find we cannot stay
any where till we come to the first Man, the common Parent and Root of us all.
And it is very evident that the first Fountain of mankind was corrupted, seeing
all the streams are so.

2. Let us consider what was the first sin?

God made our first Parents holy and happy; and whilst they performed their
duty, they could not but be happy. But the Devil having fallen from God himself
(as we have seen before Sect 3.) and envying our first Parents their present
happiness, he sets upon Eve to draw her from her obedience to God. And the
temptation he spread before her is this, you shall be as God. He pretends to
acquaint her with a way whereby they might raise themselves to a higher
condition than that wherein they were at present. They should be (...) like God
himself, or like Angels; they should be lifted up to a higher estate than now
they enjoyed. And this happiness (he tells them) they might acquire by eating
of that Tree in the midst of the Garden which God had forbidden them; which he
intimates would be so far from procuring death or misery to a them, that it had
a contrary virtue in it, namely, to raise them to higher state of happiness
than now they enjoyed. Eve being caught by this subtle device, began to believe
this Serpent (who thus proves himself a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning)
and to d^ believe God, and to doubt the truth of his threatening and
commination, who Genesis 2.17 had told Adam, Of that Tree thou shall not eat, for
in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Ev^ being thus won upon
by the D^vils temptation, did venture to e^t of this sorbidden fruit, and dre^
Adam to eat also. So that infi^elity and doubting of the truth of Gods word and
threatenings (t^rough the Devils insinuation) and pride and affection of an
h^gher estate, seem to be the first miscarriages and sins of Adam and Eve. O
the cursed Nature of pride and unbelief! How soon did these ^^ns enter into the
very Angels! How soon did they undo our first Parents!

3. Let us inq^ire what were the causes and occasions of Adams sin?

1. God was not. The pure and holy Nature of God could not be the Original of
man's sin. The Holy God cannot be the cause of any unholiness. God indeed
permitted man to fall, seeing he knew how to bring good out of it. But he
inclined him not to it.

2. Neither external Objects, nor the temptations of Satan, could nec^ssitate
the will of man to sin. The Devil might persuade but could not force.

3. The persuading cause in respect of Eve was Satan in the form of a Serpent.
The Devil opened the Serpents mouth and caused it to speak with man's voice, as
an Angel opened the mouth of Balaams Ass, Numb. 22.28. Now the Serpents cunning
may appear in this.

1. He first assaults the Woman, not the Man. 2. He equivocates about knowing
good and evil, which he represents to her as a state of perfection. Whereas the
forbidden Tree was called the Tree of knowledge because Adam if he did eat
thereof should experimentally know to his sorrow, from how much good he had
fallen and how much evil he had brought upon himself. 3. He uses Eve, (a
Companion newly made for Adam, and surely very dear to him) to draw in her
Husband.
4. Man being not created at first immutably Holy, but defectible, and sin
being only a defect, a person that was mutable and defectibly Holy, as Adam
was, might fall into sin. 'Twas no strange thing that Man should be created
defectible, and being a defectible and mutable Creature that he should fall. It
was most congruous that God having made such a Creature as Man (furnished with
such powers, and capable of being governed by a Law, and of being moved by
promises and threats) should for some time hold him in a state of trial,
unconfirmed, that it might be seen how he would behave himself toward his
Creator, and that he should be rewardable, or punishable accordingly, in a
state that should be everlasting and unchangeable. But if any shall further
inquire into the manner of this first defection, it is most probable there was
in the instant of temptation a suspension of the understanding's Act (not only
as previous to the sin, but as a part of it) and thereupon a sudden
precipitation of Will, as Estius determins. But let us not too curiously
inquire into this matter. It Is wholesome counsel that one gives, that we should
labor rather to get sin out of our Souls, than trouble our selves how it came
in. For as a man that falls into a deep Ditch or Pond ('it is Austin's
similitude) does not lie there considering how he fell in, but labors speedily
to get out; so it should be with us in this case.

4. Let us consider what were the sad effects and consequents of this sin and
breach of Gods Covenant. First, Upon our first Parents. Secondly, Upon us their
Posterity.

1. Our First Parents were hereby deprived of their Original Righteousness, and
Communion with God.

2. They became depraved and corrupted, inclined to evil, and indisposed to
good.

3. They brought themselves under an estate of wrath, were driven out of
Paradise and were made liable to death, both Temporal and Eternal. And though
they were reprived for the present from suffering the penalty the Law requires;
yet,

1. Sorrows were inflicted on the Woman in Childbearing. Under which we may
comprehend her sorrows in breeding, bearing, bringing-forth, and bringing up
her Children.

2. Sorrow also was inflicted upon the Man, Genesis 3.17.18. Cursed is the ground
for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns
and Thistles shall it bring forth. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy
bread, etc.

3. His Dominion over the Creatures was much impaired.

4. He was rendered utterly unable to help out of this miserable estate.

2. Let us consider the sad effects of Adams fall in reference to us.

1. We were involved in the guilt of his first transgression. For the Covenant
was not made with Adam only but with all mankind who where seminally or
radically in him. We were not indeed then personally in him, (for we were not
then Natural Persons) but we were in him seminally and virtually. And God may
justly reck^n us to have been seminally in him, because our Essence was to be
deriv^d from him. And as when a man is guilty, no part of him is innocent, so
we were guilty of ^dams first sin, so far forth as we were parts of him, and in
him. As Levi is said to have paid Tithes in Abraham, because he was in the
Loins of his Father Abraham, when Melchizedech met him, Heb. 7.9, 10. though he
was born some Generations after him; on the same groun^ it may well be inferred
that all Adams posterity did eat of the forbidden fruit in him, because they
were all at that time in his Loins. And the Apostle speaks to the same purpose,
Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the World, etc. In whom E^^ in q^^, h^^
viro, non mu^ie^e; q^^d vir sit praecipuu^ a^^^or posteritatis, tam ^si m^lio
p^i^^est la^sa. ^raim.
all have sinned. If a Father by Treason forfeit his Estate, no wonder if his
Children de deprived of it.

2. We were hereby d^prived of Original Righteousness, Romans 3.23. All have
sinned, (that is in Adam) and so come short of the glory of God; that is, are
deprived of his glorious Image which in man's first creation was stamped upon
him. By reason of that first sin of Adams (whereof all are guilty) want of
Original righteousness and depravation of Nature are come upon us as a just
punishment of Adams transgression, and are the sad consequents of it. Therefore
some say that God now deprives Souls of Original Righteousness, Non qua
Creator, sed qua Judex.

3. Instead of Original Righteousness a corrupt disposition and vitiosity of
Nature was imparted to all their Posterity descending from them by ordinary
Generation. The Soul is now propense to evil, because it wants that rectitude
that should regulate it. As sickness, besides the depriving us of health,
affects our bodies with corrupt humors. Mr. Cotton on Eccles. 11 Verse. 5, holds
that God forms the Soul of man of the Spirituous part of the seed of the
Parents, and so Original corruption is naturally propagated from the Parents to
the Children. This corrupt disposition is called, The old Man. Romans 6.6. The
sin dwelling with us. Romans 7.17. It is called Flesh as opposite to grace. Romans
7.18. The Law of the Members. Romans 7.23. Body of sin. Romans 6.6. The body of
death. Romans 7.24. Lastly, A man's own lust, James 1.14. In which place by the
next words following it is plainly distingui^hed from actual sin, as being
expr^sly affirmed to be the procreant cause of it. So that by this Original
corruption all our Faculties are depraved.

1. Our Minds blinded. 2. Our Wills rendered averse to that which is good. 3.
Our Memories unfaithful to retain what is good, but too tenacious of evil. 4.
Our Consciences defiled. 5. Our Affections disordered.
These are some of the sad Consequents of Adams First transgression.

4. We are cast under the wrath and curse of God. Besides the effects of this
wrath and curse upon our Souls (of which before) our bodies are now liable to
diseases and deformities, and all our enjoyments and every condition of our
lives is subject to a curse. And which is most deplorable, we are liable by
reason of our sins to Eternal wrath and misery.

5. We are hereby rendered utter unable to help our selves, Romans 5.6. The Law
exacts perfect and perpetual obedience under a curse. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them. Now here observe Two things.

1. What the Scripture speaks concerning man's Impotency, and inability to help
himself out of this miserable condition wherein he is by Nature.

1. He is said to be mere darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness (says
the Apostle to the Converted Ephesians) but now ye are light in the Lord: And 1
Cor. 2.14. But the Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God:
For they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

2. To have a heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36.26.

3. To be enthralled under the Dominion of sin and Satan. Acts 26.18.

4. To be dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.5.

5. To be without strength in Spiritual things, Romans 5.6. and unable to come up
to the obedience the Law requires of us.

6. Man's carnal mind is said to be enmity against God, Romans 8.7. For it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, till it be effectually
changed.

Secondly, Observe by what terms the Scripture expresses man's recovery out of
this sad estate.

1. It Is called Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Joh. 3.3, 5.

2. A Spiritual Resurrection. A quickening and raising from the death of sin to
the life of grace, Joh. 5 24, 25. Ephesians. 2.1.

3. A new Creation, and Gods own Workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. By all which it may
appear that though man's misery be from himself, yet his help is only from the
free grace of God.

It remains now that we inquire what use we are to make of this Doctrine of our
Fall in Adam.

1. This should humble us for our Original Apostasy from God; the Apostasy of
our Head.

2. We should take heed of imitating our first Parents in their disobedience
and Apostasy. Pride undid them, and undid the Angels that fell; let us take
heed of falling into the condemnation of the Devils, 1 Timothy 3.6. Therefore our
blessed Savior who came to undo the works of the Devil, comes in the lowest
humility imaginable, even in the form of a Servant.

3. A Third instruction we may gather from the consideration of the instrument
of our first Parents disobedience. The Devil having Apostatized himself from
God, was restless till he had drawn our First Parents into the like Apostasy
and Rebellion. While we live let us take heed of the Company of Apostates, and
such as are fallen off from God and the practice and profession of true Piety.

4. If our first Parents fell from God by disobedience in Paradise, how should
we tremble that walk in a corrupt World, and carry corrupt hearts about us? How
ought we to cease from trusting in our selves, and to put all our trust and
confidence in God. If the Devil prevailed over Adam, how much more easily may
he prevail over us? If he could deceive by a Serpent, how much more easily may
he deceive, when he uses men for his instruments that are like our selves. And
this is further to be observed, that the more godly any are, the more will the
Devil labor to foil them. For if he can foil one of them, he blurs their
profession, and by such a scandal makes others shy of it. Oh do you not see
(will the World then say) what kind of Saints these are? They are all such.
Saints in profession, but Hypocrites at the heart. And thus by the falls of
Professors the Devil mightily advances his own Kingdom.

5. Seeing we were all involved in the guilt of our first Parents disobedience
and seeing we have received from them by our immediate Parents a corrupt and
depraved Nature; let us consider that this is no estate to be rested in. If we
rest, and abide in our natural and corrupt estate; let us remember that the
wrath of God abides on us. Oh let us think seriously on this, and lay it to
heart. Joh. 3.3. Says our Savior, Except a man be born again he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. If death seize thee before thou art regenerate and born
again, better thou had never been born. It Is not enough (believe it) to be a
civil honest man or woman, to live neighbourly and friendly, (though that is in
it self indeed very commendable) but I say, that is not enough to secure our
Souls against the Justice of God. By Nature we are all Children of wrath,
bondslaves of Satan; and a great change must pass upon us, if ever we intend
to come to the Kingdom of God.

6. Let all Parents and Masters of Families labor to convince those under
their charge of their miserable condition by Nature, and let them endeavor
faithfully to acquaint them with the way and means how they may escape out of
it. Let them show them that seeing they are undone by the First Adam, they must
labor to recover themselves by the Second.

7. Seeing Christ has done so much to redeem us; let us consider how greatly
our Damnation will be aggravated if we neglect the great Salvation tendered by
him in the Gospel.

I come now to the Third thing to be considered concerning man, and that is,

3. The way and means of his recovery by Christ, Man by his fall having made
himself incapable of life by this first Covenant, viz. The Covenant of Works,
it pleased the Lord to make a Second Covenant with him, namely the Covenant of
Grace, Of the Covenant of Grace.
wherein he freely offers unto sinners life and Salvation by Jesus Christ,
requiring they should repent of their sins and believe in him that they may be
saved.

In treating of this Covenant that I may proceed more methodically, I shall

1. Compare these two Covenants, [viz. of works, and grace] together, and show
wherein they agree, and wherein they differ.

2. I shall open more particularly the Nature of the Covenant of Grace. First I
shall show wherein they agree.

1. They agree in the Author. God is the Author of them both.

2. They agree in the parties concerned. God and men, are the Parties concerned
in both Covenants.

3. They agree in this, that in both there is a promise of life and blessedness.

4. In both Covenants there is a condition required on our parts for the
obtaining the blessedness promised. Neither of the Covenants promise life and
blessedness absolutely whether we obey or no, whether we believe or no, but
under the condition of Obedience and Faith.

5. B th Covenants require a perfect Righteousness of us, if we intend to
obtain the blessedness promised. No blessedness is promised in either Covenant
but upon condition of bringing in a perfect Righte^usness, either of our own or
another. And these are the things wherein they agree. In the next place let us
consider wherein they d^ffer.

1. They differ in the condition required. One requires Works, the other Faith.
The one says do this and live. The other, believe in the Lord Jesus and thou
shall be saved, Acts 16.31.

In the Covenant of Works there was indeed an act of Faith required, viz. that
God would give the blessed life promised upon man's performance of his duty and
obedience, but it was not such a Faith as is required in the Covenant of Grace,
which is the receiving and apprehending and trusting our Souls on the
righteousness which is wrought for us by the active and passive obedience of
Christ. The ^ovenant of Grace also requires Works. For the Grace of God that
brings Salvation teaches us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live Righteously, Soberly and Godlily in this present world, etc. And Christ
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, Zeal us of good works, Tit. 2.11, 12, 14. But it
does not require works from the same principle that the Covenant of Works does.
That requires works to be performed by our own strength and ability received at
our creation, whereby we were sufficiently enabled to do the things required of
us. But the Covenant of Grace requires works to be done by the assistance of
the Spirit of Christ. Phi^. 4.13. I can do all things (says the Apostle)
through Christ that strengthens me. Therefore the obedience of the Gospel is
called the obedience of Faith. Romans 16.26. as following Faith and springing
from it. Repentance and Faith are not so in man's power now as Obedience was
under the Covenant of Works. And secondly, it does not require works for the
same end. For the Covenant of Works requires works as the way and means of our
standing right before God. But the Covenant of Grace does not require works as
the matter of our Righteousness and Justification before God, but that thereby
we should glorify God in this World, be fitted for Heaven, and should evidence
and testify our renewed nature.

2. In the Covenant of Works there was no Mediator. But in the Covenant of
Grace there is. Therefore the one is called Foedus amicitiae, the other Foedus
misericordiae.

3. One sin broke the Covenant of Works, but in the Covenant of Grace there is
pardon obtainable for multiplied transgressions, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked man
forsake his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon.

4. The Covenant of Works gave unto man some occasion as it were to glory, if
he had stood. But the Covenant of Grace cuts off from Man all pretense to glory
in himself, and engages him to give all the glory entirely unto God. So says
the Apostle, Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? of
Works. Nay: But by the Law of Faith. And 1 Cor. 1.31. The Apostle tells us
Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. He
that glories let him glory in the Lord. So Ephesians. 2.9. By grace are ye saved,
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of Works
lest any man should boast. Having thus showed the agreement and difference
between these two Covenants.

I come now to speak more particularly of the Covenant of Grace. Concerning
which let us observe these things.

1. The Covenant of Grace was for substance one and the same in all ages of the
Church, though diversely administered before, and after the coming of Christ.
From Adam to Noah, from Noah to Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to
David, and so on from David to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the World,
the Covenant of Grace has been one and the same, without change or alteration.
Yet it was administered in a different manner under the Old and New Testament
and thence it had the denomination of Old and New Covenant. Yet both did agree
in many things, As

Of the old administration of the Covenant of Grace and of the new.
1. They both lead to one and the same Mediator, by and through whom the
blessings promised are to be expected; Christ at his Resurrection raised up
(together with himself) many of the Saints who died under the former Covenant
as we read, Mat. 27.52. Whereby he showed that the benefit of his Mediation,
Death and Resurrection did belong to them under the old Covenant as well as to
us under the new. But some will perhaps say that Christ is called the Mediator
of the New Testament. Heb. 9.15. Answ. He is so in respect of actual and
personal confirmation of it by his own blood, which was not done in the old
Covenant. But he was Mediator of the old Covenant as may appear by the types
that did prefigure him, and in respect of the virtue and efficacy of his blood
which was to be shed, which did take away the sins committed under the old
Covenant as to them that truly believed in him. Hereunto agrees that in Heb.
13.8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, that is, as to
the virtue of his death.

2. The same condition is required under both administrations, namely
Repentance and Faith in the Messiah. It Is true, many of the Jews under the old
Covenant sought Righteousness by the works of the Law, and not by Faith in the
Messiah, but this was their error and sin. It was not the true Doctrine of that
Covenant.

3. Under both there was the same Law and Rule of Life to walk by, viz. the
Moral Law. Jam. 28. This Law is called (...), a Royal or a Kingly Law, because
it has a Kingly and authoritative power over all Mankind.

4. They both propound the same Salvation. God would not have called himself
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob if they had not been saved. Neither would
the place of Rest have been called Abraham's bosom, if Abraham himself had not
had part in that place of Rest. But some will object, Heb. 8.8 9. Where it is
said, the New Covenant is not as the Old. I answer, We must distinguish betwixt
the substance of the Covenant and the manner of its dispensation. In respect of
the dispensation, the new is not as the old though it be as to substance. As
Rebecca veiled, and unvailed was the same woman, and yet not the same. The same
in person, not the same in habit and attire. That which brought the blessing to
Abraham was this, that he believed on that seed, which was to spring from him,
looking for Righteousness and Life by him. So then the old Covenant spoken of
in the old testament and the new, which is now published in the Gospel, are for
substance one and the same without any essential difference between them. But
though they thus agreed, yet in many things they differed. As particularly.

1. The old administration of the Covenant of Grace was more burdensome, the
new is more easy, this the Apostle plainly intimates, Acts 15.10. Now
therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which
neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear. And Gal. 4.3. Even so we, when we
were children, were in bondage under the elements of the World. There were
required under the old Covenant, Circumcision, costly Sacrifices and Oblations,
tedious journeys to Jerusalem, at the three solemn feasts, restraint from many
liberties which we enjoy under the new.

2. The one was more dark, the other is more clear. Eternal life was not so
clearly discovered in the old Testament as it is in the new, 2 Timothy 1.10. Yea
Christ himself and his offices, and benefits were then but darkly revealed.
Hence the Gospel is called the revelation of the mystery kept secret since the
World began, Romans 16.25. not that it was absolutely hid or kept secret, but
comparatively in respect of the more clear and plain discovery of it afforded
to us in these days. Hence that of our Savior to his Disciples, Matthew. 13.16,
17. Blessed are your eyes for they see; and your ears, for they hear, for
verily I say unto you that many Prophets and Righteous men have desired to see
those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things
which ye hear and have not heard them. It was meet that the glory of a clearer
discovery of eternal life should be reserved to Christ himself. Now the veil is
done away.

3. A less forcible influence and efficacy accompanied the old administration
than does the new. The spirit of Christ is now poured forth more abundantly
since his Ascension, and a more mighty operation of the Spirit accompanies the
ministry of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.6.

4. A more servile spirit acted in those who were under the old Administration
they being drawn generally more by the terrors of the Law, than by the promises
of Grace.

5. In respect of extent, they much differ. For the old was revealed but to few
in comparison, viz. to the Jews and their Proselytes, whereas the grace of the
Gospel is held forth to all Nations.

6. The old Covenant was to last but for a time, viz. till the time of
reformation. Heb. 9.10. but the new is to last unto the end of the world, and
shall never wax old or wear away.

7. They differ in respect of their Sacraments. Circumcision and the Passover
which were the chief Sacraments under the old Administration were bloody
Sacraments, for Christ's blood was then to be shed. But under the new, our
Sacraments are unbloody, for Christ's blood is shed.

8. They differ as to the manner of their ratification. The old was ratified by
the blood of the Levitical Sacrifices, the new by the blood of the Son of God.

Having thus spoken of the Covenant of Grace in the general, and of the old and
new dispensation thereof in particular, let us now consider what use we are to
make of this Doctrine.

1. Let us bless God for making this Covenant with fallen Man. Let us consider
the freeness of it. There was nothing in us but our misery to move him to it.
And he made no such Covenant with the Angels that fell. 2. Let us consider the
sureness of it; God has confirmed it. 1. by his word and promise, 2. by his
oath. 3. by his sea. It Is indeed called sometimes a Covenant, and sometimes a
Testament. A Covenant with reference to God the Father who has made this
gracious Covenant with the children of men, and in it has promised many great
privileges and blessings unto them that perform the conditions therein
required. He promises in this Covenant.

1. That He will be our God, Heb. 8.10. And that is a very large, and
comprehensive promise 2. That He will forgive all our sins. And therefore when
God showed mercy to his people of Israel, He is said to have remembered his
Covenant, Exodus 2.24. And the Saints of old did use in their approaches to God
to plead this Covenant and to ground their Faith and Hope on it. Psalm. 74.20.
Jer. 14.21. 3. That He will renew and sanctify our natures, and write his Law
upon our hearts. 4. That He will put his fear into our hearts that we shall not
depart from him. Jer. 32.40. and so will preserve us by his grace and power
from total and final Apostasy. 5. That no outward thing that He sees good for
us, shall be wanting to us. 6. That He will give us Eternal glory in the other
life.
And as it is called a Covenant with reference to ^od, so it is called a
Testament with reference to Christ, who by his blood and death confirmed it,
and as a Testator bequeathed life and salvation to all penitent Believers; He
having all power and auth^rity given him both in Heaven and Earth. Mat. 28.18.

2. Let us bless God that we were born under the best dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace. It Is an unvaluable mercy to be born under the new Covenant
or Gospel dispensation. This is called a bettter Covenant, as being established
on better promises, Heb. 8.6. viz. more spiritual, more clear, and more
extensive. The old was a ministration of the letter, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. It
literally declared what was to be done, but comparatively there was little
spiritual ability afforded for the performing of the things enjoined; I say
comparatively the old had but a weak operation in respect of the new. Not that
the old had no Spiritual efficacy; For many under it were eminent in Grace, as
Abraham, Moses, Josiah, Hezekiah, etc. but the more plentiful effusion of the
Spirit was reserved till Christ's Ascension.

3. As ever we expect to enjoy the privileges and benefits of the Covenant of
Grace, let us make conscience to perform the conditions therein required, which
are these.

1. Repentance, which is a Grace necessary to prepare us to receive Christ.

2. Faith in Christ. We cannot become the Children of God, but by Faith in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26.

3. Obedience which is a grace necessary to enable us to walk answerably to
this holy Covenant, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to
love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul? To keep the Commandments of the Lord and his Statutes which I command
thee this day for thy good.

CHAP. III. Of the Mediator between God and Man.
SECT. I. Of the Titles of the Mediator. I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord.

JEsus Christ the only Son of God is the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace.
Concerning whom we shall inquire 1. What his Titles are by which he is called.
The Titles given him in the ancient Creed are four. Jesus, Christ, the only Son
of God, our Lord; of all which I shall speak in order.

1. Jesus; Jesus.
which signifies a Savior. God by an Angel gave him that name, Matthew. 1.21. He
was designed by God the Father to perform for the Children of Men whatsoever is
implied in his name. Jesus denotes the work and business for which he came into
the World. The Angel told the Shepherds, Luke 2.11. unto you is born this day
in the City of David a Savior, who is Christ the Lord, so 1 Timothy 1.15. This is
a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into
the World to save Sinners, and here let us consider how Jesus is a Savior, and
why truly and properly so called. This will more particularly appear, if we
consider the great evils he saves us from, and the great benefits he has
purchased for us.

1. He saves us from the guilt of sin. By his exact Obedience to the Law, and
by his Sufferings and Passion he has made satisfaction to the Justice of God
for our sins. He has trod the Winepress of his Fathers Wrath for us. Rev.
19.15. He has born our sins in his own body on the tree. 1 Pet. 2.24.

2. From the dominion of sin, we have a promise, Romans 6.14. that sin shall not
have dominion over us, because we are not under the Law as a Covenant of Works
exacting perfect obedience, and ministering no strength to perform it; but under
a Covenant of Grace in Christ which ministers strength to resist sin and
overcome it. So Tit. 2.14. The Apostle tells us, that Christ gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works.

3. From Satan. He rescues us, 1. from his power and dominion. The Seed of the
woman, Genesis 3.15. destroys the power of the old Serpent the Devil. And
therefore the Apostle tells us, Acts 26.18. that he was sent to preach the
Gospel to the Gentiles that thereby he might open their eyes, and turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified. 2.
From his Temptations. By Faith in Christ we are enabled to quench the fiery
darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.16. And the Apostle tells us, 1 John 5.18. that
whosoever is born of God keeps himself that the wicked one touches him not;
that is, tactu qualitativo (as Cajetan says) so as to leave an impression of
his own Devilish nature upon him. 3. From his Accusations, Rev. 12.10. I heard
a loud voice saying in heaven, now is come Salvation and Strength, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the power of Christ, for the accuser of our brethren is
cast down, which accuses them before God day and night. And they overcame him
by the blood of the Lamb, etc.

4. From the curse of the Law. He came not to take away the Law as a rule of
life, but to free us from the curse of it. He has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, by being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13.

5. From death. The last enemy is Death. But Christ will raise our bodies to a
glorious life and so destroy Death, 1 Cor. 15.26, 54.

Thus Christ is an All sufficient Savior, able to save to the uttermost. Heb.
7.25. able to save both soul and body and that for ever, Heb. 5.9. He is the
author of eternal Salvation to all that obey him. And therefore Ephesians. 5.23. He
is styled the Savior of his mystical body.

All the three Persons save, but in a different manner.

The Father saves by the Son. The Son by paying the price of our Ransom and
Redemption. The Holy Ghost by persuading the heart savingly to close with
Christ for the obtaining this Salvation.
Would thou (therefore O sinner) have Christ to be thy Savior; then 1. break
off thy si^s by Repentance, and surrender thy self up to him to be pardoned in
his blood, and sanctified by his spirit. For though Christ be able to save and
willing to save, yet they that remain impenitent and disobedient have neither
part nor portion in him.

2. Labor to stir up in thy heart a high love to Christ who has done so much
for thee, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, says the
Apostle, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. So much of his first Title Jesus.

The second Title of our Savior is Christ, Christ.
which signifies anointed, now He was anointed by the Spirit of God to three
Offices.

To be our Prophet. Priest. King.


Messiah and Christ signify the same thing, Joh. 1.14. we have fo^nd the
Messiah which being interpreted is the Christ.

Among the Jews after the Babylonish Captivity, the name Messiah was very
frequent and familiar. In the Chaldee paraphrase The Chaldee Paraphrase was not
an Exposition word for w^rd of the Hebrew Text, but it took in the general
sense of the learned Jews by way of Comment.
now extant there is express mention of the Messiah in above seventy places.

The Jews expected a Messiah to come of their own Nation, of the Tribe of
Judah, and of the Family of David. And so was Christ our Lord.

In the old Testament three sorts of persons were anointed, Kings, Priests, and
Prophets. To these three Offices was Jesus anointed, and took them all on him
for our benefit. For a threefold misery lay upon men that were to be saved; 1.
Ignorance and blindness of mind. 2. Guilt, which we were not able to satisfy
for. 3. Depravation, and corruption of nature, Bondage and Captivity to Sin and
Satan, which we were not able to free our selves from. Suitable to these three
necessities, Christ is Anointed to a Threefold Office, of Prophet, Priest, and
King: He was a Prophet to teach us, a Priest to make Atonement for us, and a
King to govern us, and defend us. Of these his Three Offices I shall speak in
order.

1. He took on him the Office of a Prophet. Christ was a Prophet.
Anointing with Oil was a Ceremony used in the Old Testament, whereby three
sorts of persons, viz. 1 Kings 19.16.
Prophets, Lev. 8.2.12.30.
Priests, and Kings were inaugurated into their Office. And their Unction
signified, 1. Their call to their Office. 2. A collation of gifts to fit them
for their Office.

As Oil does revive and refresh, so the effusion of the graces of the Spirit of
God makes Persons fit and apt for the work to which they were called. Thus
Christ though he were not materially, yet he was really Anointed by God to this
Threefold Office, with the gifts Hae duae part^s Unctioris Christi si^
differunt, quod donorum collatio ad humanam naturam tantum, ordinatio ad
officiu^, ad utramque naturam pe^tinet.
and graces of the Holy Ghost, which quickened and made him joyful in all his
undertakings for our Redemption. Which Anointing or effusion of grace into his
humane Nature, he received not in measure, John 3.34. But abundantly, above
what was ever imparted either to Angels or any of the members of his mystical
Body. This may appear from Psalm. 45.7. compared with Heb. 1.9. Thou have loved
Righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God even thy God has Anointed thee
with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows. And from Isa. 61.1. compared with
Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he has Anointed me to
preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. Acts 10.30. God has Anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with Power, etc. And the Apostle tells us,
Acts 3.22, 23. That Moses had Prophesied of this great Prophet commanding he
should be heard and obeyed in all things. Deuteronomy. 18.15.18, 19. Now our Savior
executed his Prophetical Office by making known the will of God to the Children
of men, and by revealing to them the way of Salvation.

His teaching was of Two sorts, Outward. Inward.


For his Out-ward teaching.

1. He taught by the Patriarchs and Prophets that lived before his coming in
the Flesh, 2 Pet. 1.21. For Prophecy came not in Old time by the will of man:
But Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

2. He taught himself in Person for the space of about Three years and a half.
John 12.49. For I have not spoken of myself, but the Father which sent me, he
gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak, Ephesians. 4.21.
The Apostle tells the Ephesians they would not give themselves up to
Licenciousness, if so be they had been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus;
that is, had received the Divine truth as it was preached by Christ himself,
and is delivered in his Gospel. John 15.15. All things that I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you, John 8.26. I have many things to say, and
he that sent me is true, and I speak to the Word those things which I have
heard of him. And Verse. 28. Then said Jesus unto them, when ye have lift up the
Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self;
but as my Father has taught me, I speak these things.

Here let us observe.

1. The Matter he taught which (in general) was what he had heard and received
of his Father. John 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine but his that sent me. Joh.
17.8. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me. In particular he taught both Law and Gospel.
The Law he vindicated from the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, who placed the
observance of it in outward acts. But he shows that the Law forbids not only
outward acts but in-ward lusts also. And besides the Law, he preached also the
Gospel; as you may see, Joh. 6.40. And this is the will of him that sent me,
that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And John 3.16. God so loved the
World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. 2. Let us observe also the places
where he taught. 1. In the Synagogues, Mark 6.2. 2. In the Temple, Matthew.
26.55. 3. In the Cities and Villages, Mark 6.6. Luke 8.1. 4. By the Seaside,
and out of a Ship, Mark 4.1. Matthew. 8.2. 5. In Houses and Streets, etc. John
13. and Chap. 14. Chap. 15. and Chap. 16. Luke 13.26. 6. On the Mount, Matthew.
5. and Chap. 6. and Chap. 7.
3. Let us observe the manner of his teaching which was frequently by Parables
and Similitudes; and he spoke with Authority. 4. Let us observe how he
confirmed his Doctrine with sundry Miracles, which were real, plain, open, and
visible to Multitudes of Spectators, and Witnesses, Matthew. 11.4, 5.
3. He taught also by his Apostles, Evangelists, and Ministers, giving them
extraordinary gifts and stirring up some of them to write Books by the
inspiration of his Holy Spirit, for the Churches use, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

4. He now teaches outwardly by those Pastors and Teachers and Ministers of his
word, whom in all ages he raises up for that purpose. And thus much of his
outward Teaching.

As for his inward Teaching, he performed that of Old, and so does also now by
his Holy Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired
and searched diligently, who Prophesied of the grace that should come unto you:
Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the
glory that should follow. John 16.13, 14. Howbeit, when he the Spirit of Truth
is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself;
but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak: and he will show you things
to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you.

It remains now that we consider what improvement we are to make of this
Doctrine that Christ is a Prophet. Let us learn these Lessons from it.

1. If Christ be so great a Prophet, and teaches now by his Ministers, then
they should be listened to as Dispensers of his Mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Let a
man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, etc.

2. We should pray to Christ that he would please to teach us inwardly by his
holy Spirit. The Spirit teaches by inlightning the mind, and inclining the
heart, and bowing the will to obey.


3. We should labor to be humble. For the humble he will teach.

2. Christ was a Priest. Christ was a Priest.


There are Two parts of his Priesthood Oblation. Intercession.


1. Oblation. We were all liable by reason of our sins, to eternal punishment,
from which we could not be freed except our sins were remitted. Now without
shedding of blood there was no remission, Heb. 9.22. It was therefore necessary
that Christ should appear to put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself, Heb.
9.26.

2. When Jesus had offered up himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins. He
ascended up on high, and entered into the Holy of Holies to make intercession
for us, Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. Heb. 7.25. He ever lives to make intercession for
us.

In the time of the Old Levitical Priesthood the Highpriests Office had two
Parts.

1. Oblation to offer up Sacrifice.

2. Presentation of it in the Holy of Holies with prayer and intercession unto
God to accept it for the sins of the People. See Levit. 16 from 11, to 17.

Now in answer to this Type there are two distinct parts of Christ's Priesthood.

1. The offering up himself a Sacrifice on the Cross for us, Heb. 9.26. which
answers to the killing of the Sacrifice without the Holy of Holies.

2. He carried this his Blood virtually into the Holy of Holies, namely into
Heaven, Heb. 9.12. where he appears and there also prays and intercedes for us
in the virtue and merit of that Blood. And the Type of those prayers was the
Cloud of Incense made by the High Priest. Both these parts of his Priesthood
the Apostle mentions, 1 John 2.2. Where he calls Christ a Propitiation or a
Propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins, and an Advocate to the Father for us.
Christ therefore offered a Satisfactory Sacrifice to God for us on the Cross,
and now intercedes for us in Heaven.

The virtue of Christ's Priesthood began with the first sinner that was
pardoned. By him alone all that are pardoned are accepted, and without him none
ever were, or will be accepted. His blood was reputed by God as shed from the
time that the first Promise of the Covenant of Grace was made; namely, that the
Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head, Genesis 3.15. And therefore
Christ is said, Rev. 13.8. to be a Lamb slain from the beginning, that is, in
Gods Decree; So that the Fathers that lived before he was offered, enjoyed the
benefit of his Death and Sufferings. They were saved merito pretii praestandi,
as we are saved merito pretii praestiti. And of this Priesthood of our Savior
there is no end in regard of the virtue and efficacy of it. And thus we see how
Christ was our Priest and how he made atonement for our sins by his perfect
obedience and sufferings. His Person God-man was the Priest. The Sacrifice was
his humanity, the Lamb of God without blemish. The Altar which consecrated this
Sacrifice and added merit to the sufferings of his humanity was his Godhead.
And thus he made himself a Sacrifice for our sins. Three things Christ has
done for us as our Priest.

1. He has obeyed the Law perfectly. 2. He has offered up himself a Sacrifice
for our sins. 3. He now lives to make intercession for us.
From all that has been said we should learn these lessons.

1. That Christ's active and passive obedience is of sufficient value, worth and
merit, to satisfy Gods Justice for all our sins. For in that he voluntarily
took on him our humane nature, and so voluntarily put himself under the
obligation of the Law, his very active obedience becomes meritorious.

2. That Christ did intend his obedience and sufferings for this end and
purpose.

3. That God has accepted of what Christ has done and suffered as a sufficient
price for our Redemption.

4. We should learn from hence highly to prize Christ's Sacrifice. It Is the
great relief we have against sin. He has made satisfaction to Divine Justice,
so that God is now reconcilable to fallen Man in and through him.

5. This should teach us to have a great care of our precious souls. The great
price paid to ransom them should teach us their worth. We are wont to be
exceeding careful to keep things that cost dear. Never any thing cost more than
the soul.

6. Seeing Christ was Crucified for our sins, we should learn from him to
crucify sin in our selves, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with its affections and lusts.

7. Seeing Christ suffered so much for us, we should be content, yea ready to
suffer for him when ever he calls us to it.

8. From the consideration of Christ's intercession and the constancy and
prevalency of it, we should encourage our selves to go to God in and through
him for help in all our needs. He is a powerful advocate.

9. The Consideration of Christ's oblation of himself once for us, and his
continual intercession still performed in heaven for us, should inflame our
hearts with entire love to him. He deserves our best, our most enlarged
affections. We can never love him enough. I come now to Christ's third Office.

3. Christ was a King. Christ was a King.
God speaking of his Son, Psalm. 2.6. says, I have set my King upon my holy hill
of Zion. Zech. 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout O daughter of
Jerusalem: Behold, thy King comes unto thee: He is just, and having Salvation,
lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a colt, the fool of an Ass. This is
applied to our Savior, Mat. 21.5. The Prophet Isaiah fully attests this. Isa.
9.6, 7. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government
shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called, Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the
increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end; upon the Throne of
David, and of his Kingdom shall he sit, to order it, and to establish it with
Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever: the zeal of the Lord
of Hosts will perform this. And Luke 1.33. It Is said of Him, He shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. To
which we may add Rev. 17.14. These shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb
shall overcome them: for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Now there is a
twofold Kingdom belonging to Christ.

1. Regnum Essentiale, an essential Kingdom which belongs to him as God.

2. Regnum Vicarium or a deputatory Kingdom and dominion which God gave him as
Mediator. This Kingdom Christ administers and his Kingly Office he executes
several ways, and by several royal Acts.

1. By gathering to himself a People out of the several Kingdoms and Nations of
the Earth, and making them willing (by infusing his grace into their hearts) to
submit unto him.

2. By giving them Laws by which they are to walk.

3. By appointing to them Officers and Censures. Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some
Apostles and some, Prophets: and some Evangelists: and some Pastors and
Teachers. V. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. And so for censures, and
discipline, he has appointed how an offending Brother should be dealt with. 1.
He should be privately admonished, then in the presence of two or three. And if
he shall neglect to hear them, then they must tell it unto the Church: but if
he neglect to hear the Church, then he must be unto them as an Heathen man, and
a Publican. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

4. By restraining, and curbing, and subduing His and His Churches enemies.
Particularly,

1. Sin, that it shall not have dominion over those that are His.

2. The World, with its baits and allurements.

3. Satan, delivering them from his temptations and wiles.

4. Wicked and ungodly men. Thus he executed his Kingly power in bringing
destruction upon the Jews by the Roman Armies; and that destruction is called
his coming in his Kingdom. Mat. 16.28. Verily, I say unto you, There be some
standing here, which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom.

5. Death it self, 1 Cor. 15. He will despoil the Grave and make it give up all
its Captives.

By judging the quick and dead at the last day. And then this his Mediatory
Kingdom He will render up to his Father. 1 Cor. 15.24. Then comes the end,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he
shall have put down all rule, and authority, and power.

6. By supporting those that truly believe in him in all their afflictions here.

7. By rewarding them in a most royal manner hereafter.

And thus much of the several ways whereby our Savior executes his Kingly
Office.

Now as to the quality of his Kingdom, we are to know, it is not of this World,
it is a Spiritual Kingdom. John 18.36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of
this World: if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight,
that I should not be delivered to the Jews: But now is my Kingdom not from
hence. Romans 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but
righteousness, and peace, and j^y in the Holy Ghost. In the Kingdom of Christ,

1. The King is Spiritual, the Lord from Heaven.

2. The Subjects are Spiritual, those that are regenerated.

3. The Laws are Spiritual, reaching the inward man.

4. The Privileges are Spiritual. Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Glorification.

Now Christ's solemn inauguration into this His Kingly Office was at his
Ascension into Heaven, and sitting on the right hand of the Father. Not but
that he was a King by right before; but he entered on the full and public
execution of this his office, when God raised him from the dead, and set him at
his own right hand in heavenly places far above all Principalities and Powers,
Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Then He whose name is the word of God, had on his vesture and on
his thigh a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Rev. 19.13, 16.

Let us now consider what improvement we ought to make of this Article that
Christ is a King.

1. If Christ be a King, we should daily pray that his Kingd^m may come, that
is, His Kingdom of Grace into the hearts of men. We should all earnestly desire
and pray that he may reign in our hearts, and the hearts of others by his holy
Spirit.

2. This may show us the blessedness of those that are his Subjects. They are
under a powerful Protector.

3. We should all examine our selves whether his Kingdom beset up in us or no.
Christ is sometimes called the Head of the Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Let us
seriously consider whether we are guided and governed by him as the members of
the body are by the Head? and whether we do receive life and influence from him.

4. If Christ be a King, then we may assure our selves that he is able to
defend his Church, and subdue the enemies of it, though they be never so strong
or subtle.

5. If Christ be a King, then we should acknowledge his Sovereignty. The
Apostle tells us, Phil. 2.10 11. That at the name of Jesus every knee should
bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth: And
that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of
God the Father. To bow at the name of Jesus is to confess his Sovereignty, to
submit to his power, and to humble our selves before him.

6. If Christ be a King? We should pray that the Kingdoms contrary to his
Kingdom, may be subverted, viz. the Kingdom of Sin, Satan, and Antichrist.

And thus much of Christ's threefold Office. We come now to speak of the third
Title given him in the ancient Creed which is, His only Son, Christ is the only
Son of God. Thus Nathanael the true Israelite makes his confession of him, John
1.49. Rabbi thou art the Son of God, thou art King of Israel. Thus Martha
expresses her Faith concerning him, John 11.27. I believe that thou art the
Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the World. This was the famous
confession of Peter, John. 6.69. His only Son.
We believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God,
Mat. 16.16. And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. And the Gospel of John was written that we might believe that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, John 20.31. Now Christ is so the Son of God as
no other is, or was, or ever can be. He is his only Son, his only begotten Son.

This I shall further explain by these particulars following.

2 Our Savior had a real being and existence before his conception here on
Earth, and distinct from that being which he assumed here, John 8.58. Before
Abraham was, I am. Yea he had a Being before the Flood, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. For
Christ also has once suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, (that he
might bring us to God) being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the
Spirit: By which also he went and preached to the Spirits (now) in prison who
were disobedient in the days of Noah. Yea he had a being before the World
began: for the World was made by him, so the Apostle tells us, Heb. 1.2. God
has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir
of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds: Col. 1.17. He is before all
things, and by him all things consist.

2. The being which he had before his conception was not a created being, but
the Divine Essence, he was truly God, John 17.5. And now, O Father, glorify
thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the
World was. See more in the third Section of the first Chapter.

3. The Divine Essence which he has, was eternally communicated to him from
the Father (who was always Father as well as always God;) And this is called
his Eternal Generation. And therefore he is called the only begotten Son of
God, John 3.16. For God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son:
That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
And thus he is distinguished from the Holy Ghost, (who proceeds from the Father
and the Son,) and from the Adopted Sons of God, being his Eternal Son by
eternal and ineffable Emanation. Joh. 7.29. I know him that sent me (says
Christ) for I am from him, Joh. 1.18 No man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. B^t
some will (possibly) here object, God the Father says of Christ, Psalm. 2.7.
Act. 13.30, 33. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. To which we
answer, God speaks not there of Christ's Generation, but of the manifestation of
it, which was accomplished at the time of his Resurrection, by which he was
mightily declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4. And though he was then
declared to be so, yet his Generation was Eternal. The Grave is as the Womb of
the Earth. Christ, when he was raised from the dead was (as it were) begotten
to a new life, and on this account God who now raised him is styled his Father.
But some will further Object. Christ is called The first Born of every
Creature, Col. 1.15. How can he then be the Eternal Son of God? I answer, he is
called The first born of every Creature, because he was begotten of God as the
Son of his love, antecedently to all other Emanations from him, and before any
thing was framed or created by him.

And thus much for the Explication of this Article. Let us now consider what
improvement we should make of it.

1. This should show us the excellency and dignity of the Person of the
Messiah, and should assure us of the infinite value of his active and passive
obedience.

As our offenses are aggravated by the consideration of the high dignity of the
Person whom we have offended, so the value of Reparation arises from the
dignity of the Person satisfying. And this satisfaction consists in the
reparation of the honor which by our sin was cclipsed. And all honor does
increase proportionably as the person yielding it is more honorable or worthy.

2. This may show us that the more worthy the Person of Christ was before he
suffered, the greater was his condescension in stooping to such great and
unworthy sufferings for our sakes.

3. This greatly magnifies the love of God in sending his only begotten Son
into the world to die for Sinners. This love of God is frequently extolled and
admired by the Apostles, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all
things, 1 John 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the love of God toward us,
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live
through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our Sins. What an amazing thing is this
love of the Father in sending his only begotten Son to be our Redeemer, and
what an amazing thing is this condescension of the only Son of God to die for
such worms as we are.

I come now t^ Christ's fourth Title. Our Lord. Our Lord.


After our Sav^ (...) Relation, viz. of the only Son of God, founded upon his
eternal generation, follows his Dominion as the necessary consequence of his
Sonship; because the only Son must of necessity be Heir and Lord of all in his
Fathers house; and all others (which bear the name of Sons, whether they be
Angels or Men) must be looked upon as his servants, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, Acts 10.36. He is Lord of all, Mat. 28.18. All power is given
unto him both in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. God has set him at his
own right hand in the Heavenly places far above all principality and power, and
might, and dominion, and has put all things under his feet.

The word Lord signifies properly Dominion, and implies a right of possession
and power of disposing. This premised, let us consider how and in what respects
Christ is Lord?

As there are two natures united in the person of Christ, so there are two
kinds of dominion belonging respectively to those natures. One inherent in his
Divinity; the other bestowed on his humanity. One by which he is Lord, maker of
all things. The other by which he is made Lord of all things.

Christ as God has a supreme universal dominion over the Worlp. So Thomas
acknowledges in those words, John 20.28. My Lord and my God. But Christ as
Mediator has some kind of dominion or Lordship bestowed on him, and given unto
him. And in this sense the Apostle says, Acts 2.36. He was made both Lord and
Christ. And one branch of this his dominion, was his power on earth to forgive
sins, Mat. 9.2, 6. He said therefore to the sick of the Palsy thy sins are
forgiven thee, that they might know that the ^on of Man had power on earth to
forgive sins. And another is the right of Judicature, or Judging the World
committed to him, Joh. 5.22. The Father has committed all Judgment to the Son,
and has given him authority to execute Judgment because he is the Son of Man.
He will Judge the World by that man whom he has ordained, Acts 17.31. But let
us further consider by what right Christ is Lord.

1. By right of Creation, Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him, and without
him was not any thing made that was made.

2. By right of sustentation, and preservation of the Creatures he has made,
Col. 1.17. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Heb.
1.3. He upholdeth all things by the word of his power.

3. By right of donation, ordination, and the appointment of God, Acts 2.36. To
him all power is given both in Heaven and Earth.

4. By right of Redemption. The ransomer of a bondslave was wont to be his
Lord. When we were bondslaves to Sin and Satan, Christ paid our ransom. No
bondage so great as ours was: no price so great as that which he paid;
therefore no service too great for us to pay unto him.

5. By right of Covenant. In our Baptism we bind our selves and Covenant to be
his. Thus we see by how many Titles Christ is Lord. If any shall further
inquire how he exercises this his dominion. I Answer, In these particulars.

1. In giving Laws to his Subjects and servants. 2. In appointing Officers in
his Church. 3. In providing for, and protecting his Family. 4. In correcting
his servants for their miscarriages. 5. In rewarding them according to their
Works and Services, both here and hereafter.
The improvement we should make of this Doctrine is in short this. We should
seriously consider whether we do indeed take Christ for our Lord as well as for
our Savior. Many do like Christ's Saviorship well enough, but do not like his
Sovereignty. They will not have him rule over them. But let us often think by
how many Titles Christ is our Lord [by right of Creation, Sustentation,
Redemption and Covenant] that so we may stir up our hearts to own him as our
Lord, and humbly to submit to him and to pay him the Homage we owe unto him,
and heartily, cheerfully, diligently and constantly to obey him even to our
lives end.

SECT. II. Of the Person of Christ.
WE come now to consider what manner of person our Savior was. He was God and
Man in the same Person: The Eternal Son of God, the second person in the
Trinity, took to himself our humane nature (a humane Soul and Body) and united
it after a wonderful manner, to his Godhead, and so God and Man became one
person. This I shall labor to make out by these seven following particulars.

1. Jesus Christ who was God before by the Divine nature which he had from
Eternity, was in the fullness of time made Man, Gal. 4.4.

2. He was made Man by assuming our humane nature unto himself, and joining it
to his Divine nature.

3. Although our humane nature was joined with his Divine nature, (that is,
with the nature common to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) yet was that Union
made only in the Person of the Son. Not the Father nor the Holy Ghost, but it
was the Son, that was incarnate.

4. The Divine nature did not assume an humane person; but the Divine Person of
the Son did assume our humane nature. If Christ had only taken the Person of a
man, then there must have been two Persons in Christ, (a Person assuming and a
Person assumed;) Yea, then that only Person which Christ had assumed should
have been advanced, and saved by him. He therefore assumed not an humane
Person, but he assumed the humane nature common to all the Sons and Daughters
of Adam and Eve.

5. He took an humane Soul as well as an humane Body. For he increased in
wisdom and stature, Luke 2.52. In the one, in respect of his body, in the
other, in respect of his Soul. He, whose knowledge did increase with his years,
must have a Subject proper for it, which is no other than an humane Soul. This
was the Seat of his finite understanding, and directed will, distinct from the
will of his Father, and consequently of his Divine nature as may appear by
that, Luke 22.42. Not my Will, but thine be done.

6. In this union the two natures remain really distinct in Christ, without
either conversion or transubstantiation of the one into the other; and without
commixtion or confusion of both into one. There was no conversion of the humane
nature into the Divine, or of the Divine into the humane.

7. Though with us the Soul and Body being united make a Person, yet in Christ
the Soul and Body were so united, as to have their subsistence not of
themselves (as in us) but in the Godhead. No sooner was the Soul united to the
Body, but both Soul and Body had their subsistence in the Second Person in the
Trinity.

SECT. III. How our Savior became Man?
THis union between our humane nature and the Deity of the Son of God was
wrought in the womb of the Virgin Mary. Yea, our Savior was not only made man
in her, but of her; The humane nature which he assumed being made of her
substance. This I shall clear and make out by these assertions.

was conceived by the Holy Ghost.
1. He was not conceived in her by the help of Man, but by the power of the Holy
Ghost. Her womb was the Bride Chamber where the Holy Ghost did knit this
indissoluble knot between the Deity of the Son of God and our humane nature.
Joseph was only Christ's legal Father, his Foster-Father, Luke 3.23. Being as
was supposed the Son of Joseph. This conception therefore was wrought by the
Holy Ghost. He immediately and miraculously enabled the Virgin Mary to conceive
our Savior, Luke 1.35. And the Angel said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee, therefore that
holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. The
Holy Ghost did not perform any proper act of Generation, (such as is the
foundation of paternity) but framed the humane nature of Christ of the
substance of the Virgin.

2. The humane nature of Christ was totally sanctified, and so fitted for a
personal union with the Word, John 17.19. For their sakes I sanctified my self.
Christ out of his infinite love humbled himself and became Man: Yet at the same
time, out of his infinite purity, he would not defile himself by becoming
sinful man. The humane nature in its first original was formed by the Holy
Ghost, and in its formation sanctified and so united to the Word; that as the
first Adam was the fountain of our Impurity, so the second Adam might be the
fountain of our Righteousness.

3. Christ took our nature clothed with sinless infirmities: Culpable and
sinful infirmities he did not take on him. Indeed poenal infirmities such as
are common to all the Sons and Daughters of Adam (as to be subject to pain,
grief, and sorrow, hunger, thirst, cold, etc.) such he took on him, ( Isa. 53.
v. 4. Surely he has born our griefs and carried our sorrows:) But he took not
on him poenal infirmities such as are personal. He took our sinless infirmities
to show the truth of his humanity. He took them on himself that he might pity
us, and might teach us by his holy example how to bear them.

4. As the Virgin Mary conceived our Savior by the power of the Holy Ghost, so
she brought him forth into the world. He was born of her. And under this head
these particulars are to be taken into consideration.

1. Christ was born of a woman that was a pure Virgin, Born of the Virgin Mary.
untouched by man, even when she brought him forth. The promised Messiah was to
be born after a miraculous manner, Jer. 31.22. The Lord has created a new
thing in the earth, a woman shall incompass or enclose a man. It is a new
Creation because wrought in a woman without the help of man. The Prophecy in
Isaiah must be fulfilled, Isa. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear
a Son and shall call his name Immanuel. The Messiah promised before and under
the Law was to be born of a Virgin.

2. The Messiah was to be of the house and lineage of David. Of whom the
Apostle says, Acts 2.30. that he being a Prophet, knew that God had sworn with
an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he would
raise up Christ to sit on his Throne. And it is from many places of Scripture
evident and certain, that Mary and so Christ did lineally descend from David.

3. Observe the time when Christ was born. It was when Augustus was Emperor and
taxed the Jews and all Nations under his dominion, as we find, Luke 2.

4. Observe the place where our Savior was born. It was in Village of Judah
called Bethlehem, that the Prophecy in Micah might be fullfilled, Mich. 5.2.
But thou Bethlehem, Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in
Israel.

5. Let us consider the manner of his Birth, which was very mean, namely in the
Stable of a common Inn.

6. Observe the first tidings or manifestation of his birth, which was made by
Angels to poor Shepherds, Luke 2.10, 11. And the Angel said unto them. Fear
not, for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people. For unto you is born this day, in the City of David, a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord And thus we have showed how our Lord and Savior was born
into the World, and became man. Before I shut up this particular, it will be
needful that I show why it was requisite he should be both God and Man.

1. It was requisite he should be God for these reasons.

1. That by his Divine and mnipotent power, he might uphold his Humanity that
it should not sink under the weight of Gods wrath l^id upon him for our sins.
This s^nne think was shadowed in ^^e Altar ^n which the Sacrifice wa^ to be
burned, which was made of wood but covered with brass to keep it from being
co^^umed. So Christ was Man, but the weakness of the humane nature was covered
with (...) power o^ Divinity, so that it might be supported under its
sufferings.
The wrath of God was so heavy, that no mere Creature could bear up under it.
The manhood of Christ would have sunk under those sufferings, had not the
Divine power upheld it.

2. That he might make his obedience and sufferings in the h^mane Nature of
infinite value and merit. This One-man, this God-man was more worthy then all
the men of the World put together. The humane Nature of Christ being Personally
united to the Godhead, is of more worth than all the Race of mankind. So that
Christ's obedience and sufferings do make a full satisfaction to God for all the
dishonor done him by our sins.

3. That he might do those great things for us (after he had laid down his life
for us) which none but God could do, viz.

1. To Baptize us with the Holy Ghost. None can send the Spirit of God into the
hearts of men, but he who is God.

2. To repair his Image in us.

3. To subdue sin in us.

4. To conquer Satan for us.

5. To guide and carry his Church to Eternal life, through all those
hindrances, that lie in their way.

6. To conquer Death and raise our bodies to a glorious Immortality.

Secondly, It was requisite he should be Man, for these reasons.

1. Man's Nature had sinned; therefore it was requisite man's Nature should
suffer. It seems fit and requisite in respect of the justice of God, that the
same Nature should be punished which had offended.

2. He could not have suffered, if he had not been man.

3. If our Mediator were only God, he could have performed no obedience, the
Godhead being free from all manner of subjection.

4. It was fit he should be man, that Satan might be vanquished in that Nature
he had supplanted, Genesis 3.15. And I will put enmity between thee and the Woman,
and between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head and thou shall
bruise his heel.

5. That he might be a merciful High Priest. For in that, in our Nature he
experienced temptation, he knows how to succor and pity us when we are
tempted. And lastly, He was both God and Man, that he might be a meet Mediator
to deal between God and Man, and to work a Reconciliation between them.

SECT. IV. Of our Saviors Life.
HAving thus spoken of our Saviors Birth, and how he came into the World, it
will be requisite we should now speak of his Life, and how he lived and
conversed in this World, which the Ancient Creed mentions nothing of, but
passes immediately from his being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Virgin Mary to his suffering under Pontius Pilat. I have in my Harmony of the
Four Evangelists fully set forth the History of the Life of our blessed Lord
and Savior. Here I shall only give a short Summary of what I have there more
largely delivered, to which I refer my Reader.

The Life of our Savior we have divided into Six Parts, and in each Part have
taken notice of the Particulars observable.

The First Part of our Saviors life was from his Birth to his Baptism
containing, the space of about Thirty Years. In which we have these particulars.

1 At Eight days old he was Circumcised, Luke 2.21. Matthew. 1.25.

2. Mary the Fortieth day after her delivery goes up to Jerusalem to the
Temple to be purified, where she and Joseph present the Child Jesus to the Lord
according to the Law, Exodus 13.2, 12, 13. Mary presents the offering for her
Purification, viz. (being a poor Woman) a pair of Turtle Doves, Levit. 12.6, 8.
Simeon and Anna here acknowledge him and prophecy of him, Luke 2. from 22. to
41.

3. This done, Joseph and Mary return with Jesus to Bethlehem, and there
continue for some time. For about Two Years after our Saviors Birth, the Magi
or Arabian Astronomers who had in their own Country, at our Saviors Birth,
seen a strange Star, or extraordinary brightness over Judea, and understanding
either by some Old Prophecy, or New Revelation from God, that it signified the
Birth of the Messiah promised to the Jews, they being moved by the Spirit, come
to Jerusalem to inquire after the place where this New King should be born.
They are told by Herod, and the Priests that the Birthplace of the Messiah was
to be at Bethlehem. Herod bids them go, and inquire for him, and when they had
found him, bring him word. They come to Bethlehem, and there finding him do
homage to him, and present him with gifts. This done, being warned of God not
to go back to Herod, they return into their own Country another way, Matthew. 2.
from 1. to 13.

4. After their departure Joseph is warned by God in a Dream to fly into Egypt,
and so provide for the life of the Child; which accordingly he did, and there
He, Mary and the Child remained till Herod was dead. But in the mean time Herod
finding himself deceived by the Magi, and thinking that this young Child had
been still at Bethlehem or thereabout, that he might be sure to destroy him, he
commands all the Male Children from Two years old and under that were in
Bethlehem, or the Coasts thereof to be killed, Mat. 2. from the 13. to the 19.

5. Not long after, Herod dying, Joseph is warned of God in a Dream to return
with the young Child unto the Land of Israel, which accordingly he did, and
dwelt in the City of Nazareth, Mat. 2 from 19. to the end.

6. Christ at Twelve Years old is brought to Jerusalem at the Passover, and
there disputes with the Doctors in the Temple. From hence he went down with his
Parents to Nazareth again, and there lived privately till his Baptism, Luke 2.
from 41. to the end.

.7 John Baptist being newly entered into his public Ministry, preaches
Repentance and Baptizes. He sharply reprehends some of the Pharisees and
Sadduces that came to be Baptized of him. He gives particular answers to the
questions of the People, of the Publicans, and of the Soldiers enquiring what
every one of them ought to do. He gives his first Testimony to Christ,
preferring him before himself, Luke 3. from 1. to the 18. Mat. 3. from 1. to
the 13. Mark 1. from 7. to 9.

The Second Part of our Saviors life from his Baptism to the Passover next
ensuing containing the space of half a Year, in which we have these particulars.

1. He is Baptized by John in Jordan, and witnessed from Heaven to be the
Eternal Son of God, and a Second Testimony by John given of him, Mat. 3. from
the 13. to the 18. Mark 1. from 9. to 12. Joh. 1. from 15. to the 19. Luke 3.
from 21. to 24.

2. Immediately after his Baptism he goes into the Wilderness, and is there
assaulted by Satan with a Threefold Temptation, Mat. 4. from 1. to 12. Mark 1.
from 12. to 14. Luke 4. from 1. to 14.

3. John being now Baptizing in Bathabara, some of the Pharisees come from the
Sanedrim at Jerusalem to enquire who he was. He tells them he was only the
Forerunner of the Messiah, Joh. 1. from 19. to 29.

4. Christ now comes to John, whom John calls the Lamb of God, and declares
that he was made known unto him to be the true Messiah by the descending of the
Holy Ghost upon him, John 1. from 29. to 35.

5. Upon this Testimony Two of John's Disciples follow Jesus, viz. Andrew and
Peter, Joh. 1. from 35. to 43.

6. Christ calls Philip, and Philip brings Nathanael to Christ, who
acknowledges him to be the Son of God, Joh. 1. from 43. to the end.

7. Christ works his first Miracle at a Wedding in Cana, where he turns Water
into Wine, and prepares to go unto the Passover now at hand, Joh. 2. from 1. to
13.

The Third Part of our Saviors life from the first Passover after his Baptism
to the Second, wherein are comprehended the Acts of the first entire Year of
his public Ministry.

1. He purges the Temple of Buyers and Sellers, Joh. 2. from 13. to the end.

2. He instructs Nicodemus, concerning Regeneration and Faith in himself, Joh.
3. from. 1. to 22.

3. He institutes Baptism Baptism instituted, of which see a particular Tract
at the end.
appointing his Disciples to Baptize, which they accordingly perform; John in
the mean time Baptizeth in Enon, John 4.1, 2.

4. John's Disciples take it ill that Christ was more followed than their
Master; from whence John takes occasion to instruct them in the difference
betwixt himself and Christ; whose high dignity above himself he sets forth and
declares; as also what they shall have from Christ who believe in him; and what
they are to expect who believe not in him, John 3. from 25. to the end.

5. Herod Antipas now casts John into Prison; for reproving his incestuous
taking of Herodias, Luke 3. from 18. to 21. Mark 6. from 17. to 21. Mat. 14.
from 3. to 6.

6. Christ hearing of John's imprisonment, leaves Judea, and resolves to go
into Galilee, Mat. 4.12. John 4. from 1. to 4. Mark 1.14.

7. Going into Galilee through Samaria, he talks with a Woman of Samaria, and
reveals himself to her, and instructs her concerning the right way of
Worship; and that he is the Messiah: which she relates to the Inhabitants of
the City Sychar, many of whom come out to him. He declares to his Disciples
upon this occasion what is his principal meat and drink; and that now the time
of his Spiritual Harvest is at hand. Many of the Samaritans believe in him,
John 4. from 4. to 43.

8. He goes from thence into Galilee, and being at Cana, he heals a
Nobleman's Son with a word of his mouth, that lay sick at Capernaum, John 4.
from 43. to 55.

9. He preaches with great fame in the Synagogues of the Galileans, Luke 4
from 14 to 16. Mark 4. from 14. to 16. Mat. 4.17.

10. He t^acheth in the Synagogue at Nazareth out of Esai. 61. that he himself
is the promised Messiah; and shows by the instances of what was wrought by
Elias for the Widow of Sarepta; and by Eliseus for Naaman the Syrian, that Gods
favors are free and gratuitous, and therefore he might bestow them where he
pleased, giving that for a reason why he did no Miracle there. They being angry
with him endeavor to cast him headlong from the brow of a H ll, but he passing
through the midst of them, escaped their hands, Luke 4. from 16. to 31.

11. He comes now to Capernaum, and teaches there on the Sabbath day, Mat. 4.
from 13. to 17. Luke 4.31.32. Mark 1.21.22.

12. In the Synagoue there he dispossesses a man of an unclean Devil, Luke 4.
from 33. to 38. Mark 1. from 23.29.

13. He cures Simon's Wife's Mother of a Fever, Luke 4. from 38. to 40. Mark 1.
from 29. to 32. Mat. 8. from 14 to 16.

14. Also many other sick and possessed Persons, Mat. 8. from 16. to 18. Mark
1. from 32 to 35. Luke 4.40.41.

15. He goes from thence and preaches in many other Cities in Galilee, and
casts out Devils, Mark 1. from 35. to 40. Luke 4. from 42. to 45. Mat. 4. from
23. to 26.

16. He cleanses a Leper, sending him to the Priest to offer for his
cleansing, according to the Law of Moses, Mark 1. from 40. to the end. Luke 5.
from 12. to 17. Mat. 8. from 2. to 5.

17. In the presence of many of the Scribes and Pharisees, he cures one sick
of the Palsy, that was let down through the Roof of the House to him; and
pronounces his sins to be forgiven him, and proves he had Authority so to do,
Mark 2. from 1. to 13. Luke 5. from. 17. to 27. Mat. 9. from 2. to 9.

18. He teaches the Multitude out of Peter's Ship, and after a miraculous
draught of Fish, which he had helped them to, he promises to make him and
Andrew, James and John, Fishers of men, Luke 5. from 1. to 12. Mark 1. from 16.
to 21. Mat. 4. from 18. to 23.

19. He calls Matthew the Publican from the receipt of custom to follow him,
Mark 2. from 13. to 15. Mat. 9. Verse. 9. Luke 5.27.28.

20. Matthew invites him, and many other Publicans and sinners, to a Feast; to
which he goes, and eats with them and justifies it, because he was a Physician
of Souls. He gives reason why his Disciples fasted not at that time, as the
Disciples of John and the Pharisees did, Mat. 9. from 10. to 18. Mark 2. from
15. to 23. Luke 5. from 29. to the end.

The Fourth Part of our Saviors Life from the Second Passover after his
Baptism to the Third, containing the Acts of the Second Year of his public
Ministry. In which we have these particulars.

1. Jesus goes again to Jerusalem at the Passover, and there heals on the
Sabbath day a man that had had an infirmity Thirty eight Years, lying at the
Bath of Bethesda; who at his command carries away his Bed, and being reproved
for it by the Jews, he he justifies himself by the warrant he had from him, so
to do. The Jews hereupon seek to put Jesus to death, as one that brake the
Sabbath, and made himself equal with God. Christ justifies this action, and
asserts his equality and conjunction with the Father in all his works, such as
are raising the dead, judging, receiving Divine honor, saving sinners,
quickening those that are dead in trespasses and sins: and farther shows by the
Testimony of his Father, of John, and of his Miracles themselves, and of the
Scriptures, who he was, John 5. from 1. to the end.

2. His Disciples pluck and eat Ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, and are by him
defended for it against the Pharisees, by Scripture and reason, Luke 6. from 1.
to 6. Mat. 12. from 1. to 9. Mark. 2. from 23. to 29.

3. He heals a man on the Sabbath day that had a withered hand, and proves that
the Sabbath was not profaned thereby: Hereupon the Pharisees and Herodians
consult to destroy him, Mark 3. from 1. to the 7. Mat. 12. from 9. to 15. Luke
6. from 6. to 12.

4. To avoid this danger, he withdraws himself to a private place, but
Multitudes flock to him, and he heals the diseased among them, forbidding
them to noise it abroad, that the Prophecy of him Recorded, Isa. 42.1. might
be fulfilled, Mark 3. from 7. to 13. Mat. 12. from 15. to 22.

5. He goes up to a Mountain to Pray, and continues all Night in Prayer and
then chooses out of his Disciples Twelve Persons to be his Apostles, whose
Names are there set down, and gives a reason why he chose Judas for one of
them, Luke 6. from 10. to 17. Mark 3. from 13. to 20.

6. Then he comes down with them, and heals diverse sick Persons, and the
multitude so tumultuously flowed in upon them, that they had not time to eat
Bread, and refresh themselves, Luke 6. from 17 to 20. Mark 3. from 19. to 22.

7. Seeing so great a Multitude there present, he went up into the Mountain
again, as a place of advantage to speak more audibly to them, and there
preached that Divine and excellent Sermon, called the Sermon in the Mount, in
which,

1. He propounds the eight Beatitudes.

2. He admonishes his Apostles of their duty, comparing them unto Salt, Light,
and a City set on a Hill.

3. He shows he does not oppose the Law, or the Prophets.

4. He vindicates several Laws from the corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, viz.
the Sixth, the Seventh and the Third Commandment, and the Law of Retaliation,
and the Law of loving our Neighbors.

5. He instructs his Apostles concerning giving Alms, concerning Prayer (giving
them a breviary or pattern of Prayer) and concerning fasting.

6. He disswades them from inordinate carking and caring for the things of this
life; and advises them in the first place to seek Gods Kingdom and his
Righteousness.

7. He dehorts them from rash judging, and from giving that which is Holy to
Dogs.

8. Exhorts them to fervency in Prayer; to do as they would be done by; to
strive to enter in at the strait Gate.

9. He gives them a Caveat to beware of false Prophets, teaching them how to
discern them.

Lastly, He shows them that it is not enough to profess him for their Lord and
Master in words, except they do his will, and perform his command, Mat. Chap.
5. Chap. 6. Chap. 7. Luke Chap. 6. from 20. to 50.

8. Having ended his Sermon he goes to Capernaum, and there heals the
Centurions Servant, by his word only, that lay sick of the Palsy; and highly
commends the Centurions faith; and upon this occasion foretells the Calling,
Conversion, and Salvation of the Gentiles. Luke 7. from 1. to 11. Mat. 8. from
15. to 14.

9. He raises from the dead a widows son at Nain, Luke 7. fr. 11. to 18.

10. John being still detained in Prison, and hearing a great fame of Christ's
Miracles, sends Two of his Disciples to him, (not so much for his own as their
satisfaction) to know whether he were the Messiah or no. Christ proves by his
Doctrine and Works, that he is the Messiah: He gives a glorious Testimony of
the Person and Office of John, as the first Preacher, that the Spiritual
Kingdom of the Messiah was begun; into which Multitudes thronged, though the
Pharisees rejected the counsel of God toward themselves. He upbraids the Jews
under the Parable of little Children in the Market place (sometimes piping
merrily, sometimes singing mournfully) that they would not be won neither by
John's Austerity, nor his Affability. Particularly threatens the Cities of
Corazim, Bethsaida; and Capernaum, with very heavy Judgments: He joyfully
acquiesces in the good pleasure of his Father, in hiding the mysteries of
Salvation from the wordly wise (who will not submit to the teachings of Christ)
and revealing them to Babes and Sucklings: He shows, the power of revealing the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven is committed to him by his Father; and
thereupon invites all weary and heavy laden sinners to come to him, and to take
his Yoke upon them, promising them rest, Luke 7. from 18. to 36. Mat. 11. from
2. to the end.

11. Simon a Pharisee invites him to eat with him, where Mary Magdalen bedeweth
his feet with her tears, and wipeth them with her hair; whereat Simon is
offended, but Christ defends her by the Parable of the debtors; he forgives her
sin and commends her Faith, Luke 7. from 36. to 51.

12. He goes up and down with his Disciples, Preaching the Gospel, and certain
pious women followed him, and ministered to him, of their goods; among whom was
Mary Magdalen, out of whom seven Devils had been cast, Luke 8. from 1. to 14.

13. He cures one so possessed, that the Devil had taken from him both the use
of Eyes and Tongue. The Pharisees blaspheme his Miracles, saying he did them by
Beelzebub, which he confutes several ways. He shows that Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, is never forgiven; that an account must be given of every idle
word, Mat. 12. from 22. to 38. Mark 3. from 22. to 31.

14. He rebukes the Pharisees for seeking a new sign: He refers them to that of
Jonas, which typified his Resurrection: He opposes against their
stiff-neckedness, the example of the Ninevites, and of the Queen of Sheba: by
the similitude of an unclean spirit, that was cast out and returned again, he
shows how it shall go with them, Mat. 12. from 38. to 46.

15. He shows whom he accounts his Mother and Brethren, Luke 8 from 19. to 22.
Mat. 12. from. to 51.46 Mark 3. from 31. to the end.

16. He teaches the People out of a Ship, presenting unto them nine Parables.
1. Of the Sower, the Seed, and four sorts of ground. 2. Of the Tares. 3. Of the
Seed growing insensibly. 4. Of the grain of Mustardseed. 5. Of the Leven. 6. Of
Treasure hid in a field. 7. Of the Merchantman and the Pearl. 8. Of the Net. 9.
Of the Candle set in a Candlestick, and not put under a Bushel. He shows the
cause why he taught in Parables, and expounds them to his Disciples, Mark 4.
from 1. to 35. Mat. 13. from 1. to 53. Luke 8. from 4. to 19. Luke 13. from 18.
to 22.

17. He passes over the Lake with his Disciples, sleeps in the Ship, and a
great Tempest arising, he is awakened by them, he stilleth the Tempest, Mark 4.
from 35. to 42. Mat. 8. from 23. to 28. Luke 8. from 22. to 26.

18. When they came on the other side of the Sea to the Country of the
Gadarens, he there dispossesseth a man of a Legion of Devils, and permits them
to enter into a Herd of Swine, who thereupon ran headlong into the Sea: The
Gaderens offended at this, desire him to depart their Coasts, which he does,
and commands him that was cured to abide there, to make known what great things
he had done for him, Mat. 8. from 28. to 35. Mark 5. from 1. to 21. Luke 8.
from 26. to 40.

19. He crosses the Sea again to Capernaum, where he is gladly received, Mark
5.21. ^uke 40. Mat. 9.1.

20. He raises Jairus's daughter that was dead, Luke 8. from 41. to 57. Mark 5.
from 22. to the end, Mat. 9. from 18. to 27.

21. He restores two blind men to their sight, Mat. 9. from 27. to 32.

22. He casts a Devil out of a man, which made him speechless, Mat. 9. from 32.
to 35.

23. He teaches now at Nazareth his Country, where he is despised, Mark 6.
from 1. to 7. Mat. 13. from 54. to 59.

24. He has compassion on the multitude who were as Sheep without a Shepherd;
and exhorts his Disciples to pray that Laborers may be sent into the Harvest,
Mat. 9. from 35. to 39.

25 He sends out his twelve Apostles to Preach, and to work Miracles, he gives
them their Charge and Commission, and fortifieth them against persecutions, and
promises a blessing to those that receive them, Mat. 10. from 1. to 43. Mark 6.
from 7. to 12. Luke 9. from 1. to 7.

26. The Apostles depart and Preach up and down, and cast out Devils, and
anoint such as were sick with Oil, and recover them; Mark 6. from 12. to 14.
Matthew. 11.1.

27. John Baptist is now beheaded by Herod, and his body buried by his
Disciples, Mark 6. from 17 to 30. Mat. 14. from 3. to 13.

28. Herod hearing of the fame of Christ, thinks him to be John Baptist risen
from the Dead; others think him to be Elias or one of the old Prophets, Mat.
14.1, 2. Mark 6. from 14 to 18. Luke 9. from 7. to 10.

29. The Apostles having preached up and down, return to their Master, and give
him an account of their Labors: He takes them with him into a desert place,
whither a great Multitude followed him, of about five thousand men, whom he
feeds with five loaves and two fishes, Mark 6. from 30. to 45. Mat. 14 from
13. to 22. Luke 9. from 10. to 18. John 6. from 1. to 14.

30. The People are so affected with this Miracle that they would forthwith
have made him King, but he withdraws himself to avoid it, and sends his
Disciples to Sea; in the mean time retires himself to the Mountain to pray;
then he comes to his Disciples (they being in a great Tempest) walking on the
Sea; Peter desires leave from him that he may come to him on the water, which
being granted, Peter being afraid begins to sink, but is saved by him. He
stilleth the Tempest whereby he is acknowledged to be the Son of God: He comes
again into the Land of Genezareth, and heals many sick persons, John 6. from
14. to 22. Mark 6. from 45. to 57. Mat. 14. from 22. to 37.

31. The multitude that had been miraculously fed by him, follow after him, and
find him at Capernaum: He reproves them for following him for loaves, and
admonishes them to seek for incorruptible food, which is to be obtained by
Faith in him: He shows that Faith in him comes from the Father: He declares
himself to be the Bread of life to true Believers; that his Flesh is meat
indeed, and his Blood drink indeed, which must be eaten and drunken Spiritually
to obtain eternal life. At this Doctrine several of his Disciples stumbled: he
instructs them concerning the right sense of his words: Many of his Disciples
forsake him: Peter and the other Apostles confess that he has the words of
eternal life, and abide with him: He declares that one of them is a Devil,
John 6. from 22. to the end.

The fifth part of our Saviors life, from the third Passover after his
Baptism, to the fourth, containing the Acts of the third year of his public
Ministry. In which we have these particulars.

1. Our Savior now goes up to the Passover at Jerusalem, and making there
but a short stay, returns into Galilee, John 7.1.

2. Certain Scribes and Pharisees come thither to him from Jerusalem, and
quarrel with him because his Disciples did eat with unwashen hands. He reproves
their Hypocrisy and Transgressing of Gods Commandments through their
Traditions, instancing in the Fifth Commandment. Then he shows what it is
that truly defiles a man, viz. that which comes from within, out of the
heart, Mat. 15. from 1. to 21. Mark 7. from 1. to 24.

3. He now retires himself into the borders of Tire and Sidon, where he casts
out a Devil out of the Daughter of a Canaanitish woman, highly commending the
strength of her Faith, who would not be discouraged though he called her Dog,
Mat. 15. from 21. to 29. Mark 7. from 24. to 31.

4. He heals one deaf and dumb, putting his fingers into his ears, and
saying, Ephatha, and touching his Tongue, Mark 7. from 31. to 38.

5. He goes up into a Mountain, and there he heals all manner of diseased
People brought unto him, Mat. 15. from 29. to 32.

6. He feeds four thousand men with seven loaves and a few little Fishes, Mat.
15. from 32. to the end, Mark 8. from 1. to the 10.

7. He refuses to give the Pharisees and Sadduces any new Sign from Heaven, but
refers them to what was prefigured by the rising of Jonah out of the Whales
belly, Mark 8. from 10. to 13. Mat. 16. from 1. to 5.

8. He warns his Disciples of the leaven and corrupt Doctrine of the
Pharisees, Sadducees and Herodians, Mark 8. from 13. to 22. Mat. 16. from 5. to
13.

9. At Bethsaida he restores a blind man to his sight, Mark 8. from 22. to 27.

10. Diverse opinions of the people concerning him. Peter's confession of him to
be the true Messiah, whom he commends, and promises upon the rock of that
truth to build his Church, which he will govern by the Ministry of his Apostles
and his other Servants that shall succeed them, giving them the Keys of his
Kingdom. He foretells his Death and Resurrection, and rejects the evil
Counsel of Peter, dissuading him from dying and suffering. He requires of all
that would be his Disciples, to be willing to bear the Cross, and to be ready
to lay down their lives for him. He gives them an intimation that some of them
there present should see a Type and resemblance of his second coming in the
destruction he should bring upon Jerusalem, and the Jewish Nation by the Romans
for their obstinacy. Mat. 16. from 13. to 29. Mark 8. from 27. to the end. Mark
9.1. Luke 9. from 28. to 28.

11. He takes Peter, James, and John into an high Mountain, and is
transfigured before them; Moses and Elias appearing to them: from Heaven he is
declared to be the Son of God. He teaches that John is that Elias that was to
come, Mat. 17. from 1. to 14. Mark 9. from 2. to 14. Luke 9. from 18. to 37.

12. He casts out a Devil that inflicted dumbness and deafness on a Lunatic,
which his Disciples were not able to do, the cause whereof is declared, as also
the power of Faith quickened by Fasting and Prayer, Mat. 17. from 14. to 22.
Mark 9. from 14. to 30. Luke 9. from 37. to 43.

13. He again foretells his Death and Resurrection, Mark 9. from 30. to 33.
Mat. 17. from 22. to 24. Luke 9. from 43 to 46.

14. He pays the half shekel for himself and Peter, miraculously fetching it
out of the Fishes mouth, Mat. 17. from 24. to 28.

15. He teaches by the example of a little Child, who is the greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and among his Disciples. He forbids to hinder such as
cast out Devils in his name. He promises a reward to any that do the least
good office to any that are his. He shows what punishment they are worthy of,
that give offense, and how narrowly men must beware they give not scandal to
little ones, whom the Holy Angels do take care of, and whom he is come to save,
as he declares by the similitude of a lost Sheep. He shows what mischiefs are
like to come to the World by reason of the offenses and scandals. That we must
refrain from whatsoever is an occassion of sin, or an hindrance to Salvation,
though as dear to us as our right eye, right hand, or foot, rather than go to
Hell, where the worm dies not, and where the fire is not quenched. That the
hearts of Christians must be seasoned with the Salt of Grace and Holiness, That
they his Apostles are the Salt of the Earth, and must be of savoury Spirits
themselves, and by the Savouriness of their Doctrine and Conversation, must
season others, and maintain concord and union among themselves. He gives rules
about dealing with a trespassing and offending Brother, and shows what the
office and power of the Church is in such a case, when the first and second
admonition does not prevail to reform him. He promises his gracious presence
with his Church, be the number great or small, when they join together in
Prayer or Church Censures. He shows how we must be ready always to forgive,
which is declared by the Parable of a King, forgiving one of his servants ten
thousand Talents, who would not forgive a fellow servant of his one hundred
pence, Mark 9. from 33. to the end. Mat. 18. from 1. to the end. Luke 9. from
46. to 51.

16 His Kinsmen now persuade him to go up with them to Jerusalem to the Feast
of Tabernacles, which he refuses for the present to do, John 7. from 1. to 10.

17. But after some days he sets forth privately with his own Disciples for
Jerusalem, journeying thitherward through Samaria, the Samaritans refuse him
lodging; James and John desire they may call for fire from Heaven upon them,
but are rebuked by him for it, John 7.10. Luke 9. from 51. to 57.

18. He declares his poverty to a Scribe that had a mind to follow him; he
commands another to follow him without delay, and not go home to bury his
Father. To another, that would have gone home to take leave of his friends, he
declares, that as he that starteth from the Plough is not fit for the Field, no
more is he that shifteth from his Calling fit for his service, Luke 9. from 57.
to the end. Mat. 8. from. 19. to 23.

19. He now sends out his Diciples to preach the Gospel and work Miracles. He
instructs them how they should fit themselves for their journey, and how they
should carry themselves toward their hearers: He threatens Corazin, Bethsaida,
and Capernaum for their great impenitency and contempt of the Gospel, Luke 10.
from 1. to 17.

20. Being now come to Jerusalem at the Feast of Tabernacles, he teaches in
the Temple, vindicates his Doctrine, and shows them how they may try Doctrines
and Teachers: Then he vindicates his practice in healing the impotent man on
the Sabbath day; diverse opinions of the people concerning him: He proceeds on
in teaching, which so enraged some of the Jews, that they sought to take him,
but for the present they could not. The Pharisees and chief Priests send their
officers to apprehend him. He threatens the unbelieving Jews, that hereafter
they shall seek him and shall not find him. On the last day of the Feast he
invites unto him all that are spiritually athirst, and promises the Holy Ghost
to those that believe in him; upon this a division arises among the people:
The Officers that were sent to apprehend him return without bringing him
Prisoner, and extol his Doctrine. The Pharisees are enraged at this, and speak
reproachfully of him, and of the people who were so taken with him, Nicodemus
gainsayeth their proceeding, pleading he was not to be condemned before he was
heard: Hereupon not agreeing among themselves, they part and go their several
ways, John 7. from 11. to the end.

21. Early in the morning he teaches in the Temple, whither they bring to him
a woman taken in Adultery, he frustrates their intention against him, and
dismisses the woman with a serious admonition. He teaches that himself is the
light of the World: He defends himself against the Pharisees by his own and his
Fathers testimony: He tells the Jews they shall hereafter seek him in vain and
shall die in their sins if they believe not in him: He declares who he is, and
by whom he is sent: He promises those that believe in him knowledge of the
truth, and freedom from the Servitude and Slavery of sin: He proves that the
unbelieving Jews wrongfully boasted that they were Abraham's and Gods Children,
they being Children of the Devil, because they fulfilled his lusts: He reproves
their unbelief, for which they slander him as a Samaritan, who has a Devil.
This calumny he confuteth, and testifies that Abraham saw his day, and that he
was before Abraham; at this they would have stoned him, but he secretly
conveyed himself from their fury, John. 8. whole Chapter.

22. He anoints the eyes of a man that was born blind with clay, and that on
the Sabbath day; and commanding him to wash in the waters of Siloam, restores
him to his sight. The man being brought to the Pharisees relates the same. They
reproach Christ as a breaker of the Sabbath, and seem to doubt whether this man
had ever been blind. They send for his Parents, who refer them to their Son,
whom they call and examine again: He answers them, and from this Miracle
argues, that Christ is no Sinner, but a person extraordinary and sent from
God; for which Testimony he is reproachfully cast out by them and
excommunicated: He is further instructed by Christ, believes in him, and
worshipeth him. Christ tells the Pharisees that they are Spiritually blind,
and therefore they remain in sin, because they are not sensible of their
blindness, John 9. whole Chapter.

23. Upon this occasion he propounds the Parable of the Faithful and true
Shepherd, and of the false and unfaithful, describing them by their contrary
marks and properties, and points out himself as the true Shepherd of his Sheep,
as also the true door of the Sheepfold. That he is no hireling, seeing that he
willingly lays down his life for his Sheep: His hearers are divided in their
opinions concerning him, John 10. from 1. to 22.

24. The Seventy Disciples return, and joyfully relate what they had performed,
whom he teaches to be humble, and wherein they ought most to rejoice. He
gives thanks to his Father who has hid Mysteries of Salvation from the wise
of the World, and has revealed them to despised little ones. He shows from
whom saving knowledge comes. He declares them happy whose eyes have seen the
Messiah in the flesh, whom many Prophets and Kings desired to see, and saw not,
Luke 10. from 17. to 25.

25. He answers a Doctor of the Law, inquiring what he must do to inherit
Eternal Life, and shows him who is his Neighbor, by a similitude of one fallen
among Thieves, and pitied by a Samaritan, Luke 10. from 38. to 43.

26. He is now entertained at Bethany by Martha and Mary, where he commends the
Godliness of Mary above the Carefulness of Martha, Luke 10. from 38. to 43.

27. He now a second time prescribes unto his Disciples that f^rm or pattern of
Prayer, which he gave them in the Sermon on the Mount. He stirs them up to
fervency and importunity in Prayer, from the Parable of a Friend coming to his
Friend at midnight, and especially to pray for the Holy Spirit, which the
Father will not deny to them that ask him, Luke 11. from 1. to 14.

28. He casts out a dumb Devil, and confutes the Blasphemy of those, who said
he did it by Beelzebub. He shows by a Parable the miserable state of that man
into whom the unclean spirit returns again after ejectment, Luke 11. from 14.
to 27.

29. He shows to a woman, who pronounced the womb blessed that bare him, that
they are blessed that hear the word of God and keep it, Luke 11. from 27. to 29.

30. He testifies that no other sign shall be given to those unbelieving Jews,
than that signified by Jona's rising out of the Whales belly, that is, the
wonder of his Resurrection. He opposes to their stifneckedness the example of
the Queen of the South, and the men of Nineveh: He teaches by the similitude
of a Candle, that the light of the Gospel must not be hid. He shows why that
generation continued so blind, namely, because the eye of their mind was
darkened, Luke 11. from 29. to 37.

31. He is invited to dinner by a Pharisee: He complies not with them in
washing before dinner. He there reprehends the Pharisees, Scribes, and Lawyers,
for their Hypocrisy, Ambition, and Cruelty against those sent to them from
God, and threatens the Judgment of God unto them. They lay new snares to catch
him, but fail of their expectation, Luke 11. from 37. to the end.

32. He warns his Disciples of the Leaven and corrupt Doctrine of the
Pharisees, he exhorts them to do all things uprightly, seeing all things shall
be brought to light, and not to be fearful of men in publishing his Doctrine,
but to depend on God's care of them, he exhorts them to own and profess him
before men, and he will own them at the day of Judgment. He shows the horrible
danger of Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; and exhorts them not to be
solicitous how to answer when they are brought before Councils, seeing they
shall then be instructed what to say by the Holy Ghost, Luke 12. from 1. to 13.

33. He refuses to arbitrate a difference about an Inheritance between two
Brethren; and upon that occasion he dehorts them from covetousness by the
Parable of a rich man, who would needs build his Barns bigger. He disswades
them from being over-careful and solicitous about earthly things; and by the
example of the Ravens and Lillies he shows that the care of this life should be
committed unto God; and that his Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof should
be sought in the first place: He exhorts to give Alms, and so to deposite their
riches in Gods hand, and to lay up Treasure in Heaven: To watch for his coming
(the time of which is uncertain, like the coming of a Thief in the Night.) And
if they approve themselves vigilant Servants, they shall be rewarded. He shows
that his Ministers are diligently to look to their charge, which if they do,
they shall be highly recompensed; but if they prove slothful, negligent, and
tyrannize over their fellow Servants, they shall be severely punished. He
forewarns them of persecution and trouble. He shows them that he himself came
to suffer, and to bring fire on Earth. He exhorts the People to discern, take
notice of, and improve the season of grace, and merciful visitation afforded to
them; for it is a dreadful thing to die without reconciliation with God, Luke
12. from 13. to the end.

34. From the report of certain Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with
their Sacrifices, and from the example of the eighteen, on whom the Tower in
Siloam fell; He takes occasion to exhort the Multitude to repent, and to that
end propounds the Parable of the barren Fig Tree, Luke 13, from 1. to 10.

35. He heals a Woman on the Sabbath day, that had been bowed together
Eighteen Years, and justifies the same against the Ruler of the Synagogue. He
compares his Kingdom to a Grain of Mustard Seed and Leaven, showing thereby the
power of his word, and spreading Nature of his Evangelical Doctrine, Luke 13.
from 10. to 22.

36. He comes to Jerusalem at the Feast of Dedication, and being compassed
about with the Jews, he is asked by them whether he be the Christ? He affirms
it, and proves it by his works. He tells them the reason why they believe not
in him, namely, because they are not of his Sheep. Those that are his Sheep
believe in him, and they are kept by him and his Father to eternal life. Upon
this the Jews would have stoned him as a Blasphemer; but he proves by Scripture
and by his works, that he did rightly call himself the Son of God. They attempt
to seize on him, but he escaped out of their hands, Luke 13. verse. 22. John 10.
from 22. to the end.

37. Being asked whether few should be saved, he exhorts them to enter in at
the strait Gate, and to take the present season of grace, from the Parable of a
man that had invited guests, and admitted those who came in due time; but shut
out the Loyterers. He shows that the Gentiles shall receive and embrace the
Gospel, and shall enter into the Kingdom of God, whilst they for their
impenitency shall be cast out, Luke 13. from 23. to 31.

38. He tells the Pharisees, who warned him of the great danger he was in from
Herod, that he feared him not; for he knew he must die at Jerusalem; and then
he passionately complains of the cruelty and stifneckedness of the People of
Jerusalem, and foretells their ruin, Luke 13. from 31. to 36.

39. He now cures one that had the Dropsy on the Sabbath Day, and justifies
the same. He reproves the ambition of the Pharisees, striving for the
upper-most Seats at Feasts, and exhorts them to humility. He exhorts them also
to feast the Poor, who cannot requite them, Luke 14. from 1. to 15.

40. By the Parable of a great Supper, and the excuses of those that were
invited (to shift off coming,) he upbraids the Jews with their ingratitude; and
foretells their rejection, and the calling of the Gentiles, Luke 14. from 15.
to 25.

41. He shows that he that will be his Disciple must deny himself, and all that
is dear to him, and must consider before hand what it may cost him (as he that
intends to build a Tower, or as a King that intends to wage war with another
King, must do) lest with shame he revolt from him afterward, and become
altogether unprofitable, like Salt that has lost its Savor, Luke 14. from 25.
to 36.

42. The Pharisees murmur that he coversed with sinners. Hereupon he shows Gods
tender care of the recovery of lost sinners by three eminent Parables; First,
Of the lost Sheep. Secondly, Of the lost Groat. Thirdly, Of the lost Son, Luke
15. whole Chapter.

43. By the Parable of the cunning though unjust Steward, he teaches them to
make friends to themselves of the unrighteous Mammon, and to be faithful in a
right employing their Temporal Riches. He exhorts them also to take heed of
serving Mammon, or setting their hearts on Riches. He reproves the Pharisees
for their Pride, Hypocrisy, and affectation of the opinion of men. He shows
that the Sacrifices prescribed by the Ceremonial Law Typified and prefigured
him, and that the Prophets Prophesied of him until John came, who declared him
to be actually come in the flesh, and began the Evangelical Ministry. He
declares the permanent Authority of the Moral Law, which was by the Pharisees
violated, particularly in the Seventh Commandment. By the Parabolical History
of Dives and Lazarus, he shows the different estate of the Godly Poor and the
unmerciful Rich in the other World, Luke 16. from 1. to 32.

44. He teaches his Disciples to take heed of giving occasion of offense and
scandal, and to forgive those that trespass against them, who are sorry for
their offense how often soever they have offended, Luke 17. from 1. to 5.

45. The Disciples hereupon pray for the increase of their Faith, that they may
depend on him for power to perform this, and his other injunctions. Upon this
occasion he describes the power of Faith, and by the Parable of a servant
coming from the service of the Field, and setting himself to other services
after, he declares that a man does not merit of God, by doing his duty, Luke
17. from 5. to 11.

46. He heals ten Lepers whereof but one returns to give him thanks, Luke 17.
from 11. to 20.

47. He shows that his Kingdom comes not with observation or outward pomp. He
sorewarns them of the days of Tribulation, that would come on that Nation after
his departure out of this World. He describes this his coming to execute
vengeance on those obdurate Jews, viz. That it should be suddenly, and would
surprise them in their deep security, as it was in the days of Noah, and Lot.
That there would be much of God's providence seen in rescuing some fr m that
calamity, wherein others would fall, Luke 17. from 20. to 38.

48. He incourages his Disciples to fervency, importunity, and perseverance in
prayer from the Parable of an importunate Widow prevailing with an unjust
Judge, Luke 18. from 1. to 9.

49. By a Parable of a Pharisee and a Publican he teaches that God hears and
justifies the penitent sinner, and not those which rely on their own
righteousness, Luke 18. from 9. to 15.

50. He now crosses Jordan, and there teaches and heals, Mat. 19.1.2. Mark 10.
to 1.

51. He answers the Pharisees question concerning divorce, that the Married
may not part but in case of Adultery. He shows the gift of continence is not
given to all, Mat. 19. from 3. to 13. Mark 10. from 2. to 13.

52. He commands that little Children should be brought unto him, and blesses
them, Mat. 19. from 3. to 16. Mark 10. from 13. to 17. Luke 18. from 15. to 18.

53. He answers a rich young man, who desires to know of him, what he must do
to inherit Eternal life, and gives him a special command to go and sell all and
give to the poor, to try him and convince him of his secret covetousness, who
thereupon departs very sorrowful. Upon this he teaches how hard it is for a
rich covetous man who trusts in his riches, to be saved. He promises them who
leave all for his sake, both Temporal and Eternal recompenses: And to his
Apostles (who had done this) he promises high favors at the day of Judgment,
viz. That they shall sit upon Twelve Thrones judging the Twelve Tribes of
Israel. Yet he cautions them to be humble minded, and to look to it that they
persevere, for many that are last shall be first, and first shall be last, Mat.
19. from 16. to 31. Mark 10. from 17. to 32. Luke 18. from 18. to 31. Luke 22.
from 28. to 31.

54. Under the Parable of an Householder hiring Laborers at several hours of
the day into his Vineyard, he shows that all ought to be Laborers; that God
does freely both call and reward; that none ought to have any confidence in
their own works, but a low estimation of themselves, and of whatever they do or
suffer for him, Mat. 20. from 1. to 17.

55. Lazarus is now sick at Bethany, and Jesus is sent for to him, but for the
present goes not, that he might die, and so God might be the more glorified in
raising him to life again, John 11 from 1. to 7.

56. He acquaints his Disciples now a Third time that he should suffer death,
and rise again the Third day; they thereupon diswade him from going into Judea,
but he tells them as long as his day lasted, Providence would secure him from
danger, Mat. 20. from 17. to 20. Mark 10. from 32. to 35. John 11. from 7. to
11. Luke 18. from 31. to 35.

57. He gives answer to the request of James and John, Zebedees Children,
desiring that they might sit one on his right hand, the other on his left in
his Kingdom. He exhorts them to prepare for sufferings and the Cross, and
commands all of them to be humble minded, and not to seek after dignity and
pre-eminence one above another, (remembering that their Office was a Ministry
and service, not a Lordship or Dominion) and to imitate his example who came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Mat. 20. from 20. to 29. Mark 10.
from 35. to 46. Luke 22. from 24. to 28.

58. He now sets forward toward Bethany for the raising of Lazarus who was
dead. His way lying through Jerico, when he came nigh the City he cured a
blind-man. Zacheus gets up into a Sycamore Tree to see him. He invites himself
to Zacheus's House, who gladly receives him, and testifies his repentance by
restitution, and is comforted by him. By the Parable of a Nobleman going into a
far Country to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to return, and delivering
Ten Pounds to his Ten Servants to employ and improve in his absence. He shows
he was not now presently (as they thought) to enter upon a Temporal Kingdom,
but to die and suffer, and so go to Heaven; and then to return again in an
eminent manner. In the mean time they ought to employ the Talents he had
entrusted them with for his service, and he would reward their diligence. He
cures Two other blind men, whereof one was Bartimeus, as he goes out of the
City, Luke 18. from 35. to the end. Luke 19. from 1. to 28. Mat. 20. from 29.
to 35. Mark 10. from 46. to 53.

59. He now approaches to Bethany, where Martha meets him, with whom he
speaks of the Resurrection of her Brother and all Believers. Mary comes out
to him also. He weepeth and goes to the grave, and finds Lazarus four days
buried, he prays to his Father and raises him to life again; whereupon many
believe in him, others go and tell it to the Chief Priests, John 11. from 11.
to 47.

60. The Chief Priests and Pharisees call a Council, and consult upon the
matter. Caiaphas unwittingly prophesies of the fruit of Christ's death: Here
they conclude This is the First Council at which the Jews determined to put our
Savior to death.
he shall be put to death, but to avoid their fury for the present, he withdrew
himself privately unto Ephraim, John 11. from 47. to 55.

61. He is inquired for at Jerusalem by those that came up sometime before the
Feast to purify themselves, John 11. from 55. to the end.

62. Six days before the Passover he is entertained at a Supper at Bethany by
Simon the Leper, where Lazarus fate at Supper with him. Mary pours a box of
precious ointment on his head and feet, wiping them with the hairs of her head.
For this she is blamed, and repined at by Judas; but defended by Christ. Many
Jews resort thither to see Lazarus newly raised, wherefore the Chief Priests
seek to put him to death also, John 12. from 1. to 12. Mat. 26. from 6. to 14.
Mark 14. from 3. The great week. Dominica Palmarum.
to 10.

63. On the first day of the week now commonly called Palm Sunday, he sets out
with his Disciples for Jerusalem. He sends two of his Disciples for an Ass,
which the owner lets them have, and being set thereon, he rides toward the
City. The people spread their Garments in the way, and cry Hosanna. When he was
come to the descent of the Mount of Olives many from the City met him with
branches of Palm Tree in their hands. The Pharisees speak to him to silence the
People, and to forbid them to make such acknowledgments to him. He answers that
if they should hold their peace, the very stones would cry out. Then coming
within the view of the City, he burst out into tears at the consideration of
their obstinacy, and their ruin that would ensue thereupon. He rides into the
City in this triumphant manner. The Pharisees are enraged hereat, Luke 19. from
28. to 45. John 12. from 12. to 20. Mat. 21. from 1.12. Mark 11. from 1. to 11.

64. He goes directly to the Temple. He drives the buyers and sellers See. 1.
of the third part of our Saviors life.
out of it. He heals the blind and lame that were brought to him. He justifies
the Children crying Hosanna, and teaches in the Temple Luke 19. from 45. to 49.
Mat. 21. from 12. to 17. Mark 11. from 15. to 20.

65. Certain Religious Greeks desire to see him. They speak to Philip about it.
Being brought into his presence, he speaks to them of his death, and the fruit
of it by the Parable or Similitude of a grain of Wheat, which is not lost when
it is sown, but springs up with increase. He shows that all that will be
his Disciples must follow him in suffering, and not think their life to dear to
lay down for him. He prays unto his Father, and is answered by Thunder, and
with it a voice from Heaven, he tells them that that voice came not for his
sake alone to comfort him, but to testify to them that he was the true
Messiah. He goes on to declare the glorious fruits of his death, as
particularly the delivering the World from the usurping power of Satan, and the
drawing all sorts of persons to believe on him after he has been lifted up on
the Cross. He shows that his suffering death in his state of Humiliation, and
yet abiding for ever in his state of Exaltation may well stand together. He
exhorts them to walk in the light whilst they have it, testifying that he
himself is the light of the World. The consequent of this was that though the
Jews generally continued blinded and hardened (as was foretold by Esaiah) yet
some of the Rulers believed in him, but durst not openly confess him. In fine,
he shows the benefits of Faith and mischiefs of Unbelief, John 12. from 20. to
the end.

66. Having thus spent the day, at night he goes with his Apostles to lodge at
Bethany, Mat. 21.17. Mark 11.11.

67. Next morning (viz. Monday Monday.
) he sets forth with them for Jerusalem again, and cursed the barren Fig Tree
by the way, and then goes to the Temple, and teaches there, and at night
returns with his company to Bethany again, Mat. 21.18, 19. Mark 11. from 12. to
15. Luke 21.37, 38.

68. Next morning, (viz. Tuseday Tuesday.
) coming again with his Apostles to the City, in the way they observed that the
Fig Tree, (which the day before he had cursed) was now quite withered. Hereupon
he discourses of the power of Faith in prayer, and exhorts them to forgive such
as have done them any wrong, Mark 11. from 20. to 27. Mat. 21. from 20. to 23.

69. He goes again to the Temple, and teaches there. The Chief Priests and
Scribes ask him by what authority he did these things. He answers them by
propounding to them a question concerning the Baptism of John. He convinces
them of their disobedience by the Parable of the two Sons; and shows them that
Publicans and Harlots embrace the Gospel before them, for all their fair
profession. He threatens their ruin by the Parable of a Lord of a Vineyard,
whose Servants and Son were abused, and slain by the Husbandmen. By the Parable
of the Marriage of the Kings Son, to which the guests invited refused to come,
and therefore others were invited in their stead, (among which one appeared
without a Wedding Garment, etc.) He declares the rejection of the Jews, the
calling of the Gentiles, and shows that some do join themselves to the Church
in Hypocrisy, Mark 11. from 27. to 34. Mat. 21. from 23. to the end. Mark 12.
from 1. to 13. Luke. 20. from 1. to 20. Mat. 22. from 1. to 15.

70. He gives an answer to the question of the Pharisees and Herodians whether
they might pay tribute to Caesar or no. Then he answers the question of the
Sadduces concerning a Woman that had seven Husbands, and proves to them the
Resurrection of the Dead. He answers a Doctor of the Law, demanding of him
which is the great Commandment, and tells him he is not far from the Kingdom of
God. He then propounds a question to the Pharisees how the Messiah could be
David's Son, whom David himself calls Lord; but they could not answer him, Mat.
22. from 15. to the end. Mark 12. from 13. to 28. Luke 20. from 20. to 45.

71. He now begins a severe commination against the Scribes and Pharisees,
exhorting his hearers to follow what they should rightly teach them out of
Moses and the Prophets; but not their example and works. He describes their
Hypocrisy and Ambition in making broad their Phylacteries and fringes of their
Garments, in loving salutations in public places, and to be called Rabbi. He
admonishes his hearers to take heed thereof and to study Humility. He
denounces eight woes against the Scribes and Pharisees, 1. Because they shut
Heaven against men. 2. Devoured Widows houses. 3. Made bad Proselytes. 4.
Taught perversely to swear by the Temple, Altar and Heaven. 5. Tythed small
matters, and neglected the weightier matters of the Law. 6. Made clean the
outside, but not the heart. 7. Were like whited Sepulchers. 8. Repaired the
Sepulchers of the old Prophets, and sought to kill the new. Then complaining of
the stiff-neckedness of the City of Jerusalem. He foretells her destruction,
Mat. 23. whole Chapter. Mark 12. from 38. to 41. Luke 20. from 45. to 48.

72. He commends the poor Widows gift of two mites, which she cast into the
Treasury of the Temple, Mark 12. from 41. to the end. Luke 21. from 1. to 5.

73. Going now out of the Temple (into which he never entered again) he
foretells the destruction thereof; Being come to Mount Olivet, he foretells the
grievous calamities that should befall the Jews, before the Temple, and Cities
destruction; and gives them Signs that should sometime before precede it, as
the arising of false Christ's; Wars, and rumors of Wars; Famines, and
Pestilence, and Earthquakes, and fearful sights and signs from Heaven: Great
persecutions against those that professed him: The arising of many false
Prophets and Heretical teachers: The spreading of the Gospel among all the
chief and principal Nations in those parts of the World: Then he gives them
signs that should immediately precede it. Namely, the begirting the City by the
Roman Army, at which time the Prophecy of Daniel should be fulfilled: The
arising of false Christ's and false Prophets, that should be so cunning that
they should deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect. He now comes to
describe the destruction it self, which he sets forth as the destruction of the
whole World, of which it was to be a Type. For the precise time when this
destruction should be, he tells them they must not expect to have it revealed
to them, it being hid from men and Angels, yea, and from himself also as man.
Yet two things he acquaints them with. 1. That this Judgment would come
suddenly, and unexpectedly on the Jews, as destruction did on the old World. 2.
See. 47. of this part
That the Providence of God would much appear in the rescuing of some out of
that calamity, in which others will fall. He exhorts them to watch and pray
that they may be accounted worthy to escape those calamities, by the Parable of
good servants, expecting the coming of their Master, and because the time of
his coming is uncertain, he presses them again to a diligent watchfulness by
the Parable of an Householder, watching against the coming of a Thief, Mat. 24.
whole Chapter, Mark 13. whole Chapter, Luke 21. from 5. to 37.

74. By the Parable of five wise and five foolish Virgins, he again exhorts
them to watchfulness against his coming; and by the Parable of Servants which
had each of them received Talents from their Lord to trade withal, he exhorts
to a faithful improvement of the gifts which God had given to every one. Then
he comes to describe his last coming to Judgment, and how he will distinguish
his ^heep from the Goats, and give and execute Sentence upon them both, Mat.
25. whole Chapter.

75. Having thus Preached his Prophetic Sermon on Mount Olivet, he comes to
Bethany and suppeth there; Rising from Supper, he girded himself and washed his
Disciples feet. Peter at first refused to admit of it, but afterward suffered
it. He teaches them hereby his spiritual washing of them, and exhorts them to
imitate this example of his Humility, and to be serviceable one to another. He
complains of, and detects the Traitor Judas, whom he discovers to John by
giving him a sop: After which the Devil entered into him, and he went forth. Our
Savior comforts himself against his near approaching death with this
consideration, that God should be glorified thereby. He exhorts his Disciples
to mutual Love. Peter promises he will lay down his life for him; but Christ
tells him he will deny him thrice, John 13. whole Chapter.

76. Wednesday. Wednesday.
On this day the Chief Priest and Elders met in Caiaphas's House, and hold the
second Council how they might take Jesus and put him to death. Whilst they were
thus consulting, Judas comes to them, and offers to betray him to them. They
bargain with him for thirty pieces of silver to do it; which he having
accepted, returns to his Master at Bethany, Mat. 26. from 1. to 6. and from 14.
to 17. Mark 14.1, 2. and 10, 11. Luke 22. from 1. to 7.

77. Thursday. Thursday.
Our Savior now sends Peter and John to Jerusalem to prepare the Passover
for him and his Disciples, and directs them by a special token to follow a man
that would lead them to a great Chamber ready furnished; which they accordingly
do, and having provided all things for the present Supper, return to him again,
Matthew. 26. from 17. to 20. Mark 14. from 12. to 17. Luke 22. from 7 to 14.

78. Being now ready to go with his Apostles to eat the Passover (which he was
to eat that night) he comforts them concerning his going away from them to the
Father, seeing he went to prepare Mansions for them at his Fathers house. He
declares to Thomas that he is the way, the truth and the life; and to Philip
that he that sees him sees the Father. He promises his Apostles that they
should do great Miracles, and obtain what they shall pray for in his name. That
they shall receive the Comforter, the H^ly Ghost, and not be left Orphans. He
exhorts them to love him and keep his Commandments, promising his, and his
Fathers abode with them, and that the Holy Ghost should bring all things
necessary to their remembrance. He leaves his peace with them, and declares
that they ought to rejoice, because he goes to the Father. He shows his
willingness to obey his Father, even in suffering. Then arising he goes forth
with them to Jerusalem, John 14. whole Chapter.

The sixth part of our Saviors life comprehends what he did and suffered at
the fourth Passover after his Baptism, at which He our Passover was
Sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. And here we have these observables.

1. Thursday evening he comes with his Company to the place prepared for him,
and there eats the Passover with them. He tells them there was one at the
Table with him that would betray him. He institutes the Sacrament of his
Supper. Of the Lords Supper see a particular tract at the end.
They conclude with an Hymn, Luke 22. from 14. to 24. Mat. 26. from 20. to 31.
Mark 14. from 17. to 27.

2. He warns Peter of the approach of his Trial, and that he should that very
night before the Morning-Cock crew, deny him thrice. He acquaints his other
Apostles with his own and their approaching troubles, Luke 22. from 31. to 39.

3. Before their departure from the place where they had eaten the Passover,
he gives them his farewell exhortations, contained in the fifteenth and
sixteenth Chapters of John, where he compares himself to a Vine and his
Disciples to branches, which abiding in him will be fruitful. He testifies his
singular love to them, and exhorts them to keep his Commandments, and to love
one another. He shows the greatness of his love to them, in that he is willing
to lay down his life for them, and calls them his friends and chosen ones. He
comforts them against the hatred of the world by many arguments. He shows
them that all manner of excuse is taken from the Jews, who have both heard his
Doctrine and seen his Miracles. He declares that the Holy Ghost shall testify
of him, and make his Person and Doctrine to be acknowledged in the World; and
they themselves should bear witness concerning him. He fortelleth them they
shall be persecuted, and must expect to meet with Excommunication and
Martyrdom. He comforts them with the promise of the Holy Ghost, who shall
convince the World of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, and shall lead them
into all truth, and shall glorify him, and shall in all things so accord with
him, that he shall evidence he has his message from him. He declares he shall
shortly be taken from them, but shall be seen again by them for a little while;
so that their Sorrows shall quickly be turned into joy. He tells that when the
Comforter is come they shall be more fully illuminated and not puzzled with
doubts as now they were. He promises that their prayers shall be heard that are
put up in his name, and for their encouragement he assures them not only of his
own intercession, but his Fathers love, he declares plainly to them his leaving
the World, and going to his Father. His Disciples hereupon are confirmed in
their belief in him. He forewarns them they should be scattered and fly from
him; yet his Fathers presence would be with him. He promises them, that
trusting in him, they should have peace, and bids them be of good cheer: for he
had overcome the World for them, John 15. whole Chapter. Joh. 16. whole Chapter.

4. He now pours out a most Divine and Heavenly Prayer unto the Father, wherein
he prays. 1. For himself, that the Father would now glorify him, (having thus
far finished his work) that he may give eternal life to those that know him and
believe on him. 2. For his Apostles, that the Father would keep them in unity
of love, and would preserve them from the evil of the world, and Sanctify and
fit them more and more for the great work of Preaching the Gospel. 3. For all
that shall believe on him, through their word, that they may be one here, and
eternally glorified with him in his Kingdom hereafter, John 17. whole Chapter.

5. Having ended his Prayer, he went with the eleven toward the Garden of
Gethsemane, at the foot of Olivet, John 18.1. Luke 22.39.

6. Judas as it seems slipped away when they rose from Supper, and went to his
Accomplices in the City, who were ready to execute their wicked design. As our
Savior goes along with his Disciples toward the Garden, he tells them they
will be offended at his sufferings that night, and like Sheep will be
scattered, when they shall see him the Shepherd smitten. Yet notwithstanding he
intended to meet them again in Galilee. He foretells Peter again of his fall
that night, which Peter seems to abhor, Mat. 26. from 31. to 36. Mark 14. from
27. to 32.

7. Being come to the Garden, he leaves eight of his Disciples behind, and
takes only Peter, James and John with him, and charging them to watch and pray,
he falls prostrate on his face, and prays to his Father, that, if he were
willing, that Cup might pass from him. An Angel from Heaven is sent to
strengthen him: He comes to his Disciples, and finds them sleeping, and
reproves them for it, and exhorts them again to watch and pray. He goes a
second time and prays more earnestly, being in an Agony, so that his sweat was
as it were great drops of blood: Returning to his Disciples he finds them
asleep again. He went away a third time and prayed to the same effect as
before, and coming to his Disciples, found them asleep again; then he bids them
sleep on; for he that would betray him, was at hand, Mat. 26. from 36. to 47.
Mark 14. from 32. to 43. Luke 22. from 39. to 47.

8. Judas immediately comes with a great band to take him, and betrays him
with a kiss. At Christ's word they fall back to the Earth. He speaks to them to
let his Disciples go. When they began to lay hands on him, Peter draws his
sword, and lays about him, and smote off Malcus'es Ear. Christ rebukes him for
his rashness, and heals the wound presently; declaring that he could have more
then twelve Legions of Angels for his guard, if he would be forcibly rescued.
His Disciples now fly and forsake him. He is apprehended. A young man that
followed him escapes their hands, Mat. 26. from 47. to 57. Mark 14. from 43. to
53. Luke 22. from 47. to 54. John 18. from 2. to 12.

9. He is first brought before Annas, John 18. from 12. to 15.

10. Then before Caiaphas and the Sanbedrim. In the night Caiaphas examines him
concerning his Doctrine and Disciples. An Officer of the High Priest strikes
him with the palm of his hand. They seek false witnesses to accuse him; at last
two came, who agreed not in their Testimony. The High Priest adjures him to
declare whether he were the Christ; he expressly says he is, and they shall see
him sit on the right hand of God, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Caiaphas
at this rent his Clothes, and he and the rest of the Bench pronounced him
worthy to die as a Blasphemer. Then there were vile abuses put upon him in the
High Priests house by the servants and others, by spitting upon him,
blindfolding of him, smiting and mocking him, John 18.15, 16, 19. And from 20.
to 24. Mat. 26. from 57. to 69. Mark 14. from 53. to 66. Luke 22. verse 54.63,
64, 65.

11. Peter having got into the High Priests Hall there denies him thrice, but
upon Jesus's looking upon him, he goes out and bewailes it bitterly, Mat. 26.
from 69. to the end. Mark 14. from 66. to the end. Luke 22. from 54. to 63.
John 18. from 15. to 19. and from 25. to 28.

12. Friday Friday.
Morning. The Elders and Chief Priests met together in Council again, and have
Jesus brought before them. They ask him again whether he were the Messiah, and
the Son of God; He tells them he was; hereupon they judge him again a
Blasphemer out of his own mouth, and lead him away bound to Pilate, Mat. 27.1,
2. Mark 15.1. Luke 22. from 66. to the end.

13. When they came to Pilates Palace they would not go in, lest they should be
defiled. Pilate coming forth to them, they accuse Jesus before him of three
things. 1. Of perverting the Nation. 2. Of forbidding to pay Tribute to Caesar.
3. Of saying that himself was Christ a King. Our Savior makes no reply to
these apparently false accusations. Pilate bids them judge him according to
their own Law. They reply they had not power to put any man to death. Pilate
hereupon examines him himself, and asks him whether he were the King of the
Jews? Our Savior answers he was a King, but his Kingdom was not of this World:
That he came into the World to bear witness to the truth. Pilate asks what is
Truth? yet would not stay for an answer, but bringing Jesus out to the gate
where the Jews stood, he professes he found no fault in him. The Jews at this
were more enraged, saying that he stirred up the People through all Jewry, even
from Galilee to that place. Pilate hearing that he belonged to Galilee, sends
him to Herod who was then in Jerusalem. Our Savior would not work any Miracle
before him, nor so much as vouchsafe him a word. Hereupon Herod and his
attendants abuse him, and mock him, and array him in a gorgeous Robe, and so
send him back to Pilate. Upon this occasion both the Governors were made
friends, Mat. 27. from 11. to 15. Luke 23. from 1. to 13. Mark 15. from 2. to
6. John 18. from 28. to 39.

14. Being brought before Pilate again, he calls the Jews, and tells them that
neither he nor Herod found any fault in him, he would therefore (to gratify
them) chastise him and so release him. Then it comes into his mind how he might
release him without any chastisement at all. He makes therefore a motion to
them to have Christ given them in honor of their Feast, and that they might be
the more willing to it, he matched him with Barabbas, but they by the
instigation of the Priests chose Barabbas, (though pressed three several times
by Pilate to the contrary) and cry out that Jesus should be crucified. When
Pilate saw that all this would not do, he orders Jesus to be soundly scourged,
supposing that that lesser punishment would have pacified the rage of the Jews.
The Soldiers hereupon strip him, scourge him, put a Crown of Thorns upon his
Head, smite him and mock him. Pilate now shows him to the people thus cruelly
used; they cry out Crucify him, Crucify him; for he made himself the Son of
God. When Pilate heard that, he was more afraid, not knowing how Divine a
Person Christ might be; therefore he examines him again concerning his original
and parentage, but our Savior gave him not a word. Pilate at this is offended,
that he would not speak to him, who had such power over him. Christ answers, he
could have no power over him, except it were permitted to him of his Father.
This so wrought on Pilate that he now seeks more earnestly to release him; but
the Jews cried out, if thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend;
By that word he is vanquished. He sits now upon another Tribunal in open view,
and has Jesus brought before him. He says to the Jews, behold your King. They
scornfully reject him, saying they had no King but Caesar. Whilst he is upon
the Bench, his Lady sends to him to have nothing to do with that just man. He
calls for water and washes his hands before them, and declares he is innocent
of the blood of this just person, and bids them look to it. They cry out, his
blood be upon us, and upon our Children. Then he released Barabbas, and
condemned Jesus to be Crucified. Mat. 27. from 15. to 32. Mark 15. from 6. to
21. Luke 23. from 13. to 26. John 18.39. and 40. John 19. from 1. to 17.

15. Judas repenting, brings back the money and casts it in the Temple, and so
goes and hangs himself. With the Money a Potters field is bought, as was
foretold by the Prophet Zachary, Mat 27. from 3. to 11.

16. They now lead forth our Savior to Crucify him; Simon of Cyrene is forced
to help him to bear his Cross. Two Thieves are led forth to be Crucified with
him. A great many people follow him, and several women, lamenting him, to whom
he foretells the misery that should come on them and their Children. When they
were come to the place of execution, they gave him a bitter portion of wine
mingled with Myrrh, which having tasted, he refused to drink. They strip him of
his clothes, and lift him up on the Cross, placing him between two Malefactors.
He prays, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Pilate caused a
superscription to be written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, This is Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews. Not long after he was fastened to the Cross, a
wonderful prodigious darkness began, and continued till three in the afternoon.
The Soldiers divide his Garments, and cast lots for his seamless Coat. They
that passed by reviled him. The Chief Priest and Rulers mocked him, saying he
saved others, himself he cannot save. The Soldiers also did the same, off^ring
him vinegar. One of the Thieves also cast the same in his Teeth, but the other
rebukes him for it, and prays unto Christ to remember him when he came into
his Kingdom. His Mother standing by the Cross is commended by him to Jehu's
care, about three of the Clock he cries out, Eli, Eli, Lamasabacthani. The Jews
scoffingly say, he calls for Elias to help him. He then said he thirsted. They
that stood by gave him vinegar, which having tasted, he said it is finished,
then crying with a loud voice, he said Father into thy hands I commend my
Spirit, and bowing his head he gave up the Ghost. The Centurion seeing these
things glorified God, saying, certainly this was a Righteous man, truly this
was the Son of God. Immediately upon his death four Prodigious things ensued.
1. The rending of the Veil of the Temple. 2. An Earthquake. 3. The rending of
the Rocks. 4. The graves were opened. The Centurion and people return to the
City much affected. Toward the evening the Jews besought Pilate, that the legs
of the Crucified persons might be broken to hasten their death, that so they
might be removed, which being granted, the legs of the two Thieves were
broken, but not of Jesus, being already dead, yet a Soldier with a Spear
pierced his side, out of which came blood and water, Mat. 27. from 31. to 57.
Mark 15. from 20. to 42. Luke 23. from 29. to 50. John 19. from 16. to 38.

17. Joseph of Arimathea begs his body of Pilate, and he and Nicodemus wrap it
in fine linen, with spices, and lay it in Joseph's new Sepulcher, hewn out of a
Rock in a Garden. They roll a stone to the door of the Sepulcher. Mary Magdalen
and other Religious women observed where his body was laid, and went, and
prepared Spices and Ointments, purposing more exactly to embalm him when the
Sabbath was over. The Chief Priest desired Pilate that the Sepulcher may be
secured. Hereupon a Guard is set upon it, and the Stone sealed with the public
Seal, Mat. 27. from 57. to the end, Mark 15. from 42. to the end. Luke 23. from
50. to the end. John 19. from 38. to the end.

SECT. V. Of our Saviors Death and Burial.
WE have now presented you with a short view of our Saviors Life, as also with
the History of his Death. Touching which, these things are further to be taken
notice of.

1. That the promised Messiah was to suffer according to the predictions that
went before of him. Esaias. 53.4, 5. Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried
our Sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Mark 9.12. And he answered, and told them, how it is written of the Son of man,
that he must suffer many things, and be set at naught, 1 Pet. 1.11. Searching
what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them did signify, when
it testistified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ and the Glory that should
follow. Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter
into his Glory? verse 46. Thus it is written and thus it behooves Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. Acts 26.22, 23. Having
obtained help of God, I continue unto this day witnessing both to small and
great, saying none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come. That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the People, and to the
Gentiles.

2. As his Sufferings in the general were foretold, so that he should Suffer
Death was also particularly determined. God had in his all-wise Council
determined, that his Son should die for the sins of men. The Serpent was to
bruise the heel of the Woman's Seed, and the same seed, viz. Christ to bruise
his head, Genesis 3.15. And Acts 4.27, 28. For of a truth against thy holy Child
Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles
and the People of Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy
Council had determined before to be done.

3. His suffering Death was typified, 1. By the Paschal Lamb slain. 2. By the
brazen Serpent lifted up, John 3.14. 3. By the daily Sacrifices, which
intimated, that without the shedding the blood of the Messiah there could be no
remission of sins.

Let us now consider in the next place how our Savior Suffered. The ancient
Creed says, He suffered under Pontius Pilate. Suffered under Pontius Pilate.
But who was this Pilate? Pilate was a Roman, sent by Tiberius the Emperor to
be Governor of Judea. About sixty years before our Saviors birth, the Jews by
Pompey the Great were made tributary to the Romans. For though during the life
of Hircanus the High Priest, and the Reign of Herod and his Son Archilaus, the
Roman State suffered the Jews to be Governed by their own Laws and Governors,
yet when Archilaus was banished by Augustus they received their Governors from
the Roman Emperors, being made a part of the province of Syria. Pilate
therefore was Procurator of Judea at this time, and under the President of
Syria was furnished with power of Life and Death. The Chief Priests and Elders,
though they condemned our Savior in their own Council as guilty of death, yet
could not put him to death, the power of Life and Death being at this time out
of their hands. Therefore they bring him before Pilate and vehemently accuse
him before him. Pilate saw plainly that it was for envy that they thus accused
him, Mat. 27.18. For when he had examined him he found no fault in him touching
those things whereof they accused him. Three times did he challenge the Jews to
show what evil he had done. Three times did he profess that he found no cause
of death in him. His own wife sent to him this Message, Have thou nothing to do
with that Just Man. And when he heard that our Savior declared himself to be
the Son of God, He was then more afraid. Yet at last through the vehement
clamor and importunity of the Jews, (who told him, if he spared him he was not
Caesar's friend (He was prevailed upon (even against the light of his own
Conscience) to condemn him to be Crucified. The Historians of those times
acquaint us that this Pilate was a very vile Person. That he was a man of a
high, rough and untractable Spirit; that he brought the Bucklers stamped with
the picture of Caesar into Jerusalem (which was an abomination to the Jews,)
and would not for all their entreaties remove them, till commanded by Caesar.
After that he Seized on the Corban or Sacred Treasury, and spent it upon an
Aquaeduct; nor could all their importunate Petitions divert his intentions.
When the Galileans came up to Jerusalem to worship God at his own Temple, he
mingled their blood with their Sacrifies, as we read, Luke 13.1. And being a
notorious wretch he was afraid of being accused at Rome, for the insolences
and rapines of his Government, and therefore to content the people, he released
Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus to be Crucified. But though herein he
acted against all principles of Honesty and Justice, yet he was an instrument
of fulfilling the determinate Council of God. For the promised Messiah (who was
to die for our sins) was to be crucified and to suffer upon the cross. This was
typified by the brazen Serpent, was Crucified.
Numb. 21.9. and Joh. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness:
even so must the Son of man be lifted up: This also was Prophesied of our
Savior, Psalm. 22.16. They pierced my hands and feet. And Zech. 12 10. They
shall look on me whom they have pierced.

Now our Savior was actually condemned and delivered up to that kind of death
by Pilate, who gave sentence it should be as the Jews required; and they
required he should be Crucified.

There are three things observable concerning Crucifixion.

1. 'Twas a painful death. The hands, and feet (which of all parts of the body
are most nervous, and consequently most sensible) were pierced through with
nails, which caused a lingering and tormenting death.

2. 'Twas an ignominious 'Twas servile supplicium. Thieves and Robbers were
usually by the Romans punished with this kind of death
death; and therefore among the Romans inflicted upon their Slaves and
fugitives.

3. A cursed death, as it is written, Deuteronomy. 21.13. Cursed is every one that
hangs on a tree. Having premised these things let us now consider what are
the instructions we should learn from this Article, that our Savior was
Crucified.

1. Christ has hereby redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, Gal. 3.13. that is, he has endured that most shameful death of
the Cross which was accounted accursed, and inglorious.

2. Christ has blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us,
and taken it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. One ancient custom (as
they tell us) of Cancelling Bonds was by striking a nail through the writing.
Our Saviors Crucifixion has done this for us.

3. Seeing Christ was Crucified for us, we should in imitation thereof labor
to Crucify sin in our selves. Our old man must be Crucified, that the body of
sin may be destroyed. We must remember that those that are Christ's must
crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts. Gal. 5.24.

4. We should often meditate on the bitter Cup our Savior drank, and on those
nails that pierced his hands and feet; that so we may be the more ready and
willing to suffer for him. We should consider how he humbled himself and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, teaching us thereby to humble
our selves, and with patience to bear the lowest condition for his sake; and to
imitate him who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame.

We come now to the next word in the Creed, viz. He Dyed. Our Savior was not
only nailed to the Cross but died thereon. He suffered upon the Cross a
dissolution, and died a true and proper death. Dead
He died for our sins according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.3. He was cut off
from the Land of the Living, Isa. 53.7, 8, 10. and made his Soul (that is, his
life) an offering for sin. He said, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit,
and having said so he gave up the ghost, Luke 23.26.

It Is true, Christ did voluntarily die; for he says, no man takes away my
life from me, but I lay it down of my self, John 10.18. That is, He laid not
down his life by a necessary compulsion, but by a voluntary election. He took
upon him a necessity of dying for our benefit. But the Jews were the causes of
his death, and by wicked bands crucified him, Acts 2.23. and slew him and
hanged him on a tree, Acts 5.30. They are truly said to have done it, because
by their incessant importunity they prevailed with Pilate to do it. Our Savior
therefore being truly put to death and suffering a real dissolution, let us
consider what union was dissolved by his death and what continued. In Christ
there were two different substantial unions. One of the parts of his humane
nature, each to other, (in which his humanity consisted, and by which he was
truly man;) the other of his natures divine and humane, by which it came to
pass that he was both God and Man in the same person. Now the union of the
parts of his humane nature was dissolved on the Cross, and a real separation
made between his Soul and Body. But yet there was no disunion of either of them
from his Deity. The union of the natures remained still, nor was the Soul or
Body (though separated one from the other) separated from the Divinity, but
still remained united unto it.

When he cried out My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? it intimates no
more but that he was bereft of those joys and comforts from the Deity which
were necessary to assuage the bitterness of his present Agony. Having thus
showed that our Savior did really die. Let us now inquire why it was needful
he should die. 'Twas requisite for these reasons.

1. That the new Covenant or Testament might be ratified by his blood. Where a
Testament is, there must needs be the death of the Testator, Heb. 9.16.

2. That he might perform that part of his Priestly Office which required the
shedding of his blood. For without shedding of blood there is no remission,
Heb. 9.22. Therefore Christ our Passover must be Sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.

3. If he would redeem us, he must give himself a ransom for us, 1 Pet. 1.18,
19. For we being enemies could not be reconciled to God but by the death of his
Son, Col. 1.21. And by his death he has destroyed him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.15. By his death was our redemption wrought,
as by the price that was paid, as by the atonement which was made, as by the
full satisfaction that was given, that God might be reconciled to us, who was
before offended with us.

and Buried.
Thus we have seen what our Savior died on the Cross. And as he really died by
the separation of his Soul from his Body, so his body was carried and laid up
in a Sepulcher, hewn out of the Rock in which never man was before laid. This
the Evangelists do sufficiently testify. Now that the Messiah was to be buried
was typified by Jonas, who was three days and three nights in the Whales
belly. And accordingly the Son of Man was to be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth, He is said to be three days and three nights in the
Grave, the whole time or space of three days being put for a part of it, by a
synecdoche see my Harm. Chapter 6. page 266.
Mat. 12.40. The Psalmist intimates as much Psalm. 16.9. My flesh shall rest in
hope, for thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, My Soul In Hell that is, my dead
body in the Grave, see the next.
nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption, Isay. 53.9. He was cut off out of
the land of the living. He made his Grave with the wicked and with the rich in
his death, Christ being put to death, his body was by Joseph of Arimathea
begged of Pilate, and by him and Nicodemus (one of their great Council) taken
down and wound in fine linen with spices (as the manner of the Jews was to
bury) and laid in a new Sepulcher in a Garden nigh the place of his execution,
and a great stone rolled to the door of the Sepulcher, Matthew. 27.60. Thus the
design of the Jews made his Grave with the wicked, intending he should be
buried with them who were crucified with him. But the design of Heaven placed
him with the rich in his death, and caused a Councellor and a Ruler of the Jews
to bury him. So that we may interpret that place of Isaiah thus, He was buried
nigh to the wicked, yet with the rich when he was dead. Our Savior
notwithstanding the malice of the Jews being thus honorably buried. The Chief
Priests desired of Pilate, that the Sepulcher might be made sure, lest his
Disciples should steal him away. which was accordingly done, the Stone being
sealed with the public Seal, and then a watch was set upon the Sepulcher.

We come now to consider what improvement we are to make of this Article.

1. Then seeing Christ did really die and was buried, let us testify our
communion with him in his death, by dying unto Sin.

2. In his Burial, by the burial of the old man.

3. In his Resurrection, by rising unto newness of life. This the Apostle hints
to us as our duty, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

SECT. VI. Of that Article in the Creed. Descended into Hell
He descended into Hell.
AFter Christ's Crucifixion, Death, and Burial, the Creed subjoyns He descended
into Hell. In treating of which I must in the first place suggest this, that
this Article of Christ's descent into Hell was not in the ancient Creeds. It Is
not found in the Rules of Faith delivered by Irenaeus. lib. 1. c. 2. by Origin.
lib. (...), or Tertullian, Adversus Prax. cap. 2. It Is not in those Creeds that
were made by the Councils as explications of this Creed; particularly not in
the Nicene, where the words are these, He was Crucified for us under Pontius
Pilate, He suffered and was buried, and the third day he rose again according
to the Scriptures. It was not in the Roman, or any of the Oriental Creeds. This
being premised we come to consider this Article, which cannot with any show of
reason be understood of Christ's Divine nature, which is every where present,
and cannot be said either to ascend or descend. It must therefore be understood
of his humane nature. And here it will be needful to enquire whether it be to
be understood of his Soul or of his Body. If it be to be understood of his
Soul, it must be meant either Metaphorically or really. Some understand it
Metaphorically, and so by Christ's descent into Hell they understand those
inexpressible sufferings of his Soul, See Calv. Instit. lib. 2. c. 16.
(which of all his sufferings, were the most grievous) by which he felt the
wrath of God in his Soul for our sins. But these sufferings were all antecedent
to his death, he having suffered part of them in the Garden, and part on the
Cross, and all before he commended his Spirit into the hands of his Father, and
said it is finished and gave up the ghost. But the descent into Hell (as it now
stands in the Creed) seems to signify something done after his death.
Besides, the torments of the damned are surely such as these, 1. Remorse of
Conscience or the neverdying worm. 2. A bitter sense of an utter rejection from
the favor of God. 3. Despair of ever being eased of that unsupportable misery;
Now certainly none of these could befall our Savior. He did not endure so much
as for a moment any of the Hellish torments. Therefore surely in this sense
Christ's Soul did not descend into Hell. Others hold that Christ's Soul did
really and by a local motion descend into Hell. This they pretend. 1. To prove
and that from three places of Scripture. And 2. To assign the ends for which he
did thus descend. We shall examine both. First They say, that though these
words are not formally expressed in the Scriptures, that Christ descended into
Hell, yet they are contained virtually in them, which they will prove. 1. From
Ephesians. 4.9. Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended, first
into the lower parts of the earth? by which they understand Hell. For answer,
by the lower parts of the earth, I humbly conceive is meant, the earth it self,
which is the lowest part of the World, as Heaven is the highest. For before
Christ could ascend unto Heaven, it was necessary he should descend to the
Earth by his incarnation, but there was no necessity of his descending into
Hell. And further, the Grave may be called one of the lower parts of the earth
in opposition to the surface or upper part of it, on which we live. And this is
all that seems to be meant in this place. 2. They pretend to prove it from 1
Pet. 3.19. where it is said, that Christ being put to death in his humane
nature, was quickened or raised up again by the power of his Spirit or Godhead,
by which he preached to the Spirits in Prison, whence they infer that he
descended into Hell to preach to the Spirits there in torments. Answer, From
these words it appears. 1. That Christ preached in the days of Noah by the
same Spirit, by the virtue and power of which, he was raised from the dead. But
that Spirit was not his Soul but something of a greater power. 2. those to whom
he preached were disobedient all that time, the long-suffering of God waited
for their repentance and return, while the Ark was preparing. And 3. Their
Souls or Spirits, for their disobedience, are now in Hell, and for refusing of
that mercy that was offered to them by the preaching of Christ. It Is true
indeed, this was not performed by an immediate act of the Son of God, as if he
had personally appeared on earth and actually preached to the old world, but it
was performed by the Ministry of Noah (who was guided and inspired by his
Spirit) and accordingly is called a preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. The
third place they allege for the maintenance of their opinion is, Acts 2.25,
26, 27, (a place that relates to Psalm. 16.10.) Thou will not leave my Soul in
Hell, etc. Therefore (say they) surely Christ's Soul did locally descend into
Hell. I Answer, Soul is sometimes taken properly only for the Soul or Spirit of
a man, sometimes improperly, for the whole person as Acts 27.37. We were in the
Ship two hundred threescore and sixteen Souls. Sometimes the Hebrew word,
(...), Nephesh, which signifies a Soul, does also signify a dead body, as
Levit. 19.28. Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, Levit.
21. v. 1. There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people, Numb. 6.6.
All the days that he separateth himself unto the Lord, he shall come at no dead
body. In all which places the word rendered here the dead or dead body is
Nephesh. And Anima is used pro cadavere, in Virgils Aeneiad. 3. animamque
Sepulchro condimus. And as the word Nephesh sometimes signifies a dead body and
might have been so rendered in Psalm. 16.8. so the word Sheol there rendered Hell
does also sometimes signify the grave. As Psalm. 55. v. 15 Let death seize upon
them, and let them go down quick into Hell: Psalm. 141.7. Our bones are
scattered at the graves mouth, where the word Sheol signifies the grave and not
a place or receptacle of Souls under the earth. And let this be further
considered that these words are to be understood only of Christ's Resurrection
(as appears plainly by the Apostles drift, v. 31.) and prove not at all the
deliverance of his Soul out of Hell, but of his body from the Grave. And if the
words instead of, [Thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell,] had been rendered thus
(as the Hebrew words, as we have shown, will well bear) thou will not leave my
dead body in the Grave, nor suffer thine holy one to see Corruption, there had
been no pretense to allege this place to prove Christ's descent into Hell.
Having thus examined their Scripture-grounds for this Doctrine, I come now to
consider the ends assigned by them, why our Savior should thus descend. And
those are two,

1. Some hold that he descended into Hell to deliver the Souls of the
Patriarchs detained till then (as they suppose) in limbo Patrum, that is, in an
out-skirt, or outward region The Papists divide Hell into four Regions 1. The
Hell of the Damned or place of everlasting torments. 2. Purgatory, where they
say the Souls of such as were not sufficiently purged from their sins in this
life are detained for the through purging of them. And are there in torment,
equal for the time, to that of the damned. 3. Limbus infantium, a place where
they suppose such children are disposed of, as die without Baptism, whom they
suppose to suffer the loss of H^aven and heavenly happiness, but no pain or
torment. 4. Limbus patrum, Where in like manner the Fathers before Christ (as
they suppose) were detained, though suffering no pain, yet wanting the joys of
H aven. And they say Christ's Soul when it was separated from his Body descended
thither to deliver them from thence, and to carry them to Heaven.
of Hell, where they suffered no pain indeed, yet wanted the joys of heaven. I
Answer, There is no ground to believe that the Souls of the Patriarchs or other
Righteous Persons, that died before the coming of Christ, were kept in any
place below, which can be called hell or limbus Patrum. Abraham's bosom surely
was in the Heavens above, far from any region where the Devil, and his Angels
were. Elias was carried up in a Chariot to Heaven; and our Savior says, Many
shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 8.11. And surely the Kingdom of Heaven
is no region of Hell. This also must be remembered, that Christ's death was
efficacicous for the Salvation of Believers before his coming as well as since,
he being a Lamb slain (in the decree of God) from the beginning. And therefore
no necessity to place the Patriarchs in limbo, our Savior having by his
Allsufficient merits, and intercession provided a better place for them.

2. Others say that the end of our Saviors descent into Hell was to triumph
over Satan, and all the powers below, within their own dominions. And the
places of Scripture they bring to prove it are Col. 2.14 15 He blotted out the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross: And having spoiled
Principalities and Powers he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in it. And Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on High, he led
Captivity Captive and gave gifts unto men. I Answer. From these two places of
Scripture no more can be proved than this, that Christ triumphed over
Principalities and Powers at his death upon the Cross, and led Captivity
Captive at his ascension into Heaven. And if the places be well weighed, I
believe they will be so far from proving that Christ descended into Hell to
triumph there, that they will appear more proper to persuade the contrary. For
why shoud he go to Hell to triumph over them, over whom he had triumphed on the
Cross? And why should he go to Captive that Captivity then, which he was to
lead Captive when he ascended into Heaven? And further, in vain shall we
pretend that Christ descended into Hell to lead Captivity Captive if we withal
maintain, that when he descended thither, he brought none away that were
Captive there. And for his triumphing over his enemies in Hell, surely the
Prophet David intended no such thing when he said, Acts 2.26, 27. Therefore did
my heart rejoice and my tongue was glad because thou will not leave my Soul in
Hell. He speaks of it as a matter of joy and gladness, as a matter of great
benefit not to be left there. But can it be accounted a benefit or matter of
joy to any one not to be left or permitted to stay in that place to which he
came purposely that he might triumph over his adversaries, whom he had
conquered? surely no. So that there seems not to be any sufficient ground to
assign either of these for the ends of his supposed descent. But to come closer
to the matter, none need trouble themselves to find out ends why our Savior
should descend thither, seeing there is no express place in the Scripture where
the Holy Ghost says, that Christ did descend into Hell, the place of the
damned. The four Evangelists that wrote the History of our Savior make no
mention of his going to any such place. The Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2.
mentions Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, but not a word of his descent
into Hell. This was no part of the Gospel which Paul Preached. And for the
further clearing of this matter, let us consider these things. 1. His Godhead
could not descend, being every where present as we said before. 2. His Body was
laid in the Grave. 3. His Soul went not to Hell, but immediately to Paradise
the place of joy and bliss, Luke 23.43. This day (says our Savior to the
penitent Thief) shall thou be with me in Paradise. These things being premised
I see not that this article of Christ's descent can be understood of his Soul
either metaphorically or really. Others therefore understood it of his body. And
here also is some difference. For some by Christ's descending into Hell
understand only his burial, because in those Creeds where this Article of
Christ's descent was expressed, there is no mention of his Burial, but it is
wholly omitted. Thus the Athanasian Creed, who suffered for our Salvation,
descended into Hell, rose again the third day from the Dead. And Ruffinus tells
us, that though the Oriental and Roman Creeds had not these words in them, that
Christ descended into Hell, yet they had the sense of them in the word Buried.
By which it appears that the first intention of putting these words into the
Creed was to express the burial of our Savior, and the descent of his body
(...) (...) quasi (...), locus invisi^^lis, sic ^eddidit v^tus I^enai interp^^s.
into an invisible place, namely, the Grave. The Aquileian Creed is the first
that we read of, that mentioned both his burial and descent into Hell: But
Ruffinus thinks they intended by both expressions one and the same thing,
though others by mistake (as it seems) did from the latter expression conclude
that our Saviors Soul did actually and locally descend into Hell. But we have
showed before what little ground there is for that opinion. But there are some,
who by Christ's descent into Hell, will not allow, should be meant his burial
only; for then (say they) there will be a tautology in the Creed, which that in
so short a symbol the composers of it would be guilty of, is hard to imagine.
Others therefore to obviate that objection say, by his descent into Hell is not
to be understood his burial, but his continuance under the power of death for
some time, though it was very short. For death had no long dominion over him,
Romans 6.9. This I acknowledge to be a true and safe sense. But that (...) does
signify a permansion or continuance for some time in the state of the dead,
does not to me appear. However let every pious and judicious person follow his
own Judgment herein, especially seeing, as the learned Vossius tells us, The
Fathers did not hold this descent of Christ into Hell for an Article of Faith.
Patres hoc dogma de descensu animae Christi non habuere pro capite, sive (ut
nunc loqui solemus) pro articulo fidei. Vnde id videas prope in omnibus
symbolis omitti: ut in ipsius synodi Nicenae symbolo: ubi profecto non
praeteriissent, si dogma hoc agnovissent. Quippe eo nihil magis valuisset ad
refellendum Arrium, siquidem is negabat Christum habuisse animam, ac
Divinitatem ei pro anima fuisse, aiebat. Nec hujus meminit confessio fidei
synodi Illyricae nec meminere Concilia duo Occumenica Constantinopolitanum, and
Chalcedonense. Sic ergo statuimus Orientales per descensum Christi ad inferos
primitus intellexisse, id quod Occidentales vocarunt Sepulturam: Et errore
quodam factum esse, ut cum prius qui unum dicerent, alterum praeterirent, ambo
postea caeperint conjungi. Sane temporibus Ruffini, id est, circa annum
quadringentesimum ipsa ecclesia Romana erat contenta meminisse solius
sepulturae. Aquileiensis vero Ecclesia habuit quidem utrumque in symbolo suo,
sed si ex Ruffini mente judicandum, unum idemque ambobus significari
arbitrabatur. Ruffini verba in expositione symboli haec sunt. Sciendum est quod
in Ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non habetur additum, descendit ad inferna sed
neque Orientis in Ecclesiis habetur hic sermo. Vis tamen verbi eadem videtur
esse in eo quod sepultus est. Errore etiam illa duo conjungi judicium est
doctissimi Schindleri, sic in Lexico suo scribentis in voce Sheol. Sheol
significat Sepulchrum. Genesis 44.29. deducetis canos meos (i. e. canitiem meam,
vel me canum ex senectute) in Sheol, id est, in terram, quatenus est mortuorum
receptaculum 1 Reg. 2. v. 6. 9. Neque sinito canitiem ejus descendere cum pace
(...), ubi Gehennam non possumus intelligere, nec enim hec poena a Judice
terreno infligitur sed plane sign atur Sepulchrum, statusque mortuorum.

SECT. VII. Of our Saviors Resurrection. The third day he rose again from the
Dead.

OUr blessed Lord and Savior (as we have showed) was crucified, put to death
and buried. We come now to show that the third day after his burial, He rose
again from the Dead. And here several particulars will fall under our
consideration. 1. We shall show That it was prophesied of the Messiah that he
should rise from the dead. 2. That Jesus our Lord did so rise as was foretold.
3. We shall produce the proofs of his Resurrection. 4. We shall show the
principal cause of his Resurrection. 5. The time 6. The ends for which he
arose. I begin with the First, namely, that Christ's Resurrection was prophesied
of and foretold. And this may appear from Acts 2.31. Where the Apostle shows us
that David seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ; that his
Soul was not left in Hell, neither did his flesh see corruption. Christ himself
did foretell it, Mat. 17.22.23. The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands
of men, and they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again.
And John 2.19. Destroy this Temple (viz. of my Body) and in three days I will
raise it up. Christ had so plainly and so often foretold his Resurrection that
the Chief Priests and Pharisees could say to Pilate, Sir, we remember that this
Deceiver said while he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again. And
the Apostle Paul professes, Acts 26.23. that he said no other things then what
Moses and the Prophets did say should come, viz. that Christ should suffer and
that he should rise from the Dead. And as Christ's Resurrection was prophesied
of, so it was typified and prefigured. 1. By Isaac, Genesis 22. who was bound, and
laid on the Altar, and as good as dead in his Fathers account, yet Abraham
received him from the dead again in a figure, Heb. 11.19. that is, in a figure
of Christ's Resurrection. 2. By Jonas, Matthew. 12.40. as Jonas was three days and
three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth. 2. Jesus Christ our Lord did so rise as
was foretold. The Lord of Life was buried on that day on which he was
Crucified; and his body was in the grave some part of that day, and all the
next day, and some part of the day following. And very early on the first day
of the week he arose. The Apostles to whom he showed himself alive after his
passion by many infallible proofs gave witness of his Resurrection, Acts 1.3.
He being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things, pertaining to the
Kingdom of God. And our Savior himself after his Resurrection, said to his
Apostles, Luke 24.39, 40. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self,
handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have;
and when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. 3. For a
further proof of his Resurrection, let us consider the manner of it, and his
several Appearings after it. 1. Very early on the first day of the week with a
great Earthquake our Lord arose, and an Angel descending rolled away the stone,
and sat thereon. The watchmen are frighted away. 2. Mary Magdalen, Joanna,
Mary the mother of James with others, come to the Sepulcher with spices
prepared to embalm him. The Angel speaks to them not to be afraid, but to come
and see where Jesus had been laid, but was now risen. He bids them go tell his
Disciples that in Galilee they should see him. 3. The women go and tell the
same to the Disciples, but their words seemed to them as idle tales. 4. Peter
and John run to the Sepulcher and see the linen clothes in which Jesus was
wrapped; but his body was not there. They return home wondering: but Mary
Magdalen still stayed there weeping, and looking back she saw Jesus; yet
thought it had been the Gardner, but upon his speaking to her she discerned
that it was He. This was his first appearing after his Resurrection. 1.
Appearing.
She goes to embrace his feet, which he forbids, but sends her to tell his
Disciples, (whom he calls his Brethren;) which she accordingly does, but they
believe her not. The other women run to the Sepulcher to try if they likewise
could see him; and being there told by the Angel that he was risen, Christ
meets them in the way and says All-Hail, and sends them to his Brethren to
tell them they should meet him in Galilee. 2. Appearing.
This is his second appearing. The affrighted watchmen who had fled into the
City and had acquainted the Chief Priests with all that had happened, have money
given them to say that his Disciples stole him away while we slept. But how
miserable a fiction was this? For if they had stolen his body away, (which yet
they did not) could they have put life into it? 3. Appearing.
And we see our Savior is alive again. His third appearing was to the
Disciples that were going to Emaus. His fourth was to Simon Peter. 4. Appear.
His fifth appearing was to his Disciples met together, Thomas being absent. 5.
Appear.
Here he shows them his pierced hands and side, See these things morefully set
down in the 8th. Chapter of the 6th. Book of my Harmony.
and eats a piece of a broiled fish and an honeycomb with them; bids them
tarry at Jerusalem till the gifts of the Holy Ghost should be poured forth upon
them. He gives them a new Commission, and breaths on them, saying, Receive ye
the Holy Ghost; adding, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins
ye retain, they are retained. Thus he appeared five times on the day of his
Resurrection. His sixth appearing was to his Disciples on the eighth day after
his Resurrection, 6. App^ar.
being the first day of the Week, Thomas being present, whom he condescends so
far to satisfy, that he cries out, my Lord and my God. 7. Appear.
His seventh appearing was to several of his Disciples at the Sea of Tyberias,
as they were fishing; he helps them to a great draught of Fish (having before
caught nothing) whereby they knew him. Peter casts himself into the Sea to swim
unto him. The other Disciples come to him by boat. He eats with them bread and
fish. He asks Peter thrice whether he loved him, and commands him to feed his
Sheep. He foretells him of his future sufferings, and reproves him for his
Question concerning John. 8. Appear.
His eighth appearing was on a Mountain in Galilee to above five hundred at
once. Where he gives commission to his Disciples to go, and teach all Nations,
and baptize the Converted. And promises that not only many shall be converted
to the Faith, but that miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost shall be conferred on
them that believe, as casting out Devils, speaking with tongues, etc. and that
he will be with them and their successors to the end of the World. ^. Appear.
His ninth appearing was to James. His tenth and last was on the fortieth day
after his Resurrection; 10. Appear.
At which time having commanded them to wait at Jerusalem for the descending of
the Holy Ghost upon them, and answered their question, whether he would restore
the Kingdom to Israel at that time or no, He led them forth to Mount Olivet,
and there lifting up his hands, and blessing them, he was carried up into
Heaven, a Cloud receiving him out of their sight. Two Angels appearing to them,
assure them that he will so come to Judgment as they had seen him go to Heaven.
And thus much for our Saviors several appearings after his Resurrection.

Fourthly, Let us consider how our Savior arose. The principal cause of his
Resurrection was God himself. For no other power then that which is Omnipotent
can raise the dead, as the Apostle intimates, Acts 2.32. This Jesus has God
raised up, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. according to the working of his mighty power, which
he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead and set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places. This great work is attributed to the Father,
but not to him alone; For to whomsoever that infinite power does belong, by
which Christ was raised; That Person must be acknowledged to have raised him.
The Son of God therefore being of the same essence and consequently of the same
power with the Father, and the same being true also of the Holy Ghost, we must
accordingly acknowledge that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost raised up Christ
from the dead. John 2.19, 21. Jesus said unto them, destroy this Temple and in
three-days I will raise it up, he spoke of the temple of his body So that not
only God the Father raised the Son, but also God the Son raised himself, by the
power of his Divinity, which was never separated after his incarnation either
from his Body or his Soul.

5. Let us consider the time when he arose, viz. on the third day from his
passion. This was foretold of the Messiah not only that he should rise again,
but that he should arise the third day after his death, it was typified by
Jonas as we showed before. Our Savior did rise properly on the third day after
his death; and he was three days and three nights in the heart of the earth,
synecdochically the whole time or space of three days being put for a part of
it. Our Savior rose the first day of the Week: and his Resurrection being so
eminent a declaration, that he had fully accomplished the work of our
Redemption, from thence the Sabbath was changed to that day. Acts 20.7. And
upon the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them. 1 Cor. 16.1. As I have Ordained in the Churches
of Galatia so do ye. Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay
by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come. He ordains that their Collections for the poor Saints and oblations
should be on that day. And St. John says Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lords day. Thus the observation of the seventh day of the week, which the Jews
kept, did cease and was buried with our Savior. And the observation of that
day on which the Son of God rose, by the practice of the blessed Apostles was
transmitted to the Church of God, and so has continued in all ages of the
Church ever since. As God spoke by Moses to the Israelites, Exodus 31.13.
Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you. viz.
that you profess your selves to be my people in an especial manner. So they
that belong to the Church of Christ are known by observing the first day of the
week, on which he arose, and by this mark (among others) are distinguished from
such who own not Christ nor his Gospel.

6. And lastly, Let us consider the ends for which Christ arose? And those were
such as these, 1. for our justification. Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our
offenses and rose again for our justification. 2. To assure us of our
resurrection. If Christ's body had not been raised, how could we have expected
the Resurrection of our bodies? The Resurrection of the members depends upon
the Resurrection of the Head. 2 Cor. 4.14. 3. That he might be declared to be
the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4. by his Resurrection from the dead.
Therefore says the Apostle, Acts 13.32.33. We declare unto you glad tidings,
how that the promise which was made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the
same unto us their Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again, as it is
also written in the second Psalm. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. Christ was the Son of God before, but then he appeared so to be against
all contradiction. For he arose by his own divine power, which no mere man ever
did or shall do. 4. He rose again to encourage us firmly to believe in him as a
most perfect Redeemer. Our Surety is released and set free, therefore Gods
Justice is satisfied, and so we are begotten unto a lively hope of eternal life
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. 5. By his
Resurrection he has showed us how we ought to imitate him and to rise from the
death of Sin to the life of Grace. This the Apostle intimates to us, Romans 6.4.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father; even so we also should walk
in newness of life. Let us consider therefore and seriously examine our selves
whether we be risen with Christ or no? Are our affections set on things above?
Acts 3.2. Do we delight in the Ordinances of God? (They that have a spiritual
life will delight in that food whereby that spiritual life is maintained.) Do
we delight in communion with God, and exercise our selves in frequent
meditation and the believing views of the Glory of the other life? Those who
are risen with Christ seek the things that are above.

SECT. VIII. Of our Saviors Ascension and sitting on Gods right Hand. He
ascended into Heaven.

THe words of the Creed are these. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the
right hand of God the Father Almighty. In treating of this Article I shall
first show that the promised Messiah was to ascend into Heaven. 2. That our
Jesus did really and truly ascend thither. 3. I shall show what Heaven it was
he ascended into. 4. The reasons of his Ascension. 5. The time when he
ascended. 6. The place from whence he ascended.

I begin with the First, namely, that the promised Messiah was to ascend into
Heaven. This was typified of him by the High Priests going once a year into the
Holy of Holies, Heb. 9.11. which was a type of Heaven. The High Priest when he
had slain the Sacrifice, did with the blood thereof enter into the Holy of
Holies. So the Messiah having offered up himself a Sacrifice to God for us with
his own blood, went into the Holy of Holies, viz. into Heaven, there to
intercede for us by the virtue and merit of that blood. And as this was
typified, so it was also prophesied of the Messiah, Psalm. 68.18. compared with
Ephesians 4.8. Thou have ascended up on high, thou have led Captivity Captive,
thou have received gifts for men. He was to conquer Sin and Death and Hell, and
triumphing over them, he was to ascend to the highest Heaven, and thence to
send the precious and glorious gifts of the Spirit unto the Sons of Men. And
accordingly he himself did foretell his Ascension, John 6.62. and John 20.17.

2. This was not only foretold of the Messiah, but really performed by him. He
who was the Eternal Son of God, and by his Divinity present in Heaven while
here upon the Earth, did by local translation of his humane nature, really and
truly ascend from this earth below into the Heavens above, as is sufficiently
testified by these following Scriptures, Mark 16.19. Luke 24.50, 51. Acts 1.9,
10. Christ's Ascension was visibly performed in the sight of his Apostles. They
saw him when he ascended; the holy Angels there present bearing also Testimony
unto it, Acts 1.10, 11.

3. Let us consider the place he ascended unto, which was the Heaven of
Heavens, he passed through all the regions of the air, through all the
celestial Orbs, till he came to the Heaven of Heavens, the most glorious
presence of the Majesty of God. He ascended far above all visible Heavens to
the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. that he might fill all things, that is, fulfill
all things prophesied of him.

4. Let us consider the reasons why he ascended.

1. Having finished the work of our Redemption, it was meet he should return
thither from whence he came, John 16.28. John 17.4, 5. 2. After his Humiliation
his Exaltation was to follow. The first step of which was his Resurrection, and
his Ascension another step of it. 3. Christ by his Ascension manifested his
victory over Sin, Satan and Death. 4. He Ascended to make intercession for us.
Romans 8.34. 1 John 2.1. Heb. 9.24. 5. That he might send down a more plentiful
effusion of the gifts and graces of his Spirit. And accordingly he tells his
Apostles, John 16.7. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for
you that I go away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you.
John 7.38, 39. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this spoke he of the spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified. 6. He ascended that he might prepare
a place for his members. John 14.2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions, if
it were not so I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you, Heb.
6.20. Whither the forerunner is for us entered even Jesus made an High Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedeck.

5. We come to consider the time when he ascended, viz. forty days after his
Resurrection, Acts 1.3. The reasons why he continued so long, we may suppose to
be these two. 1. to confirm unto his Disciples his Resurrection, and assure
them of the truth of it; and, 2. To instruct them in the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God.

6. Let us consider the place from whence he ascended, viz. Bethany, that part
of Mount Olive^ which was near Bethany.

7. Let us consider how he ascended, viz. while he blessed his Disciples, he
was parted from them. And while they beheld, a Cloud received him out of their
sight.

We come now to consider what improvement we ought to make of this Doctrine. 1.
Christ's ascension confutes the Popish Doctrine of transubstantiation. He is not
really and corporally present in the Sacrament. He is not there, for he is
ascended into Heaven. 2. It makes for our consolation. It may serve to
encourage us to go to God in all our necessities, seeing we have so powerful an
advocate at Gods right hand. 3. Seeing Christ is ascended, it may assure us
that if we be his members we shall ascend also. The head being ascended, the
members must likewise in due time ascend. John 17.24. Father, I will that those
also whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me. The Apostle speaks of the ascension of true
Believers as a thing already effected by Christ's ascension, Ephesians. 2.6. And has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ
Jesus; that is, having by that power by which he raised Christ from the grave,
quickened us and bestowed a new spiritual life upon us, he has also (in assured
hope) raised us up from the dead in Christ our Head, and has set us with him
in Heaven. For He sitting there who is our Head, we who are his members may at
present not unfitly be said to fit there also in him, and shall infallibly come
thither in due time. 4. It may take away the fear of death, yea, make it
desirable to us, if we be members of Christ, seeing it will but carry us
thither, whither he is gone before to prepare a place for us. Therefore the
Apostle says Phil. 1.23. that though he was in a strait betwixt two whether he
should desire to die or live, considering the need the Philippians and others
had of his Ministry; yet as for himself he had a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better than to continue in this World.

Having thus spoken of Christ's ascension to Heaven, sits on the right hand
of God the Father Almighty
it remains that I speak of the other part of the Article, viz. his sitting
on the right hand of God the Father Almighty. Concerning this Article we shall
show these things. 1. That the promised Messiah was to sit on the right hand of
the Father. 2. That our Messiah did after his ascension sit on the right hand
of God. 3. We shall show the importance of this phrase. 4. What improvement we
are to make of this Article.

1. The promised Messiah was to sit on the right hand of the Father. This was
foretold Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand
until I make thine enemies thy footstool. That those words were spoken
concerning the Messiah, may appear from Mat. 22.44. and Acts 2.34, 35.

2. Our Messiah after his ascension did sit at the right hand of God, Mark
16.19. He was received up into Heaven and sat on the right hand of God. This
was an honor never promised, never given to any but the Messiah, Heb. 1.13. To
which of the Angels said he at any time sit on my right hand? The Angels indeed
stand about the Throne of God, but never any of them sat down on his right
hand. But our Savior was so assured of this honor, that before the Chief
Priest and Elders, when he saw his death contrived, and his Cross prepared, he
expressed his assurance of it, Luke 22.69. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit
on the right hand of the power of God. And the Apostle Peter speaking of him
after his Ascension, 1 Pet. 3.22. says Who is gone into Heaven and is on the
right hand of God, Angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto
him.

3. Let us inquire what is the importance of this phrase sitting at the right
hand? The intent of the Holy Ghost is not to show what bodily posture Christ is
in, but what dignity he is in, therefore in Scripture Christ is sometimes said
to be at Gods right hand, Romans 8.34. 1 Pet. 3.22. sometimes to sit on Gods
right hand, as Mark 16.19. sometimes to stand Sedere judicantis est, stare vero
adjuvantis, G egor.
at Gods right hand; and thus he appeared to Stephen, Acts 7.55, 56. as ready
to assist him, as ready to plead for him, as ready to receive him. It Is true,
God being a Spirit has no material parts, no right hand or left hand; but he
is pleased to condescend to our capacities, and to speak to us after the manner
of men, among whom the right hand is the most honorable place. Thus 1 Kings
2.19. Bathsheba was placed on Solomon's right hand. The right hand of God must
therefore be taken here metaphorically, not properly. And so it signifies. 1.
The great honor given to Christ. 2. The great Power and Dominion he has
obtained in Heaven. It imports his Kingly Power, and it was his solemn entry
upon his Regal office as to the execution of that full dominion which was due
unto him. For worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power and Riches and
Wisdom and Strength and Honor and Glory and Blessing, Rev. 5.12. Therefore he
said after his Resurrection, all power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth,
Mat. 28.18. And the Apostle tells us Phil. 2.8, 9. To him every knee shall bow,
that is, that all should be subject to him. The principal end of this Regal
Office of Christ is the effectual Redemption and actual Salvation of all those
whom God has given him. And whosoever, or whatsoever opposes their Salvation,
is by that opposition, become his enemy. And seeing the Promise of God cannot
be evacuated, our Savior must exercise this his Regal Power at the right hand
of God till all such enemies be subdued, 1 Cor. 15.25. For he must reign till
he has put all enemies under his feet. And when the whole Office of the
Mediator shall be completed and fulfilled, then every branch of the execution
shall cease, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. Then comes the end when he shall have delivered
up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule and
all Authority and Power, and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the Son also himsef be subject unto him that put all things under him,
that God may be all in all. But though the Mediatorship of Christ be then
resigned, and the Regal Office, as a part of that Mediatorship; yet Christ
shall not cease to be King or loose any thing of that power and honor he had
before; but as the Nicene Creed has it, His Kingdom shall have no end.

4. Let us now consider what improvements we ought to make of this Article.

1. If Christ be set down on the right hand of God, let this mind us of our
duty, which is humble subjection and obedience to him.

2. Let us encourage our selves if we belong to him, to expect protection from
him. God has given him to be head over all things to his Church. And all power
is given him both in heaven and earth.

3. Let us remember his intercession, Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered into
the Holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. 1 John 2.1. If any
man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Heb.
7.25. He is able to save them to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Does the guilt of sin
sting and wound our Consciences? Let us remember what an Advocate we have. Are
we in want of any mercy? Let us remember what our Savior himself says, John
16, 23. Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name he will give it you. Whatever
trouble we are in, let us not be dismayed, considering Christ is at Gods right
hand. Heb. 12.2.

4. Let all those that oppose Christ and his Kingdom think seriously of this,
His enemies must be made his footstool.

SECT. IX. Of our Saviors coming to judge the World.
THe words of the Creed are these. From thence He shall come to Judge the Quick
and the Dead. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
Concerning this Article we shall make these inquiries.

1. How may we be assured there will be a day of Judgment.

2. Who is to be the Judge at that great day?

3. What will be the nature and manner of that Judgment?

4. What will be the Consequents of it?

1. How may we be assured there will be a day of Judgment?

The Scripture holds forth to us a twofold Judgment to come.

1. Particular judgment which follows immediately upon every ones death,
Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, and the Spirit shall
return unto God who gave it. This is also held forth by that Historical Parable
of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.22, 23. and Heb. 9.27. The Apostle tells us It is
appointed unto man once to die, and after this to Judgment. Unum sci^icet. Nam
ultimum judicium nihil aliud erit quam promulgatio solennis, and totalis
executio sententiae semel in singulos cum moriuntur latae, Jac. Capellus. in
loc.


2. A General, Judgment at the end of the World, the certainty of which may
appear to us from these Arguments.

1. From the sense that even natural conscience seems to have of it. Acts
24.25. and as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come,
Foelix trembled.

2. From the Justice of God which requires it. Here Barabbas a murderer is
released and Christ is Crucified; here Judgment is often perverted, and the
Righteous oppressed. But there is a Judgment to come that will set all things
straight.

3. From the clear and manifest declaration of the will of God that it shall be
so, Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into Judgment with every secret
thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil, And Acts 17.31. He has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness by that
man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in
that he has raised him up from the dead.

4. From the representation made of it to some of Gods servants in Divine
visions, as 1. to Daniel. Dan. 7.9, 10. I beheld till the Ancient of days did
sit, whose Garment was white as Snow; thousand thousands ministered unto him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The Judgment was set and
the books were opened, and 2. to St. John Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead small and
great stand before God, and the books were opened. And another book was opened
which is the book of life; and the dead were Judged out of those things which
were written in the books according to their works.

2. Let us inquire who is to be the Judge? The Apostle assures us that this
Jesus Christ will be the Judge, Acts 10.42. He has commanded us to preach unto
the people and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead, John 5.22, 27. For the Father Judges no man (that is
immediately by himself) but has committed all Judgment unto the Son, and has
given him authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Now
Christ is appointed the Judge.

1. Because he is the Son of man, The authority of Judging is common to all the
three Persons; but the execution of this power is proper only to the Son. The
Father and the Holy Ghost will Judge the World by Him.
who suffered so much for the sins of men, and this as a reward of his
humiliation.

2. Because God intending to make a general and visible Judgment, will have a
visible Judge, Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with Clouds and every eye shall see
him, that the Judicial proceedings may be in an outward and visible manner.
Christ indeed came not at first as a Judge but as a Redeemer, John 3.17. but
his second coming will be to Judge the World, 2 Timothy 4.1.

3. Let us inquire what will be the nature and manner of this Judgment? And
here 1. Let us consider the Preparations to it, Scripture sets forth this by
the Archangels Trumpet, by which all the World shall be (as it were) summoned
to appear at Gods Tribunal, 1 These. 4.16. 2. For the manner of it, the
Scripture represents it to us under the form of a judiciary process, wherein,

1. The Judge himself will appear exceeding glorious. He will come with power
and great glory even the glory of the Father, Mat. 16.27. And when this his
Glory shall be revealed, then the Saints shall be glad with exceeding joy, 1
Pet. 4.13.

2. His attendance will be very glorious, Mat. 25.31. The Son o^ man shall come
in his ^lory, and all the holy Angels with him.

3. A Throne will be set, a Tribunal, a seat of Judgment erected, Mat. 19.28.
The Son of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, etc. Romans 14.10. For we
shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

4. There will be a personal apearance of all men before this Tribunal. He
shall judge both the quick, that is, those found alive at his coming (upon whom
a change different from death shall pass,) and the dead, viz. that died before,
It was a singular and extraordinary privilege v^uchsafed to Enoch and Elias
that they should not di^. But according to Gods ordinary and usual dispensation
It is appointed to all men once to die, Heb. 9.27.
Acts 10.42.

5. The Actions and Works of those that shall be judged shall then be
manifested, 1 Cor. 4.5. He will bring to light the hidden things of darkness
and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, Eccles. 12.24. God will
bring every work into Judgment with every secret thing, whether it be good or
whether it be evil. The Books will then be opened, viz. 1. The Book of Gods
Omniscience and Remembrance, Mal. 3.16. and the book of Conscience, Jer. 17.1.

6. The Statutes shall be produced, upon which they shall be tried, and found
guilty or not-guilty. And they are two. 1. The Law of Nature, written on Man's
heart at his creation, which requires perfect obedience, and which God gave man
power at first to perform. 2. The Law or Covenant of Grace. Now we shall all be
found guilty upon the first Statute. Woe to us if we be cast by the second
also. To prevent this, let us set our selves seriously to repent of all our
sins, and by a lively faith lay hold on Christ, and take him for our Lord and
Savior, and faithfully endeavor to conform our selves unto his precepts.

7. The evidence or witnesses that will be ready to prove the indictment
against all impenitent sinners, especially such as lived under the Gospel, are,

1. God the Father whose mercy was by them so wretchedly slighted.

2. God the Son, whose blood they trampled under their feet.

3. God the Holy Ghost, whose blessed motions they so often resisted.

4. All faithful Ministers who strove with all affectionateness to draw them to
Christ.

5. All good Parents, Governors, Masters or faithful Christian friends among
whom they lived, who gave them faithful counsel for the welfare of their Souls,
and a good example.

6. All their sinful companions, who were partakers with them in their sins.

7. Their own Consciences, which are a thousand witnesses.

8. The Judge will pronounce sentence upon every one according to his works.
And this will be twofold.

1. Of Absolution. 2 Of Condemnation.
1. Of Absolution to the Righteous, in these words, come ye blessed of my
Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, Matthew. 25.34. The Saints of God
shall first be acquitted before the wicked be condemned, that they may
afterward join with Christ in Judging the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. There the Apostle
tells us that the Saints shall Judge the World, that is, not Authoritatively,
but by way of Approbation, approving and magnifying Christ's Righteous Sentence
on Devils and wicked men, and giving some such approbation (probably) as that
of the Angel Rev. 16.5. Thou art Righteous O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shall be, because thou have thus Judged. Thus all the Saints shall be Judges,
but some of them more eminently as Assessors with Christ, as is intimated
concerning the Apostles, Matthew. 19.28. ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones,
Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. 2. Of Condemnation upon the wicked, Matthew.
25.41. Then shall he say to them on his left hand, depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
9. The execution of the Sentence, and disposing of the persons Judged to their
everlasting state according to that sentence, Matthew. 25.46. And these shall go
away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. The
sentence is irrevocable; no reprieve to be expected. Then there will be an
everlasting separation between the Righteous and the Wicked.

4. What will be the consequents of this Judgment?

1. Christ's resigning up his Kingdom, (not his essential Kingdom, but that
which he administered as mediator) to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. 2. The burning
of the World; of which we read 2 Pet. 3.12. By which fire some think the World
shall not be utterly consumed, but renewed, clarified and refined.
I come now to the Application, which I shall reduce to three heads.

This Doctrine of the day of Judgment may be useful.

1. By way of exhortation to all. 2. By way of consolation to the Righteous. 3.
By way of terror to the Wicked.
1. By way of exhortation to all.

1. Let us all labor to strengthen and confirm in our selves a belief of this
great Article. There is no Doctrine more certain in the word of God, nor more
clear and fundamental than this of the day of Judgment. Heb. 6.2.

2. Let us frequently meditate on it, let us often think on those awakening
places, 2 These. 1.7.8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his
power, 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Archangel, with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first, Jude verse 14.15. And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of these, saying, behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and
of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. To
think often of this great day may prevent many a sin, Psalm. 58.11. Verily there
is a reward for the Righteous, and doubtless there is a God that Judges the
earth.

3. Let us all solemnly prepare our selves for this great trial by setting up a
Judgment Seat in our own Souls beforehand.

1. Let us seriously examine our state toward God. Every one is either a Child
of Wrath and Perdition, or a Child of God and an heir of Heaven. Let us examine
whether we are the one or the other. We keep a great stir about Sects, but the
truth is, there are but two great Sects or Parties in the World; And those are
either such as are for the present in the state of Nature, or such as are in
the state of Grace. Let us therefore seriously consider to which of these two
we do belong. Let us consider what our present state is. Have we the marks of a
converted person upon us or no? Has the work of sound conversion ever passed
upon us or no? Let us remember, that except we be converted we cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. 2. Let us examine our hearts. Let us
consider what Principles we act from; what projects we are driving on, and what
ends we aim at, let us examine whether Grace rule in our hearts or Sin. Whether
we labor to keep a good Conscience toward God and Man? 3. Let us examine our
lives. Have we performed duties of Piety toward God as we ought? Have we
performed our relative duties toward men as we ought? Have we been so careful
in the right governing our selves as we ought. 4. Let us consider whether we
have improved our Talents as we ought? 1. Our Spiritual Talents, viz. the means
of Grace God has afforded us. 2. Our Temporal Talents, such as Power, Riches,
Health, Strength, etc. Let us remember that of all these things we must give an
account.
4. Let the consideration of the day of Judgment quicken our Repentance. There
is no way to live free from inward rebuke here, or to appear with comfort at
the day of Judgment, without having our peace made with God upon Gospel terms.
O Sinner break off thy sins by repentance now while there is time, before thou
be brought to thy trial at Gods Tribunal.

5. Seeing we must all come to Judgment, let us be wise beforehand to make the
Judge our friend. But how shall we do that?

1. By repenting unfeignedly of all our past sins, as I said before.

2. By believing in him, and giving up our selves sincerely to obey him.

3. By owning him before the World, and owning our selves for his Disciples.

4. By being willing to deny our selves for his sake and to take up his Cross,
Luke 9.23.

5. By duly regarding his Ambassadors and their Message, Matthew. 10.40.

6. By prizing and and improving his Ordinances.

7. By doing good to others according to our abilities and opportunities. See
Matthew. 25. from 34. to 41.

6. Having prepared our selves for our trial, let us watch for our Summons to
appear before this great Judge. And so much of the first use.

2. This Doctrine may serve for consolation to the Righteous. It Is a fountain
of great comfort to all the people of God.

1. Christ the Judge is their Head, Husband, Advocate, their elder Brother,
their Intercessor, who has loved them and washed them from their sins in his
own blood, Rev. 1.5. O let them think of it to their unspeakable comfort.

2. Let them consider that he will reward them for all the works and faithful
services they have done for him in this life. Here they have performed many
secret duties that no eye has seen; there is a time coming, when he that sees
in secret will reward them openly, such or such a service they have done for
God; the thing possibly in it self but small (as the Widows mite) but it was
performed with much love and desire to please God, and much singleness of
heart; such a service shall not go unrewarded.

3. Let them consider, that though here they they lie under many scandals and
reproaches for the name of Christ and the ^estimony of their Consciences, yet
there is a time coming when God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, and
blots from their names.

4. Though here they suffer many afflictions and tribulations, yet let them
comfort themselves and have patience but a little, James 5.8. for the coming of
the Lord draws nigh, whose coming will be to their unspeakable comfort.

3. And lastly, This Doctrine speaks terror to the wicked, Acts 24.15. When
Paul Preached of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come, Foelix
trembled. People love a general way of Preaching, such as will give fair
quarter to their Lusts, but they should be often told of that great day wherein
God will judge them for all their proud Rebellions against him. Here they will
do what they list (as far as they are suffered) but they should be remembered,
that for all these things God will bring them to Judgment.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I. Concerning the Holy Ghost. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

IN speaking to this Article, it will be requisite that I 1. premise this, viz.
that each Person in the sacred Trinity is to be believed in by us, and we are
thankfully to accept the mercies that are conferred by each Person, and to
labor to perform the duties we owe to each of them distinctly. For as to take
God for our God is more than barely to believe that there is a God; and to take
Christ for our Savior, is more than barely to believe that he is the Messiah:
so to believe in the Holy Ghost, is not barely to believe that he is the third
Person in the Trinity, and truly God, but to take him for our Guide,
Sanctifier, Helper, Advocate and; Comforter. 2. We are to know that he is
called the holy Spirit, because of all the three Persons his peculiar office
is, to Sanctify and make Holy the Church and people of God. And therefore the
Apostle tells the Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.13. that God had chosen them to
Salvation through the Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.
There are some that say, they believe in the Holy Ghost and that he Sanctifies
them, and all the elect people of God, and yet reject all his Sanctifying
motions, and hate all those that are Sanctified by him, making them the objects
of their scorn. There are others of another strain who enthusiastically plead
the authority of the Spirit in themselves against the authority of the Spirit
speaking in the Holy Scriptures. But let us take heed of both these. That
therefore I may speak pertinently to this Article, I shall show that we must
labor 1. Rightly to understand the Doctrine of the holy Spirit. 2. Our duty
toward him. The Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost (which is to be believed by
us) we have in part already explained in the Section concerning the Trinity,
viz. Sect. 2. of Chap. 1. Wherein we have showed

1. That the Holy Ghost is a Person, not a mere quality, energy or operation.

2. That he is a Divine Person, and has one and the same divine nature with the
Father and the Son, and so is God truly, and properly.

3. That he is a Person distinct from the Father and the Son.

4. That he is a Person proceeding both from the Father and the Son. We shall
now in some more particulars show what is further to be known and believed
concerning this blessed Spirit.

1. This holy Spirit infallibly inspired both the Prophets of old, and also the
Holy Apostles and Evangelists first to preach, and and then to write the
Doctrine of Christ, which is contained in the holy Scriptures.

2. This same blessed Spirit settled this holy Doctrine, and the testimony of
those holy men, by many miracles and wonderful works, which he enabled them to
work, by which they did convince the unbelieving World, and plant the Gospel.

3. This same blessed Spirit having constituted the Offices and Officers of the
Church, he does qualify and fit men with requisite gifts for their stated
ordinary ministerial work (which is to explain and apply the foresaid
Scriptures, and administer the Sacraments, and guide and govern the Flock) and
does assist them in a discharge of their Office.

4. This same blessed Spirit is Christ's advocate with men, and does by the word
illuminate their minds, and sanctify and renew their wills, and draws them to
Christ, to rest on his great propitiation.

5. This same holy Spirit also assisteth the Sanctified in the exercise of
Grace given them, as in the exercise of Repentance, Faith, Obedience, and
Selfdenial. He also directs and governs their conversation, inabling them to
walk watchfully, that they may not dishonor God nor their holy profession. For
if we live in the Spirit (being quickened by his renovation) we must also walk
in the Spirit, following his directions; and if we walk in the Spirit we shall
not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh. And as many as are thus led by the Spirit,
they are the Children of God, Gal. 5.25.

6. He teaches us to pray, and guides us, and directs us in our prayers and
devotions, Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.26, 27. and so is said to make intercession for
us, by teaching us how to pray and intercede for our selves. For which
intercession, among other things, he has the name of a Paraclete given him by
Christ, Joh. 14.16. (...) sive Advocati officium est Clienti suggerere utilia,
ad ea hortari, eum animare atque confi^mare coram judice, ejus causam agere,
pro eo intercedere.


7. We are said to be sealed by this holy Spirit. As a man's Seal does signify
the thing sealed to be his own, so the Spirit of Holiness in us, is God's Seal
upon us, signifying that we are His, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of
God whereby you are sealed unto the day of Redemption.

8. This holy Spirit is the earnest, or first fruits to us of eternal life. The
Spirit is given to us by God as the earnest of the glory which he will give us.
To whomsoever he gives the Spirit of Faith, Love, Holiness, he gives the
earnest of eternal life.

9. This Spirit does also witness or evidence to true Converts that they are
the Children of God, and so is called the spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15, 16. Ye
have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of
adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with
our spirit that we are the children of God. And this he does evidence to us
several ways. 1. By showing or manifesting to us the Grace which he has given
us. 2. By showing the certainty of the Promise made to all those who have such
Grace. 3. By helping us from those Graces and those Promises to conclude with
confidence that we are the Children of God. And then he comforts us, and helps
us to rejoice in what we do or suffer for Christ, in the hope of the glory that
we shall be partakers of.

Thus much concerning the Doctrine of the Spirit; we come now to consider the
duties which we owe to him. Which are these.

1. We ought to obey and follow his blessed motions. Yet here we must take heed
that we do not mistake the Spirit of God and his motions, and instead of them
follow the motions of Satan or of our own Passions or Pride, or fleshly wisdom.
By these marks the Spirit of God may be known. 1. The Spirit of God infuses
into us Heavenly wisdom to mind the securing our peace with God and our title
to the Kingdom of Heaven in the 1. place. 2. He is a Spirit of Love, his
motions are for love and doing good. 3. He is a Spirit of Concord and moves
Believers to unity, and disswades them from divisions among themselves, or to
join in carnal confederacies with the wicked, see 1 Cor. 12.25. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
4. He is a Spirit that teaches Humility and Self-denial making us little in our
own eyes. 5. He is a Spirit that teaches Meekness, Patience and Forbearance;
not Boisterousness, Contention Reviling, or Revenge. 6. He is a Spirit that
teaches zeal for God; not a furious destroying zeal, but a zeal against known
sin, and for known truth and known duty. 7. He is a Spirit that teaches
mortification and crucifying of our lusts, and subduing of sensuality. 8. He is
a Spirit that does not contradict the Doctrine of Christ delivered in the holy
Scripture, but moves us to endeavor to conform our selves thereunto, Isa.
8.20. 9. The motions of this blessed Spirit do always tend to our good, and to
drive us to God, and to obey his holy Will and Commandments, and never to
transgress any of his precepts.

2. We must take heed of quenching the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. (that is, the
gifts and graces of the Spirit in our selves) but must labor to stir them up
by prayer and the due exercise of them.

3. We must take heed of grieving this blessed Spirit. Ephesians. 4.30. Not that he
can properly be grieved; but he is said to be grieved when we do that which in
it self is apt to grieve him, if he were capable thereof; and which provokes
him to do that which grieved persons use to do, namely to withdraw his gracious
and comforting presence.

4. We must not neglect the means the Spirit has appointed us to use for our
improvement in Sanctification. We must attend upon him and expect him in his
own ways, and not in ways wherein he uses not to go.

5. We must do most when this blessed Spirit helps us most. If he
extraordinarily help us at any time in prayer, we should not break off so soon
as at other times.

6. We must be very thankful for the assistances he is pleased at any time to
afford us. And above all, if he has convinced us of the evil and danger of our
sins, has wrought in our hearts true Godly sorrow and contrition for them, and
a real hatred and loathing of them, and has drawn our hearts to Christ Jesus,
to seek pardon and reconciliation with God in and through his merits and
Intercession, and has begun a work of Sanctification in us, then we ought to
admire and to be for ever thankful for the free and efficacious grace of this
Holy Spirit.

SECT. II. Of the Holy Catholic Church. The Holy Catholic Church.

THat which we are bound to believe concerning the Holy Catholic Church is
this, viz. that Christ has a Church upon the earth, which for the latitude and
extent thereof may be called Catholic, and for the Piety of the Professors
thereof may be called Holy. In the treating of which, I shall speak. 1. Of the
name. 2. Of the nature of the Church. 3. Of the distinctions of it. 4. Of the
notes of it.

1. Of the name. Church is a name not found in all the writings of the Old
Testament, in which the body of Gods people is represented to us after a
figurative manner of Speech, by the names of Sion and Jerusalem, Psalm. 87.2.
The Lord loves the Gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob, and
Psalm. 112.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love
thee. The name Church occurreth not till the time of the Gospel, and then it
was imposed by our Savior. For no sooner had Peter made this confession for
himself and the rest of the Apostles, Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God, Mat. 16.16. but presently our Savior adds, upon this Rock (that is, the
rock of this confession, or upon this Truth whereof thou have made profession)
will I build my Church. As if he should have said, This profession, or this
Faith which thou have professed, shall be the foundation of Believers,
especially the object of this faith and confession, viz. I my self who am the
true Messiah. The Greek word for Church is (...) which signifies coetum
evocatum, a chosen or selected company, a company called forth of the world or
chosen out of others to profess Faith in Christ, and to worship the true God
according to his will. And hereby is to be understood the body collective of
all Gods people professing Faith in Christ, though made up of several
particular Congregations, which have been called by the grace and goodness of
God to a participation of his Word and Sacraments and other outward means of
eternal life. The Church therefore in the language of the New Testament does
always signify a company of persons professing faith in Christ. Single
persons so professing, are members of the particular Churches to which they
appertain. And all those particular Churches are members of the universal or
Catholic Church, which is one by unity of aggregation, not only of many
persons, but also of many Congregations of believing and baptized persons. The
Church is therefore one, though the members be many; And there are several
things wherein the members of the Catholic Church do agree, and several things
also wherein they differ. The things wherein they differ are these.

1. The members of the Church are not all of the same age or standing in
Christ. Some are Babes, some Young men, and some are Fathers, 1 John 2.12, 13,
14.

2. They are not all of the same degree of strength. Some are of small
strength, and have need to be fed with milk and not with strong meat. Some are
weak in Faith and apt to be offended, whom the stronger must take heed of
offending. Some are of sounder understandings, and others are tainted with
errors and corrupt opinions.

3. They have not all the same degree of gifts, nor the same sort of gifts.

4. They are not all of the same usefulness and serviceableness to the Church.
Some are as Pillars, Gal. 2.9. Some are fit to be teachers of others, some so
live that the Church has much benefit by their lives, and great loss by their
deaths. And some are such troublers of it by their weaknesses and corrupt
distempers, that their death is some ease to the places where they did live.

5. They are not all the same in regard of office. Some are appointed to be
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Overseers and Stewards of the mysteries of God, and
to feed the flock, and to be their Rulers in spiritual things. And some are the
Flock, commanded to learn of them and to have them in honor and high esteem
for their works sake, and to obey them. As there are diversity of gifts, so
also of offices.

6. They have not all the same employment. The Magistrates work is of one kind
and the Ministers of another. There is one sort of duties belongs to Parents,
and another to Children, one to M^sters, and another to Servants.

7. All the members of the Church are not to be equally honored and loved.
Even among the Elders there are some that are worthy of double honor. Some are
of high and excellent gifts and graces; and as more of God does shine forth in
them, so a greater love and honor is due to them.

8. The members of the Church will not have all an equal degree of glory, there
being a great inequality in their graces and the services they have done for
God in this World.

And so much of the things wherein the members of the Church do differ.

2. Let us consider what are the things wherein they agree.

1. The members of the Catholic Church (strictly taken as comprehending only
the true living members thereof) have all one God, the fountain of their being
and happiness, and are all related to him as Children to one Father, Ephesians. 4.6.

2. They have all one Head, Redeemer, Savior, and Mediator, Jesus Christ, to
whom they are all united.

3. They have all one Holy Ghost dwelling in them, illuminating, sanctifying
and guiding of them, and are all animated by this one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

4. They have all one principal ultimate end, which is the glory of God and
their own eternal Salvation, which they all aim at, hope for, and expect. Ephesians.
4.4.

5. They have all one Gospel which teaches them the knowledge of Christ, and
the things appertaining to their Salvation.

6. It Is one kind of Faith that by the holy Doctrine is wrought in their Souls,
though the degrees be various: and in the main essentials of Christianity they
usually agree, though in lesser things there is sometimes much difference among
them, Ephesians. 4.5.

7. There is one new disposition or holy nature wrought by the spirit of God in
them all. And the affections predominant in them have one and the same object.
Sin is the chiefest thing that all of them hate; the displeasing of God is the
chief thing they all fear; and God in Christ is the prime object of all their
loves.

8. They have all one rule or law to live by. The moral Law is to them all a
rule of life.

9. They are all entered into one and the same Covenant to renounce the World,
the Flesh and the Devil, and to give themselves up sincerely to the service of
God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

10. They agree in a special love to the whole Church, and desire of its
welfare. And though there may be some differences (through mistake) between
some particular members, yet they desire and pray for the safety of the whole.

11. They agree in their love to all the Ordinances and institututed means of
Grace, and make use of them in order to their improvement in holiness.

And thus much of the things wherein the members of the Catholic Church do
agree.

2. We come to consider the nature of this Church. There are two things by
which the nature of this Church may be discerned from such other public
Assemblies which may seem to lay claim to this title. 1. Holiness. 2.
Catholicism or Universality. Now this Church may be called Holy. 1. In respect
of its vocation. All the members hereof are called unto, and engaged unto
Holiness. 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity. The end of Christ's gathering them out of the World to be his
people is, that they may be holy and a peculiar people to himself, zealous of
good works. Thus Moses speaking of the Congregation of Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Thou
art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. That is, they were so by destination
and engagement, though many of them were not really so^ 2. The Church may be
called holy, because it trains up people in the ways of holiness and
godliness. 3. It may be called holy in respect (though not of the greater yet)
of the better part of it, whom God has sanctified by the graces of his holy
Spirit. The other Attribute of the Church is Catholic. Catholic as it is not
in the Scriptures, so was it not anciently in the Creed, but inserted by the
Fathers of the Constantinopolitan Council. It signifies General or Universal.
Now the Church is called Catholic.

1. In respect of place. It being not now shut up in the narrow bounds of
Judea, but diffused through the World. 2. In respect of persons. All sorts of
persons being promiscuously called to Faith in Christ. Neither Jew nor Gentile,
neither bond nor free being excluded, Gal. 3.28. 3. In respect of times; It
comprehending all the Faithful that have been in all times and ages ever since
the giving of the first promise [that the seed of the woman should bruise the
Serpents head.] And to our Saviors days; and since then to the age in which
we live, and is to contitinue from hence by a continual accession to the end of
the world. Nay it does not only include that part of the Church is now militant
on earth, but that also which is triumphant in Heaven. Both they with us and we
with them make one body mystical, whereof Christ is the Head. And all together,
together with the ancient Patriarchs and other holy men of God, which lived
under the Law, do make up that one glorious Church, which is called in the
Scriptures, the general Assembly, the Church of the first born, whose names are
written in the Heavens. Heb. 12.23. Catholic then the Church may be called in
regard of extent, whether we consider time, place or persons. 4. In respect of
Doctrine, because it maintains the Catholic Doctrine, quae semper, quae
ubique, quae abomnibus credita est, Adversus Haereses c. 3
as Lirinensis (d) says, which has always, and in all places, by all sorts
of real Christians been received as Orthodox. Catholic in this sense is the
same with Orthodox, and a Catholic Christian the same with a true professor. A
private Christian may be called Catholic in this sense. And thus the Fathers
of the purest times made use of this word Catholic to distinguish themselves
from Heretics, according to that famous saying of Pacianus; Christianus mihi
nomen est, Catholicus cognomen. Christian (says he) is my name, and Catholic
my surname. By the one I am known from Infidels, by the other from Heretics.
And so long as the main body of Christians retained the form of wholesome words,
and kept the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, it served fitly for a
distinctive mark to know an Orthodox Professor from an Heretical. But when the
main body of the Church was once torn in pieces, and every leading faction
would be thought the true Church of Christ, they took to themselves the name of
Catholics also. And thus our great Masters in the Church of Rome have
appropriated to themselves the name of catholics, accounting all men Heretics
that differ from them, and do not hold communion with them in their errors. And
then they defend themselves by the name of Catholics, from having dealt
unjustly with their fellow Christians, men every way more Orthodox than
themselves. But let them talk what they will, the Church which is truly
Catholic contains within it all those Congregations, which are truly the
Churches of Christ. And all persons whatsoever who are true Christians belong
to it. So that whosoever is not of the Catholic Church, cannot be of the true
Church, out of which ordinarily there is no Salvation.

3. I come now to the distinctions of the Church.

1. The Church of Christ may be considered either as Militant or Triumphant.


The Church Militant is that company of Christians here on earth who are in
warfare, warring against Satan, the World and the Flesh.

2. The Church Triumphant are those Saints who having vanquished and overcome
those adversaries, do now reign and triumph in Heaven. This distinction is
founded upon Ephesians. 3.14, 15. Where the Apostle says, I bow my knees unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in heaven and earth
is named. The Family in Heaven is the Church Triumphant. The Family on Earth
the Church Militant: of which the Apostle himself was one when he said 2 Timothy
4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith. The Triumphant we may read of, Rev. 7.9. After this I beheld, and lo, a
great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and
People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed
with white Robes, and Palms in their hands. Having thus premised this
distinction of the Church Militant and Triumphant. I come now to speak
particularly of the Church Militant.

1. Then we must know that the Churcrh Militant here on earth consists partly
of such as are truly of it, partly of such as only in respect of their outward
profession belong to it. As the Holy Ghost speaks, Rev. 2.9. of some who
professed themselves Jews, I know the Blasphemy of them that say they are Jews
and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: so we may say of some who profess
themselves Christians, that they are very far from being such in truth and
reality. For profane persons and hypocrites are rather in the Church than of
it.

The Militant Church is either visible or invisible. The visible Church is a
visible company of people professing the Gospel, whether they do it in truth
and sincerity, or no. It does consist of good and bad. It is compared to a net
cast into the Sea which gathered of every kind, etc. Matthew. 13.47. And to a
field wherein were both wheat and tares, Matthew. 13.24. And to a great house
wherein are vessels of several sorts, some to honor, some to dishonor, 2 Timothy
2.20. The invisible Church consists of such as truly are what they profess
themselves to be. It is called invisible because it is not visible to the eyes
of men. They can see the profession, but whether it proceed from the heart or
no they cannot see. The Invisible Church therefore is hid in the visible, and
there is no more difference between them, than between the whole and a part.

3. The Church Militant is distinguished into Particular and Universal; A
particular Church is a company professing the Faith, in some particular place.
Thus we read of the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 1.7. that is, Churches that
were in seven Cities in Asia, as appears verse 11. Yea we read of Churches in
particular houses, as in the house of Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16.5. and in
the h^use of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. The universal Church is the whole company of
Believers that profess Faith in Christ throughout the world. All Christians as
Christians who profess and hold the essentials of Christianity are the
Catholic or universal Church. And all Congregations consisting of lawful
Pastors, and Christian people, associated for personal communion in the worship
of God, and holy living, are particular true Churches, though they may also
much differ in degrees of purity. This is the universal Church, as upon earth.
Otherwise, as I said before, the universal Church comprehends both the Saints
on Earth and the Saints in Heaven. The Church of Rome most absurdly affects to
be called the Catholic Church, yea Roman Catholic. Cathotholick imports the
universal Church, and Roman but a particular. The Church of Rome was once
indeed an eminent part, (yet but a part) of the Catholic or Universal Church.
But now she is so degenerate and corrupt, that she is termed Babylon. Rev. 1.7.
And the people of God are commanded to come out of her, Rev. 18.4. And I heard
another voice from Heaven saying, come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Did the Church
of Rome in the Apostles days worship Images? Did it pray to Saints? Did it
pray for the Dead? Did it perform its Divine Worship in an unknown tongue? Did
it withhold the Cup from the Laity? Was this the Primitive practice of the
Church of Rome? I suppose the Romanists themselves will not assert it. We can
make it appear that we hold the same Faith that was of old delivered to the
Saints, and that we have not departed farther from the Church of Rome than they
have departed from this Faith and the truth of Christianity. Yet the Papists
notwithstanding use to ask us, where was your Religion before Luther? To which
we answer wherever there were any true and real Christians before Luther, among
them was our Church. This is the Church we profess our selves of. And surely
there were many more more Christians at that time in the world then those that
were in the Cummunion of the Church of Rome. It Is true Christianity that makes
any to be Christians, and members of the Catholic Church; it is not every
inferior truth that does so; neither does every error cast a man out of it.
That Church then which comprehended all the true Christians in the World is the
Church we were of before Luther. We do not confine the Catholic Church to any
Sect or Party. Protestants we hold are the soundest part of this Church, but
not the whole Church. All within the Communion of the Church of Rome that are
true Christians we allow to be of this Church. And the same we say of the
Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, Abyssines, or any other professing Christianity.
And though the Papists talk much of Antiquity, if they will try whether their
Doctrine or ours be the sounder, we are willing to appeal to Antiquity. Let the
eldest way of Religion carry it. We are of a Religion that is not less then
sixteen hundred years old. For we hold the Doctrine delivered by Christ, and
his Apostles, which they have shamefully departed from. But the Papists farther
ask us, If their Church be not the true Church, what is become of our
Forefathers who died in the Communion of their Church? We answer, They might
live and die in the Communion of that Church and yet be free from many of the
gross errors in it. And God might graciously pass by their ignorance and
weakness, who had not so great a light as we have to show them the error of the
Romish Church. We do therefore in Charity think, that some of our Ancestors
formerly, and some of the Papists at this day who hold and believe the main
Articles of the Christian Faith, and do live good lives according to their
knowledge, may be saved; but not by their Popery, but by their Christianity.

And thus much of the distinctions of the Church.

4. I come now in the last place to speak of the notes of the Church, which are
these three. 1. True and sound Doctrine preached. 2. Right administration of
the Sacraments. For as those are more or less purely administered, so the Church
is more or less pure. 3. Obedience to Christ and his Doctrine. Discipline
indeed is necessary for the preservation of the Church, in purity of Doctrine
and Manners; yet it belongs not to the very being, but to the well being of it.
But here a question may arise. How is the Church said not to err? Answ. 1. The
whole does not err, though some particular Church may. 2. The Church does not
err universally though in some points of Doctrine it may, which are not
essential or fundamental to Salvation.

Let us now consider what improvement we are to make of this Article.

1. This shows us the admirable privilege of every truly regenerate sanctified
person, who is most certainly a member of the true Catholic Church. All true
Christians are Catholics in a better sense than the Romanists use that word.
But whosoever is wicked and profane, let them talk they are for the Church,
etc. it is manifest they are not members of Christ's Holy Catholic Church.

2. All that are true members of the Catholic Church, should keep close to the
Catholic Rule of Faith and Life, which is the will of God revealed in the holy
Scriptures.

3. They should labor for a Catholic Spirit, and Catholic affections which
may incline them 1. To love all Christians as Christians for Christ's sake,
though they may differ from them in some particulars. A true Catholic Spirit
is for union among all the People of God. 2. To compassionate all real
Christians in their sufferings and afflictions, Romans 12.15, 16. 3. To pray
earnestly for the prosperity of the Catholic Church, and to be solicitous and
much concerned touching the welfare thereof. And all true members of the
Catholic Chhurch may comfort themselves with this consideration, that they
have a share in the paayers of this Catholic or Universal Church now Militant
upon the Earth.


SECT. III. Of the Communion of Saints. the Communion of Saints

COncerning this Article we shall inquire. 1. Who may truly be called Saints;
and wherein the true nature of Saintship does consist, and how the Saints are
distinguished from others. 2. Who are those persons with whom these Saints have
Communion. For the first

1. By the tenure of the Gospel we shall find that those are truly and properly
Saints, who being called with an holy calling, have not been disobedient to it,
but are endued with a holy faith uniting them to Christ, and are purified
thereby, and are Sanctified by the holy Spirit of God, and by virtue thereof do
lead a holy life, daily endeavoring to perfect holiness in the fear of God;
such persons are really and truly Saints; and being true members of the Church
of Christ are, the proper subject of this Article.

2. Who are those persons with whom these Saints have communion? and in what
does this their communion consist?

1. The Saints of God living in the Church of Christ have communion with God
the Father, praying unto him and praising of him, trusting in him, and
exercising such acts of worship as he requires, 1 John 1.3. That which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with the
Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. David affectionately expresses his
desire of this communion, Psalm. 42.1. As the heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God.

2. They have Communion with God the Son, 1 Cor. 1.9. God has called us to the
fellowship of his Son. For being united to Christ by faith, they are thereby
made partakers of his Righteousness, and receive spiritual life and grace from
him for the sanctifying of their natures, and sincerely endeavor after
conformity unto him.

3. They have communion with God the Holy Ghost. The Apostle has two ways
assured us of the truth hereof; one Rhetorically by a seeming doubt. If there
be any fellowship of the Spirit, Phil. 2.1. The other directly, praying
devoutly for it, 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of
God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.

This is the communion which the Saints enjoy with the three blessed persons in
the Trinity, John 14.23. If any man love me (says our Savior) he will keep my
words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him. And the presence of the Spirit cannot be wanting where these
two are inhabiting; for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. The Spirit therefore with the Father and the Son inhabiteth in the Saints.
For know ye not (says the Apostle) that ye are the Temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you, 1 Cor. 3.16.

4. The Saints of God living here in the Church of Christ have communion with
the Holy Angels. They are Ministering Spirits for our good, Heb. 1.14. They
rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner. They do many good offices for the people
of God, which possibly they are not sufficiently sensible of. And this their
Ministry is exercised (as it is probable) about the ordinary concernments of our
lives, and not in some extraordinary cases only.

5. The Saints of God living in the Church of Christ have communion with all
the Saints departed out of this life, and admitted to the presence of God. The
Godly on earth do in heart and affection converse with the Saints in Heaven.
And it is probable the Saints triumphant wish to the Saints militant the
happiness they enjoy, and possibly pray for them in general, though their
particular cases they may not know. But we are not to think (as the Papists
fondly conceive) that they interpose their merits for us, and that for this
cause we are to invocate them, or perform any Religious worship toward them.
These are but inventions of man's brain, wanting warrant from the word of God.

6. The Saints of God living in the Church of Christ have communion with the
Saints living in the same Church. If we walk in the light (says the Apostle)
we have fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.7. And another Apostle tells us,
1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit they are are all baptized into one body. So that
they have communion one with another in these offerings, 1. They all join
together in the use of and have benefit by the same ordinances, and all partake
of the same promises, are all ingraffed into the same stock, and receive life
from the same root. 2. According to their places and calling they teach and
admonish one another. 3. They endeavor to walk by the same Rule, and to mind
the same things Acts 3.16. Heb. 3.13.
4. They pray one for another, Ephesians. 6.18. and Jam. 5.16. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed: the effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. 5. They comfort and encourage
one another in the ways of God. 6. In respect of temporal things they are
ready to succor, relieve and help one another according to their abilities.

Having thus opened the nature of this Article, let us now consider what are
the instructions we should learn from it?

1. If we believe this communion of Saints, which has been before described,
then let us seriously consider whether we have a part and share in it or no.
There are many instead of communion with God and with Christ, have communion
with Satan, and instead of communion with Saints have communion with the
ungodly and wicked, and join with them in the practice of iniquity, in
swearing, swaggering, drinking, revelling, and scoffing at Saints and
Saintship; and this they account and call good fellowship. But let no man
deceive himself. The Apostle tells us, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. That God is light, and
in him there is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth. But if we walk in the light
as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, etc.

2. If we have a share and part in this communion, it should inflame our hearts
with an ardent love to all that are within this communion. If similitude of
shape or feature will beget a kindness, if congruity of manners and disposition
will unite affections, what great love should there be among all the Saints who
have the same image of God stamped upon them, and are acted by the same spirit?
Surely all that are true members of Christ should heartily desire and pray for
the welfare of all their fellow members. And should have their hearts touched
with the miseries that befall either the Church of Christ in general, or the
particular members thereof. See Amos 6.6.

3. A belief of this Article should teach us, that as we are to do good to all
in our several places and according to our abilities, so especially to those
who are of the household of Faith.

SECT. IV. Of Forgiveness of Sins. the forgiveness of sins,

REmission or Forgiveness of Sins is a privilege that belongs to them, who are
true members of Christ's holy Catholic Church. That we may the more clearly
explain this Doctrine we shall consider. 1. What Sin is? 2. What are the kinds
of it. 3. What is the wages due to it. 4. By whom sins are forgiven. 5. Upon
what account they are forgiven. 6. What forgiveness of sins does contain in it.
7. What is required of them who may expect this great privilege.

1. We shall consider what Sin is, and what is the foul nature of it, that so
we may the better estimate the great goodness of God in pardoning of it. The
Apostle shows us 1 John 3.4. that Sin is the transgression of the Law. The Law
of God is the rule of the actions of man, and any deviation from that rule is a
Sin, and brings us under guilt.

2. Let us consider what are the kinds of Sin. Sin is either original or
actual. 1. Original Sin is by the Church of England in her Articles described
to be a fault and corruption of the nature of every man that naturally is
engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original
Righteousness and inclined unto evil. In which description three things may be
observed. 1. Original sin is the corruption of the nature of every man
descended from the loins of Adam. 2. It is a departure from that original
Righteousness wherewith the Lord enriched Adam and our selves in him. 3. It Is
an inclination to evil. So that the whole race and off-sping of Adam, who were
then radically, seminally, and potentially in his loins, were infected with
this contagion. As the Scripture says of Levi, that he paid tithes in Abraham
to Melchisedec, Heb. 7.9, 10. For he was then in the loins of his Father
Abraham when Melchisedec met him. So all we and the whole race of Mankind were
in Adam when he lost himself. And that we are all from the womb tainted with
this original corruption Unum illud peccatum fons est aliorum Becan.
and depravation of nature, is plain and manifest from these Scriptures, Psalm.
51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity and in sin did my mother conceive me,
Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath even as others. And that
even Infants themselves are tainted with this original corruption may appear
from this, that they are liable to death. Now Death is a wages no way due to
Infants for actual sins (for actually as yet they have not offended) therefore
there must need be in them some original guilt, some birth-sin, which makes
them liable to death. 2. Actual sin, (which is the fruit of original) is any
action or commission or any omission repugnant unto the Law of God.

3. Let us consider the wages of sin. The Apostle tells us, Romans 6. last. The
wages of sin is death. The wages, due reward, and fruit of sin is death. But
life eternal is the fruit of righteousness, not as its wages, but as a gift
freely given by God, upon the account of the merit and intercession of Jesus
Christ. Every sin therefore being a deviation from the Law of God, brings us
under guilt; and guilt makes us liable to suffer the punishment which is due to
our sins, and proportional to our offenses. And our offenses are augmented by
the consideration of the dignity of the person against whom they are committed.
And being committed against God, must therefore needs be very heinous, and bind
us over to suffer eternal punishment, except we obtain a pardon, and our sins
be remitted.

4. Let us consider by whom sins are remitted. 1. Men may forgive offenses
committed against them, so far forth as they concern them, Luke 17.3, 4. If thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him, and
if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn
again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. But as Sin is a
transgression of Gods Law, so God only can forgive it. 2. It Is God the Fathers
Prerogative to forgive Sins. Isaiah 43.25. I even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgression for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. 3. God
communicated this power to his Son, while he was here on the earth, who had
power of forgiving sins as part of that power that was given him both in Heaven
and Earth, Mark 2.5. and 7. When Jesus saw their Faith he said unto the sick of
the Palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee: The Scribes ask who can forgive
sins but God only? Their position was good, that God only can forgive sins, but
their supposition false, that Christ was a mere man, and not God as well as
Man. 4. Ministers may forgive sins not authoritatively, but Ministerially, and
declaratively. They preach remission in Christ's name, and declare what persons
they must be, and what they must do, who shall obtain it.

5. Let us consider upon what account and for whose sake sins are forgiven. The
external impulsive cause inclining God to pardon us our sins and trespasses, is
the respect he has to the obedience and sufferings of our Savior Jesus
Christ. The Apostle tells us, Romans 3.24. that we are justified freely by the
grace of God (as by the internal impulsive cause of our justification, by which
he was first moved to forgive us our sins,) and then through the redemption
wrought by Jesus Christ, as the external moving or impulsive cause of so great
a mercy. The death of Christ is the meritorious cause of our forgiveness, Mat.
26.28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for
the remission of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, Acts
13.38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through this
man is preached unto you, the forgiveness of sins. And by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified, by the
Law of Moses, 1 John 1.7. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin. Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in
his own blood. God is indeed said to remit our sins, but never to remit the
price, without which we had never been redeemed. The Law promised life but upon
perfect, absolute, uninterrupted obedience, and the voice thereof was, Do this
and live; But this we failed in; we need therefore the interposition of the
Sacrifice of Christ for us. The atonement made by the Sacrifices under the Law,
clearly had relation to the death of the Messiah, and whatsoever virtue was in
them, did operate through his death alone. As he was a Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world in Gods decree, so all atonements which were ever made,
were only effectual through his blood. So that no sin was ever forgiven but by
virtue of that satisfaction, and God was never reconciled to any sinner, but by
intuition of that propitiation. Yet the general doctrine of remission of sins
was never clearly revealed, and publicly preached to all Nations, till the
coming of our Savior in the flesh.

6. Let us consider what forgiveness of sins does import, and contain in it.
Forgiveness of Sins does comprehend in it reconciliation of an offended God,
and a satisfaction made to a just God. It contains reconciliation (without
which God cannot be conceived to remit;) It comprehends satisfaction, without
which God was resolved not to be reconciled. Christ by his death has
reconciled God unto us, who was before offended by our sins. His death was
ordained to be a propitiation for us, and to render God propitious to us. The
punishment which Christ endured was a full satisfaction to the Will and Justice
of God. He gave his life a ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. Now a ransom is a
price given to redeem such as are any way in captivity, or any thing laid down
by way of compensation to take off an obligation, whereby he who was before
bound, becomes free. Christ bought us, and the price he paid for us was his
own blood, and that blood was a full and perfect satisfaction unto God. And as
the offense is augmented (as we said before) by the dignity of the person,
against whom the offense is committed, so the value and dignity of that which
is given by way of compensation is enhaunced according to the dignity of the
person who makes that satisfaction. If therefore we consider on our side the
nature and obligation of sin, and on Christ's side the satisfaction made and
reconciliation wrought, we shall easily perceive how God forgiveth Sins, and in
what the remission of them consists. Christ taking upon him the nature of man
and offering himself a Sacrifice to God for man's sin, gives that unto God (
for, and instead of the everlasting punishment due to man,) which is more
valuable and acceptable unto God than that punishment could be, and so makes a
sufficient compensation and satisfaction to God for the sins of man. Which
sacrifice God accepting, releases the offense, and becomes reconciled unto man
(He performing the conditions required of him) and for the punishment which
Christ endured, takes off man's obligation to eternal punishment. And in this
act of God consists the forgiveness of sins.

7. Let us consider what is required of them, who may expect this great
privilege and blessedness, the remission of all our sins. The things required
of them are these.

1. True Repentance. Of which see Chap. 2. of the second part of Knowledge and
Practice. 2. Faith in Christ. Of which see Chap. 3. of the same Treatise. 3.
Sincere obedience unto Christ. Heb. 5.9. He is the author of eternal Salvation
to all that obey him. 4. A readiness and willingness to forgive others who have
done us wrong. Matthew. 6.14, 15. For, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Mark 11.25. And
when ye stand praying, forgive if ye have ought against against any; that your
Father also which is Heaven may forgive you your trespasses. Having thus in
brief explained the Doctrine of remission of sins, it will possibly seem
requisite that I should add a few things more for the fuller explanation of so
great an Article, which we are all so much concerned clearly and distinctly to
understand. In order hereunto, I shall further consider these three things.

1. What is meant in Scripture by Justification. 2. What is the procuring cause
thereof. 3. How any come to be partakers thereof.
For the first. Justification and remission of Sins in the Scripture are one
and the same thing. See Acts 13.38, 39. Matthew. 26.28. Ephesians. 1.7. Acts 10.43.
Romans 5.19.
In some texts of Scripture we are said to be justified by Christ. In others,
that we obtain remission of Sins by Christ. In others that we are made
righteous by Christ. By which expressions one and the same thing is intended.
For Justification is a discharging us from the guilt of all our sins, and an
acquitting us from the challenges of the Law, and a constituting us righteous
before God, not qualitative by making us inherently righteous, with such a
perfect righteousness as is Gods Justice-proof, (for by such a righteousness no
Son of fallen Adam can be justified, as we shall show afterward) but it is a
constituting us righteous in the sight of God or a judicial absolving of us
upon the account of satisfaction given and accepted on our behalf: and though
Justification principally consists in our pardon, and the remission of our sins
yet; there are other blessings also springing from it. For those whom God
justifies, he sanctifies, and whom he sanctifies here, he will also glorify
hereafter.

2. Let us consider the procuring cause of our pardon and justification. The
procuring cause of it is the Satisfaction made to Divine Justice by the active
and passive obedience of Christ. And that we may understand this the more
clearly, let us take into our consideration these particulars.

1. The Law or Covenant of Works required of our first Parents perfect and
sinless obedience upon pain of death. But they transgressing, fell under the
curse and condemnation of the Law. However, it pleased God of his infinite
mercy that the Law should not be immediately executed upon them. And yet he did
not abrogate it but only relax it as to the right of it by introducing another
Covenant, viz. the Covenant of grace.

2. By this second Covenant or Covenant of Grace no Son of fallen Adam can be
justified with the justification of an innocent person or as one perfectly and
inherently righteous. For such persons (if they should be challenged) are
justified because they are found without fault or blame, and their
justification is nothing but a declaration of their righteousness and
innocence. But by this Covenant of grace we must be justified as sinners and
offenders, upon a satisfaction made to the justice of God for our sins. For
offenders can no other way be brought into the state of just men, but upon a
legal pardon and discharge. And so we may be said to be justified when the
compensation or satisfaction made for us is accepted, and we thereupon are
legally pardoned and discharged.

3. This Compensation or Satisfaction made to the justice of God in our behalf,
is made by the active and passive obedience of Christ, and the whole of our
justification is founded thereon. I say the active as well as the passive
obedience of Christ is here to be reckoned as concurring hereunto. For though
Christ when he had once assumed our nature, and was made Man, was bound to obey
the Law; yet in that he voluntarily came from Heaven, and voluntarily took our
nature, and so voluntarily put himself under the obligation of the Law, this
consideration makes his active obedience also meritorious. These two are
therefore jointly to be considered in this matter. For Christ voluntarily took
on him the office of a mediator, He was not compelled to it. Indeed when he was
man, he was obliged as a man. A creatures homage was due from him when he had
assumed our nature, but it was his own free choice that brought him into that
state and condition. From hence therefore it will follow that all that Christ
did and suffered, he paid by way of valuable consideration unto God for the
sins of men. The whole fabric of the Gospel is bottomed upon satisfaction made
to the justice of God on our behalf. We are said to be ransomed, redeemed,
purchased, bought with a price, and that must needs be by a valuable
consideration paid, and by Satisfaction made. No works of our own could ever
amount to such a purchase. Could men either have pefectly kept the Law, or have
sufficiently answered for the breach of it ex post f^cto, Righteousness would
have been that way, and Christ had not died.

4. Christ's active and passive obedience is reckoned accounted and imputed to
those who perform the conditions required of them in the Gospel, for their
benefit and advantage, and so is made theirs as to the benefits redounding
therefrom. But it is not so imputed to them as if they were righteous in the
sight of God with the self-same active and passive righteousness wherewith
Christ was righteous; or as if they had suffered in Christ and obeyed in
Christ, and were as righteous and innocent in Gods esteem as Christ himself.
Which some men dangerously presuming and asserting, infer from thence that God
sees no sin in his children but all righteousness, which is a wondeful mistake.
For no other persons righteousness can otherwise become ours, or be imputed to
us, than by the effects and advantages of it. It cannot be a just judgment to
adjudge us to have performed that our selves which was actually done by
another, though done on our behalf and reckoned to our benefit. We are
therefore judged righteous for, not in the very righteousness of Christ. Some
indeed have conceived that Christ's active and passive righteousness are so made
ours by imputation, as if we our selves were accounted by God to have done and
suffered those very things that Christ himself in his own person did and
suffered. But how can it be supposed that God can account us to have done all
that which Christ did, (that is, to have performed all righteousness without
sin) or to have suffered all that which Christ suffered, which in truth and
reality we did not. It Is true that God is pleased, that the whole of what
Christ did and suffered, as to the effects and advantages of it should redound
to us, and be for our good and benefit. Thus all that Christ did and suffered
is imputed to us as done for us, but not as done by us. See a late learned
Treatise called Justification Evangelical, by Sr. C. W.
And thus Christ is the Lord our righteousness. And what can we desire more
than to reap all the benefits of Christ's whole undertaking, and upon the
account of it, (it being accepted of God in our behalf) to be pardoned and
justified, sanctified and saved. And thus to have Christ made to us of God (as
the fundamental cause, procurer and spring of them) wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. And thus we see that Christ's personal
righteousness is not imputable to any creature otherwise than as to its
operation fruits, and effects. Each justified persons righteousness before God
is not identically and numerically the same with Christ's in his public
capacity as Mediator. For then every justified person would be personally
righteous with a righteousness that has a stock of merit in it sufficient to
save the world, which is very absurd to imagine.

But there are some that allege against what has here been asserted, these
following Scriptures. 2 Cor. 5.21. God has made him to be sin for us who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. I answer,
whereas Christ is said to be made sin for us, we are to understand it, that he
was made a Sacrifice for our sins and that to this end and for this purpose,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, that is, that we might
be made righteous with a Gospel righteousness. He did and suffered what was
requisite to make satisfaction to the justice of God for sins, that we might
reap the fruit of his righteousness, and by believing in him might be accounted
for righteous, that is, acquitted and pardoned. Not that his righteousness is
made personally ours, as if we had done and suffered what he did and suffered;
but that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, that is, made
righteous or acquitted by God through the merit of his righteousness. [In him]
therefore is not to be taken personally and literally, but we are said to be
righteous in him, when we are so according to the rule of the Gospel, and are
righteous in the righteousness of Gods appointing and Christ's procuring. And
thus we are said to walk in him, when we walk according to the rule of his
Gospel. We are said to abide in him, when we continue steadfast in his doctrine.
We are said to sleep in him, when we die in the faith and hope of the Gospel.
We are said to marry in the Lord, when we marry according to the rules he has
prescribed. A second Scripture alleged is, Romans 5.19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be
made righteous. I Answer, this text makes nothing for the transferring or
imputing of Christ's personal righteousness to us. But it shows us these things.
1. That as the effect of Adams sin was universal and came upon all, so the
effect of Christ's obedience was universal; It came upon all, that is, all sorts
of men both Jews and Gentiles without distinction. 2. One sin of Adams
introduced death, but Christ's obedience procures forgiveness not only for that
one sin, but for all other sins whatsoever that have insued thereupon. 3. One
act of disobedience was enough to condemn, but more than one act of obedience
was requisite to procure our pardon. 4. Though Christ do not save so many by
his obedience as Adam brought into a state of condemnation by his disobedience,
yet the second Adam is much more potent than the first: because there is much
more efficacy and power required to the saving of one than there was to the
condemning of many. As the restoring of one man to life is much harder than the
destroying the lives of many.

5. As the effect of one man's disobedience was that thereby many became
sinners, (to be shapen in iniquity and brought forth in a sinful nature;) so as
the effect and consequent of one man's obedience many come to be new born and
are made righteous. And this seems to be the true meaning and import of this
Scripture.

The last Scripture alleged is that of Phil. 3.9. Not having mine own
righteousness, but the righteousness which is of God by faith Answer, The
Apostle desires not to be found in his own righteousness as he was a Jew or
Pharisee, but to be found in Christ, ingraffed into him by faith, and to have
that righteousness which is of Gods ordaining and Christ's procuring (and by
faith is made ours) which is Gospel righteousness, and this righteousness we
have before described.

3. I come now to the third thing I propounded to inquire into, namely, How any
come to partake of this great mercy and benefit, viz. Justification before God.
I Answer. This is obtained by performing the condition the Gospel requires,
which is Faith in Christ. The Covenant of Grace is in the proposal of it
conditional; and Christ with all his saving benefits is proposed to us upon
terms which we are to perform. Our Savior says, He that believes shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. We are said in Scripture to be
justified by Faith, and the Gospel is styled the Law of Faith; and whatsoever
is required of us by it, is called the obedience of Faith.

1. It Is not a bare assent to the truths of the Gospel or to the Revelation or
History of Jesus Christ. That Faith that the Scripture calls a justifying Faith
is an operative working Faith, a Faith that includes in its nature a suitable
acting and obedience. This Faith is never spoken of in the Scripture as a bare
believing and assenting to the truth of the Gospel in opposition to acting
agreeably thereunto, but as the grand principle of action, and so it is in it
self. Since Abels time, the spring of all religious actions has been Faith,
viz. believing God and his promises and threatenings. The bare believing the
truth of Christianity or the bare professing of it, without answerable walking
and suitable obedience is not enough to save any man. And therefore to be a true
believer is to be a sincere practical Christian. The Apostle tells us that he
that does righteousness is righteous, and not he that reckons himself so
without righteous acting, upon the mere score of his believing or bare
profession. When Paul says, Abraham was not justified by Works, we must
suppose him to mean either such perfect sinless works as would in strict rules
of justice make the reward to be a debt. And such works Abraham had not. Or el
e such works as were depended on by the carnal Jews, as sufficient to procure
their pardon and acceptance with God by their own inward work and merit. These
he disclaimes. And when he opposes works to grace, he means such works as were
supposed to justify by their own merit, and which put us out of need of grace.
But he knew that justification is not now so attainable but by Faith; yet not
by such a Faith as is not accompanied with good works, as St. James proves. For
by works (says he) Faith is made perfect. As if he should have said, true
saving faith comprises obedience in it, and is not complete and perfect without
it, nor such a faith as in Scripture is accounted for righteousness. Now
Abraham's Faith, the Scripture tells us, was accounted to him for righteousness.
But it was so accounted with reference to that obedience that was virtually
comprised in it and naturally flowed from it. And that his Faith comprised in
it a suitable obedience, is manifest; else it would have been so far from being
esteemed or accounted to him for righteousness, that it would rather have been
accounted to him for hypocrisy. It Is true, Abraham could not pretend to a
sinless perfection; he had no such works to plead as were Gods Justice-proof.
He had no such righteousness as in its own nature and by its own intrinsic
worth could justify him, and denominate him a perfect righteous man. Had it
been so, it needed not any favor to have been accounted for righteousn^ss. But
God was pleased out of his free grace and favor so to reckon and account of
it. Abraham's faith therefore was a believing the revelation of the Messi^h to
come and of pardon and salvation obtainable by him, and acting sutably
thereunto by a sincere though imperfect obedience. This God did impute and
account to him for righteousness. Therefore Paul never intended to exclude
Gospel works or such a sincere obedience as is naturally consequent to a true
and saving Faith, and which is accepted of mere grace, and cannot pretend to
any merit. But he speaks against such works as were depended on, and by virtue
of which men pretended to claim justification as a reward justly due to them,
in opposition to free grace. Now this Gospel justification we have described,
is so far from being such a justification by works as the Jews sought after,
and St. Paul disputes against, that it is a justification that results wholly
from grace, and is the effect of Christ's purchase and of another covenant; and
all merit and reward that can be claimed as a debt is utterly excluded thereby.
Abraham was not justified upon the terms of the Law, viz. sinless perfection,
but he was justified as one that had sin and failings about him which needed
forgiveness, and so was justified by Faith in the Gospel-way; but it was by an
operative faith which was productive of good works. Which works were not such
as by any innate virtue in themselves did constitute him just, but were the
fruits and genuine offspring of his faith which rested on the promised
Messiah, as the sole procurer of his pardon and forgiveness. Sinless works
therefore we see were necessary under the Covenant of Works to obtain the
reward as a just debt; but sincere works are necessary under the Covenant of
Grace as the genuine fruits of faith without which it is imperfect. For if it
be without works it is no true justifying Faith, as the Apostle James abundantly
proves.

2. We must take heed we do not so apprehend of Faith, as if it had in it self
any justifying virtue or were of any innate worth to acquit us before God from
the guilt of our sins. The value of it is wholly from Gods ordination and its
relation to Christ. We are justified by Christ alone meritoriously and by what
he has done and suffered. Faith is but a conditional means by which we come to
reap the fruit and benefit of Christ's merits.

Faith therefore and believing being the Gospel condition, let us further
inquire what is comprehended in it.

1. Then, The way and method of Gods justifying a sinner being founded on the
depth of his own infinite wisdom, and no way suited to the corrupt reasonings
of a carnal mind, God expects we should fully believe it and firmly assent to
the truth of it. And this in it self is a righteous act (and so accounted of
God) firmly to believe him and what he reveals to us.

2. He expects we should thankfully accept and acquiesce in, and rely upon this
way of Justification, which he tenders to us, without quarrelling or disputing;
and that we should receive Christ in all his offices as our Prophet, Priest and
King.

3. That we should subject our selves to all the Precepts of the Gospel, and
that our faith should approve it self to be of the right kind by a suitable
obedience.

Objection. But does not the annexing of such a condition as this unto
forgiveness lessen the grace and bounty of it.

Answer. No, in no wise. For consider these things.

1. The dispensing of pardon and forgiveness upon such a condition as faith in
Christ, which includes Gospel obedience, is one of the most effectual means to
introduce sanctity and holiness into the World. For what more effectual way can
there be to do it, than to make it conditionally necessary to justification and
salvation.

2. Gods immutable holiness and justice is hereby made more illustrious, and
his solemn hatred and dislike of sin is more manifested. For hereby it is
evident that God will save no man in his sins, but from his sins. Whom he
justifies he will sanctify. No man's sin is so forgiven, that the least
allowance is vouchsafed to it. None but such as are sanctified can be accepted
of him.

3. Whatever is by the Gospel conditionally required of us, is fully and freely
given us. Faith and every other grace is the gift of God. We perform the
condition required of us solely by the power of his grace freely given unto us.
And all the rewards of the Gospel are but the gracious remunerations of Gods
own gifts and graces. Free grace and divine bounty is the root that bears all.
And therefore the holiest men on earth have the greatest cause to be most
humble. For having received most, they ought most to abase themselves.

4. It Is fit that all who shall be saved should be rationally satisfied of the
excellency of that life the Gospel calls them unto. For the precepts of the
Gospel are framed and calculated for our advantage and benefit. The commands of
Christ are in no wise grievous to any man truly and rationally informed of his
own interest. The Gospel commands us to be sober, righteous, and godly; and
it is rationally best for us so to be, both in order to our own good, and the
good and benefit of others among whom we live. And therefore it is fit we should
make a solemn choice of this life for our selves, and seriously resolve as men
of truth and fidelity to pursue it. There ought to be sincerity of intention
and endeavor in us to live this life, though we do not arrive at perfection of
action. We should therefore examine what is the deliberate choice of our wills,
whether to be Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ as well as to be justified by
his merits. Christ will not judge of us by a sudden passionate choice, but by
our rational and advised choice. And we must especially take heed of all
degrees of insincerity and hypocrisy, which of all sins under the Gospel does
most dangerously border on a breach of the condition required. Believe it,
those things that keep people usually from the good things of the Gospel are
either a direct refusal of Christ, or a sloathful carelessness, unconcerned
neglect of him, or a prevailing falseness in the course of Gospel obedience.

I shall conclude all that I shall say upon this argument with these four
particulars.

1. Our Lord and Savior did certainly perform all things that were required to
be performed by him as our mediator.

2. By reason of the high dignity of his person, his obedience and sufferings
are of more value and worth than the obedience and sufferings of all mankind
would have been.

3. These things being performed by him in our nature and wholly upon o^r
account, God accepts them for us, though not as done by us, and reckons all the
benefits and advantages of them to us.

4. If we desire to partake of the benefits of Christ's active and passive
obedience, we must sincerly believe in him and take him for our Lord and
Savior; and if our Faith be a true justifying Faith, it will purify our hearts
and reform our lives.

Having thus explained this Doctrine of the forgiveness of sins, let us now
consider what improvement we should make of it.

1. Let us admire the infinite goodness of God, that there is a possibility of
pardon for the children of men, who are naturally under wrath. There is none
for the Angels that fell.

2. Let us often meditate upon, and admire the way of it. 1. No pardon to be
obtained for man without a Mediator. And where could fallen man have found a
Mediator, that would have undertaken his cause? 2. No ordinary Mediator would
suffice. If all the holy Angels had joined together, it would have not been
sufficient. Only the eternal Son of God could effect it. 3. Let us consider,
that Christ obtained our peace not by a bare mediation, but by paying a price
for us, and making full satisfaction to the Will and Justice of God by his
obedience and sufferings.

3. Let us often admire the benefits of it. 1. It is not only a great mercy in
it self, but the foundation of all other mercies. It Is the Queen of mercies,
that has a glorious train of other mercies attending it. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed
is the man whose sins are forgiven, whose iniquities are covered, to whom the
Lord imputes not transgression. None of the ancient Philosophers ever gave
such a definition of happiness. 2. The sense of this mercy makes all
afflictions more easy to be born. What can hurt us if God be reconciled to us?
3. Pardoning mercy brings healing with it unto the Soul. Christ Sanctifies
those by his Spirit, whose pardon he procures by his Merits. 4. It affords
great comfort against death, which is otherwise terrible of terribles.

4. If pardoning mercy be so great a mercy, let us often consider how vile and
wretched those persons are who slight this mercy. But who are they? 1. All
careless ones who neglect this great salvation, and prefer the things of the
World before it. 2. All wicked and profane ones, who go on daily increasing
their guilt, not minding to make peace with God. 3. All that rest on any thing
besides Christ's righteousness and intercession, for the procuring their pardon
with God.

5. Let us all examine our selves whether we have obtained this blessedness or
no. Many content themselves with weak grounds, on which they build their hopes
of pardon. 1. They are not so bad as others. They think they are sinners; yet
guilty but of few sins in comparison of what others are guilty of. I answer,
Possibly they may not be so bad as others, yet they may be in a very bad
condition for all that; out of which, if they do not get, they will be
everlastingly miserable. 2. Others think well of them. Be it so. But we shall
not stand or fall by man's Judgment. 3. They live civilly, so they may do, and
yet be unconverted; and without true conversion and regeneration, no salvation
is to be expected.

6. Seeing God is ready to forgive, let us all endeavor to secure this
blessedness to our selves. 1. Let us seek it as earnestly as ever we sought any
thing in the World. 2. those that must shortly be arraigned. If a guilty
Malefactor knew that the Assizes drew nigh, at which he could not expect but to
be condemned, surely above all things in the world he would endeavor to get his
pardon. 3. Let us seek it as those who are not content to be put off with any
thing else besides it. And to encourage us hereunto, let us consider. 1. God is
ready to pardon. He has sworn that he delights not in the death of a sinner.
2. Christ died for this very purpose to redeem us, and when he was on the
earth, he complained that people would not come to him, and believe in him,
that by him they might have life. 3. All means of grace afforded to us are
intimations that God intends us mercy, if we be not wanting to our selves. 4.
All good motions and stirrings of the Spirit of God in our hearts are
significations of his good will toward us. 5. And lastly, As vile or viler
sinners then we are have obtained pardon, and why then should not we encourage
our selves to seek after pardon while it may be obtained.

SECT. V. Of the Resurrection of the Body. The Resurrection of the Body.

THis is one of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.2. It Is set
before the Eternal Judgment which will adjudge men to their eternal state,
because it is previous to it.

The Scripture speaks of a twofold Resurrection.

1. A Metaphorical Resurrection, viz. that of the Soul out of the state of Sin
and Spiritual Death. Of this the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.1. Ye that were
sometimes dead in Sins and Trespasses, and Col. 2.13. You that were dead in
your sins has he quickened. Grace, Righteousness and Holiness is the Spiritual
life of the Soul, and where these are wanting, there must needs be a spiritual
death in sin. Romans 8.6. to be carnally minded is death: but the Spirit is life
because of Righteousness, verse 10. that is, the Soul is alive Spiritually when
it is partaker of righteousness and grace. Our Souls therefore must first rise
from their state of death in sin to the new life of grace, if we desire to have
a part in the glorious Resurrection of the body to eternal life, of of which I
am to speak afterward, and as the Apostle says, Romans 6.4. As Christ was raised
from the dead so must we be raised from the death of sin, that we may walk in
newness of life.

2. The Scripture speaks of a real Resurrection, viz. of our bodies; namely, of
the same body that died, which shall be raised again and reunited to the same
soul that at death departed from it.

This resurrection of the body is that which we profess to believe in this
Article. And to confirm our faith therein, let us consider these two things, 1.
God can do it. He can raise our bodies when dead to life again. 2. He has
declared he will do it.


1. God can do it; For he is Omnipotent. Therefore, says our Savior to the
Sadducees who denied the Resurrection, Acts 26.8. Luke 18 27. Ephesians. 1.1^.13.
Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, Mat. 22.29. And
the Apostle, Acts 26.8. reasons thus. Why should it be thought a thing
impossible that God should raise the dead? He that could make this World out of
nothing at first, undoubtedly can raise up man's body again, which though it
have suffered many changes and transmutations; yet is not turned into nothing.
Though the parts of man's body be dissolved; yet they perish not. The first dust
out of which man was made, was as far from being flesh as any ashes or dust now
can be. And God who is Omniscient knows how to distinguish the dust of one man's
body from another. And being Omnipotent can give to every body what belongs to
it, to make it the same numerical Body again. This he can do according to the
mighty working That Parable Ezekiel 37. Where by reviving dead bones is showed,
that God would certainly rest^re the people of Israel out of captivity, that
Parable, I say, supposes the Resurrection of the Dead as a thing well known and
certainly believed by that people.
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. Abraham
thought it possible, Heb. 11.18, 19. When he really intended to Sacrifice his
Son Isaac, accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the Dead. Job
not only thought it possible but firmly believed it, and spoke of it with
assurance, Job. 19. verse 25. For I know that my Redeemer lives and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, verse 26. And though after my
skin worms destroy this body; yet in my flesh shall I see God, verse 27. Whom I
shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my
reins be consumed within me. Martha doubted not of it, John 11.24. For
(speaking of her brother Lazarus then dead) She said I know that he shall rise
again in the Resurrection at the last day. And indeed there are many things in
nature that seem to carry a resemblance of it. When we go to sleep (solemnly
commending our selves to Gods pardoning mercy in Christ and to his gracious
protection) we do as it were lie down in our graves; our sleep is a great
resemblance of death, and our rising in the morning, of the Resurrection. The
Sun sets every night and disappears; yet rises joyfully in the morning. The
Seed that we sow first dies before it be quickened, 1 Cor. 15.56. The earth
receives the bare seed, and by corrupting it, restores it in a better fashion
than she took it in. The Seed s^wn is so far from perishing, that it rises up
far more beautiful. Whereas it was sown dry and hard, it springs up fresh and
green. So why should it seem incredible, that our bodies shall rise from
corruption with far more excellent qualities than they had before. God can
raise them, that is our first Argument.

2. God has declared that he will do it; and that is abundantly sufficient to
induce us to believe it. Observe these Scriptures for the proof of it. Dan.
12.2. And many That is, all shall arise and they will be many not a few. For
many is not opposed to all here, but to few. Romans 5.19. By the disobedience
of one man many, i. e. not a few, were made sinners. For all were made sinners.
of them that slept in the dust of the earth shall awake; some to everlasting
life and some to shame, and everlasting contempt, John 5.28, 29. Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming in which all that are in the Graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnation. Acts
24.15. And I have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that
there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, Luke
14.14. Thou shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the just, John 6.39.
And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day,
verse 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees
the Son and believes on him may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up
at the last day. 1 These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with Him. Verse
15. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive
and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep,
verse 16. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ sholl
rise first.

Let us now consider what improvement we should make of this doctrine.

1. Let us take heed of erring about this doctrine. Let us take heed of the
leven of the Sadducees, who said there was no resurrection Acts 23.8. There are
two sorts of persons that exceedingly err about this doctrine.

1. Those that affirm that there is no other Resurrection but that which is
Spiritual, viz. that of the soul from the death of sin. This was the error of
Hymenaeus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. They acknowledged no other
Resurrection but the renovation of the mind which passes upon a man in this
life. Now this Spiritual Resurrection is limited only to true Believers; but
the Corporal belongs to all that are in the Graves, of whom our Savior says,
John 5.29. They shall all come forth, some to life and some to damnation, which
cannot possibly be meant of the Spiritual Resurrection, and therefore there is
another besides that.

2. Those that say the same numerical body that died shall not rise again; but
some new airy body, not flesh and blood, bones and sinews as ours are made up
of. But this is a great error. For,

1. If the same bodies do not arise, then it is not a Resurrection but a new
Creation. I acknowledge it is not necessary they should arise with every parcel
and particle of flesh they ever had, or had when they dyed; but they shall rise
with so much of their bodies as shall make them the same numerical bodies that
died. As a man in the Wars if he lose an arm or a leg, yet we say (and say
truly) he is the same man still that he was before. So the dead shall rise with
so much of their bodies, as shall (when reunited to their souls) make them the
same persons they were before.

2. Our Savior says all that are in the Graves shall come forth, that is,
surely the same bodies that lay there, and not other bodies for them, Rev.
20.13. It Is said, the Sea shall render up its dead; surely not new bodies but
the old bodies that were buried there.

3. The Bodies of true Believers as well as their Souls are united to Christ,
and thereby made the Temples of the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle assures us, 1
Cor. 6.19. And can you think Christ will lose any one of his members? he
assures us to the contrary, John 6.39, r 40.

4. The Apostle tells us, this corruptible, this mortal shall put on
incorruption and immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. Therefore the same bodies that are
now mortal and must die, shall be raised. And indeed the Apostle plainly shows
all along in that excellent discourse of the Resurrection, that he intends that
the same body that dyed should rise again.

5. It seems most agreeable to the Justice of God, that it should be so; viz.
that the same numerical body that was the souls instrument either in good or
evil actions, either in works of Righteousness or Sin, should partake with the
Soul also in its rewards or punishments, shall they that beat down their bodies
and bring them into subjection, or suffer Martyrdom in their bodies for the
cause of Christ be rewarded in other bodies than those that thus suffered? Or
shall that body and flesh of a wicked man, which was so great an instrument of
his soul in sinning against God, and dishonouring of him, and hurting others,
be dissolved into dust, and shall another body be framed for that miserable
soul, to suffer with it those exquisite torments that the damned must suffer
for ever? Surely this cannot be. Therefore it seems most agreeable to the
Justice and Providence of God, that every one should receive either reward or
punishment in his own body, which he had here in this life.

6. Christ himself did rise with his own body, viz. with that body, that had
been crucified. And others that had slept in their Graves did come forth thence
at our Saviors Resurrection, and surely they came forth with those very bodies
that slept there, and not with new bodies, Matthew. 27.52, 53. We have here the
first fruits of the resurrection to confi^m our faith.
And so much of the first use.

2. Let us labor to strengthen our Faith in the belief of this Article. And in
order hereunto let us consider. (1.) This Article was that which many faithful
Christians were ready to suffer Martyrdom for, and to seal with their own
blood, 1 Cor. 15.29. else what shall they do (or what shall become of them)
that are baptized, (that is, that suffer Martyrdom) For so the word to be
Baptized signifies sometimes, as Mark 38. and the praepos. (...) signifies for,
Acts 9.16. See Apost. hist. page 182.
for the dead, namely for professing to believe the Resurrection of the dead.
And why stand we in jeopardy every hour, viz. of the like Baptism for the same
profession, either from pers^cuting Sadducees, who allow no Resurrection, or
from the furious Jews, who deny Christ to be risen? (2.) This Article is a
great foundation of a Christians hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead. For if in this life only we had hope, we were of all men most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. (3.) This Doctrine tends much to the illustrating the
infinite wisdom, power, justice and mercy of God. (4.) It teaches us how much
we owe to our Lord and Savior who has redeemed our bodies as well as our
souls, and will save our bodies as well as our souls.

3. If there will be a Resurrection, let us not bewail the death of our pious
friends with too much sorrow or concernment. Their bodies are but laid up for a
glorious Resurrection.

4. The consideration and belief of the Resurrection should strengthen us
against the fear of our own death. As God said to Jacob, Genesis 46.3, 4. Fear not
to go down into Egypt; for I will go with thee, and bring thee up again. So a
dying Saint may say to his body, fear not to go down into the grave, into the
dark and dismal vault, my dear Redeemer will bring thee up again. Death to the
Righteous is but like the pulling down of an old ruinous house to build it
again in a more excellent and glorious manner.

5. If God can and will raise the dead, it should strengthen our Faith in Gods
power that he can raise us up out of any affliction into which we are at any
time fallen, and that he can raise up his own interest in the World, or in any
Nation, though it be never so low. See Romans 4.17, 21. What cannot that God do,
who quickneth the dead?

6. It should teach us not to set too high a price or value upon our own lives
when we are called to expose them for the cause of Christ or for our Countries
good. Every faithful servant of Christ that so loses his bodily life, takes the
best course to have it restored to him with advantage. And in this sense our
Savior says, he that loses his life shall save it, that is, shall not only
recover it again at the Resurrection, but shall over and above also be rewarded
with eternal life in glory, John 12.25. He that loves his life shall lose it,
and he that hates his life in this World shall keep it unto life eternal. If
God therefore call thee to expose thy body to death for him, fear not to do it:
He will raise it up again in a more glorious manner. It Is said of those
Worthies, Heb. 11.35. that were wracked and tormented for professing the truth,
that they refused to be delivered ( viz. to the prejudice of their Consciences)
expecting a better Resurrection than that now offered them, viz. to be
delivered or raised up from their present pains and sufferings. They expected a
Resurrection of their bodies to eternal glory.

7. This should deterr us from sinning with our bodies, which must be raised
again, and if we die in our sins, must suffer with our souls everlasting
punishment. Let us take heed of employing our bodies as instruments of sin.
Remember (O sinner) that wretched body of thine which thou have so often
debauched by drunkenness, and polluted and defiled by uncleanness, it must rise
again to damnation except thou repent; that tongue of thine with which thou
have so often lied, cheated, scoffed at serious piety, and dishonored God by
swearing, cursing, ribbaldry, backbiting, etc. shall be tormented in that same
flame that Dives was tormented in. Luke 16. As Christ said of Judas, it had
been better for him he had never been born; so we may say of some men, It were
better for them they might not rise again. But as the Soul and Body sinned
together, so they must suffer together. And as they enticed one another to sin,
so they must be together for ever miserable.

8. And lastly. Let us labor to be united unto Christ by a lively faith, that
he may raise us up as our Head. He will raise the wicked as their Judge. He is
Lord both of dead and living, and so has right by that dominion to raise the
dead, Romans 14.9. and will accordingly do it. And some he will raise to suffer
everlasting punishment and others to a glorious everlasting life. And of such
as these the Apostle speaks, John 11.25. Whosoever believes on him shall never
die, that is, eternally, so as to suffer everlasting punishment.

It now only remains that I should answer three questions, and then I shall
shut up this discourse. 1. Seeing men return to the earth at several ages, the
Infant at one age and the man at another, it may be questioned, whether they
shall arise in the same age and disproportions of age and stature which they
had whilst they lived? Answer. Augustine Restat ergo ut quisque su^m habeat
mensuram vel quam habuit in juventute vel quam haiturus esset, si vixisset.
August. de civ. lib, 22. c. 13.
resolves it negatively, and determines it thus. That we shall all of us be
raised in that proportion of strength which men attain to commonly, at their
best estate. And this resolution of the case the Apostle does seem to favor,
when he says, that though the body be sown in weakness, (in the weakness of
old age or infancy) yet it shall be raised in power. All imperfections and
deformities shall be taken away. For neither is it likely that Infancy, (being
imperfection,) and old age, (being corruption) can stand with the estate of a
glorified body.

Quest. 2. How can there be a Resurrection, seeing the Apostle tells us that
flesh and blood shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 15.50.

Answ. Our Bodies shall be fitted for that glorious state by the mutation of
their qualities. See Apost. Hist. page 183, and 184. Our bodies shall not enter
into Heaven vile The Apostle tells us, the body shall be raised a Spiritual
body, that is, a body endued with Spiritual qualities, free from carnal
desires, and wholly subject to the Spirit.
as now they are, but shall be changed. As men's hearts are changed here by
regeneration, so their bodies shall be changed in the Resurrection; changed in
qualities, not in substance. As a corn of grain that is sown is raised in
substance and kind the same, but diverse in qualities, rising up with blade and
ear and corn in it. It does not rise in just the same figure in which it was
sown, but with advantage. So it will be in the Resurrection.

Quest. 3. What shall become of them that shall be found alive at Christ's
coming?

Answ. They shall not dye, but shall be changed suddenly from a mortal into an
immortal state. See 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. 1 These. 4.15, 17.

SECT. VI. Of Life everlasting. And the life everlasting,

IN treating of this Article, (which the Nicene Creed calls the life of the
World to come) I shall first show, that both the old and new Testament bear
witness to it, and give us sufficient ground to believe it, Dan. 12.2. Many of
them that sleep in in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life and some to shame and everlasting contempt. God plainly showed to those
who lived under the old Testament that there is an everlasting life in the
world to come, by the examples of some, whom he took and translated out of this
world into the other, without death intervening. Enoch, who lived before the
giving of the Law, and Elijah who lived after, are both instances of this, Genesis
5.24. Enoch walked with God, and he was not: for God took him, Heb. 11.5. By
Faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God had translated him, And so Elijah was carried up in a fiery
Chariot, and by a whirlwind into Heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. After Abraham Isaac and
Jacob were dead, God styled himself their God, Exodus 3.6. Moreover he said I am
the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of
Jacob. Now Christ told the Sadducees, that God is not the God of the dead, but
of the living, Matthew. 22.32. God so stiling himself their God, shows that
their souls did still live (though separated from their bodies) and also that
their bodies should be raised again, and both souls and bodies being reunited
should live for ever. Deus est Deus Abrahae s^il. totius. God is the God of the
whole man and not a part only.
And thus much for the proof of this Article out of the old Testament. But the
new Testament does more clearly assert this Doctrine, life and immortality
being (in a more evident manner) brought to light by the Gospel, as the Apostle
tells us, 2 Timothy 1.10. To give some few places of many that might be brought
for the proof hereof. Matthew. 25.46. And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the Righteous into life eternal, John 3.16, 36. God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have everlasting life. Mark 10.30. But he shall receive
an hundred fold now in this time, and in the world to come eternal life, John
12.25. He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in
this world shall keep it unto life eternal, 1 These. 4.17. Then we which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds to meet
the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we
know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, John
17.27. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. Having thus
showed, that everlasting life is plainly asserted both in the old and new
Testament, I come now to show, that there are three degrees of this everlasting
life held forth to us in the Scriptures.

1. There is a life eternal Initial, which is the life of grace, John 3.36. He
that believes on the Son has everlasting life, that is, has it begun in him,
has the earnest of it in his Soul.

2. There is a Partial life eternal, which is the life which belongs to the
Soul when it is separated from the body; It Is the happiness which the souls of
the Righteous enjoy between the time of death and the day of Judgment. The
Scripture is abundant in asserting this kind of life eternal, which the
separated soul injoys in the other world, Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust
return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God who gave
it, Matthew 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the Soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
Hell, Luke 12.4. Be not afraid of them that kill the body and after that have
no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear. Fear him
who after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell, yea I say fear him,
Heb. 12.23. To the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men,
made perfect, Luke 23.43. Our Savior said to the penitent Thief, To day thou
shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.46. And when Jesus had cried with a loud
voice, he said, Father into thy hands I commit my Spirit; and having said thus,
he gave up the Ghost. Acts 7.59. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and
saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, Phil. 1.23. For I am in a strait betwixt
two, having a desire to depart, and to he with Christ, which is far better, 1
Pet. 3.19. By which also he went and preached to the Spirits (now) in Prison,
Rev. 6.9, 10. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the
Souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the Testimony which
they held. And they cried with a loud voice saying, How long O Lord holy and
true do thou not judge and revenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.

3. There is a life eternal Perfectional, which shall be conferred on the
Saints after the reunion of their Souls and Bodies, Matthew. 25.34, 46. Then
shall the King say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World. Then
shall the Righteous go into life eternal. Now this perfectional life
everlasting (which will be the portion of the Saints at the last day) is such a
life as shall be free from all evil, and full of all good.

1. Free from the evil of sin. The Souls of the Just shall then be made perfect.

2. The evil of temptation. There was a Tempter in Paradise, there will be none
in Heaven.

3. The evil of affliction. All tears shall be wiped from your eyes. Rev. 7.17.

2. This life shall be full of all good.

1. Their Understandings shall have a clear knowledge, sight and vision of God.

2. Their Wills shall be perfected and adorned with an absolute and indefective
holiness.

3. Their Affections shall be set right with an unalterable regularity.

4. They shall enjoy an uninterrupted communion with God.

5. They shall be blessed in their company.

6. And lastly, They shall have this blessedness secured to them without fear
of ever losing it or being deprived of it; But though the Saints shall enjoy
such an eternal life in bliss, as we have before described, yet it shall not be
so with the wicked. Eternal life in misery will be their portion. They shall be
tormented, 1. With the pain of loss, 2. With the pain of sense, 3. With the
worm of Conscience, a tormenting reflection on their former folly. 4. With
despair of ever coming out of that woeful misery which is the very Hell of Hell.
But of these things I have spoken more largely in the former Treatise page 130.

It remains therefore now that I show what improvement we are to make of this
Article, and then I shall shut up this discourse.

1. We may from hence learn, how inexcusable they are who hazard and expose
their souls and bodies to eternal torments for a short satisfaction of their
brutish lusts.

2. We should consider that there is no concern we have in the World, that
should lie so near our hearts as the making our peace with God upon sure and
safe grounds.

3. From hence we may learn how highly we ought to prize the blood of Christ
and his undertaking, by which alone we can escape the wrath that is to come.

4. It may show us how we ought to pity those who are running on in a full
carreer to Hell. How should we endeavor by our earnest entreaties to keep them
from falling into that dismal place of torment?

5. We should consider with what extreme folly they are possessed, who mind
only this present life; that live as if there were no other life besides this,
or none else worth looking after.

6. We should above all things endeavor to secure to our selves eternal life
in Bliss and Happiness. Every man and woman's portion must be one of these two,
either everlasting life in Bliss, or everlasting damnation. And if we must be
either eternally happy or eternally miserable, methinks it should make us pass
the time of our sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. and to give diligence to
make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And to quicken our diligence
hereunto, leet us consider these things.

1. By nature we have no title to everlasting Bliss. By nature we are children
of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.

2. We must be united to Christ, if ever we intend to obtain it. God has given
eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son has life, he
that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5.11, 12.

3. Holiness of heart and life here is necessary for the obtaining of eternal
life in bliss and happiness hereafter.

4. As Parents have been instrumental (under God) of conveying a temporal life
to their Children. So they should labor (as much as possibly they can) that
they may be so religiously instructed and educated, that they may at last
obtain an eternal life in bliss and happiness.

Of Baptism.
A Sacrament Vox Sacramentum non occurit in Scriptura quia est Latina. Apud
veterem Latinum interpretem est pro Graeco nomine (...). Vox autem Graeca
generaliter pro omni secreto, minus generaliter pro secreto divino, specialiori
significatione pro secreto divino symbolis, signis, figurisque externis
proposito ac representato. In hac significatione respondet ei vox Latina
Sacramentum, quae deducta est a verbo Sacrare, and a scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis Latinis a Militia desumpta fuit, in qua juramentum quo milites
Duci obstringebantur vocabatur Sacramentum. Vide Riveti Cathol. Orthodox.
Sacramentum proprie and stricte accipitur pro signo, sigillo quo res coelestis
declaratur, obsignatur, and communicatur.
is an outward and visible rite instituted by Christ to signify the benefits
of his death and passion, and to seal and confirm the promises of Salvation to
those who perform the conditions required of them.

There are two Sacraments of the new Conant or or new Testament, viz.

1. Baptism. 2. The Supper of the Lord.
Being to speak here of Baptism, I shall first distinguish of the several kinds
of Baptism.

1. There is Baptismus fluminis sive aquae the Baptism of water, John 1.33. He
that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall
see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost.

2. Flaminis sive Spiritus. The Baptism of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. I baptize
you with water (says John Baptist) but he that comes after me shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost.

3. Sanguinis sive Martyrii. The Baptism of Sufferings, Mat. 20.22. Are ye able
(says our Savior to the sons of Zebedee) to drink of the Cup that I shall
drink of, and to be Baptized with the Baptism that I am to be Baptized with,
that is, are ye able to partake with me in those sufferings and afflictions
which I am shortly to undergo.

I am to speak of the first of these, viz. The Baptism of water Concerning
which, that I may proceed Methodically, I shall speak.

1. Of the Institution of it.

2. Of the Nature of it.

3. Of the excellent uses and ends of it

4. I shall inquire who are the persons that ought to be Baptized.

5. Whether Baptism be of absolute necessity to Salvation.

6. What improvement those who were baptized in their infancy ought to make of
their Baptism, when they are grown up and come to years of understanding.

7. What are the particular duties of Christian Parents toward their infant
Seed and Children.

1. I begin with the first. The institution. It Is God only who has authority
to appoint Sacraments in the Church. It Is his divine institution which makes a
Sacrament. The whole Church cannot do it, And John 1.33. We read that John
Baptist had commission to Baptize with water. He that sent me to Baptize with
water, the same said unto me, etc.

2. Christ gave Commission to his Apostles in the first year of his public
Ministry to baptize, else it is not imaginable they would have done it, John
3.22. After these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the land of Judea,
and there he tarried with them and baptized (that is by the hands of his
Apostles) for Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples, John 4.12.

3. After his Resurrection he enlarged the Commission, of his Apostles, Matthew.
28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Here he prescribes the form they
should use in the administration of Baptism, injoyning them to baptize in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And the words in Mark 16.16. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned, seem to be an addition to those in Matthew. 28. and are not any express
direction as to the admitting Infants, or not admitting them, but a direction
how they should go and disciple the Heathen Nations by preaching the Gospel to
them, and when they had converted any to Christianity, they should baptize
them, and so bring them into Covenant with God; and when the Parents were in
Covenant, their Children could not fail to be so also, as (God willing) we
shall show hereafter.

2. We come to consider the Nature of Baptism.

Baptism in its general notion, is an outward visible sign and representation
of inward and spiritual blessings and benefits conveyed and made over by Christ
unto the persons baptized, they performing the conditions required of them.

In Baptism there are two parts 1. The Outward. 2. The Inward.


In the outward part there are three things considerable.

1. The outward Element, Water,

2. The Action of applying the water by sprinkling or dipping.

3. The form of administering or applying the water, viz. in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The quantity of water which is to be used, is not
limited by the holy Scriptures. Sprinkling Imm^rsio non est de necessitate
baptismi, quum non in ea posita sit mysterii hujus vis and efficacia, Causab.
in Mat. C. 3.

Ablutio est de necessitate baptismi Dom. Soto.


is as significant (as to the main ends of Baptism) as dipping. Therefore the
blood of Christ (which is signified by Baptism) is called the blood of
Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. And sprinkling comes nearer the baptism
mentioned in the old Testament, than dipping does. For the Children of Isreal's
passing under the Cloud and through the Red Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. is called a
baptizing. And surely they were not dipped in the Cloud, but only sprinkled
with it, that is, with some drops that fell from it; nor dipped in the Red Sea
(as the Egyptians were, who were drowed therein) but only touched it with
their feet, or else possibly some drops from the waves of it might be blown
upon them by the wind. But against this some object that place, Romans 6.4.
Buried with him in Baptism.

Answ. Our Baptism shows our communion with Christ in his death, it being a
sign and representation of Christ's blood shed, and consequently of his death
and burial; and should mind us that in conformity to him we should die unto
sin. But we must not press Metaphors too far, else as Christ lay three days
and three nights in the Grave, so we must lie under water, which if it were
practiced would quickly end this controversy. Besides, our pouring water on
the person baptized resembling in a sort the pouring dust or earth on a dead
body, may be a representation of Burial also. But we must not (as I said)
strain resemblances too far. Besides, we do not find that our Savior and the
Apostles continued every circumstance that was in use in the first institution
of the Sacrament of the Passover. As particularly, they were at first enjoined
to sprinkle their door-posts with the blood of the lamb, and to eat it with
their loins girt, and staves in their hands, as people in haste, ready to march
out of Egypt. But this and other circumstances we do not find observed by our
Savior or his Apostles in their eating the Passover. Therefore some
circumstances may be varied according to Christian prudence, provided we keep
close to the main of the institution, and the ends of it. To conclude this
particular, baptizing is any kind of religious washing, or sprinkling in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, duly performed by a person rightly
qualified for it. And what Mr. Perkins says in this matter is considerable,
viz. that if we were to baptize a converted Pagan or Turk of ripe years, in a
hot Country (mark that) we might baptize him by dipping. And so much of the
outward part. The inward part of Baptism or the spiritual mysteries hereby
signified are these two.

1. The blood of Christ sprinkled upon the Soul for the washing away the guilt
of sin, and procuring remission and justification to the person baptized.

2. The grace of Christ poured into the Soul, purging out the power and
dominion of sin by regeneration and sanctification.

3. We come now to consider the excellent ends and uses of Baptism.

1. Baptism, as it has reference to God is a sign or solemn rite signifying the
washing away of the guilt of our sins in Christ's blood, and the Sanctifying our
natures by his holy Spirit. And is a Seal to confirm it to us, as circumcision
was to the Jews, Romans 4.11. Into whose place it succeeds, as we shall show anon.

2. Baptism, as it has reference to us, is a solemn dedicating and and
consecrating us to the sincere worship and service of God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. 1. It Is a dedicating and consecrating us to God the Father as our
Creator, that we should obey him as our rightful Lord, love him and depend on
him as the fountain of our happiness, preferring his favor before any thing
else in the world. 2. It Is a dedicating us to Christ, that we should believe in
him, and accept him as our Savior and Redeemer, expecting to be saved only by
his merits, righteousness and intercession. 3. It Is a dedicating us to the Holy
Ghost, that we should accept him as our guide, sanctifier, and comforter, that
by him we may be freed from the dominion of sin, have the image of God repaired
in us, be led into all saving truths, and guided in the ways of godliness, and
comforted with a sense of Gods love in Christ, and hope of eternal glory.

3. It Is a solemn engaging us to renounce the Devil, the World and the Flesh as
the three great enemies of God and our Souls. They are all expressed in Ephesians.
2. v. 28. and 3. in times past ye walked according to the course of this World,
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that now works in
the Children of disobedience. Among whom we also had our conversation in times
past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the
mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.

4. It Is an enrolling us into Christ's family the visible Church, to walk in
union and holy communion with the members thereof, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit
are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we
be bond or free.

5. It Is an obligation or bond of obedience engaging us to perform the precepts
of the Gospel. We are thereby engaged to repent of our sins, to believe in
Christ, to endeavor to be holy in all manner of conversation, and to take up
our cross when our Savior calls us to it. As the Apostle speaks to the
Galathians, Gal. 5.3. I testify to every one that is circumcised, that he is
debtor to the whole Law. So say I to every one that is baptized, he is a debtor
to the whole Gospel, and bound to observe the precepts of it. And so much of
the excellent ends and uses of Baptism.

I come now to the fourth particular, to consider who are the persons who ought
to be baptized? Those are to be Baptized who are converted to the Faith of
Christ, whether Jews or Gentiles, and the Children of one or both Christian
Parents. The former part of this po- is granted by all. But there are some who
doubt of the latter. sition That I may therefore more clearly prove the right
of infants of Christian Parents to baptism, I shall first lay down some rules,
which it will be requisite for us to observe in this matter.

1. There are many great truths couched and comprehended in the Scriptures
which are not plainly and in so many words expressed; and whatsoever may be
rightly deduced by necessary and unavoidable consequence from Scripture is
Scripture, and binding to us. Our Savior, Mat. 22.31. proved the Resurrection
of the dead against the Sadducees, not by express Scripture but by consequence
and deduction from Scripture. See Sect. 6. concerning life everlasting.

2. Those truths which are more plainly revealed in the Old Testament, are more
sparingly mentioned in the New, and those that are more darkly mentioned in the
Old, are more clearly revealed in the New. There is much said of the
privileges of children in the Old Testament, and particularly of their right
to the Seal of the Covenant, and therefore the less is spoken of it in the New.

3. Those truths which were not controverted in the Apostles days, they were
not so zealous in pressing, or defending, there being not any apparent reason
or occasion for it. And of that nature the Baptism of Infants seems to be.

4. Those Scriptures which speak of the privileges of Children or Infants, are
the fittest Judges of this controversy, and not those which speak only of the
privileges of grown or adult persons. As if the question be, whether any
Infants may be saved? you must not determine it by Mark 16.16. He that
believes, and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned, (For this concerns only grown persons) but by such scriptures as these,
Genesis 17. v. 7. and v. 10.11, 12. Where God promises to be a God to Abraham, and
to his Seed, and requires that his male children at eight days old should be
circumcised as a token or seal of the Covenant between him and them. So if
there should be a question started, whether Parents ought to maintain their
Children in their Infancy? you must not determine this question by 2 These.
3.10. Where the Apostles says, this we commanded you, that if any will not
work, neither should he eat, but by 1 Timothy 5.8. He that provides not for his
family is worse than an Infidel. And according to this rule we must proceed in
this matter. This controversy must be determined by those places of Scripture
which do either express or imply the privileges of Infants. Having laid down
these rules, I come now to give some arguments or reasons for Infant Baptism.

1. The Covenant of Grace stands now in force for the benefit of the Children
of believing Parents, and if they be within the Covenant of God, the Seal Esse
foederatum sufficit ad accipiendum signum foederis. Dave nant.

Haec est fundamentalis ratio paedo-baptizmi. Daneus.


of the Covenant belongs to them. Be baptized every one of you (says the
Apostle to the converted Jews, Acts 2.39.) For the promise is to you and to
your Children. The same Greek word that is here used for children, is used for
Infants and Children at nurse, as may appear, if you consult 1 Cor. 7.14. 1
These. 2.7. If it were not so, the converted Jews should have suffered loss, by
believing in Christ, namely, if their children should be excluded now from the
promise or Covenant of grace, who were included in it for 2000 years before,
under the old Administration. For, as we said before, God established a
Covenant with Abraham and his seed. And Isaac was within this Covenant when he
was but eight days old, and received the Seal of it. Now concerning this
Covenant made with Abraham, observe these particulars. 1. It was an evangelical
Covenant, and the Seal of it, viz. Circumcision was the Seal of the
righteousness which is by Faith, Romans 4.11. 2. It belonged not to Abraham only
but to his Children. 3. This blessing bestowed on believing Abraham was to
descend on the believing Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. For he was to be the Father of
all them that believe, though they were not circumcised, as the Apostle tells
us in the place fore-quoted, Romans 4.11. Now could the believing Gentiles be
heirs of this Covenant (according to promise as it is, Gal. 3.29.) if their
children be excluded from it? For the Childrens right to the Covenant and
promise is part of the Fathers inheritance, the promise being, I will be a God
to thee and thy seed. 4. Consider, the Covenant of Grace has always been one
and the same for substance, though not as to manner of Administration. And
under the Old Testament it took in Children, and can we think it leaves them
out now under the Gospel? Surely the grace of God is not straiter under the
Gospel than it was under the Law: For Christ is the Mediator of a better
Covenant as the Apostle tellls us, Heb. 8.6. that is, of a better
administration of the Covenant of Grace. And how could this be, if infants who
were within the Covenant under the Law, should now be out of it under the
Gospel? But to clear this matter yet further, the Apostle tells us that
Children of believers are foederally holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children
unclean, but now are they holy. As if he should have said, if both Parents were
Heathens, then were their Children unclean, that is, out of Covenant; but now
one of them being a Christian, it pleases God that the Child shall have benefit
and privilege by that Parent; now are they holy, that is, in Covenant with
God. And in this sense; If the root be holy, so also are the branches, Romans
11.16. If the Parents be holy, so also are the Children. The Apostle speaks not
of an inward holiness inhering in the nature of the Child, but of an outward
holiness or right to Church Privileges and Ordinances. And according to this
sense, those words of Ezra are to be understood, Ezra 9.2. Ye have mingled the
holy seed, that is, that are in Covenant, with the Nations, that is, with those
who are out of Covenant. I know, the Anabaptists interpret those words of the
Apostle [now are your Children holy] to import no more but this, they are
legitimate and no bastards. But that cannot be the meaning of them: For the
Children then of many Pagans would be as holy as they: For multitudes of them
are born in lawful Wedlock, and so no bastards.

All visible members of the Jewish Church had a foederal right to the
Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. They were all baptized into Moses, all eat the
same spiritual meat, and yet with many of them God was not well pleased. This
foederal right did not stamp on them a character of saving grace, but was only
a right to the means of Salvation, and how far God would make them effectual,
no man could tell. Some that had a right to them, made no right use of them.
For an infant therefore to be born of Christian Parents professing to believe
in Christ, and willing solemnly to dedicate him to God, is all that God
requires of an infant to give him Title to his Covenant. Hypocrites may have a
right to outward Church privileges though the Spiritual benefit do not belong
to them, they not making a right use of them. No outward Ordinance is intended
for the elect only. Christ and ^is Apostles admitted some to Church privileges
that shall never be s^ved.
We must baptize all whom the Parents bring with such a profession for
themselves, and their children. And their Infants are in Covenant, because
reputatively their Parents wills are theirs, to dispose of them for their good.
And the Children are supposed to consent by their Parents who consent for them.
And the Parents will is reckoned for the Child's, till he come to age, to have a
will of his own. His Parents faith and consent to dedicate him to God, is his
Title. Now Parents dedicate their Children. 1. Virtually, when they dedicate
themselves to God. 2. Actually when their hearts actually and particularly
consent to dedicate this Child to God. 3. Sacramentally, when they bring him to
baptism and solemnly there dedicate him to God. And this is the title of
Children to baptism, and not their mere natural relation to their Parents.

As for Sponsors, Godfathers or witnesses, probably the use of them in ancient
time was this. They were such as came to the Church, and professed they
believed the Parents were true believers, and in case they did Apostatize or
die, did promise to see to the Christian education of the Child themselves. But
surely as the Parents faith and consent to dedicate their Child to God (and
that either of one or both) conveys the right of baptism to the Child, so the
Parents themselves ought to be the principal dedicators of their Child to God
in baptism. If Godfathers or Sponsors be chosen by them as their deputies to
do it for them, it may possibly be admitted, but as this is generally used it is
a matter more of ceremony and civility than of Christianity. And as a learned
man Fuller in his Infants Advocate page 156.
says, Godfathers are generally like brass andirons standing more for sight
than service, more for ornament than use.

2. If Children were circumcised under the Law, they may be baptized under the
Gospel. For baptism succeeds to all the essentials of circumcision.
Circumcision was not a mere badge of distinction, to distinguish the Jews from
other nations, but a Seal of their consecration to God. It had more in it of
what was Sacramental than of what was Ceremonial. And the chief mystery
signified by circumcision was, that natural corruption must be cut off and done
away. Now Christians are said by baptism to be spiritually circumcised. Ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, says the Apostle, Col.
2.11, 12. He urges it as an argument to them to throw off the Jewish
circumcision, for they were circumcised with the circumcision of Christ, viz.
with that which he had appointed in his Gospel, and that was baptism. So that
baptism is now come in the room of circumcision. And as Solomon says, Eccles.
1.4. One generation passes away, and another comes, but the earth remains for
ever; So may I say, one Sacrament of initiation, (viz. Circumcision) passes
away, and another, (viz. Baptism) comes in its stead, but yet the same
Covenant of Grace that was then, remains still. So that what circumcision was
to them, our baptism is to us, as particularly.

1. Circumcision was to be a sign or token of the Covenant to them, Genesis 17.11.
So is baptism to us, Acts 2.38, 39. Then Peter said unto them, repent and be
baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, etc. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

2. Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to them, Romans 4.11.
And so is baptism to us, Acts 22.16. Arise and be baptized and wash away thy
sins, calling on the name of the Lord.

3. Circumcision signified the necessity of sanctification to them, and
therefore they were required to be circumcised also in heart, Romans 2.29. So
baptism to us, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

All the difference between circumcision and baptism is for our advantage. For
1. Baptism is not so painful as Circumcision was. None of our blood is required
here to be shed. 2. Baptism is not confined to the eighth day, but may be done
before or after. 3. Women, and female children may be baptized, who could not
be circumcised. Acts 16.5. We read that Lydia was baptized. And Acts 18.1. it is
said they were baptized both men and women. But we come to a third argument for
infant Baptism, and that is this.

3. Whole Families were baptized under the new Testament, as Lydia and her
household, Acts 16.15. Stephanus and his household, 1 Cor. 1.16. And the Jailer
and his household, Acts 16.31, 32. Can we imagine so many families without any
Children in them?

4. Children are capable of receiving benefit by baptism, why should they
therefore be kept from it? The benefits of Baptism are. 1. Remission of sin by
the blood of Christ; and children need that remission, by reason of original
sin. 2. Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ; and they need the Sanctifying
of the Spirit to renew their natures. And Christ may in the due administraion
of this Ordinance graciously work on the Soul of an Infant, and change its
disposition, and infuse the seeds of grace into it before it comes to the use
of reason, why then should not children be brought to Christ, and dedicated to
him by baptism? Surely they that keep them from him, dangerously expose them to
the grand enemy of their Souls.

5. The fifth and last argument I shall bring for Infant Baptism, shall be the
practice of the Church in ancient times, and near to the Apostolical. And for
proofs of this nature, I shall take my rise from the time of Austin, without
looking lower, and so ascend toward the days of the Apostles.

First then for Austin, Augustinus Anno. Chr. 410.
who flourished about the year of Christ 410. he is positive, and express for
it, Epist. 3. ad Volusiam, consuetudo matris ecclesiae in baptizandis parvulis
nequaquam spernenda est, neque omnino superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda,
nisi apostolica esset traditio. Idem libro primo de pec. mer. and remiss. cap.
26. Parvulos Baptizandos esse Pelagiani concedunt. Qui contra authoritatem
Vniversae Ecclesiae proculdubio per Dominum and Apostolos traditam venire non
possunt. Et Sermon. 10. de verbis Apostoli de Poedobaptismo loquens, Nemo,
inquit, vobis susurret doctrinas alienas. Hoc ecclesia semper habuit, semper
tenuit. Hoc a majorum si de accepit, hoc usque in fidem perseveranter custodit.

Somewhat before Austin lived St. Hierom, Hieronymus. 4^0.
( viz. Anno. 400) who is clear for Infant Baptism Epist. ad Laetam. Qui
parvulus est Parentis in Baptismo vinculo solvitur, etc. Children says he are
freed in Baptism from the sin of Adam, in the guilt whereof they were involved,
but men of riper years from their own, and his. Hieron. advers. Pelag. libr. 3.
in fine. And in conclusion he resolves Infantes etiam in peccatorum remissionem
baptizandos esse, that Infants are to be baptized for the remission of sins.

Before him lived St. Ambrose, viz. about the year 370. Ambrosius. 370.
who speaking of the Pelagian Heresies, who published among other things, that
the hurt which Adam did to his Posterity was exemplo non transitu, rather by
giving them such a bad example of disobedience, than by deriving on them any
natural sinfulness, does thereupon infer, that if this were true, it would
prove evacuatio baptismatis parvulorum; a very nulling the Baptism of Infants.
Ambros. lib. 10. Epist. 84. Et lib. 2. cap. 11. Nec senex proselitus, nec
infans Vernaculus excipitur, quia omnis aetas peccato obnoxia, and ideo omnis
aetas sacramento idonea.

About the same time or something before flourished Gregory Nazianzen, Greg.
Nazianzenus. 3^0.
who in his fortieth Orat. de bapismo says, (...), etc. quid autem de iis
dicis, qui adhuc tenera aetate sunt? an eos quoque baptizabimus? ita prorsus,
si quod periculum urgeat. Praestat enim absque sensu sanctificari, quam sine
sigillo, and initione abscedere. Atque hujus rei ratio nobis est circumcisio
die octavo peragi solita, quae baptismi figuram quodammodo gerebat, atque iis,
qui rationis adhuc expertes erant, offerebatur.

Cyprianus 250.
Ascend we now to Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, who lived in the third century
about the year 250, who was as great a stickler for Infant Baptism in his time
as any who succeeded him. In Epist. ad Fidum lib. 3. Epist. 8. Porro si etiam
gravissimis delictoribus, etc. If, says he, remission of sins be given to the
greatest offenders, none of which, if they afterward believe, are excluded
from the grace of Baptism, quanto magis prohiberi non debet infans, qui recens
natus, nihil peccavit, etc. How much rather should Infants be admitted to it,
who being new born have not sinned at all, save that they have contracted from
Adam that original guilt which follows every man by nature, etc. Nor was this
Cyprians opinion only, but the unanimous consent of sixty six African Bishops
convened in Council, by whom it was declared (as he there relates) that Baptism
was to be administered as well to infants as men of riper years.

Origin. 120.
Before him lived Origin about the year 220. who plainly tells us in Romans cap.
6. Ecclesiam ab Apostolis traditionem accepisse etiam parvulis baptismum dare.
And further shows, that it was administered to them in reference to original
sin, which if it were not in Infants, gratia baptismi superflua videretur, the
grace of baptism might be thought superfluous. Idem in Levit. Hom. 8.

Irenaeus. 1^4.
Before his time in the second Century flourished Irenaeus, he seems c ear for
Infant baptism. Christus venit omnes per seipsum salvare, I omnes inquam, qui
per seipsum renascuntur, in Deum, Infantes, and parvulos, and pueros. Irenaeus
advers. haereses. Lib. 2. 39. Upon which words the Glosser makes this
observation. Nomine renascentiae, Dominica, and Apostolica phrasi, baptismus
intelligitur.

And thus far we can go, to show the ancient practice of the Church concerning
Infant Baptism.

5. We come now to the fifth thing we propounded to inquire into, and that is,
whether baptism be of absolute necessity to Salvation?

Baptism is not of such absolute necessity, that they that partake not of it,
must certainly and unavoidably perish. The penitent Thief on the Cross (who was
then converted) surely never was baptized. And Baptism of it self does not
confer grace, For Acts 8.13, 23. Simon Magus was baptized, yet remained in the
gall of bitterness. God can confer grace as he pleases, and when he pleases. He
ties us, but not himself to the use of means. Baptism is generally and
ordinarily necessary to salvation, both necessitate praecepti and medii; surely
Christ would not command a needless thing to all nations in the name of the
blessed Trinity. We cannot ordinarily expect grace, but in the use of the means
of grace, which he has appointed. It Is not therefore the simple privation, but
the neglect or contempt of baptism, that is dangerous. And so I come now to the
sixth thing I propounded to inquire into, viz.

6. What improvement should they make of their baptism who were baptized in
their Infancy?

1. They should reflect upon their Original corruption, and how defiled they
were from the Womb, so that as soon as they were born they stood in need of a
Savior.

2. It should mind them, that long ago they were solemnly dedicated to Christ,
entered into his family, listed under his banner, engaged (as far as could be
done by their Parents) to the sincere service and worship of God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, and to forsake the Devil, the World and the Flesh. But now
they are come to years of understanding, they must renew their Covenant with
Christ by their own actual consent. And surely if things were regularly carried
in the Church (as they ought to be) the passing out of the Infant state of
Church-member-ship into the state of adult members should be very Solemn, and
by a serious, understanding, personal owning of their Baptismal Covenant; and
then they should be confirmed in the state of adult members, and then, and not
before be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The infant baptismal
Covenant will save none that live to years of discretion, that do not heartily
own it in their own persons.

3. It should stir up Godly sorrow in them, that being so long ago engaged unto
Christ, and dedicated to him by their Parents, they have walked no more
answerably thereunto.

4. It should stir up in them a vigorous exercise of Faith in Christ's blood.
Did they need Christ's merits and intercession when young, and when they were
under the guilt only of original sin; how much more now do they need it, when
they have committed so many actual sins?

5. The remembrance of his baptism should be a mighty argument to turn a sinner
from the error of his way. Say to thy Soul (O Sinner) I was dedicated to Christ
in my Infancy, and now shall I go on in sin serving the Devil? I was listed
under the banner of Christ; and shall I now fight against him? Ah wretch! how
can I do these things?

6. It should be a great antidote against temptation: whenever thou art tempted
to sin, say to thy self, I am baptized, I am solemnly engaged unto Christ, how
can I do this great wickedness and sin against him?

7. I come now to the seventh and last thing I propounded to consider, namely,
What are the duties of Christian Parents in reference to their Children. Their
duties are these,

1. To be sensible of their own sinful condition by nature, and how they have
been instruments of propagating a corrupt nature to their poor Children.

2. To bless God for Christ, who is the the only Physician, who can cure them
and their children.

3. Seasonably to present their Children to this ordinance of baptism, and
professing their Faith in Christ, and their consent to take him for their Lord
and Savior, solemnly to dedicate them unto him: And when they dedicate their
children unto Christ, they should address themselves unto it as one of the
solemnest works in the world. They should do it with due preparation,
reverence, and seriousness as beseems those that are transacting a business,
of such unspeakable importance.

4. They should engage to bring up their children in the principles of the
Christian Faith. They should imagine God said to them as the daughter of
Pharaoh said to Moses's Mother, Exodus 2.19. Bring up this Child for me. Bring
up this Child in my fear, and for my service.

5. They should be very earnest in prayer to God for their children. O that
Ismael might live in thy sight, says holy Abraham, Genesis 17.18. So should pious
Parents pray for their children, O that this child of mine may be a real member
of Christ. O that he may have the Image of God stamped upon his Soul. O that he
may honor God here, and be for ever happy with him in his Kingdom hereafter.

6. They should be early instilling good and wholesome principles and documents
into them; precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and there a
little, as they are able to bear it, Isa. 28.10. And the Mother as well as the
Father should make conscience to do this. We read that Bathsheba the mother of
Solomon did so, Prove. 31. which chapter contains her wise instructions to him.
And if it be the duty of Parents thus carefully to instruct their Children,
then surely it is the duty of Children carefully to observe and lay to heart,
and practice the instructions of their Parents.


7. They should check the first appearings and buddings forth of sin in them,
endeavoring to make them sensible of the great evil and danger of it.

8. They should labor to make them in love with the beauty and excellency of
Holiness and Virtue.

9. They should bring them to the ordinances of God, expecting the spirit of
God will move upon those waters.

10. They must be sure to set them a good example. Children are more led by
example than precept. Exemplum concionatoris concionibus validius. Et exempl^m
Parentis praeceptis validiu^.


11. They must encourage all good beginnings of virtue or ingenuity they see in
them.

12. And lastly they must labor to give them a good education and put them
into a good way of living in the World, and make such provisions for them as
God in his Providence shall enable them. And those Parents that do these
things, whatever the success be, will have comfort in so doing.

Of the Lords Supper.
I Come now to treat of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. In the handling of
which I shall,

1. Endeavor rightly to inform your Judgments concerning the true nature, use,
intent, and benefit of this holy ordinance.

2. Direct your practice, that you may know how to receive it in a right
manner, and to your spiritual benefit.

That you may therefore be rightly informed concerning the nature of this
Sacrament, you must know, that the Jews had two ordinary standing Sacraments.
viz. 1. Circumcision. to which Our Baptism. do answer. 2. The Passover. to
which The Lords Supper. do answer.


Theirs were bloody Sacraments; for the blood of Christ was to be shed. Ours
unbloody; for the blood of Christ is shed. Now that I may speak more distinctly
and plainly concening the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it will be requisite
that I speak something 1. concerning the Jewish Passover, which we shall
consider either as it was first instituted or as it was afterward celebrated,
wherein diverse rites of the first Egyptian Passover were not exactly observed.

The first institution of the Passover we find, Exodus 12. When Israel after
long servitude and bondage was to go out of Egypt, God commanded them in their
several families to kill a Lamb; to roast it whole; to eat it within doors that
night; to sprinkle the side and upper door-posts with the blood thereof; and so
doing, they should be safe from the destroying Angel, that rode circuit that
night to destroy all Egypts first born, but he was to pass by all the houses of
Israel sprinkled with blood. And hence the name Passover, Exodus 12.27. This was
to be greatly observed on the fourteenth day of the first month, at Even.

In the treating therefore of this Passover we shall first consider the things
that were proper to the Jewish Passover in Egypt, and then show how they
prefigured Christ our Passover.

1. They were commanded to take a Lamb. A Lamb the emblem of innocence. So our
Savior was styled, John 1.19. The Lamb of God, being of a Lamb-like humility
and meekness. John his beloved Disciple often styles him so, as being
exceedingly delighted with this similitude.

2. A Lamb without blemish. So was our Savior, 1 Pet. 1.19.

3. One of their own flocks and folds. Christ was of the Jewish Nation, Romans
9.4, 5. Like in all things to his brethren, sin only excepted.

4. It must be slain. So Christ was put to death on the Cross.

5. Not a bone of it must be broken, which was verified in Christ, John 19.33,
36.

6. It must be roasted. So our Savior suffered the scorching heat of his
Fathers wrath; sweating drops of blood for our sakes, Luke 22.44. O Sinner how
little art thou sensible of what thy Savior has suffered to redeem thee!

7. The blood of the Lamb must be sprinkled on the side and upper door-posts of
their houses, if they intended to be preserved from the destroying Angel. So
must the blood of Christ be sprinkled by Faith on our hearts, if we intend to
be delivered from the wrath to come. See 1 Pet. 1.2. and Heb. 12.24
There is no escaping the wrath of God, but by the sprinkling of Christ's blood
on our consciences.

8. They were to eat this Paschal Lamb with sower herbs and unlevened bread. 1.
With sower herbs, to mind them of what affliction and bondage they were in in
Egypt. We must have contrition and remorse wrought in us for our sins, and be
in bitterness of soul for them, ere we can reasonably expect relief by Christ.
2. With unlevened bread. The succeeding Jews, that they might show their
exactness in observing this precept, did at this Passover-time use great
diligence to rid their houses of all leven; yea they were so strict about it,
that they searched with candles to see if there were any remaining in any
corner or hole. And lest after all their diligence any should remain with them
yet unfound out, they passed a solemn execration upon it in these or the like
words. All the leven that is within my possession, which I have seen, or which
I have not seen, which I have cast out or not cast out, be it accursed, be it
as the dust of the earth. The Apostle shows us that by leven is meant, malice
and wickedness, by unlevened bread, sincerity and truth. He intimates what
manner of persons they must be that intend to feed upon Christ by Faith. They
must not think to eat of this Lamb, except they rid themselves of their Leven.
Leven, it swells the mass, and sours it. Pride makes the heart swell, and
malice soures it; search therefore, O Sinner, to find out thy leven when thou
think of approaching to this holy Table. Search every corner of thy heart as
with a candle; and when thou have found out thy sins, manifest thy hatred and
loathing of them; Never think to be pardoned except thou part with thy sins;
Never think to be saved except thou be sanctified.

9. They were to eat it with their loins girt, and staves in their hands, and
shoes on their feet, showing themselves thereby to be in a posture of
readiness to be gone out of Egypt, and to seek the promised Land. Which may
intimate to us, that we must receive this blessed Sacrament with intention to
leave the dominions of Pharaoh, the Kingdom, Service, and bondage of sin and
Satan, and to march on toward our heavenly Canaan. People would fain escape
damnation, yet are loath to leave their pleasing and profitable sins. No coming
to Canaan except you leave Egypt.

10. When they had eaten of the roasted Lamb, if any thing thereof remained, it
was to be burnt with fire and not left till the morning. This may show us that
Sacramental elements are not Sacramental Nihil habet ratione Sacramenti extra
usum legitimum and Sacramentalem.
but in their use only and while they are used. As Bread and Wine in this
Sacrament, and Water in Baptism, after the Sacramental use, are no longer
Sacramental. A stone is boundary in its use and place: Remove it, it is a mere
stone, no boundary.

11. Two sorts of persons were barred from eating the Passover. 1. The
uncircumcised, the stranger and foreigner, Exodus 12.43, 48. Such as are not
initiated into Christ's Family the Church by the first Sacrament of Baptism,
cannot regularly be admitted to the Lords Table. 2. unclean persons (though
circumcised) or such as were in a journey, were to be put off to the Passover
of the second month, being not cleansed for the present, according to the
purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. Numb. 9.10.11. This shows us
that some persons who are within the communion of the Church may be unfit at
some particular times to come to the Lords Table, yea though believers, may at
such times eat and drink unworthily.

12. After the Paschal Lamb was eaten, on the next day viz. on the fifteetnh
day of the first month, began the Feast of the Passover, or feast of unlevened
bread. It continued seven days, and no levened bread was to be eaten during
that time; and of those seven days the first and last only were holy
Convocations or Sabbaths, wherein they might do no servile work, Exodus 12.15,
16. Levit. 23.5, 6, 7. Numb. 28.16, 17, 18. The Apostle alludes hereunto, 1
Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed, therefore let us keep the feast.
As if he should have said, those for whom Christ our Passover is Sacrificed, on
wh^s^ consciences his blood is sprinkled, ought to be a holy people not levened
with sin and wickedness, and to walk before God in sincerity and truth, living
all their days in a holy rejoicing and thanksgiving.

Thus much of the first Passover as instituted and observed in Egypt; some of
the Ceremonies whereof were proper to that Passover, and not intended for any
other following. And accordingly in after times they were not observed. As
particularly,

1. The Paschal Lamb was afterward to be slain and eaten only at Je^usalem,
Deuteronomy. 16.5, 6. The place which God had chosen for his public worship.

2. They did not observe the taking up of the Lamb four days before.

3. Nor the sprinkling the door posts with blood.

4. Nor staying within and not going out of the house that night; For our
Savior and his Disciples did go out after Supper.

5. Nor eating it in a traveling posture. For we find our Savior and his
disciples eating it in a posture of discubiture, or leaning on beds.

From whence we may take notice, that we are not bound to observe all
occasional or local circumstances or customs belonging to a Sacrament, nor to
follow our Savior and his Apostles in those particular circumstances of eating
the Lords Supper late at night, or in a leaning posture, or in an upper
Chamber, no woman being present, etc. Let us look to the substance, end, and
intent of the Sacrament, and chiefly mind that.

Having spoken thus much of the Passover, I think it will not be amiss for the
clearer understanding of the original institution of this Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, to insert a short description of the method and order of the
Paschal Supper with the principal rites thereunto belonging (which were then
either all or most of them, as it seems, in use among the Jews) as they are
delivered to us by their own writers, much after this manner, consisting in
several Cups, or drinkings of Wine, and two breakings of bread. Some of which
rites, we shall show, that our Savior took and ordained them to a new
Evangelical use and mystical signification.

1. When all things appertaining to the Feast were prepared, and all persons
belonging to that Company that were to eat together, were ready, the chief man
of the company (who was as it were the Priest among them) takes a cup of Wine
and blesses it in some such words as these. Blessed be thou Lord, who have
created the fruit of the vine, and blessed be thou for this good day, and this
holy convocation, etc. Compare with this custom our Saviors words, Luke
22.17. He took the Cup and gave thanks and said, take this and divide it among
you.

2. Then the Table was furnished with provisions of several sorts, viz. bitter
herbs, the unlevened bread, the body of the Paschal Lamb roasted whole, and so
brought up.

3. The chief man of the company takes the sower herbs and blesses them in some
such words as these, Blessed art thou O Lord, who createst the fruits of the
earth, etc. and then eats of them the quantity of an Olive at least, and
distributes to the rest, uttering some such sentence as this, These bitter
herbs we eat in token that the Egyptians made the lives of our Fathers bitter
in Egypt.

4. Then he takes the dish or Charger which held the unleavened bread or Cakes,
and (laying by a piece thereof to be eaten afterward with the Paschal Lamb at
the close of the Supper) he blessed the bread in some such words as these,
blessed art thou O Lord, who bring forth bread out of the earth, etc. Then
he breaks it, and eats of it.

5. When this is finished, he begins the second Cup of Wine, and the rest
follow him. Then their Children brought in, were made to ask what is the reason
that this night differs so much from other nights, instancing in many
particulars of the festival solemnities? Then the master of the feast begins a
a narrative, how their Fathers were all servants in Egypt, and as that night
God delivered them, etc. And tells particularly of the wonders done in Egypt
and the manner of their deliverance, saying to this purpose, This is the
Passover which we celebrate, because the Lord passed over the houses of our
Fathers in Egypt; therefore we are bound to give thanks, to praise, to laud and
glorify him, and sing Hallelujahs to him, etc. This kind of declaration or
showing forth the occasion of the Passover, they called Haggadah. Hence the
Apostle may be supposed to have borrowed his phrase. As often as ye eat this
bread and drink this Cup, ye declare or set forth the Lords death, 1 Cor.
11.26. This annunciation or showing forth to their Children the Lords wonderful
goodness and mercy to them, we find commanded Exodus 12.26, 27. And it shall
come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, what mean you by this
service? That ye shall say, it is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who
passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the
Egyptians, and delivered our houses.

6. Then he takes that part of the unlevened cake that was before reserved, and
blessing it, and giving thanks for it as before, he distributes to every one a
piece of it to eat with the Paschal Lamb, of which each person present was
bound to eat as much as the quantity of an Olive at least.

The breaking of bread therefore, at which our Savior did institute the
commemoration of his body, seems to be this second breaking of bread, viz. in
time of Supper, after which nothing more was to be eaten that night. For it is
said, (...) as they were eating, or toward the end of the Supper, Jesus took
bread and blessed it and brake it and gave it to his Disciples saying, take eat
this is my body, Mat. 26.26.

7. All this done, they drink up the third Cup, called the Cup of blessing, or
thanksgiving after meat, Paul calls it by this very name, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup
of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ,
etc. And this third Cup which was after supper (that is, after they had done
eating, and was the conclusion of the Supper) was the Cup which our Savior
applied to a new spiritual signification. And having instituted it into an
Eucharistical Cup, bad them drink all of it. So that now he ordaines bread to
be a representation of his body henceforward, in the same manner as the Paschal
Lamb had been the representation of his body before; and the cup to be the New
Testament in his blood now, as the blood of bullocks had been the Old Testament
in his blood before, Exodus 24.8. And Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on
the people, and said, behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made
with you, etc. After this they sang the Hallelujah, or Hymn, or Psalm of
Praise, according to Custom. And accordingly our Savior and his Apostles did
sing a hymn after the Paschal Supper before they departed. So that supposing
these Rites to be then in use among the Jews (as their own writers tell us) it
will from thence appear, that the bread and wine which our Savior distributed
at his last Passover, and appointed to signify and represent his body and
blood, were rites within the compass of it, and belonging to it, only applied
by him now to a new evangelical use and signification. And he dealt no
otherwise in this Sacrament, than he did before in that other of Baptism, which
he seems to have founded upon the old rite in use among the Jews, of
purification by water. So that our Savior in instituting both Sacaments of the
new Testament seems to have taken the old rites of the Jews, and to have
ordained and advanced them to a new evangelical use, and mystical
signification, and so to have put (as one says) a new superscription upon the
old metal. There is one thing more that it will not be amiss here to take
notice of, viz. That from the Jewish custom of having a feast at the end of
their Sacrifices, the Christians of the Primitive Church instituted their
Agapae or love feasts. And they of the Church of Corinth did much imitate the
Jewish Paschal rites in receiving of the Lords Supper. For they had a Supper
before (in which they were not always very temperate as appears 1. Cor. 11.)
And at the conclusion of this Supper they had the bread and wine of the Lords
Supper administered, as the Jews at the end of their Paschal Supper had the
unlevened bread, and the Cup of blessing.

Having spoken thus much of the Passover and the rites belonging to it; I now
come to speak of the Lords Supper which succeeds it. And here I shall treat, 1.
Of the Author of it. 2. Of the time when it was instituted. 3. Of the Nature of
it. 4. Of the ends for which it was instituted.


1. Christ himself is the Author of it. We have before shown how Christ eating
the Paschal Supper with his Disciples (who were Jews) took some of the Paschal
cheer and provisions, and made them the materials of this blessed Sacrament.
It Is Christ who was the Author of it. It Is he who is the King and Sovereign of
his Church. It Is he who appoints therein his Officers, Laws, and Ordinances. He
is the Mediator of the new Covenant, and therefore appoints the tokens and
seals of it. Divine institution only makes a Sacrament; the whole Church cannot
do it.

2. Let us consider the time in which it was instituted, viz. in the same night
in which he was betrayed by Judas, 1 Cor. 11.23. Observe Christ's great love to
his Church. He saw his death approaching; yet he bestows now a great favor on
mankind, when he sees he shall receive the hardest measure from them. O that
the same mind were in us that was in Christ Jesus! Judas had resolved
beforehand to betray him, and accordingly had agreed with the Chief-Priests and
Council of the Jews, yet with this wicked resolution he comes to eat the
Passover with him. Sins of purpose and resolution are most dangerous. We should
look not only on Judas's sin in betraying his Master, but on his fixed
intention and resolution to do it. It Is a dangerous thing to come to this
Sacrament with an intent to go on in any known sin.

3. Let us consider the nature of this Sacrament; wherein three things are to
be spoken to.

1. The outward Ordinance, or outward signs. 2. The inward and Spiritual
mysteries thereby signified. 3. The Command for the observing this Ordinance.
1. The outward Ordinance, or Sacrament properly so called consists,

1. Of certain Elements, or materials, viz. Bread and Wine.

2. Of sundry Rites and Sacramental actions appertaining thereunto.

1. Our Savior took bread and gave thanks, and so also the Cup. He blessed the
Bread and the Wine severally (as the Jews manner was) by thanksgiving and
pra^er to God. Hence this Sacrament is called the Eucharist. And this blessing
and praying over the Bread and Wine is called the consecration of the Elements,
or setting them apart from a common to a holy use. Yet this must be observed by
the way, that this Consecration changes not the Elements as to their substance,
In caena Domini nu^la est transmutatio signorum in res signatas, aut existentia
rerum signatarum in signis, sed signa vocantur res signatae Metaphorice, non
proprie. Pontificij panem tra^smutari in co^pus, Lutherani cu^pus ess^ in pane
statuunt, ut qui non exp^ndunt locu^ionem esse Sacramentalem, qualem etiam
habem^s Genesis 17. u^i circumcisio vocatur foedus. In his verbis [hoc est corpus
meum] tropus est in copula [est] quemadmodum in istis Septem vaccae sunt septem
anni; Item Semen est verbum Dei. I^i enim copula est accipitur pro significare.
Consecration makes the Elements only representatively the body and blood of
Christ.
but as to their use, office and signification only. This is my body are not
the words of consecration. For Christ bad them take and eat, before he
pronounced these words. And the words of Consecration should in reason be
spoken to God, and not to the Disciples, as these were.

2. He brake the bread. The papists break not the bread but give it whole in
wafer cakes. And they take away the Cup from the Laity; wh^reas our Savior
instituted it to be received in both kinds; and to receive it otherwise is a
palpable violation of his order.
Hence this Sacrament is called the breaking of Bread, Acts 2.42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
bread, and in prayers.

3. He gave it to his Disciples, saying take, eat; and so the Cup, take and
drink ye all of it.

So that the duty of a Minister who shall according to Christ's institution
administer this Ordinance, is,

1. To praise God for the elements of bread and wine; and setting them apart;
(according to Christ's institution) from a common to this religious use, to pray
to God that they may be effectual representations, signs and seals of the
spiritual blessings they are appointed to signify, to all those who shall
receive them in a right manner. And then to distribute the bread and wine so
consecrated to the Communicants. And the duty of the communicants is to take
and eat of this bread and drink this wine in a right manner. Of which more
afterward.

2. We come now to consider the inward mysteries and spiritual blessings
signified by these outward elements. Here Christ is represented to us as
Sacrificed for us, and delivering himself to us with the fruits and benefits of
his death, for our eternal good. I say (says our Savior.) This is my body
which was broken Though a bone of him was not broken; yet the Apostle speaks of
his body as broken, in regard of those cruel wounds he received.
for you.

The body of Christ that was nailed to the Cross, and his blood that was shed,
was a Sacrifice, as offered up to God. But it is meat and drink, as offered to
us. He was given for us in the Sacrifice, and is given to us in the Sacrament,
with the blessed fruits and benefits that flow from his death, John 55. Christ
says my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. And verse 56. He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him, that
is, He dwells in me by Faith, and I dwell in him by the constant influence
and quickening virtue of my holy Spirit. Christ must be received by us and
united to us by faith^, as meat is received by our mouth and tasted by our
Palate, and so turned into our substance. Being so received, he will strengthen
and refresh our Souls as meat does a hungry man. There is an absolute necessity
of closing with Christ as crucified and of being highly pleased with him on
that account, as the Palate is with wholesome agreeable food, that our Souls
being united to him may of his fullness receive grace for grace. Not that we
must be like the gross Capernaites (John 6.) who had a gross appehension of
eating corporally the very flesh and drinking the very blood of Christ There is
indeed a spiritual eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood by Faith,
which may be exercised when this Sacrament is not administered. And of such an
eating our Savior speaks to the Jews, John 6.53. Verily verily I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you. Now that he does not mean Sacramental eating there, is plain and
evident; for that Sacrament was not instituted till a good while after this, as
will appear to any one who understands the history of our Savior; nay this
kind of eating of his flesh by Faith he shows to be of so great necessity, that
without it he tells them they had no life in them, v. 53. which cannot be said
of all that never received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. When therefore we
approach to this holy Table, let us not be like the Carnal Israelites that did
eat Manna and drink of the rock in the wilderness, but neither saw nor tasted
Christ in them.

3. We come now to consider the command for the observing of this ordinance. Do
this in remembrance of me. This command is not to be extended to circumstances,
and accessaries but to the substance and main of the institution. This
Sacrament is called the Lords Supper from the time of the first institution,
not that we are bound to receive it only at that time. Occasional circumstances
the prudence of the Church may alter, let us look to the substance, end and
intent of this Sacrament, and chiefly mind that. The dying charge of a Friend
does usually make great impression on the bystanders. And so should this
solemn charge of our dying Savior make upon us. Do this in remembrance of me
and observe it in all ages till I come. So long it must be continued in the
world.

4. Let us consider now the ends for which this Sacrament was ordained. And
here I shall speak.

1. Of the true and proper ends for which it was instituted.

2. Of the mistaken ends for which it was not appointed.

The true and proper ends for which it was instituted are these.

1. To be a solemn commemoration of the death and passion of our Lord and
Savior, to keep it in remembrance, and in the eye of the Church till he come
to Judgment, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

2. To be a Seal of the new Covenant or new Testament, with all the promises
and privileges of it, and of the ratification of it by the blood of Christ,
Luke 22.20. This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, that is, a Sign and Seal
of the new Testament or Covenant which is to be ratified and confirmed by my
blood. Heb. 9.15.16.
Matthew. 26.28. This is my blood of the New Testament, which is now to be shed
for many, for the remission of sins: that is, this wine in the Cup is a sign or
representation of my blood, and a seal whereby the new Covenant is confirmed
with all the promises of it. For without shedding of blood there is no
remission, Heb. 9.22.
Gods Justice being no other way to be satisfied.

Now the Sacraments may be said to be Seals in two respects, 1. They are
absolute seals to the veracity and truth of Gods promises and Covenant. 2.
Conditional Seals in reference to us. They Seal the remission of sins to all
that perform the conditions required and to none else: As the tree of life did
not seal or confirm to Adam, that he should have life, except upon condition of
his perfect obedience. To them therefore that perform the conditions required
they exhibit, confer and passover the blessings promised in the Covenant of
Grace.

3. To be an objective means to stir up, excite and increase Repentance, Faith,
Love, Hope, Joy, Thankfulness in believers, by a lively representation of the
evil of sin, the infinite love of God in Christ, the firmness of the Covenant
of grace, the greatness and sureness of the mercies promised.

4. To be a badge and cognizance of the Church before the world; and a token
that we solemnly profess that we own a crucified Jesus for our Savior, and
that it is Christ and his death that we depend upon and abide by, for the
remission of all our sins and reconciliation with God.

5. To be a means of our renewing our Covenant with God. Covenants in the
Scripture were wont to be made by eating and drinking together. Isaac and
Abimelech, Jacob and Laban concluded their Covenants with a Feast. Genesis 6.30.
and Genesis 31.44, 46.
Hereby we have an advantage of entering into a stricter engagement to God, and
renewing the Covenant we made with him in Baptism.

6. To be a means of procuring and advancing unity and love among the Saints. A
feast carries in it the notion of love and good will. But this is more a feast
of love than any ordinary feast can be, because it is a remembrance of the
greatest love that that ever was manifested, viz. of that love which the Lord
showed in dying for us. It Is a Feast upon Christ's Sacrifice. And it should be a
means not only of uniting believers more firmly to Christ their Head, but of
uniting and endearing them more one to another.

The ancient Christians did notably express this. 1. By their Agapae or
love-feast, Jude verse 14. 2 Pet. 2.13. 2. By their kiss of Charity, Romans
16.16. 1 Cor. 16.30. 3. By their collections for the poor made at these times,
1 Cor. 16.1.

Having thus spoken of the true and proper ends for which this Sacrament was
instituted; I come now to consider the mistaken ends for which it was not
appointed.

1. It was not appointed to turn bread and wine into the true, and real body
and blood of Christ. For if sense be not to be believed concerning its own
object, and which tells all men that it is still bread and wine, how can we
believe that Christ or any of his Apostles were ever in the World, seeing they
that saw them and conversed with them, may on this ground for all that be
deceived; which were very irrational to imagine. And the Apostle expressly calls
it bread three times in three verses together, and that after the Consecration.
1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this Cup, ye
do show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread
and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread,
and drink of that Cup. And he tells us, that the use of this Sacrament is not
to make the Lards Body corporally present, but to show the Lords death till he
come; that is, to be a visible representation and commemoration of his death
till he come to judgment. Indeed Christ is really present in this Sacrament,
but not in the elements, but to the Faith of the worthy receiver. When they eat
of this Bread and drink of this Cup in a due manner, exercising a lively Faith
in him for the remission of all their sins, Christ is then present to their
Faith, neither is he any otherwise present in this Sacrament.

2. This Sacrament was not appointed to Sacrifice Christ really again to the
Father, to propitiate him for the quick and dead, or to ease Souls in
Purgatory, to deliver them out of it. For Christ having died once, dies no
more, but by once offering up himself has for ever perfected them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14.
that is, he has made a perfect satisfaction to the justice of God, and done
all things needful to bring them to eternal life, who are sanctified by his
grace, and brought to believe in him with a lively Faith.

3. It Is not appointed as a means to conveigh grace merely by the work done, or
by the outward receiving of it only, (as charms are supposed to work;) neither
are we to suppose that God will pardon or save any for their mere coming to
this Ordinance, though they strive not with their hearts to bring them to
repentance, faith in Christ, sincere love to God and men, and new obedience.

4. It Is not appointed as a means to wipe off the old score of sin that men may
more freely and boldly encourage themselves to sin again (as some ignorant
people are apt to think) but as a blessed means to mortify sin in us and to
engage us unto holiness. And thus much concerning the first head I propounded
to speak unto, viz. The right informing the judgment; and that concerning these
four particulars. 1. The author of this Sacrament. 2. The time of its
Institution. 3. The nature of it. 4. The ends for which it was appointed.

I come now to the second, viz. to direct your practice and to show you how you
should receive it in a right manner. In order to which you must know, 1. There
are some duties to be performed before you come to receive this holy Sacrament.
2. Some duties in the time of receiving it. 3. Some duties after.


There are two kinds of preparation necessary to a worthy receiver.

1. The General which is that we look to it, that we be in a state of grace;
for there are several graces that must be exercised in receiving this
Sacrament, and they that are not in a state of grace are utterly unfit (for the
present) to approach this holy Table.

2. The Particular which consists in a present actual fullness. In order to the
obtaining of this let me advise thee (Reader) to the practice of these things.

1. Betake thy self to some retired privacy, and sequestring thy self from
worldly cares and business, labor to bring thy mind into a good calm sedate
frame and fitness for this great work.

2. Earnestly beg of God to give thee the assistance of his holy spirit to
enable thee to fit thy self for this solemn Ordinance.

3. Seriously consider the danger of receiving this Sacrament unworthily, that
is, without such a disposition of mind and such a preparation of heart, and
such reverence and devotion as is agreeable unto so holy an Ordinance. Such
persons as are not so fitted, and yet approach to this holy Table, are guilty
of profaning this Sacrament (which is the commemoration of Christ's death) and
of vilifying the signs and pledges of his body and blood, and so incur the
danger of temporal Judgment and chastisement here, and without repentance, of
eternal hereafter.

4. Seriously consider what is required to a worthy receiving. And here a
twofold caution is to be observed. 1. That the pitch of worthiness is not to be
set too high, so as none shall be thought sit to partake of this Table but such
as have a high and eminent degree of grace. For this ^^dinance was appointed
for the ben^fit of the lowest Believers, and s^ such as are weak in the Faith.
2. That it be not set too low, so that a^^ person, though very ignorant of the
true nature and end of this ordinance, if he be free from gross, open, and
scandalous sins, may be thought fit to come and be admitted to it.

That we may therefore avoid both these, I shall set down.

1. What qualifications are requisite to a worthy Receiver? 2. What are
insufficient?
The qualifications requisite are these.

1. Knowledge. The fundamental principles and grounds of Christianity, and the
nature, signification, end and use of this Sacrament must be known by every one
that would be a worthy receiver. Ignorant persons therefore are totally unfit
(for the present) and must first be instructed before they be admitted to this
holy Ordinance. But by the knowledge required we do not mean the profound
knowledge of a Scholar (who knows how to dispute upon any of these points, and
knows all the distinctions about them) but the savoury knowledge of a
Christian, which has these properties. 1. It Is not a mere speculative floating
or swimming in the brain, but a knowledge that affects the heart and works upon
the affections. It Is such a knowledge of God, as causes the heart to fear him,
such a knowledge of sin as works in the heart a hatred and loathing of it. 2.
It Is an humbling knowledge. Knowledge not sanctified puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1.
But the more any Soul is savingly enlightened, the more it sees, and is sensible
of its own folly and corruption and great depravedness. 3. It Is a knowledge
that is operative for the drawing the Soul to Christ, and for the mending of
the heart and reforming of the life. Never let any man tell me that he has
knowledge enough, he knows as much as the Minister can teach him, he knows the
way to Heaven and Salvation as well as any body can show him, when I see him
going on in paths leading down to Hell. Shall any man persuade me that he has a
sufficient skill in Physic, and yet when he is dangerously sick, he is neither
sensible of it, nor applies any fit remedy for himself? Certainly that
knowledge of the things of God is not right, which does not affect the heart,
nor reform the life.

2. Repentance. They that are truly penitent have wrought in them by the Spirit
of God. 1. A Conviction of the evil and danger of their sins. 2. True
contrition and godly sorrow for them. 3. A hatred and loathing of them. 4. They
are brought humbly to confess them with sorrow and shame unto God. And 5. To
turn from them unto God by sincere amendment of their lives.

3. Faith in Christ. This is a main qualification requisite to a worthy
Communicant. The main acts of Faith are these two. 1. A serious owning and
acknowledging Christ for the only Savior of the World. 2. A sincere giving up
of the soul to him to be pardoned in his blood and sanctified by his Spirit,
and a solemn trusting and depending on him for all the benefits purchased by
his death and passion. And such a faith as this is operative for the purifying
of the heart and reforming the life.

4. Love. Of this grace there are several acts required. 1. We ought to excite
a great love in our Souls to God our Creator and constant benefactor, who sent
his Son to redeem us. 2. We ought to excite and stir up in our souls a great
love to Christ Jesus, who humbled himself to the death for us. In contemplation
of which transcendent love of Christ the Apostle cries out, If any man love not
the Lord Jesus let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22.

Q. But you will say, how may we know whether there be in us a sincere love to
Christ or no? 1. Have we been deeply wounded with a sense of our sins, and have
we betaken our selves to him as our only Physician to be cured, and have we
found him curing our accusing condemning consciences? Has our love to Christ
any such foundation as this? 2. Do we own Christ and love him as considered in
all his Offices? Do we love Christ not only as a Priest that has made atonement
for us, but as a Prophet and a King? Do we love the guidance of his holy Spirit
and the guidance of his word? Do we love his Sovereignty as well as his
Saviour-ship? 3. Do we love him for his deep humiliation and bitter sufferings,
which he so readily underwent for us, and for the great redemption and
salvation he has wrought for us? 4. Are we willing to obey Christ? If you love
me (says our Savior) keep my commandments? 5. Is the interest of Christ dear
to us? Are we concerned in his honor and dishonor? Are we suitably affected
when his interest prospers or is trampled upon, when it goes well or ill with
his Church? 6. Do we love him for those eminent graces which were so
conspicuous in his life? 7. Are we willing to be serviceable to him and to
suffer for him when he calls us to it? 8. Do we love him for his constant
intercession for us at Gods right hand? Let us try our love to Christ by these
marks.

3. We ought to have in our hearts a true love and charity to all Christians.
We should excite in our Souls a true love to all those that are real members of
Christ. We should love their persons, graces, and fellowship. These we should
love with a complacential love. But besides these, we should love our very
enemies with a love of benevolence, wishing well unfeignedly to them and
praying for them. The proper offices and effects of this Charity are 1.
Forgiving injuries. 2. Doing good against evil. 3. Speaking good of others (if
we can honestly) or else abstaining from speaking evil. Let us consider what
the Apostle says, 1 John 2.9. He that says he is in the light, and hates his
brother, is in darkness, even until now. He that loves his brother abides in
the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. He that hates his
brother is a Murderer. So that it seems there is a kind of heart-murder and
tongue-murder, (which we ought to take heed of) as well as the murder of the
hand.

5. The fifth thing requisite to a worthy Receiver is an hungring and thirsting
after a greater sense of Gods pardoning mercy in Christ, and of more
communications of Grace from him, by which we may be enabled to live more unto
God. Having thus showed what are the due qualifications requisite to a worthy
Receiver; I come now to show what qualifications are insufficient.

1. He that is merely civil is not sufficiently qualified to partake of this
Ordinance. By merely civil I mean a person whose life as (as to men) is
outwardly fair and civil; yet he has never had any effectual conviction of the
evil of s^n, nor of the danger of his original and actual transgressions made
upon his conscience, nor of the absolute nec^ssity that lies upon him to go out
of himself to Christ for pardon: but usually rests in his own righteousness and
in the performance of the duties of the second Table, and is either very
negligent about, or slight and perfunctory in the performance of the duties of
the first, namely the duties that relate to God immediately. He would be
righteous toward men, but his heart is very far from being truly religious
toward God. His chief care is usually about the outward fairness of his
conversation, but takes little or no care of purging of his heart of secret
sins, or mortifying his inward lusts. And neither is the glory of God his aim,
nor the word of God his rule, but his own credit and estimation in the world is
chiefly regarded by him. And many times there is some sin or other (though not
gross and notorious) continued in with allowance. And not seldom there is a
professed hatred against the practical power of Godliness, thinking it more ado
than needs. He that has only such a civility as this, is not sufficiently
qualified for this holy Table.

2. He that is merely restrained and withholden either by the sense of his
credit or fear of shame or punishment from the commission of sin, but in his
heart hankers after it and inclines to it, is not fitly qualified. There are
many persons that have some restraints upon them (as the respect they bear to
their Parents or Governors or the like) that keep them (for the present) from
the commission of those sins which in their hearts they love and would give
themselves over unto if they durst. And commonly when those restraints are
removed, their corruptions break out with more violence. I press this no
farther, I leave every one herein to deal faithfully and impartially with his
own Soul.

3. He that has only an outward formal religiousness is not fitly qualified for
this holy Table. I mean such as rest in the bare performance of outward
religious duties, and trust to them for their acceptance with God, not minding
nor aiming that their Souls should be bettered toward God by their duties.
It Is a good and useful distinction (which we have before had occasion to
mention) that of Religion the end and Religion the means. They that rest in the
means, and in outward religious performances, such as praying, hearing,
receiving the Lords Supper, or the like, without aiming at, or designing that
their hearts may be really mended and their lives reformed thereby, (which is
the end these means are appointed for) are far from being truly Religious. Yet
many times such persons are highly conceited of their own righteousness, as the
Pharisee was, Luke 18.9. Who trusted in himself that he was righteous, and
despised others.

4. Such as have only a slight sorrow for their sins past, and no serious
resolution to amend their lives, nor to forsake what they know to be sinful and
amiss in themselves, are by no means fitly qualified for this holy Table.

Let every one therefore seriously examine himself, whether he be fitly
qualified for this holy ordinance. And there being but only two estates of soul
toward God that man can be in, (viz.) either that of nature or that of grace,
(so that every man must of necessity be in the one or the other,) It concerns
us to be well acquainted with the distinguishing Characters or marks both of
the one and of the other, and to examine our selves seriously, that we may know
in which of them we are; and to stick so long upon this work, till we bring it
to some issue, and be able to make a judgment upon our selves, to which of them
we do indeed belong. In order to the helping us in this great work of self
examination. I shall give the characters. 1. Of such as (for the present) are
apparently unconverted, and 2. Of such as are converted. The unconverted are
such as these.

1. Such as are grossly ignorant of the main principles of Christianity.

2. Such as are insensible of the evil and danger of their sins, nor have ever
had any considerable remorse wrought in their souls for them.

3. Such in whose hearts sin rules and reigns, so that they delight in it.

4. Such whose lives and conversations are wicked and profane.

5. Such as were never brought to see their need of Christ in good earnest nor
solemnly to accept him for their Lord and Savior.

6. Such as disrelish holiness, and hate the life and power of godliness, and
malign such as are truly and seriously religious.

7. Such as delight in wicked company, and choose such for their companions
rather than others.

8. Such as are gross neglecters of the means of grace which God has appointed
for the bettering of our souls.

9. Such as have long enjoyed the powerful means of grace, but are nothing
changed, bettered or reformed thereby.

10. Such as have the main bent of their hearts set upon the pleasures,
profits, and delights of the world; And these are the things they chiefly mind,
though with the ruining neglect of their Souls. Such persons for the present
are apparently unconconverted.

2. Let us consider the marks and characters of such as are converted. The
converted are such as these.

1. They are such who by the grace of God have been spiritually enlightened to
see the depravation of their natures and the sinfulness of their hearts and
lives.

2. They are such as have had their hearts touched and affected with Godly
sorrow, and true remorse for their sins.

3. They are such as have been brought to see their absolute need of Christ,
and deliberately and solemnly to give up themselves to him, to be pardoned
through the merit of his active and passive obedience, and to be sanctified by
his spirit.

4. They are such who by the assistance of grace do labor to mortify their
inward lusts, and to purify their hearts from secret sins.

5. They are such in whose hearts the interest of God prevails above the
interest of the World or of the Flesh.

6. They are such who labor to be holy in all manner of conversation. 1. To be
religious toward God. 2. Righteous toward men. 3. Sober and temperate in the
government of themselves. 4. Diligent and faithful in the discharge of their
relative duties.

7. They are such as truly love all the people of God, and such as are true
members of Christ's holy Catholic Church.

8. They are such as labor to be sincere in all that they do.

9. They are such as labor to be watchful over themselves, viz. over their
thoughts, over their affections, over their words, over their actions, and over
their aims and ends.

10. They are such as in their Judgments do approve the ways of God as most
eligible and most safe.

11. They do consent to, and own the Covenant they were entered into in their
Baptism. And these are the characters or marks of such as are Converted.

Now if any one on serious examination of himself do find that there is any
seed or principle of true grace in him, and that it is the sincere purpose of
his heart to walk with God, then he ought to encourage himself to come to this
Ordinance, which was instituted to strengthen the weak Christian. And so much
of the duties which are to be performed before you come to this holy Ordinance.

I come now to show what are the duties required of you in the time of
receiving. Which are these.

1. Carefully avoid distractions, as much as possibly you can, through the
whole administration, and gird up the loins of your mind, and be intent upon
the work you are about.

2. Labor to quicken and excite, and awaken in your souls these following
graces.

1. Awaken repentance and a bleeding sorrow in thy heart for all thy sins past,
and especially for those that sit heaviest upon thy conscience. Say to thy soul
in some such soliloquies as these; O my soul, that ever I should have been such
a vile wretch! that I should have so grievously offended my merciful and
bountiful Creator! O what a mercy is it that I am out of Hell! God might have
cut me down in my sins, and cast me down into the Lake of fire and brimstone.
And has he hitherto spared me, and does he now offer me a pardon sealed with
the blood of his dear Son? O the unsearchable riches of his free grace and
mercy! O my soul how should this melt thee into penitent tears! How should this
consideration make thee loath and hate every sin that thou have ever been
guilty of, and make thee willing to renounce and forsake them all; and to turn
to God in sincere obedience?

2. Awaken and excite a spiritual appetite in thy self. Say to thy soul Happy,
yea thrice happy (O my soul) are they whose sins are forgiven, and whose
iniquities are covered, blessed are they to wh^m God will not impute their
transgressions, but will pardon them in and through his Son. Yea happy are they
whose justification is testified to their consciences by their Sanctification,
and by their sincere desire and endeavor to walk before God in all holy
obedience. O my soul that this may be my portion, whatever God denies me else
in this world! Oh that this may be a day wherein I may have a clear
manifestation of Gods pardoning mercy made to my Soul! Oh that I may receive a
plentiful effusion of the graces of the Spirit into my heart! O that my lusts
and corruptions may be mortified and subdued! O that I may be enabled to do all
my duties better than ever I have done! O that I may be more watchful over mine
heart and tongue, and all my ways than ever I have been! O that my soul may
depart much bettered, much revived, comforted, and strengthened, from this holy
Ordinance.

3. Awaken Faith. Say to thy self, O my Soul, it is not a confident and
groundless persuasion, that Christ will save thee, that is the faith now
required of thee. But thou must humbly cast thy self at Christ's feet, and
seriously and deliberately own and acknowledge him for the only Savior of
mankind, and humbly cast thy self on the free mercy of God, and his merits, and
intercession, for the obtaining the pardon of all thy sins, and must consent to
take him for thy Lord as well as thy Savior, and be willing he should rule in
thee by his holy Spirit, and govern thee by his Laws. O my Soul, willingly,
freely, deliberately, surrender thy self to him to be pardo ed in his blood, to
be sanctified by his spirit; go to him, trust in him for grace as well as
pardon. And though thou have before given up thy self to him, and by acts of
Faith united thy self to him, yet labor now to excite and put forth stronger
acts of faith and affiance in him, that thou may be more firmly united unto
him. Say, Lord I come to thee; sweet Savior I give my Soul here anew to thee;
Take it, wash it in thy precious blood from the g^ilt of all my sins, and
sanctify it by thy holy spirit. Thou have said whoever comes unto thee, thou will in no wise cast out, O receive me though an unworthy wretch; O absolve me
from the guilt of all my sins, of every sort and kind. O keep my poor Soul that
I now commit unto thee unto eternal life. There in no other name given under
Heaven whereby I can be saved. Therefore I do profess and declare, that thy
merits, obedience, and sufferings I do alone depend on and abide by for my
reconciliation and peace with God, and do now renew my Covenant that I was
entered into in my Baptism, resolving by thy grace to be for ever thine.

4. Awaken excite and stir up thy heart in love to God and to Jesus Christ. Say
to thy self, O my Soul, how great is the love of God in sending his only Son to
dye to save poor lost Sinners? He did not thus for the Angels that fell; O how
great is the love of Christ who would stoop so low! That the eternal Son of God
should take our nature and be born of a poor Virgin; that he should dye and
suffer and endure so much for poor worms, for enemies; that he should sweat
drops of blood in the Garden in his agony; that he should have his precious
body thus broken, and his blood shed to redeem us! Was there ever love like
this? O my Soul, what has been done by thee in return for all this love? O my
sweet Jesus, thou art worthy of all love and service from me, though mine heart
is base and disingenuous, and is not sufficiently affected with thy love. Thou
art infinitely lovely, though my heart loves thee not as it ought to do. Thou
wast exceeding lovely and amiable even in thine humiliation in this World; but
O how glorious art thou now triumphing in heaven? O how beneficial are thy
merits? how desirable are thy graces? O let that fullness of grace that is
poured forth without measure on thee, flow down to us thy poor members. O my
Soul imagine now thou saw thy sweetest Savior nailed on the Cross, his body
torn with the nails, and his side pierced with a Spear. Can thou choose but
love him, who endured so much to redeem thee from eternal misery? The Apostle
Paul ravished with the love of Christ cries out, If any man love not the Lord
Jesus, let him be anathema maranatha. The penitent woman in the Gospel to whom
much was forgiven, loved much, Luke 7.47. And shall it not be so with thee? Now
consider O my Soul: Christ says if ye love me keep my commandments; If thou
love him, love him in sincerity, and delight to please him. Love his person;
highly value his merits, love his ordinances, love his graces, love his
commands. O my Soul, can thou upon all these considerations say with Peter,
Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.

5. Excite in thy self love to all Christians, to all the members of Christ.
Pray earnestly, that the Lord would protect them and defend them, that he would
be pleased to perfect holiness more and more in their hearts, and unite them
more and more one to another in his truth and in the bond of love, and make
them more exemplary in a holy conversation, and supply them with all needful
outward mercies, and conduct them safe to his heavenly Kingdom.

6. Excite love in thy Soul to thy very enemies, say to thy self, O my Soul,
thou must forgive if thou expectest to be forgiven. Thy dear Savior requires
this of thee, Matthew. 6.14. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you, Verse 15. But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. If thou expectest
to be forgiven so many thousand Talents, thou must not take thy brother by the
throat for an hundred pence, Matthew. 18.28. Thou must labor to be merciful as
thine heavenly Father is merciful. Readiness to forgive injuries and wrongs, is
a great sign of a gracious state, but malice and revenge is a black mark and
character. Therefore O my Soul, pray for thy very enemies this day; Lord
convince them of their sins, give them hearts to repent of them, turn their
hearts from them, draw them to thy Son, that by him they may have pardon and
life; give them such a frame of spirit, that thou may bless them. O that I
may meet their souls in Heaven, where we shall always love, and agree together,
and never fall out more.

7. Awake and excite in thy self spiritual joy and thankfulness. Say with holy
David, bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. Has Christ
redeemed thee from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for thee? Has he
redeemed thee, and that not with silver and gold, but with his own precious
blood? Has he made thy peace with God through the blood of his Cross? Has he
vanquished death and Satan for thee? Through his blood shall thou have an
entrance into heaven and eternal glory? Oh transcendent mercy! Oh how great is
this Salvation which Christ has purchased for us! On the height and depth and
length and breadth of the love of God in Christ Jesus! Be astonished Oh my Soul
at this love, and never be forgetful of it; call upon the holy Angels to join
with thee this day in blessing God for these great and glorious benefits, and
never be unmindful of so transcendent mercies. And thus much of the graces we
must especially labor to excite and exercise in the time of Receiving. There
are some other directions also that it will be needful thou should observe at
this time.

1. Employ thine outward senses so, as to stir up in thine heart Spiritual
graces. For the work of the Communicant lies not so much between the body and
the elements as the Soul and Christ.

2. When thou see the bread broken, think of these four things. 1. The great
pain and anguish our Lord endured when his Body was broken on the Cross. Can
thou see Christ's body broken for thee, and thy heart not break with deep
contrition for thy sins? 2. Consider the great love of our Lord in submitting
to such grievous pains, and such disgrace for our sake. Think thou hear him
say, behold my friends, how my flesh is torn and wounded for your sakes. Was
there ever grief, was there ever love like mine? 3. Consider the vile and
odious nature of sin which brought our Lord to such miseries and required such
blood to expiate it. 4. Consider what the redemption of every Soul (that shall
be saved) did cost. It cost more than all the men and Angels in the World could
ever have paid for it.

3. When thou take the bread into thine hands and eatest of it, then say,
Lord thou art the bread of life, thou art the only redeemer of lost Souls. I
freely take thee for my Lord and Savior, I freely consent to the Covenant I
was entered into in my Baptism. Lord save me and sanctify me, O interpose thy
merits this day for my pardon, and strengthen me by thy grace, that I may be
faithful to thee to the end, and so may at last receive a crown of life. Lord
behold the Sacrifice of thy Son. For the sake of his obedience and sufferings
be pleased to be reconciled to me; to pardon all my transgressions, and by thy
grace so to sanctify mine heart, that no sin may have dominion over me. Fill me
with joy and peace in believing. If I have found favor in thine eyes, give me
more and more of the graces of thy holy Spirit, and cause me to grow in grace
daily, and make me fruitful in good works.

4. When thou take the cup into thy hand, think again of the wonderful love
of Christ, that he should purchase us to himself with his own blood. Oh the
infinite value, O the infinite worth of this blood! This was the blood that
only could make expiation and give God full satisfaction for our offenses. One
drop of this blood is worth a World. This is the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13.20. that is, whereby our Savior ratified and confirmed the
covenant which God made with fallen man; which covenant shall never be altered.
O blessed Savior wash my Soul in this thy precious blood from the guilt of all
my sins, and cleanse me from all mine iniquities, and be to me all that which
thou did intend to be to those who shall be saved by thee. By such prayers,
soliloquies and holy meditations thou should labor to Sanctify thy heart,
when thou art about receiving this holy Sacrament.

5. Join with all the rest of the Communicants in a hearty praising God for all
these glorious favors and benefits. Let thy Soul rejoice in God and call upon
all within thee to praise his holy name.

6. Pray earnestly that Christ's Kingdom may be propagated, and that many others
may come to understand and partake of this great salvation, purchased by our
Lord and Savior. Pray that he may be more known, believed on and faithfully
obeyed all the world over.

And so much of the duties to be performed in time of receiving. I come now to
those required of thee after thou have received. For it is not enough that thou
duly prepare thy self for this ordinance, and carry thy self reverently at it,
but thou must labor to walk suitably unto it afterward. To that end observe
these directions.

1. When the Ordinance is done withdraw thy self to some secret place, and
there on thy knees bless the Lord for Jesus Christ, and for the Covenant of
Grace made in him, and for adding the Sacraments as Seals of the Covenant to
confirm thy faith. And further, for giving thee to be born in a land, where the
glorious light of the Gospel has shone so clearly for so many years, and where
thou have such great helps and advantages for the eternal good of thy Soul.

2. Labor to keep thy heart in the fervent love of God and Jesus Christ; and
with an holy delight and joy meditate often how much thou owe to God for
sending his Son to be thy redeemer, and how much thou owe to Christ for so
willingly condescending to undertake this great work. The Apostle tells us, 1
Pet. 2.7. that to them that believe in him he is precious, yea very precious in
many respects.

1. His name is precious. It Is as an ointment poured forth, Matthew. 1.21. His
name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. And 1
These. 1. last. It Is Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come.

2. His person is precious, being God and Man in the same person. What an high
honor is it to be related to him?

3. His Offices are precious. He is Prophet, Priest and King; and he took on
him all these offices for our benefit.

4. His performances are precious, both his active and passive obedience.

5. His Life is precious, which was so holy, so humble, so exemplary.

6. His Death is precious, being a propitiatory Sacrifice for our sins.

7. His Resurrection is precious. For God releasing him from the prison of the
grave, thereby declared, he had received full satisfaction for the debt of our
sins, which he as our Surety undertook to discharge.

8. His Ascension is precious. For he ascended into Heaven as our forerunner,
to prepare a place for us.

9. His Intercession is precious. For he ever lives to make intercession for
us.

10. His authority and power is precious, whereby he governs his Church, and
which he will farther exercise in raising our bodies from the Grave, and in
Judging the World at the last day and making our bodies (if we be his members)
like his own glorious body.

11. His Doctrince is precious.

12. His Ordinances are precious.

13. His ^nterest is precious to all that truly believe in him.

3. Meditate on the privileges, promises, and comforts of the Covenant of
Grace sealed by the blood of thy dear Savior. The privileges are
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Glorification. O how great are these
privileges! The promises are such as these, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord is a Sun and
shield, the Lord will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withold from
them that walk uprightly. And Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for
good to them that love God. The comforts are the consolations of the Spirit
here, and eternal comfort hereafter.

4. Earnestly beg and humbly expect grace from Christ to enable thee to
crucify thy inward lusts and corruptions, especially those thou find thy
heart most pestered with. Having entertained Christ into thy Soul, do not
unhallow it again, by suffering any evil lust to reign and rule therein.

5. Labor to walk more watchfully. Remember, the Devil will now be very busy
to tempt thee to sin after this ordinance, as he did our Savior presently
after his Baptism. He will, if he can, by some worldly diversion damp and cool
those heavenly affections that were excited in thee in time of receiving. It Is
a dangerous thing after an heat and warmth of heavenly affections to catch cold.

6. Labor to strengthen thy purposes and resolutions of living more unto God.

Remember thou have stronger obligations now upon thee to all Christian duties
than before.

7. Often meditate on the joys of Heaven and the eternal Supper of the Lamb,
and the blessed life which the Saints do live above, Luke 14.15. Blessed is he
that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God.

8. Labor to live in charity with thy brethren, to which thou art in an
especial manner engaged by this Sacrament. Do not cover the coals of contention
under the ashes for a night or two, and then blow them up again. But consider,
if Christ has so loved thee, and forgiven thee so much, thou ought to love
thine enemies and heartily forgive them. Remember what the Apostle says,
Beloved if Christ so loved us, we ought to love one another. 1 John 4.11.

Lastly. When thou art tempted to sin, remember thou have been at a Sacrament,
and there have renewed thy Covenant with Christ; and thou must not be so base,
nor so false as willingly and deliberately to sin against him again. And thus
much of the duties to be performed before we come to receive, and in the time
of receiving, and after we have received.

A Brief Exposition OF THE Lords Prayer.
OUR Savior, Matthew. 6.9. etc. taught his Disciples after what manner to Pray,
and gave them a breviary or pattern of Prayer, which they might use in form (as
seems to be intimated, Luke 11.2.) or according to which they might order and
regulate their other Prayers.

In this Platform there are three parts.

1. The Preface, Describing God, to whom we are to pray. (1.) By his dear
Relation to us; [Our Father,] therefore most ready to succor us and others,
with whom or for whom we pray. (2.) By his greatness and Majesty, [which art in
Heaven;] that is, who does manifest himself (though he be every where present)
in Glory and Majesty, in, and from the highest Heavens; and therefore most able
to hear and help all his children, and most justly to be reverenced, loved and
trusted in by them.

2. The substance of the Prayer containing six Petitions. The three first
whereof have respect to Gods Glory; the three latter to our selves and our
particular good.

1. [Hallowed be thy Name;] wherein we Pray and Petition that Gods glorious
Nature and Attributes, viz. his infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice,
Truth, Mercy. etc. (which are discovered in his word and works and whereby he
is made known as men are by their names) may be displayed and more manifested
to the world, that all men may acknowledge and own him for the only true God,
and may glorify him accordingly.

2. [Thy Kingdom come;] that is, that his Kingly Power may be more and more
manifested in the curbing and subduing of Satan and all his enemies, that his
Kingdom of Grace may be advanced and promoted by his word and Spirit; that his
Kingdom of Glory may be hastened, Rev. 22.20. that the happiness of his people
may be full, and that Christ may resign up the Kingdom which he administers as
Mediator to his Father, and God may be all in all.

3. [Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven;] that is, that we and all
his people on Earth may sincerely, cheerfully and constantly do and submit to
his holy will, as Angels and glorified Saints do in Heaven.

4. [Give us this day our daily-bread;] wherein we acknowledge God the Author
and Giver of all our Mercies, and that we receive all from his free bounty:
That we ought daily to depend on his Fatherly care and Providence, and not to
be over anxious and solicitous for to morrow, neither inordinately to desire
superfluities, but to crave and pray for such necessary and convenient things
as are daily needful and requisite for the sustentation and comfort of our
bodily life, and that what the Lord is pleased to give us may be by him blessed
to us.

5. [And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors;] wherein we
acknowledge that our sins are debts, binding us over to punishment, and that our
selves cannot satisfy for them. We pray that in Christ these debts may be
freely and fully forgiven and pardoned. We profess we ought and do (through his
grace assisting us) forgive our debtors (that is, such as have done wrong to
us, and thereby not only made themselves debtors to God but unto us;) that we
do fully and freely forgive their wrongs and injuries done unto us, (though we
are not always bound to forgive the damage, See Exodus 22.1, 14.) and from
thence we gather an argument to confirm our hope and persuade our selves that
God will forgive us.

6. [And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil;] wherein we
acknowledge our proneness to evil, and weakness to withstand temptation; that
God has power over all corruptions tempters and temptations. We pray to be
preserved from temptations to sin or from being overcome by them, and at last
to be wholly delivered from them all.

3. The Conclusion, [For thine is the Kingdom the Power and Glory for ever,
Amen.] Wherein we have (1.) The Doxology, acknowledging and ascribing to God,
the perpetuity of his Kingdom, Power and Glory, and encouraging our selves from
thence to expect from him what we have prayed for. (2.) The sealing up the
Prayer with Amen. Wherein we summarily testify our fervent desire of obtaining
these our Petitions and our Faith in God for the granting of them.

THE Second Part, Containing a serious Disswasive from the reigning and
customary Sins of these Times, viz. Swearing. Lying. Pride. Gluttony.
Drunkenness. Uncleanness. Discontent. Covetousness. Malice. Idleness.

CHAP. I. Of Swearing.
THat I may proceed methodically and clearly in treating of this argument, I
shall confine my discourse to these seven heads.

1. I shall show what an Oath is.

2. Shall show the lawfulness of taking an Oath, when duly called thereunto.

3. Shall answer the objections usually framed from Matthew. 5. 33. etc. and Jam.
5.12. against the lawfulness of any swearing at all.

4. Shall show in what manner an Oath is to be taken.

5. Show the great sinfulness of rash, customary, and unnecessary swearing.

6. Shall answer the vain pretenses and excuses that customary Swearers use to
make for themselves.

7. Shall give some directions and means for the avoiding of this Sin.

1. I shall show what an Oath is.

Perkins in his Cases of Conscience, Lib. 2. Chap. 13. says; an Oath is a
Religious and necessary confirmation of a thing doubtful, by calling God to be
a witness of the truth and a revenger of falsehood.

Doctor Saunderson in his first Lecture of the obligation of a Oath,. 2. says,
an Oath is a Religious act, in which, to confirm a thing doubtful, God is
called upon as a witness.

Others from Numb. 30.2. define it to be a sacred bond by which a man binds his
Soul to the speaking of that which is in it self true, or to the doing of that
which is in it self lawful; unto which the living and true God is Juramentum
est contestatio Dei in re gravi, tanquam veritatis testis, and mendacij
vindicis.
called upon as a witness or arbitrator, Judge and Avenger in case of falsehood.

2. Having showed what an Oath is, I come in the next place to prove the
lawfulness of taking an Oath when duly called thereunto. And this I shall
endeavor to do by these four Arguments.

1. That which is moral, and enjoined in one of the precepts of the Decalogue
or ten commandments, binds all persons whatsoever, and is a duty to be
continued and practiced (as there is occasion) as long as the world endures,
for the glory of God and the good of our Neighbor. But to Swear by God when
duly called thereunto, is a moral duy, and enjoined in the third Commandment,
therefore it is lawful to take an oath when duly called thereunto. The minor
will easily be proved by that commonly received Rule of interpreting the
Commandments, viz. that where in any Commandment vice is forbidden, there the
contrary virtue is enjoined and commanded. So that the taking Gods name in vain
being forbidden in the third Commandment, the holy and reverent use thereof is
plainly enjoined, and such is an appeal to God as the Searcher of hearts, and
calling upon him to be a witness of our truth and sincerity, and an avenger
upon us in case of falsehood.

2. What God injoyns and connects with other duties that will ever be in force,
ought to be practiced by all Christians; but swearing by his name is such;
Ergo. For the proof of the minor See Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him and swear by his name. See also Deuteronomy. 10.20. where the same
thing is enjoined. That which has been the practice of the Godly without
reproof, before the Law, under the Law and under the Gospel, is lawful; But
swearing by the name of God, upon serious and weighty occasions, has been the
practice of all the Godly in all those times; Ergo.

1. Before the Law. See instances hereof in Abraham, Genesis 14.22, 23. And
Abraham said to the King of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord the
most high God the possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take any thing
that is thine even from a thread to a shoo-latchet. In Isaac, Genesis 26.31. And
they rose up betimes in the morning and swear one to another, and Isaac sent
them away, and they departed from him in peace.

In Jacob, Genesis 31.53. The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, the God of
their Father judge betwixt us. And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac.

2. Under the Law. See instances hereof in the people of Israel, Joshua 9.19.
But all the Princes said unto all the Congregation, we have sworn unto them by
the Lord God of Israel, etc. In David, Psalm. 119. verse 106. I have sworn, and
I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, 1 Samuel 24.21, 22.
Swear now unto me by the Lord that thou will not cut off my Seed after me, and
that thou will not destroy my name out of my Fathers house. And David swear
unto Saul, and Saul went home, etc. 1 Kings 1. ver. 13, 28, 29. 30. Go and get
thee in unto David, and say unto him did not thou, my Lord, O King, swear
unto thine handmaid, saying, assuredly, Solomon thy Son shall reign after me,
and he shall sit upon my throne? etc. In Elijah, 1 Kings 17. verse 1 And Elijah
the Tishbite said unto Ahab, as the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I
stand, there shall not be rain, etc. In Micaiah, 1 Kings 22.14. And Micaiah
said as the Lord lives, what the Lord said unto me, that will I speak.

3. Under the Gospel. See instances hereof in the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1.18.
But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. verse 23. I call
God for a record upon my Soul, etc. 2 Cor. 12.19. We speak before God in
Christ, etc. Gal. 1.20. Now these things which I write unto you, behold, before
God I lie not. In the Angel, Rev. 10.5.6. And the Angel which I saw stand upon
the Sea, and upon the earth, lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swear by him
that lives for ever and ever, etc.

4. That which is the most effectual way to end controversies between man and
man in doubtful cases, and is of so great use and benefit to humane society is
not to be laid aside. But such is an Oath; Ergo. The minor the Apostle
confirms, Heb. 6.16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. It Is true there is great d
fference in the Oaths of men. As is the person that sweare^h so is the Oath,
more or less credible. The better and the more conscientious the man the more
credible is his Oath.
There is no other way to end some controversies but by an appeal to God as a
Judge and Avenger. In the Old Testament, in any doubtful case which could not
otherwise be determined, they were to accept the Oath of the Lord, Exodus 22.
verse 11, 12.

Seeing therefore by a lawful Oath God is glorified, being appealed unto as the
Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth, the Patron of truth, and avenger of falsehood;
seeing his Omniscience, omnipresence, truth, justice, and power is thereby
acknowledged; seeing it is the ordinance of God, and a part of his worship by
himself commanded; and lastly, seeing it is the most effectual way to end
Controversies between man and man; they that would have appealing to God in
serious matters laid aside, are injurious both to the honor of God and the
good of man.

3. I come now to answer the objections usually framed from Matthew. 5.33. etc.
and James 5.12. against the lawfulness of any swearing at all.

The words of those two Texts are these.

Matthew. 5. verse 33. Again ye have heard that it has been said by them of old
time, thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths. verse 34. but I say unto you, swear not all, neither by Heaven, for it
is Gods throne, verse 35. nor by the Earth, for it is his footstool; neither by
Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King. verse 36. neither shall thou
swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black, verse.
37. but let your communication be yea yea, nay nay, for whatsoever is more than
these comes of evil.

James 5.12. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven,
neither by the earth, neither by any other oath; but let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation.

Now for the clearer understanding of these two Scriptures these two things
must be premised.

1. We must take notice of that rule, which is to be observed in the sound
interpretation of any Text that is difficult, viz. that no one Scripture ought
to have any other sense put upon it than what will fairly agree with other
Scriptures, and firmly stand with the Analogy of faith.

2. We must have a special regard to the condition and manners of the Jews at
this time, when these precepts were given. The Nation of the Jews (as it seems)
were now commonly guilty of these three things.

1. Of frequent, familiar and customary swearing in their ordinary
communication, which they made light of, provided they did not swear falsely, or
forswear themselves. 2. They used much to swear by the creatures. 3. They made
a great difference of Oaths made by the creatures, esteeming some of them to be
binding and others not.
Now the words of our Savior and the Apostle James must be supposed to be
directed against these enormities.

Which things being premised. I come to consider the words themselves.

Matthew. 5. verse 33. Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time,
thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.

Our Savior having before showed the corrupt glosses and interpretations which
the Pharisees made on the sixth and seventh Commandments, he comes here to show
how they did the like on the third also. The Pharisees (it seems) taught, that
if men did not forswear themselves, they did fulfill the third Commandment,
though they did swear familiarly by God, in their ordinary communicatication,
and sometimes by the Creatures. Both these our Savior condemns. verse 34. But
I say unto you swear not at all, that is, in your ordinary communication, (as
is plain from verse 37.) no not by God, (which upon solemn occasions is lawful,
as we have showed before) much less by the Creatures, which is always
unlawful. So that these words [(...), Non juretis omnino scil. temere and
l^v^^er. Praeceptum enim de juramento sic intelligebant Pharisaei, quod
perjurium duntaxat in eo prohibeatur, interim temeraria juramenta in vita
communi permit bant.) (...) Glassius. (...) Particula omnino cum restrictione
est accipienda, nimirum de juramento temerario, quomodo, Exodus 20.10. dicitur
nulla opera Sabbaro facienda esse, i. e. profana. Freid. lib. 3. page 12.
not at all] must be understood with some limitation and restriction. As when
God forbids doing any work on the Sabbath day, it is to be understood only of
the servile works of our callings, and not of works of necessity or mercy. So
the prohibition of Christ and the Apostle in the Texts before us, are not to be
expounded to exclude necessary Oaths upon urgent and weighty occasions, [made
by God] but only such as are voluntarily and of our own accord, without any
such cogent reason. And the Nation of the Jews being very prone to this
customary and unnecessary swearing, the Apostle James uses a form of vehemence
and earnestness to dissuade them from it, (which is often used in the
Apostolical Epistles) [(...) above all things] See Ephesians. 6.16. 1 Pet. 4.8.
Quae valde caveri volumus ea dicere solemus cavenda ante omnia. Grotius in loc.
as if he should have said, the wicked custom of swearing being grown so rife
and common among you, I do in a more especial manner caution you against it.
And so our Savior himself would not have them swear at all by the Creatures;
neither by Heaven, for it is Gods throne, etc. nor by the Earth for it is his
footstool, nor by Jerusalem, nor by their head, etc. And further, it seems the
Jews thought, when they swore by the creatures, there was no solemn obligation
in those Oaths (except when they swore by the creatures immediately
appertaining to Gods worship and service) as by the Gold given to the Corban of
the Temple, or by an oblation on the Altar, (of which we shall speak more
presently;) because in other Oaths by the creatures which had no immediate
reference to God, they thought they did not profane his name, or take it in
vain, which they knew was forbidden, Levit. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my
name falsely, neither shall thou defile the name of thy God. Our Savior shows
that these were but vain pretenses and excuses. For all the creatures had
reference to God, and though the name of God was not mentioned or interposed in
the forms of swearing by the creatures; yet it was implied. For Heaven is his
throne; the Earth his footstool; Jerusalem his City; Man his creature, and he
makes the hair of his head Caput tuum non habes in potestate tua, ut poss^s de
eo agere quod velis. Grot. non potes vel canos inducere, vel amovere.
Lightfoot. Per caput hoc juro. Virg. Aeneid.
white or black, as he pleases; no man is Lord of himself. Therefore an Oath by
Heaven, etc. is interpretatively by God. This being so, swear not at all (says
our Savior) neither by Heaven nor by Earth [nor by any other Oath says James,
chap. 5. verse. 12. that is, nor by any other Oath of that kind.] As if our
Savior should have said, swear not at all by the creatures. But if you do so
swear, think it not a small sin to break those oaths so made; Hic ostendit
Christus omnia i^la, quae illi vocabant minora juramenta maximis esse
aequiparanda. Nemo enim tam stultus censeri debet, ut rem inanimem testem
advocet suae cogitationis, and persidiae vindicem. Quare in istis juramentis
censeri debet inesse (...), and per Templum intelligi is cuju^ est Templum.
for God is concerned in those very oaths made by his creatures, though they be
unlawful in themselves. For in such Oaths the name of God is obliquely and
indirectly taken in vain, there remaining in all the creatures some prints and
characters of Gods power and majesty. Swearing therefore being an act of
worship, must be used only in weighty cases, and only by the name of God, Deuteronomy.
6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his
name. The creature cannot know thy heart, nor the truth of what thou say,
nor punish thee for thy perjury, if thou swearest falsely. Therefore no creature
can be invocated in an Oath without Idolatry, Jer. 5.7. Thy children have
forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. And further we are to take
notice that though the Pharisees made nothing of most Oaths made by creatures,
and thought them not binding, and consequently that they might break them
without perjury; yet they excepted the Oaths made by the Gold offered to the
Corban, or Treasury of the Temple, Non aurum Templi hic intelligendum est
illud, quo micabant undique parietis and liquearia, sed de auro in Corbanum
oblato est Sermo.
and the Sacrifices and Oblations offered on the Altar. Such Oaths as these
(though by the creatures) they would have to be binding. And this (it seems)
they did the rather maintain, because it was for their profit Revera ad
quaestum pertinebat dona illa haberi quam sanctissimaetiam supra templum and
altar, quasi Deus, scil. illis praecipue gauderet. Grot. in loc.
that the gifts on the Altar, and money brought into the Treasury should be
counted most holy. For it would encourage the people to be more ready to
contribute and to offer. This horrid hypocrisy Pharisaei quamvis contempsisse
videntur juramenta per creaturas tanquam in qu^bus non interponeretur nomen
Dei, ut diximus cap. ^. versu 3^. excipiebant tamen juramenta per a^rum Templi,
ac Sacr^fi^ia, tanquam nihil ess^t illis, post Deum, majus aut Sanctius, utpo^e
quae immedi^te referren^ur ad Deum propter quae Temp^^m and altar fuissent
condita. Nimi um ut ita populus intelligens singularem oblationum Sanctitatem,
promptior ^i^^et ad illa frequentanda, quorum pars maxima in Sacerdotum lucrum
ceder^t. Ita avaritia caecitatis istiu^, and stu titiae inde secutae causa
fuit. Jansenius in loc.
and avarice of theirs our Savior sharply reproves, Matthew. 23. verse 16. Woe
unto you, ye blind guides, which say, whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it
is nothing, but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the Temple, he is a
debtor, verse 17. Ye fools and blind; for whether is greater, the gold, or the
Temple that Sanctifies the gold? verse 18. And whosoever shall swear by the
Altar, it is nothing, but whosoever swears by the gift that is upon it, he is
guilty. verse 19. Ye fools, and blind, whether is greater, the gift, or the
Altar that sanctifies the gift? verse 20. Whosoever therefore shall swear by the
Altar, swears by it and by all things thereon. verse 21. And whosoever shall
swear by the Temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells therein. Verse
22. And he that shall swear by Heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by
him that sits thereon. In which words he shows that Oaths made by creatures
had reference to God; and though swearing by them was unlawful in it self, yet
they that broke their Oaths made by any of them were highly guilty; and
therefore the Pharisees did but discover their hypocrisy and wickedness in
making so great a difference in such kind of Oaths as to their binding and
obligation. From all that has been said, we may infer that those words [Swear
not at all] must not be referred to the Oath it self but to the manner of the
Oath, that is, we must not swear at all falsely, rashly, or in ordinary
communication, neither directly by the name of God, nor by the creatures. And
to prevent this, our Savior adds. Verse 37. Let your communication be yea yea,
nay nay, for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. As if he should have
said, what you have to affirm Quod affirmatis, vere affirmate, and quod negatis
vere negate.

Rabbini dicunt, Justorum etiam est etiam and non eorum est non.
Ausonius ad Paulinum.
-- Cum multa loquaces
Ambiguis sererent verbis, contra onmia, solum
Est respondebat, vel Non.

affirm it simply without an Oath, and what you have to deny, deny it simply,
without an Oath, Christianos sui temporis repre^endit Tertullianus, qui aut
ignorantia, aut consuetudinis vitio, dicerent mehercule, medius fidius, quod
and post eum fecit Hieronymus.
for customary swearing (by whatsoever it is that men swear) comes of Satan,
and the corruption of their own hearts. A true and plain affirmation and
negation in daily speech is sufficient; and if you use any thing more you will
be in danger of sinning, and falling into the judgment (...), i. e. (...).

Heinsius verba Christi, Mat. 5. verse 34. ad quae Jacobus sine dubio respicit,
conjuncta legit, (...), etc. Unde emergit sensus, non quidem omnino non esse
jurandum cum opus est, sed nullum ex j^randi formulis tum usitatis usurpandum.

Heathenish Oaths also are not to be allowed (except they will say they
personate Heathens in the use of them) as aedipol, mehercule, per Jovem
immortalem. Cursed be that elegancy that is joined with Idolatry, says the
learned Downham.


and condemnation of God. Further, that our Savior speaks here only of
private Oaths it is manifest, in that the Jews did not in their public oaths
before the Magistrate swear by the creatures, but by the name of God only. And
this may also be gathered out of the Text it self. For he says, let your
communication or ordinary speech one to another be yea, yea, nay, nay.

4. I come now to show in what manner an Oath is to be taken. The Prophet
Jeremy instructs us fully as to this, Chap. 4.2. Thou shall swear (says he)
the Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

1. In truth. That is, truly, swearing nothing but the truth, and not abusing
the dreadful name of God to attest a falsehood. Zech. 5.4. God severely
threatens him that swears falsely by his name.

2. In judgment, that is, considerately, well weighing what thou art to swear,
and by whom.

3. In righteousness, binding thy self to nothing but what is in it self just
and right, and having a full purpose to perform what thou by oath bindest thy
self to, and being careful to make it good accordingly.

Concerning the rites and forms of swearing, I find these mentioned in the
Scripture.

1. Lifting up the hand to the most high God. Thus Abraham swore, Genesis 14.22.
And Abraham said to the King of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord,
the most h gh God, etc. And thus the Angel swore, Rev. 10.5. And the Angel
which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, lifted up his hand to
Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever.

2. Putting the hand under the thigh. Thus Abraham's servant swore, Genesis 24.2.
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that
he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh. And I will make thee swear
by the Lord God of Heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shall not take a
wife for my Son of the daughters of the Canaanites. And thus Jacob caused
Joseph to swear, Genesis 47.29, 30, 31. If now I have found grace in thy sight,
put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh and swear unto me: And he swear unto
him.

Our rite of swearing for the Commons of England is by putting the hand on the
book of the Gospels, and kissing it, which is to be understood (as I suppose)
only to signify our believing in God, and expecting help from him through
Christ, according to the Gospel, as we speak the truth. Dr. Ames, lib. 2. Med.
c. 10. says, that solemnity which in some places is used, of touching and
kissing the book, is plainly of the same kind and import with the elevation of
the hand; that is, it signifies a man's consent to swear, and to the oath it
self. In Solomon's time when they took an Oath, they touched the Altar, which
Ceremony was also used among the Gentiles. Whereby was signified that they
called him to witness who was worshipped with Sacrifices offered upon those
Altars.


But if any scruple this rite and form of swearing and had rather use that
other of lifting up the hand to the most high, I see no reason (if it may stand
with the laws of the Land) but that they may be indulged therein; this form of
swearing being every way as binding as the other.

5. I come now in the next place to show the great evil, and sinfulness of
rash, customary and unnecessary swearing. This is a sin very rise and common in
our Nation, and one of those for which the Land mourns. I shall therefore
present several arguments and considerations which may sufficiently demonstrate
the heinousness of it.

1. Consider how Sacred and Venerable the name of our great God ought always
to be unto us. Every thought and mention of it should be accompanied with
reverence. It Is a duty strictly enjoined, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Thou shall fear the
glorious and dreadful name of the Lord thy God. How great a sin then is it to
vilify, profane, and make it common? How high a provocation must it needs be
to the Almighty for poor mortals familiarly to toss his dreadful name in their
mouths upon every slight occasion, and to make it the ordinary expletive or
filling up of their speech and language. Surely some of the more civilized
Heathens were of better minds, and used the names of their gods with more
reverence. But O the impiety of our times! How profanely and irreverently do
some (who call themselves Christians) use the name of the great God whom the
Angels in Heaven continually delight to laud and praise, crying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, is the Lord of Heaven, the whole earth is full of his glory, Isa. 6.3.

2. Consider that the second and third Commandments of all the rest, have
several threatenings annexed to them, to show us how greatly God is provoked by
Idolatry and taking his name in vain. He threatens he will not hold such
guiltless; that is, he will be so far from absolving or acquitting such
transgressors that he will grievously punish them, and they shall not escape
his just Judgment.

3. Consider our tongues should be our Glory. The proper end for which God has
given us the use of speech is to glorify and honor him our Creator, and to
profit one another. Our words therefore should be good, sound, and savoury; Let
no corrupt communication (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.29.) Proceed out of your
mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
grace to the hearers. And our Savior tells us, Mat. 12.36. that of every idle
word (which is frivolous and fruitless) we shall give an account in the day of
Judgment. And therefore a much more severe account surely men shall give of
their wicked swearing, blaspheming, and cursing, which are no proper works for
them to employ their tongues in, but a horrible depraving, perverting and
defiling of so excellent a member.

4. Consider what a high pitch of wickedness it is for any to deprave such an
holy institution as an Oath is, (which should always be used reverently and
only upon great and serious occasions) and to prostitute it to the venting of
every base passion, and uttering of Pride and Presumption and fearlesness of
God, and to make that which should be a tremendous Ordinance to us, a common,
slight, and familiar thing.

5. Consider how dishonorable it is to our Christian profession that those
that call themselves Christians should live in such a flat contradiction to the
Laws of Christ, and should make nothing of familiar and customary swearing,
which he so severely prohibits Matthew. 5.33. James 5.12. Is not this one of the
sins for which the name of our Lord Jesus is blasphemed among Turks, Jews, and
Infidels.

6. Consider this is one of those sins for which God has a controversy with a
Nation, and which hastens down Judgment upon it, Hos. 4.1, 2. Hear the word of
the Lord ye children of Israel; For the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God in the Land. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing Adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood. Jer. 23.10.
Because of swearing the Land mourns, see also Zech. 5 1, 2, 3, 4. Amos 8.14.
Zeph. 1.4, 5.

7. Consider how highly this sin is aggravated and the guilt of it inhaunced in
that there is so little temptation to it. Other sins have an external bait and
motive, either pleasure, profit, or credit, but in swearing and cursing there
is none of these. O the unreasonableness of this sin! What sense is gratified
by it? or what is there to incite or move a man to it but merely pride and
audaciousness of spirit, presumtion and fearlesness of the Almighty? Now the
less temptation there is to any sin, the greater is the contempt of God in the
committing of it. This sin is therefore much worse than Epicurism; Take not his
name who made thy mouth in vain:
It gets thee nothing, and has no excuse.
Lust and Wine plead a pleasure, avarice gain:
But the cheap swearer through his open sluice
Lets his Soul run for naught, as little fearing:
Were I an Epicure, I could bate swearing.
The cheapest sins most dearly punished are;
Because to shun them also is so cheap, etc.
Herberts Church Porch.

for though that be more bestial; yet this is more diabolical, and proceeding
from an obstinate pride and wilfulness, more conforms a man to the Devil than
other sins do. O what a height of wickedness is it for men to sin merely
because they will sin, and to transgress the more audaciously because God
forbids it. It Is a dreadful doom passed by the mouth of the holy Prophet on
such persons, Psalm. 25.3. Let them be confounded that transgress without cause.
Blessed Lord! How infinite is thy patience to bear so long with those hellish
Oaths and direful imprecations that the tongues of wretched mortals daily belch
out against thee! To what a strange pitch of wickedness is the world come, that
it should be counted a point of bravery and gallantry, to swear stoutly, and to
interlace their language with broad and full mouthed oaths. Nay the daring
fellows of our days (as if they were loath to go to Hell the ordinary way)
have invented new ways of sinning, and such dreadful forms of swearing as may
make the heart of any serious Christian to tremble at ^^e very mention of them.
These Sons of Belial if they be but crossed in their business or pleasure, many
times curse and swear like Devils, and swear so madly that when they are
reproved for it they will swear they did not swear. Who is there now that walks
abroad (especially in our great Towns and Cities) but shall here these hellish
oaths God damn me or sink me belched out of the mouths of men whose tongues are
set on fire of Hell. O should we rend our garments every time we hear the name
of God blasphemed, as the Jews did of old, how few sober, serious Christians
would go in whole apparel? Ah besotted Wretches, that you should thus sell your
selves to do wickedly, that you that are but crawling worms should dare thus to
set your mouths against Heaven, and impudently affront (as much as lies in you)
the Majesty of the most High? Let me speak to you in the language of the
Prophet, Isay. 57.4. Do ye know against whom ye make a wide mouth and draw out
the tongue? What could your wit ( wit said I, I mean your madness) find no
cheaper way to undo your selves? Are you resolved to try the patience of God,
and to see how long he can forbear you? Are you afraid you shall miss of hell,
except you sin at a higher rate than ordinary, and therefore are resolved by
your damning provocations to force your entrance into it and take it by
violence? Do you fear the Devil will not torment you enough, except you do
supererogate of him by being more wicked than you had any temptation to be,
that so you may have a double portion in Hell? Could you find out no other way
of Damning your selves but by sinning directly against that precious blood and
wounds of the Son of God, by which others are saved? Do you thus perform your
Baptismal Covenant, whereby you stand engaged to renounce the Devil and all his
works, and to fight faithfully under Christ's Banner all your days? What aileth
you, ye blind wretches? Are you in such have to be with your everlasting
companions, the Devils and the Damned, that you will needs hasten your
Judgment, and bring on your Damnation with a swifter pace? Are you now inuring
your selves to the language of Hell, and the infernal Tophet, that you may not
have it to learn when you come thither? Poor Wretches, what will become of you?
how soon to your sorrow will your imprecations fall on your heads? The Devil
whom you have so often wished might fetch you, stands eagerly waiting for his
commission to do it, and then you shall know to your cost, whether Gods
threatenings denounced in his word against swearers were mere scar-crows, and
whether Ministers made more ado than needs in their faithful and compassionate
warnings of you, and whether all they were fools and cowards that feared God,
and durst not sin against him at the same dreadful rate that you did. I know
very well, that whoever shall now go about to stop you in your carreer of
sinning, and (though with never so much tenderness) shall labor to show you
the evil and danger of your course, shall presently (in all likelihood) have
the Fanatic or hypocrite thrown in his face. But say what you will, there are
none so truly mad, as those that are wicked and ungodly; nor any in the world
grosser Hypocrites than they that under a Christian name live a Heathenish and
Paganish life. And tell me (I pray you) whether you would not think that Dog to
be mad that you saw fly in his Masters face that kept him? and are you then
any thing short of mad men that dare thus impudently, and daringly defy your
Creator? It Is the observation of Livy the Roman Historian that when the
destruction of a Person or Nation is destined, then the wholesome warnings both
of God and Man are set at naught. You may go on, if you please, and despise
your reprovers, but when you have done laughing at them, read these Scriptures
and laugh if you can, Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, 1 Samuel 2.25. It Is
said of Eli's Sons they hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because
the Lord would slay them. But O the blindness of those whom the God of this
world has blinded! These wretched sinners, as if swearing were not sufficient
to sink them deep enough into Hell, and cursing also to it, which whoever
frequently use, have a peculiar brand in the Scripture set upon them to be
desperately wicked, Psalm. 10.4, 7. The wicked through the pride of his
countenance will not seek after God: His mouth is full of cursing, etc. How
ready are these desperate wretches, if they be but crossed by a servant, or a
beast, in their business, or recreations, to fall a blaspheming, and cursing,
wishing the plague of God, or some other dreadful evil may fall on such or
such. As if every time they are angry or any thing displeases them, the great
God of Heaven and Earth must instantly be at their beck, and in all have come
down to avenge their quarrel, and serve their malice. But the wickedness of
these men is so transcendent that I shall say no more to them now but leave
them to consider, when they are best at leisure, that dreadful place, Psalm.
109.17, 18, 19. As he loved cursing so let it come unto him: as he delighted
not in blessing so let it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing
like as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil
into his bones.

6. Having now done with the Arguments and Reasons which sufficiently
demonstrate the heinousness of this sin, I come in the next place to answer
these vain pretenses and excuses which customary swearers use to make for
themselves.

1. They are apt to plead that they have been long used to it, and have got a
habit and custom of it, which now they cannot easily leave. To which I answer
that this is a very irrational plea. For he that is an habitual sinner is far
more abominable in the sight of God than he that sins only upon a particular
temptation or provocation. Would any man think this a good plea for a Thief to
make at the Bar; My Lord, I have been so long used to thieving and stealing
even from my youth, and am now so accustomed to it, that I cannot leave it. Is
not this a strong reason why he should not be spared, but the more speedily
sent to the Gallows? And moreover the truth is, this is a very vain pretense.
For those that have been long accustomed to swearing can and do ordinarily
forbear it, when they are in the presence of grave and serious persons, whom
they do reverence and respect. Confident I am, were it made High Treason
against the King, as it is against the King of Heaven, profanely and
customarily to swear and curse, it would be left and forborne. For the will has
a despotick and commanding power over the tongue as well as other members of
the body, and can restrain it if it please; and therefore it is a very vain
excuse for any to say they cannot leave it.

2. Some will say, they had not sworn if they had not been provoked to it. For
answer to that, let such persons consider, that the provocations they speak of
would be ineffectual and not prevail upon them, if their hearts were not very
corrupt; For how many good and gracious persons meet with great, and perhaps
greater provocations than these men meet with, who yet are never provoked to
swear or curse or do any thing like unto it. If therefore there were not a
naughty heart within, accustomed to sin, the outward temptation would not so
prevail.

3. Some will plead, they shall not be believed except they swear. To which I
answer, no wise man will believe a man the more, but rather the less for his
swearing. For he that makes not conscience of one sin, in all likelihood will
not of another, when he sees it is for his outward advantage to commit it.
There is no reason to think that man will stick to lie who sticks not to swear:
And if such persons who do usually swear, do indeed believe in God, why do they
not obey him, who forbids them to swear. if they do not, why should we believe
them, when they swear by God.

4. Some swearers will say, they mean no harm by it. For answer to that, let
them consider whether any Prince in the World will allow a Subject of his to
use his tongue as he pleases, to his dishonor, and put it up, because the man
says he means no harm by it. Much less will the King of Heaven bear with their
audacious profaning of his name upon pretense that thou intendest no harm. Such
as a man's tongue is, such is the man. For as our Savior says. Matthew. 12.34,
35. An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil
things, and a good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
good things: for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

5. Some will say they swear but small oaths, viz. By the Virgin Mary or (as we
usually abbreviate it) yes Marry; or by their head, or by the ligh, etc. To
which I answer, that we are not to think any sin small which we willingly
commit, seeing the wages of the least sin is death. And further, we are to
consider that swearing (when duly called to it) is an act of worship which we
ow to God, and we ought to swear by his name only; and that only in weighty
cases as we have showed before, from Deuteronomy. 6.13. And therefore the Prophet
sharply reproves those who swear by the sin (meaning the Idol) of Samaria, Amos
8.14. And that is a terrible place, Jer. 5.7. where God says. How shall I
pardon them for this? their Children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that
are no gods. Remember therefore, that when you swear by the creatures, you are
guilty of Idolatry, in communicating that to a creature which belongs to God
only, viz. omniscience, omnipresence, etc. And if you swear by the name of God
ordinarily, by making it common you pollute and profane it, contrary to Gods
express command, Levit. 22.32. You shall not pollute my holy name, but I will
be hallowed among the Children of Israel. And so much by way of answer to the
vain excuses of customary swearers.

7. I come now in the last place to give some directions and means for the
avoiding of this sin.

1. Take heed of inordinate anger, and impatience which usually hurries people
into a regardlesness of the duty they owe to God, and transports them into a
kind of rage and frenzy, that they scarce know what they say.

2. Take heed of pride, and a vain and foolish affectation to be approved and
applauded by wicked men. There are some who take a pride in swearing, and think
it a piece of bravery and gallantry to rap out damnable oaths. But there is no
man of reason or religion, that will not think them fools for so doing.

3. Take heed of greedy covetousness. For many men ou^ of an inordinate desire
of lucre and gain in their ordinary dealing, to countenance a profitable Lie,
will add an oath to it. They will excessively commend the goods and commodities
they are to sell, and if they find people difficult to believe them, they will
not stick to swear to it, when many times they know, and possibly afterward
will bragg how they cheated their neighbor. It Is true, there are some who will
not swear, yet will lie; but there are but few of those who usually swear, that
make any conscience of lying.

4. Take heed of earnest asseverations, and protestations such as these, as I
hope to be saved; As I live, which some hold to be a formal Oath, and the Oath
that God himself swears by, As I am a Christian; I protest before God; (which
if seriously uttered, I make no question but is an Oath) I vow to God, etc.
Remember what our Savior says, let your commuication be yea, yea, nay, nay,
for what is more then this comes of the evil one. Take heed also of such forms
of words as many use, as Faith and troth, which are I suppose the abbreviations
of by my faith, and by my truth. For an upright and sincere Christian should
abstain from those things that are male-colorata (as one says) which have a
great show and appearance of evil in them, as such words as these (so used)
have, and which minister occasion of scandal and offense to very serious and
pious persons.

5. Shun the company as much as possibly you can, of customary swearers,
because our corrupt nature is easily infected. As civil men living among
barbarous people, quickly lose the purity of their own language, and have their
speech corrupted with the barbarisms that are daily sounding in their ears; so
they that live among constant swearers, are very apt (if they be not very
watchful) to be infected with this vice.

6. Meditate often on the dreadful judgments which God has threatened against
such sinners, Zech. 5.3. Every one that swears shall be cut off, etc. And
Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. God threatens that those that do not fear his glorious and
dreadful name, he will make their plagues wonderful. Customary swearing brands
the swearer with the black mark of a profane person, and exposes him to the
wrath and curse of God.

7. When thou art called to take an Oath whether assertory or promissory, go
about it with that deliberation, seriousness and reverence which is suitable to
the Divine Majesty, whom thou call to witness. Upon an Oath credit is given,
because a man can go no higher than to appeal unto God; and it is supposed, that
no man that understands himself, would knowingly and willingly draw down the
wrath and displeasure of God upon himself. And therefore some of the more
civilized Heathens abhorred the sin of perjury. One of them being importuned by
his friends to take a false Oath for his advantage, told him, he would be his
friend usque ad aras and no further; meaning that no friendship should make him
swear a false Oath upon the Altar for him. And if Heathens have been so
conscious, how much more should those that call themselves Christians take heed
of offending in this kind? And therefore in assertory Oaths they should affirm
nothing but either as they know, or as they believe, and that plainly without
equivocation or mental reservation, which frustrate the very end of an Oath,
which is to give satisfaction in a doubtful matter; And who would rest
satisfied with another Oath, if he knew it were not to be understood according
to the usual signification of the words, but according to the secret meaning of
the swearer, which is to him unknown? So likewise in promissory Oaths, they
should be careful not to oblige themselves to any thing but what is just and
fit to be done, and within their power to perform; and they should consider
likewise what is the true and main intent and meaning of that they engage
themselves to, and accordingly endeavor faithfully to perform it. For ratio
legis est anima legis and ratio statute est statutum, as the learned speak.

8. Pray to God earnestly to plant his fear in thy heart, and then thou will
fear offending against him in this or any other kind. And keep a constant watch
over thy tongue, and take heed of offending with that member, which in many
careless Christians is the instrument of much sin and evil. A Righteous man
fears an Oath. Eccles. 9.2.

CHAP. II. Of Lying.
IN speaking of this subject, I shall proceed in this method.

1. I shall show what a lie is, and wherein the formal nature of it consists.

2. I shall show the several sorts, or kinds of lies.

3. The great evil, and malignity of this sin.

4. Give some remedies, and directions against it.

For the First. A lie is a voluntary uttering of that which is against a man's
knowledge and conscience, with an intent to deceive. Mendacium est voluntaria
falsi enunciatio fallendi causa. Mentiri est contra mentem ire. In parabolicis
locutionibus sensus literalis est non qui per verba, sed qui per res, and facta
designatur. G^^son. Non adhibentur metaphorae, parabolae, apologi, aut aliae
tropicae lo^uutiones intention fallendi, sed docendi majore cum venustate, and
voluptate. Damnanda est Jesuitica aequivocatio and mentalis reservatio; and hoc
ipso mendatii convincuntur, quibus haec in usu sunt, nimirum, quia cum veram
propositionem animo concipiant, falsum tamen enuntient.

Davenant. in Colos.


Therefore he that speaks what he thinks does not tell a lie, though he may
speak an untruth, or that which is in it self false. And in such a case what he
says, is falsiloquium, but not mendacium, a falsehood, but not a lie. He
offends not against moral truth or veracity, because he speaks as he thinks,
and so he does not lie, but is himself mistaken. It Is formale mendacium a
formal and direct lie, when we express or affirm a thing otherwise than we
conceive, or think, with an intent to deceive.

2. I come to consider the several sorts or kinds of lies. And so a lie is
usually distinguished into Jocosum. Officiosum. Perniciosum.


1. Jocosum, when a man utters a lie in sport to make others merry. To this
we may apply that of the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 7. Verse 3. They make the King
glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies. They that tell
lies merely to make others laugh, are guilty of this kind of lying.

2. Officiosum, when a man tells a lie to help another out of some present
danger, or inconvenience. God himself will not be served with a lie, Job 13.7.
Will ye speak wickedly for God? Will ye talk deceitfully for him? We may not
lie for Gods cause, or glory; much less may we do it for any man's benefit.
Plato was no good casuist for Christians, who allowed a lie either to save a
Citizen, or deceive an enemy. And the piae frauds allowed among the Papists
are also much of this nature.


3. Perniciosum, when a man tells a lie, which tends apparently to the hurt, or
damage of another either in his life, goods, or good name.

3. I come now to show the great evil and malignity of this sin.

1. It Is a sin, that makes men most unlike unto God. God is a God of truth, and
cannot lie. He is styled the Lord God of truth; Psalm. 31.5. Deuteronomy. 32.4. and
Isay. 65.16. That which makes men so unlike the true and holy God must needs be
an odious sin. One of the Ancients said well, that two things make us like unto
God, (...) to speak truth and to do good. And surely this consideration, that
lying is against the holy nature of God, should work in us an extreme
detestation of it.

2. It Is a sin, that God has declared in his word a great abhorrence of, as
may appear if you consider these following Scriptures.

Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. These six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are an
abomination to him: A proud look, a lying tongue, etc. A false witness that
speaks lies, and him that sows discord among Brethren.

Levit. 19.11. Ye shall not lie one to another.

Prove. 13.5. A Righteous man hates lying, etc.

Rev. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and whore-mongers,
and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the Lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone.

Rev. 22.15. Without are dogs, and sorceres, etc. and whosoever loves and
makes a lie.

Psalm. 101.7. -- He that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.

Hose 4.1, 2. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord
has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land: By swearing and lying, etc.
they break out, and blood touches blood.

Zech. 8.16, 17. These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the
truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates,
etc. And let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his neighbor, and
love no false Oath. For these are the things I hate, says the Lord.

Ephesians. 4.25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth to his
neighbor.

Col. 3.9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with
his deeds.

3. It Is a great perverting of that noble faculty of speech which God has
given unto man. God has given unto man a tongue to express his mind, and to
reveal and declare what he apprehends in his heart; so that his tongue is to be
the index and discoverer of his mind. Now you know, if the index or hand of a
Clock should point to eight, and the Clock presently strike ten, we should say
it was a lying Index, and greatly out of order. The case is so here, when the
tongue utters one thing, and the mind thinks another.

4. Lying is a work of the Devil, and makes people resemble the Devil in a
manner. John 1.44. Ye are of your Father, the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do, he was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own: for he is a liar and the Father of it. Pride, Malice, and Lying are
the Devils sins after a more especial manner. And who would be willing to be
like the Devil?

5. Lying is destructive to humane society. It Is injurious to all converse
between man and man. How shall a man know what to look for, or what to expect,
or what to trust to, if he cannot believe the persons he deals with; but finds
that in what they affirm to him or assure him of, or promise to him, they
notoriously lie unto him, and palpably deceive him?

6. It Is a sin condemned by the light of natural conscience. The more ingenuous
among the Heathens abhorred it. The Apostle quoteth a verse out of Epimenides a
Heathen Poet, wherein he condemns Cretians for their frequent lying. Tit. 1.12.
The Cretians are are always liars, evil beasts, slow-bellies. (...).


7. It Is a reproachful, a shameful sin. The maddest fellows, and most Ruffianly
and debauched, who make so little conscience of other sins, yet cannot induce
to be charged with a lie, because it is looked upon as a cowardly and shameful
sin. Whoever gives them the lie provokes them beyond all patience. It Is the
cause of many duels, and many times murders. Hear what that excellent person
Mr. Herbert says in his Poems.

Lie not, but let thy heart be true to God,
Thy mouth to it, thy actions to them both.
Cowards tell lies, and those that fear the rod.
The stormy-working soul spits lyese and froth.
Dare to be true. Nothing can need a lie,
A fault, that needs it most, grows two thereby.
8. Lying easily disposes to perjury. He that uses frequently to lie, it is to
be feared he will not much stick at forswearing himself upon occasion. For when
the heart is once hardened in one sin, it is mighty proclive to another of the
like kind and nature.

9. It makes a man useless in the world. When a man is once looked upon as a
person that cannot be believed, no body cares to have any thing to do with him.
For he that is not true in his words, will not be thought honest in his
dealings. So that having lost his good name he is incapacitated to do good, or
benefit, others.

10. It Is a sin, that being frequently committed wonderfully hardens the heart,
and fears the conscience. Therefore customary lying is called the way of lying,
Psalm. 119.29. And they that are in that way, usually have sinned down all
tenderness of conscience.

11. We should remember how it is made the note or character of a righteous man
to speak the truth from his heart; and the wise man tells us, Prove. 12.22. That
they that deal truly are Gods delight, but lying lips are an abomination to the
Lord.

12. Destruction is the liars reward, Psalm. 5.6. Thou shall destroy them that
speak leasing, etc. Rev. 21.8. Liars shall have their part in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone.

Prove. 19.5. He that speaks lies shall not escape. And so much of the third
particular, the great evil and danger of this sin.

4. I come now to give some remedies, and directions against it.

1. Seeing people are so prone to this vice (through natural corruption,) let
all humble themselves before God for every sin of this nature that ever they
have been guilty of, in any part of their lives. Sins that we truly repent of,
we are careful to keep our selves from, for the future.

2. Let us labor to keep our selves innocent. Saepe delinquentibus
promptissimum est mentiri. Faultiness commonly causes faultring, and sin
usually puts men upon shifts to save themselves from blame. Take heed
therefore of committing faults, and then thou will not need to tell a lie to
help thy self. The best way to avoid lying is, to endeavor always (as much as
possibly we can) to be faultless, and blameless. It Is too too usual for
Children and Servants, when they have done amiss, and are blameworthy, to seek
to hide their faults with a lie; and when they have told one lie, that that may
not be discovered or found out, to back it with four or five more, and so they
heinously increase their guilt. But they that labor to walk innocently and
blamelesly need no such miserable and wretched shifts as these are.

3. Let us fear the displeasure of God more than the wrath of men. If we be
afraid of man's anger for our faults, (which is but short, and transient) how
should we fear the insupportable wrath and vengeance of God, which is
everlasting. The one is but like a drop of scalding water falling on our flesh;
the other like being thrown into a furnace of boiling metal. No man's
displeasure (how hot soever) is to be named the same day with the anger of the
Almighty. Your Parents or Masters may be angry with you, and threaten to
correct you, but God threatens to damn you; and which of these two are you most
to consider?

4. Think it a less evil to take shame to thy self by confessing thy fault,
than to hide it with a lie. It Is Pride that makes people so impatient of the
hard opinion of others. And shame is to some persons so intolerable a
suffering, that they will rather venture to displease God than man, and chose
rather to tell a lie and expose themselves thereby to the wrath of God, than
endure a little shame or disgrace from men. Whereas if they had a right
understanding, and discerning of the difference between good and evil, they
would think it far the better course to take shame to themselves by confessing
their faults than to hide it with a lie.

5. Labor to foresee in what particulars, and upon what occasions you may (in
all likelihood) be most in danger of faultring, or telling a lie, and there set
a stricter watch and guard upon your self, fortifying your self with the greter
care and caution against this vice.

6. Labor to keep your consciences tender, that it may smite you when you are
apt to warp, or start aside from your duty. And reverence your conscience, when
it checks you, and listen to it.

7. Live as in the sight and hearing of God, and walk as one that is passing on
to judgment.

8. Labor to get a keen hatred and detestation of this vice. Represent it to
your thoughts as a sin of an odious and shameful nature. And if you be afraid
of shame, be afraid of lying which is in it self so shameful.

9. Earnestly implore the grace of God to keep you from this sin. Earnestly beg
of God that you may never be left to your self at any time, or upon any
occasion whatever.

10. Set a watch over the doors of your lips. Take heed of speaking hastily, or
rashly, or too much. For in the multitude of words this sin is seldom wanting.

11. Take heed of a greedy, and an immoderate desire of gain. How many trading
people for a small and inconsiderable advantage, for a two-penny or three-penny
matter will not stick to tell a lie, and deceive. Hear what the Prophet Micah
preached in his days. Chap. 6. v. 9, 10, 11, 12. The Lords voice cries unto
the City, etc. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the scant measure, that is abominable? shall I count them pure with
the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? For the rich men
thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and
their tongue is deceitful in their mouth. Therefore will I make thee sick in
smiting thee, in making thee desolate because of thy sins. We read in the
fourth of Matthew, 8.9. v. that the Devil took our Savior up into an exceeding
high Mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of
them; that is (as I suppose) pointed to him where they lay, and told him, that
all these would he give him, if he would fall down, and worship him. But alas!
the Devil need not bid so high for the souls of men now adays. If he take them
but into a fair, or market, or into a shop, for a small gain they will lie and
serve him.

12. Take heed of envy, and malice, which often put people upon lying. When men
owe such and such persons ill will, they care not what they say of them.

How sad, and corrupt were the times wherein the Prophet Jeremiah lived, who in
his ninth Chapter, verse 4.5. speaks to the Jews after this manner, Take ye
heed every one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother; for every
brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders, and
they will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth. They
have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit
iniquity. So the Prophet David complained in his time, Psalm. 12.1, 2. Help
Lord, for the Godly man cease; for the faithful fail from among the children
of men. They speak vanity every one with his neighbor, with flattering lips,
and with a double heart do they speak.

14. Labor for a plain spirit without guile, and represent to your thoughts
the amiableness thereof. Remember what is the note or character of a Godly man,
Prove. 13.5. A righteous man hates lying, but a wicked man is loathsome, and
comes to shame. Think with your self how ill you should like it, that those,
whom you deal with should lie to you, or deceive you, and why should you then
do so to them?

15. Learn to trust in God at all times. A man that does humbly repose himself
on Gods Fatherly care and protection over him in the greatest dangers and
straits, and is resolved that he had better stand to Gods determination and
choice in all things, than to his own, what need can he apprehend he has of a
lie, or any sinful shift, even at the greatest pinch? Distrust of Gods fatherly
care was Isaacks weakness at Gerar, Genesis 26.7. And the men of the place asked
him of his wife; and he said she is my sister: for he feared to say she is my
wife; lest the men of the place should kill him for Rebeckahs sake, because she
was fair to look upon.

16. Think much of Gods omniscience, and that his eye is always upon you. It Is
a weighty saying of my Lord Verulam, He that tells a lie shrinks from man, and
braves it toward God. He fears the wrath of man, and so tells a lie to prevent
it; but he brasens it out in the face of the Alseeing God. Gehazi feared his
masters anger, and so lied to prevent it, thinking he could not find it out;
But he feared not lying in the sight of God, for which he was punished with the
Leprosy, 2 Kings 5.27.

17. Remember, that those things that are got by a lie, are usually imbittered
with a great deal of smart and sorrow. A remarkable instance hereof we have in
Jacob, who indeed got the blessing by a lie. But observe what followed
hereupon. 1. His Brother Esau vowed to kill Genesis 27.41, ^2, etc.
him for it. 2. He was thereupon sent away from his Fathers house to his uncle
Laban, who dwelt at Haran in Mesopotamia, a great way of? 3. As he had dealt
deceitfully with his Father, so his uncle Laban dealt deceitfully with him,
changing his wages ten times, ( Genesis 31.41.) and gave him at last Leah instead
of Rachel, beside all the other hardships he endured there for twenty years
together. 4. His Mother Rebeckah, that put him upon that course of beguiling
his Father, never saw her beloved Jacob more, (as far as we can discern by the
story) she dying as it is probable, before his return. Thus we see, that they
that get any thing by lying and indirect dealing, have reason to expect that
they shall smart for it in the end.

18. Avoid those two great Jesuitical tricks, viz. equivocation and mental
reservation. Equivocation is, when an answer is expressed in such words as are
ambiguous, and carry double, and contain more senses and significations than
one, and that on purpose to deceive. Mental reservation is, when the sense is
but half expressed; as if a Magistrate should ask a Romish Priest, Art thou a
Priest, and he should answer, I am no Priest, reserving in his mind, I am no
Priest of Baal. This trick is plainly eversive of all truth in speaking. For
the reply in such cases being deceitful does not answer the question as it
ought to do. But here one thing is to be interposed, viz. that Hyperboles and
such figurative speeches are not lies, but are used to express a thing more
significantly; As the Land of Canaan is called in the Scripture a Land flowing
with milk and honey, Exodus 33.3 whereby is meant only that it was a very
fruitful Land, abounding with all necessaries. Neither are Parables or
Apologues to be accounted lies, when by things feigned an unfeigned truth is
more lively represented, as in Jothams parable. Judges 9.8. The trees went
forth on a time to anoint a King over them, etc. See also 2 Kings 14.9. and 2 Samuel 12.1. Neither is it a lie, when in show of words some false thing is
uttered, but by the gesture or pronunciation of the speaker it owe may appear,
that something else is intended. See 1 Kings 18.27. And it came to pass, that
at noon Elijah mocked them (concerning their god Baal,) and said, cry aloud;
for he is a god, either he is talking, or pursuing, or he is in a journey, or
peradventure he sleeps and must be awaked, etc.

19. Let Parents, Masters, and Superiors be careful not too hastily or suddenly
to charge faults on their children, servants, or inferiors. For such sudden
surprises put them by all due consideration, and so disorder their
understandings, that many times they speak what otherwise they would not.
Therefore let them give them time to consider, and let them advise them to
speak the truth, though against themselves, declaring to them that if they be
in a fault, an humble confession of it is the only way to obtain pardon both
from God and man. Whereas a lie will double their fault, and greatly increase
their guilt.

20. Lastly, let such as profess religion, and pretend to piety take heed they
be not at any time found tardy as to this vice. For thereby they will bring a
scandal upon their profession, and open the mouths of wicked and profane
scoffers, who are ready enough to watch for the haltings of good men, and to
charge them (though unjustly) that they will lie though they will not swear.
Let them therefore be very careful to be honest and true in their words,
cautious in their promises, and faithful in their performances, that the name
of God, and the Christian profession may not be blasphemed through them. And
though they that commonly swear make no conscience of a lie; yet let it appear,
that they Isay. 63.8. Surety they are my people, children that will not lie, so
he was their Savior.
that fear to swear, fear to tell a lie also.

CHAP. III. Of Pride.
IN treating of this Argument I shall show 1. What is not to be accounted
Pride, though it may (by some) be so esteemed. 2. What Pride is, wherein the
nature of it consists, and what are the signs and evidences of it. 3. The great
evil and malignity of it. 4. Give some remedies and directions against it.


For the First. There are some things that look like Pride (and make men
censured for proud) which are not so, such as these.

1. When a man in authority, whether Magistrate or Minister, having a Spirit
suitable to his place and work, and casting off all pusillanimity and irregular
fear of men, and by Faith eyeing God, and designing to please him, does his
duty courageously, leaving issues and events to him. This is not Pride, but
Christian courage and resolution, and a gracious gift of God.

2. When Magistrates, Parents, or Masters do maintain the honor and decorum of
their place and degree, and do keep that distance from their inferiors, which
is needful for their good, and that the inferiors may pay them that reverence
and respect, which is required of them. This is not to be accounted Pride, but
the behaving a man's self worthily in his place.

3. When a man does prefer the commands of God before the commands of men, and
is more fearful of offending God, than incurring the displeasure of men, this
is not to be accounted Pride, but a duty. The Papists, and possibly some others
will call those persons proud and despisers of Government, who will not obey
them in all their usurpations. And thus proud men call others proud, who cannot
crouch and yield to them in the exercise of their Pride.

4. When a man has a due and honest care to maintain and uphold his credit,
good name and reputation, not merely for it self; but as it may make him more
useful and serviceable to God in his generation. This is not to be accounted
Pride, but a duty that Christian prudence requires of him.

5. When a Minister, or private Christian does plainly and seriously reprove an
offending brother, out of a true desire of his amendment and reformation. This
is not to be accounted Pride, or Pragmaticalness, but the discharge of an
excellent Christian duty, which is by so much the more excellent, because it is
so much neglected, and is so hard to perform in a right manner. And so much for
the first particular.

2. I come now to show what Pride is, and wherein the nature of it con^^sts,
and what are the signs and evidences of it.

In the general, Pride is an inordinate self-exalting, and overvaluing of our
selves; Su^erbia est appetitus inordinatus propriae excellentiae. Superbus
dictu^ est, quia super vult videri quam est.
and esteeming our selves to be wiser and better than indeed we are, and an
eager desire, that others should so think of us, so speak of us, so treat us.
And this vanity of mind, this inordinate self-esteem manifests it self in
sundry Particulars.

1. When men assume that glory and honor to themselves, which ought to be
reflected and ascribed entirely to God. As Herod did, when the people applauded
him, and cried, The voice of a God and not of a man. The Texts says, Acts
12.20. etc. The Angel of the Lord immediately smote him, because he gave not
God the glory, and he was eaten up of worms.

2. When they are too highly conceited of their own wit, wisdom, care and
contrivance, and ascribe their successes unto that, and so Sacrifice to their
own net, not owning, or acknowledging the special favor and providence of God
therein as they ought to do. Deuteronomy. 8.13, 14, 17, 18. When thy herds and thy
flocks multiply and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou
have is multiplied, then beware lest thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget
the Lord thy God (which brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the house
of bondage) And thou say in thine heart, my power, and the might of my hand
has gotten me this wealth. But thou shall remember the Lord thy God; for it is
he that gives thee power to get wealth, etc.

3. When they brag, and boast, and are conceited of their own knowledge, worth,
parts, and excellencies, and their acceptance with others Thraso-like. Illud
profecto mihi datum est, ut sint grata, quae facio, omnia. Thraso in Eunuch.
Pride often times puffs people up with a conceit of their great knowledge;
whereas alas! how little do we know of what is knowable, and of what we may,
and ought to know.

4. When they contemn, slight, scorn, and undervalue others, and their
performances, crying up what they do themselves, but despising, and vilifying
what is done by others.

5. When they are apt to be very angry and choleric at any thing that agrees
not with their own humor, and are impatient to be contradicted, be their speech
right or wrong. Proud, and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud
wrath, Prove. 21.24.

6. When they are apt to be contentious and quarrelsom, and that upon small
matters. Only by Pride comes contention, but with the well advised is wisdom,
Prove. 13.10. He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife, Prove. 28.25.

7. When men are headdy, self-willed, headstrong, and unperswadable, though
never so great reasons be offered them, thinking themselves wiser than other
men.

8. When they affect singularity without reason, and go in bypath by
themselves, not ordinarily trodden by others, that they may be the more taken
notice of. A sober traveller that rides in the ordinary road is not so much
observed as he that jumps over hedge and ditch, and rides in ways untrodden by
others. Indeed good men in evil days are sometimes compelled to be singular
(as Lot was in Sodom) but they do not affect it, could they avoid it without
sin.

9. When they are censorious and uncharitable, and love to carp and find fault
with others. They are not so quick-sighted to see their own failings, as the
failings of others.

10. When they will not confess a fault, nor retract an error; though convinced
of it, but out of pride and height of Spirit, justify and defend it.

11. When they think diminutively and slightly of great mercies, and undervalue
them, because they see others enjoy greater.

12. When they are apt to be discontented, to murmur, and repine if they have
not all they desire, and if all things go not according to their wills.

13. When they are apt to fret and be impatient under the afflictions God lays
upon them, not considering what greater punishments their sins deserve.

14. When they envy the parts and gifts, or the employments and places, or the
credit and reputation of others, thinking themselves diminished or lessened
thereby.

15. When they are more careful about the outside than the inside of their
duties, and are more solicitous how they are liked and approved by men after a
duty, than how they have approved their hearts and consciences to God in the
duty.

16. When they are impatient of reproof, and of that discipline Christ has
appointed in his Church. Our Savior Mat. 18.15. has appointed that an
offending brother should be first dealt with by private admonition. If that
will not reform him, then he is to be admonished by two or three. If he do not
amend upon that, then he is to be admonished more publicly by the Church. If
he still continue obstinate and unreformed, then the Church is to excommunicate
him, and the members of it are to shun him as a Heathen man, or a Publican,
that seeing himself looked upon (for the present) as an incorrigible person, he
may be ashamed of his sin and folly. Now proud persons, of all others, are most
impatient of living under this discipline, and are apt to think it a burden
insupportable (some of them have called it the burden of Issacar) that they
cannot be permitted to live as they list, or that they should be barred of any
of Christ's Ordinances, or that any should control them.

17. When they are excessively hard and difficult to be pleased, and are too
ridged exacters of observance and respect from their inferiors.

18. When they love others not according to their true worth, but according to
the measure of respect which they show to them.

19. Proud persons are usually most injurious both in words and actions toward
weak adversaries.

20. Proud persons are very resentful of any injuries either real or supposed
done to them, and when they are wronged, they look for great submission and
satisfaction.

21. Pride makes people exceeding loath to be beholding to others. Some will
almost starve rather than make their wants known.

22. The Pride of the heart very often shows and manifests its self in the
vanity of the garb and attire.

23. Pride many times makes people to slight the Ministers and Messengers of
God, and to hear their teachers, as Judges, not as Learners.

24. Pride very often makes those in place apt to domineer over their
inferiors, and to think of the dignity of their places more than of the duty
they owe to God, and the people in those places.

25. Pride makes people spend profusely, for their credit, or reputations sake.
But when an object of Charity calls, they are backward enough. Their estates
are more at the command of their credit than at the command of God, or charity.
And so much of the second Particular, namely, what pride is, and what are the
signs and evidences of it. I come now to the third, viz.

3. To show the great evil, malignity and danger of it; And this I shall
represent to you in sundry particulars.

1. Consider, that Pride is a very ruining sin. It undid Angels, 1 Timothy 3.6.
and our first Parents. It overthrew the Tower of Babel, drowned Pharaoh,
prostrated Goliath, hanged Haman, destroyed Senacharib, made Nebuchadnezzar like
a beast, caused Herod to be eaten up with lice, Prove. 15.25. God threatens that
He will destroy the house of the Proud.

2. It Is a very disquieting sin. (1.) It Is a great disquieter of a man's own
Soul. Every little thing casts a proud man into a passion. It renders his life
miserable, and puts him in the power of any man to be his tormentor. A small
neglect or affront disorders a proud man even almost to distraction. A
remarkable instance hereof we have in Haman, Esther 3.5. (2.) It is a great
disquieter of others, a great occasion of disquiet in private families, and so
likewise in Parishes, it makes men very firebrands in the places where they
live; It makes them full of animosity against those that cross them in any
thing, and full of envy at those that are above them. And so in Church and
State, none so troublesome as proud persons. Look also upon the lamentable
effects of it in the world. O cursed Pride, thou child of the Devil, how do
thou set the whole world on fire? what woeful divisions, contentions and
mischiefs do thou cause where thou prevailest.

3. Pride usually blasts parts. It blinds the mind, and makes people over
confident of their own conceits. It Is also very frequently the highway to
Apostasy. Mark those that are proud in a Parish, or family, and if there come
any infection of schism, or heresy near them, they are commonly the first that
catch it.

4. Pride commonly hates fraternal admonition and reproof, and so keeps off the
proper remedy, and means of amendment and reformation.

5. It Is the mother of many other sins, as of revenge, oppression, and hard,
and injurious dealing.

6. It Is a very extensive sin. It Is apt to shoot it self into our whole
conversation, yea (which is saddest of all) to creep into our best duties.
There is scarce a good action we do, but this cursed fly will be apt to get
into it, and poison it, if we take not great care S^p^rbia maxim tim^nda in
recte actis. Luth.
and watch our hearts very strictly.

7. It Is a great impediment to conversion. It obstructs saving illumination. A
proud person is hardly convinced of the greatness of his Sins. Original s^n
will scarce be acknowledged by him, and he thinks but slightly, and
diminitively of his actual Sins; such a person is hardly brought to see the
necessity of conversion, and his absolute need of a Savior. And so much of the
great evil and danger of this Sin.

4. I come now in the fourth place to give some remedies and directions against
it.

1. Enter into a serious consideration of thy own vileness. E Coelo descendit
Nosce teipsum.
Consider the infirmities, weaknesses, and sicknesses of thy body, but
especially the great depravedness of thy Soul. Want of due and serious
consideration and descending into a man's self is the great cause of Pride.
Meditate on thy manifold sins, and the deserts of them, and meditate on thy
weaknesses, and miseries, and then tell me whether thou have any cause to be
proud.

2. Often meditate on the glorious nature and attributes of God; on his
infinite greatness, holiness and purity, and tha is one good means to abase
thee, and make thee to abhor thy self. Job 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee; Wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes.

3. Consider how d declares, that he hates, abhors, and resists a proud person.
nd he must needs fall, whom God sets himself against. He resists the proud, but
his grace and favor is toward the lowly. Every one that is proud in heart is
an abomination to the Lord, Prove 16.5.

4. Look upon the great imperfection of thy graces, and thy manifold failings
even in thy best duties. Ex ignorantia tui venit superbia. Ignorance of thy
self is the cause of thy Pride.

5. Look upon our humble Savior. Nulla creatura humilior Deo, says Laurentius
excellently. The most powerful sight in the world, for the humbling of the soul
is a Crucified Savior. What an example of humility has he left us? His whole
life was a constant Lecture of Humility. He condescended so low as to wash his
Disciples feet, John 13. Non ex officio, sed ex amore, and in exemplum, as one
says upon the place.

6. Look on the holy Angels how they humble themselves, and condescend to
minister for the good of the people of God, who are so much their inferiors.

7. Look upon the examples of the most eminent Saints, and you will find they
were eminent in this grace of humility. See instances hereof in Abraham, Genesis
18.27. Behold now I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust
and ashes. In Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, which thou have showed unto thy servant, for with my staff I passed
over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. In David 1 Samuel 7.18. And
David said, who am I O Lord God, and what is mine house that thou have brought
me hitherto?

8. Look upon the Devils themselves, that tempt you to be proud. See what Pride
has brought them unto. A proud man is the very image of the Devil. Pride,
Malice, Hatred, and Lying are the Devils peculiar sins. And can it be pleasing
to you to be like unto him?

9. Consider how God does usually leave proud persons to themselves, at one
time or other, and suffer them to fall into some sin or miscarriage, that so
they may be abased and humbled. One indiscreet action of a man left to himself,
may throw down the reputation that he has by great caution and circumspection
been many years in raising, and make him vile in the eyes of the world.

10. Consid. that those that are proud are usually near some dreadful fall, or
heavy judgment. God himself has made Pride a symptom, or prognostic of it.
Luke 14.11. Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted; and Chap. 1.51. He has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts. He has put down the mighty from their seat, and
exalted them of low degree.

11. Reason thy self into a loathing of this sin. Ask thy self, what art thou,
what have thou, what can thou do that thou should be proud?

1. Is it thy birth thou art proud of? If thy Parents were of great quality and
of great virtue, thou ought to look to it that thou imitate them in their
worthy behavior, and virtuous life, else thou will be a dishonor to them. If
they were great in this world, and vicious, thou have no cause to boast of thy
descent from them, but to take heed of treading in their steps, lest a curse be
intailed upon thee from them. Besides, consider that personal merits render any
man imcomparably more valuable than his relalation to very deserving Ancestors.

2. Is it Riches? The more thou have, the greater will be thy account. Our
Savior tells us it is hard for a rich man (especially such an one as trusts in
his riches) to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mark 10.23, 24. Few rich men
escape the snare. Thy account and danger should rather make thee fear, than thy
riches lift thee up. Or if thou have riches, it is very uncertain whether thou will carry them to thy grave. There are many accidents that may impoverish
thee. Or if thou do carry them to thy grave, thou can carry them no
farther, but there must leave them, and possibly either to a fool or a
prodigal. It Is often seen, the faster men gripe and think to hold their wealth,
the sooner they loose it, like him that gripes Callice-sand in his fist, the
harder he gripes it, the faster it slips away from him.

3. Is it Power thou art proud of? So great will be the account that men in
power must give, how they have improved that Talent, (whether for God, or
against him) that the very thoughts of it may affright any considering, man.
Thou have need well consider how thou have improved thy power, whether for the
interest of God, and the good of the world, or only to serve thy own or other
men's lusts, as too many do.

4. Is it thy learning thou art proud of? certainly the more learned thou art
the more humble thou ought to be. True knowledge discovers the folly and
pernicious tendency of Pride, and affords abundant matter for Humility. The
heaviest, and most weighty heads of corn bow down themselves, the empty ones
perk up themselves. Consider also how little thou know of what is knowable,
and of what thou might, and ought to know. Alas! Thy learning is but a
pitiful narrow thing in respect of the amplitude of things that are to be known.

5. Is it Beauty or bodily strength thou art proud of? Alas! possibly a
disease at this very moment is breeding in thee that will suddenly pull down
thy strength, and deface thy beauty. And observe it who will, that strength and
beauty, that raises Pride is commonly short lived. For vainglory commonly
puts great strength upon dangerous and perilous attempts and undertakings,
which usually do endanger and hurt it, if not destroy it. And that beauty which
is set forth to be a temptation to lust, and dishonesty, is commonly the ruiner
of its owner. That beauty is best set off which is attended with the ornament
of a meek, and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. If
God has given thee beauty, let it stir up thy gratitude, and not be a ground
of pride to thee.

6. Is it Wit or good natural parts that thou art proud of? Alas! how soon may
a fever or apoplexy deprive thee of thy memory, wit and understanding? Besides,
observe it, wit is never sooner foiled than by Pride. Pride casts a
ridiculousness and a kind of blot upon the greatest parts. Such an one has
good parts (says the common byword) but he knows it too well. Pride also
often times draws up into the brain, such hot choleric vapors and fumes as
disorder and discompose it. But humility and lowliness of mind is a great
advantage for the improving of all our faculties. It cools and qualifies the
blood and spirits, and keeps the whole man in a good frame and temper. Besides
those that are conceited of their wit, do usually (at one time or other) run
into some extravagancy, renders them despicable and ridiculous. It Is ten to one
but their Pride will carry them into some ridiculous action, so that they will
receive more reproach and censure for their pride, than they received before
applause for their parts? It Is far more desirable to be a wise man than a witty
man. When therefore thou art apt to swell with Pride, at the reflection upon thy
parts, think how many there are in the world more wise and learned and worthy
than thy self. Cum superbia tentat, cogita me^iores. Bernard.
Think how many brave men there now are and formerly have been, who have done
more for God, and for the good of the world than ever thou have done.

7. Is it Credit, or applause, or honor, or esteem, thou art proud of? The
wind is not more uncertain. Thou think thou have honor; thou deceivest thy
self, thou have it not. He has it that gives it thee, and he may detain it
from thee when he pleases. Honor magis est in honorame quam in Honora^o.
A man's credit is least in his own keeping of any thing.

8. Is it fine clothes thou art proud of? All Pride is a very foolish thing,
but that which arises from such mean things, is the most irrational of all.
Alas! you must shortly change all your finery for grave-cloaths, and that vile
body of yours that now you endeavor with so much art and cost to deck and
adorn must shortly be laid in the dust. Fine clothes may make Children and
young folks proud, but wise and considering persons are not usually affected
with such things. Be clothed with humility says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.5. that
is the best clothing of all.

9. Is it grace or goodness that thou art apt to be proud of? This is a thing
very irrational and absurd. For predominant pride cannot consist with grace,
but is a great sign of a graceless state. If thou have grace, so far as thou
art proud of it, thou do abuse it, contradict it, and act against the very
nature of it. For Pride is to grace what a consumption is to health. Be not
high minded, but fear, says the Apostle, Romans 11.20. When you think you stand,
take heed lest you fall. 1 Cor. 10.12. And thus much of the eleventh Direction;
namely, that we should reason our selves into a loathing of this sin.

12. Look on the humbling judgments of God that are abroad in the world, and
turn them all as so many Cannons against thy Pride. Methinks every serious
Christian should think it unreasonable and unsuitable in such a calamitous time
as this is, when God calls to humbling and abasing our selves, and to
sympathize with others that are in an afflicted condition, now to lay it out in
pride and vanity and garish garbes and attire more than formerly. We have seen
many humbling sights, and felt many humbling strokes, and have heard many
dismal cries of our afflicted Brethren and shall we now be proud? I know the
world is at that pass, that a Minister will be thought to do more wisely to
save his breath than spend it upon so hopeless a design as to think by all his
arguments to reform people in this particular. The pride of the world is now
too high to be born down by Sermons or the most earnest and serious
exhortations. Alas! It Is a monster, that has not been conquered by War, nor
Plague, nor Fire. And do you think it will be born down by the breath of a poor
Minister, though exhorting never so seriously. However, we must do our duty,
and lift up our voice like a Trumpet, and show Israel their sins, whether they
will hear or whether they will forbear. And if I can bring but one sinner (who
is concerned in this reproof) to consider his ways, and to forsake his pride
and vanity I shall not repent me of this pains.

13. Consider how God in the contrivance of man's redemption designeth the
humbling of all whom he intends to save. For he has ordained that no man shall
be justified by a righteousness of his own performance, but by the
satisfaction, merits, and intercession of the Redeemer. Therefore he prepares
men for the reception of this pardon, by humbling them and making them vile and
mean in their own eyes.

14. Read what Christ expects from them whom he intends to save, and then you
will see what a great measure of humility and self-denial is required of them.
Except ye become as little Children ye cannot enter into the Kindom of Heaven,
Matthew. 18.3.

15. Treasure up some Scripture precepts against Pride, and have them always
ready in your minds, such as these, he that humbles himself shall be exalted.
God resists the proud. Pride goes before a fall. Every one that is proud in
heart is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16.5. A man's Pride shall bring him
low, but honor shall uphold the humble in spirit, Prove. 29.23.

16. Earnestly beg of God to give you the grace of Humility.

Concerning which excellent grace, that I may treat the more profitably, I
shall show, 1. The Counterfeits of it. 2. Wherein the true nature of it
consists. 3. The great benefits and advantages of it. 4. The means to attain it.


For the First, The counterfeits of it. There are four things that carry a show
of humility, but are at a great distance from it.

1. When men vilify and discommend themselves, or their own performances, on
purpose to draw others to praise them. He that does so, cozens himself into
Pride by a show of Humility. A man would be ashamed if he were told, he used
that mean stratagem to procure his own praise. But so glorious a thing is
humility, that pride to hide its own shame, does sometimes put on the vizor and
semblance of it.

2. When men effect to wear some unusual habit, or some mean and sordid
clothes, or to use some clownish, unhandsome, and uncivil behavior, which may
make them taken notice of, and observed by others. This may look like Humility,
but is far from it. There may be a russet Pride, and a leathern Insolency. It Is
not always couched under silk and satin. Many times there is a very ugly
pride under mean clothes. The Capuchins among the Papists go in poor clothes
with naked legs, and Sandals. Who has required these things of them? I think
the Apostles rule is here to be observed, whatsoever things are honest, pure,
lovely, and of good report and praiseworthy among men, Phil. 4.8. These we
should follow and not affect a vain signularity not warranted by the word of
God.

3. When they choose to converse for the most part with their inferiors, that
they may bear sway, and be the chiefest among them, this is no argument of
Humility but rather of Pride.

4. When men live basely, meanly, in no degree answerable, or according to the
estate and condition God has put them into; this is not humility, but an
argument of a covetous and sordid spirit. And so much of the counterfeits of
humility.

2. I come now to show wherein the true nature of Humility consists, and in
what particulars it evidenceth it self. In the general. True Humility is a
lowly frame and temper of Soul arising from wise, serious, and deliberate
consideration. It Is principally rooted in the mind, and evidenceth it self in
these Particulars.

1. The Soul that is truly humble is deeply sensible of its manifold
weaknesses, wants, and imperfections. It Is sensible of the darkness of its
mind, the depravedness of its will, the disorder and irregularity of its
affections. Humilitas est animi demissio orta ex vera status and conditionis
suae agnition^. Camer.


2. It Is very sensible of its great sinfulness and manifold transgressions
against God. O (says such a Soul) who have I in the whole course of my life
too much neglected my Creator (who gave me my life and being) and in many
things how grievously have I sinned against him? And the wages of every sin
being death, how obnoxious and liable have I made my self to the wrath and
curse of God? What a mercy is it that I am out of Hell, who have so many ways
broken the holy and righteous Law of God?

3. As a consequent hereupon, it is very sensible of its great unworthiness of
those mercies it enjoyes from God. The humble soul says, as good old Jacob
did, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, which thou
have showed to thy Servant.

4. The humble Soul is filled with an high admiring, and affectionate gratitude
to God, as the free giver of all the mercies it enjoys. It Is very thankful for
temporals, but much more for spirituals; and owns all to the free bounty and
goodness of God. The humble Soul is a great admirer of free grace, and highly
prizes our Lord Jesus Christ, and his great undertaking for the redemption of
Mankind.

5. The humble Soul is patient under afflictions, and clears God of any hard
dealing in his proceedings against him. He charges not Good foolishly, how
sharp soever his afflictions be.

6. The humble person is patient under the neglects and disrespects he meets
with from men. It Is not for me (says the humble Soul) to expect or look for
respect and esteem in the World. It Is enough for me if among those few good men
I am acquainted with, I find a tolerable kind acceptance.

7. An humble person does carefully watch over his thoughts, words and actions,
lest Pride or vainglory should steal in upon him, and especially he fears lest
he should be puffed up on the account of those actions, that meet with some
applause and acceptance in the world. A man should always endeavor to do
things that deserve honor and esteem, but then he should not assume the glory
of them to himself. If he do any thing tending to the honor of God, and the
good of the world, he is very glad of it, and heartily thankful to God for
inabling him to do it. But he gives God entirely the glory of it.

8. The humble Soul has a charitable opinion of others, which he is the more
induced to upon consideration of his own weaknesses, and manifold failings.
Where there is the greatest humility, commonly there is the greatest charity,
but where there is the highest Pride, there usually is the greatest
censoriousness and uncharitableness.

9. An humble person strictly animadverts upon, and observes his failings and
defects in the good duties he performs. He takes notice of the deadness,
coldness, formality, and the degrees of vainglory, that are apt to creep in
upon him in the performance of them; and all these are matter of humiliation to
him. And thus much of the nature of humility, and the particulars wherein it
evidenceth it self.

3. I come now in the next place to show the fruits, benefits and advantages of
this eminent grace.

1. The humble man obtains grace, favor, and a blessing from God. He gives
grace, that is, he manifests his grace and favor to the humble. The humble man
does not usurp the glory due to his Creator, nor intercept the Tribute which
ought to be paid to God, but pays it willingly to the right owner. And God
has declared, that those that honor him, he will honor. The favor of God is
always accompanied with bounty, and beneficence. But his Favor is not to be
measured by his heaping temp^ral things on us, but by his blessing us with
Soul-mercies and spiritual blessings which have a reference to the life that is
to come.

2. The humble soul shall be sure of Gods direction, Psalm. 25.9. He shall be
guided (first) in the right way to Heaven, which those that are wise in their
own eyes many times miserably err from. What did many of those that were
knowing and learned among the Jews and Gentiles (being full of their own wisdom
and learning) account of the Gospel? That which was in it self the wisest and
most profound contrivance that ever was in the world, and most efficacious
instrument of man's conversion and salvation seemed to these men of wisdom mere
foolishness. (2.) But it was the power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. to all
those that were brought thereby to believe in our Lord Jesus. 2. The humble
person God will guide in his worldly affairs and business, whereas proud men
(who usually lean on their own understanding, and disdain all counsel but what
suiteth with their own wisdom) very frequently miscarry. Let us call our own
experience to witness, whether when (in a deep sense of our own weakness, and
distrusting our own ability and wisdom to grapple with the difficulties we were
to meet with) we have humbly implored the divine directions, and guidance, and
have committed our selves thereto, I say, let us consider whether we have not
found God helping of us, and casting our affairs better for us than we could
have imagined or contrived our selves.

3. An humble person is usually well thought of and spoken of by all that know
him, whereas a proud man is the mark of common obloquy. If a man be proud,
almost every body is ready to pull him down. Nay, they that are proud
themselves are ready enough to pull down others that are proud. But the humble
almost every body is willing to lift up.

4. Not one dispensation of God will pass without doing us some good, if we be
humble. Prosperity will better us, and adversity will better us. All winds will
drive us on toward the haven of eternal happiness, if we be truly humble.

5. Humility keeps the soul in great tranquillity. The passion of pride and
haughtiness how it vexes and disquiets the minds of men? but humility makes the
Soul very submissive to the will of God; shall not I submit (says the humble
soul) to the will of my heavenly father, whose will I pray daily may be
fulfilled. The cup that my heavenly Father gives me to drink, shall not I
drink it? What am I that I should not be crossed or reproached? It is but what
I deserve, nay much less than I deserve by reason of my sins. My present
condition is not so troublesome or painful or uneasy but I deserve much more.
And shall not I be patient and content and submit to my Sovereign Lord (to his
wisdom as well as to his will) who orders all things for the good of them that
love and fear him? And so much of the third particular, the benefits and
advantages of humility.

4. I come now in the last place to prescribe some means for the attaining of
it.

1. Consider how highly God values and prizes this temper. He dwells in the
highest heavens, and in the lowest hearts, Isa. 66.2. Isa. 57.15. The ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit is in his sight of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. And Mic.
6.18. says the Prophet, He has showed thee O man what is good and what the
Lord requires of thee, namely to do justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly
with thy God. God takes no pleasure in us, till he has brought us to this
frame and temper. Descendendo coelum ascenditur. Cassiodor.
Nothing makes us so precious in Gods sight as Humility. We are most precious
in Gods eyes, when we are most vile in our own. An humble and a contrite spirit
is more valued by him than all burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

2. Consider the various means that God uses to work this so necessary a grace
in the hearts of his own people. Sometimes he visits them with afflictions,
sometimes with temptations, 2 Cor. 12.7.
nay, sometimes he suffers them to fall into sin, and all to humble them.
Expedit superbo ut incidat in peccatum as he said of old. And if God so much
desires we should be humble, shall not we comply with his will therein?

3. Con. how our blessed Lord and Savior recommended humility to the World.
(1.) By his precepts, Mat. 11.28. (2.) By his example, John 13. He washed his
Disciples feet, And John 6.15. When they went about to make him a King, he
utterly refused it. There is not any one virtue that he commands and
commends more than humility, nor any one vice that he sets himself more
against than pride. In his Beatitudes, Matthew. 5. Poverty of spirit has the
first promise, and meekness and humility the third. And if we look through his
whole life, we shall find there is not any one grace he did more signally
exercise, or by his example more commend to the imitation of Christians than
Humility. Let the same mind therefore be in us that was in Christ Jesus, as the
Apostle exhorts us, Phil. 2.5.

4. Earnestly pray to God to help thee in the humbling of thy heart, pour out
thy soul to the Lord in some such petitions as these. Lord take from me (I pray
thee) all vanity and foolish complacency in my own person or actions, and help
me to reflect all gl^ry to thy self, suffering nothing to adhere to mine own
heart, but a sense of my imperfections and thankfulness to thee for all thy
free and undeserved mercies. Lord keep me from sin, folly, and indecencies, and
then enable me to receive all lessenings and diminutions to m men patiently and
contentedly.

5. Converse often with humble and afflicted persons, that so thy heart may be
affected with their condition, and that thou may sympathize with them in
their sorrows and sufferings.

6. Consider what a great influence humility has into many other graces.
Repentance, Faith, Love to God and man are much quickened and enlivened by
humility. None more truly penitent, none more joyfully and thankfully repose
and rely on the great satisfaction of Christ, none have their hearts more
inflamed with love to God and man than humble persons. Lord what am I (says
the humble Soul) that ever thou should place thy love on one so unworthy?
What am I or what is my fathers house, that thou should deal so bountifully
with me?

7. Meditate often on thy own failings and weaknesses, and reflect on the worst
things in thee, that so thou may be abased, and not only on the best to puff
thee up. The Pharisee in Luke 18. cried out, I thank thee O Lord, I am not as
other men are, an extortioner, unjust, an adulterer, or as this Publican; but
the poor Publican cried out Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

8. Meditate on thy own death, and celebrate thy own Funeral in thy serious
thoughts and meditations. Methinks some serious thoughts of death and the grave
should be able to pull down the pride and plumes of the vainest spirit.

CHAP. IV. Of Gluttony.
IN handling of this subject, I shall proceed in this Method.

1. I shall show what Gluttony is. 2. I shall inquire into the causes of it. 3.
Shall show the great evil and danger of it. 4. Shall propound some helps and
remedies against it.
For the First. I shall first show in the general what gluttony is, and then
come to speak more particularly of it.

Gluttony may be thus described. It is a voluntary excess in eating for the
mere pleasing of the appetite or some other carnal end. But here I must
interpose three cautions.

1. The same quantity may be an excess in one that is not in another. A strong
and laboring man may eat a great deal more than a student or a man of a
sedentary life. Therefore the excess is not to be estimated by the quantity
eaten, but by the condition of the person eating. Ordinarily, that is to be
called and accounted excess, when a man to please his appetite, eats more
than is profitable and convenient for his health, or to help him on in his
duty. And here that excellent rule of Aristotle is to be observed, who makes
virtue to consist in the mean, or measure, and that distance from the extremes
which the prudence of a prudent man determines. Virtus consistit in ea
mediocritate quam vir prudens defini verit.
And so in this case, the prudence of every particular man must determine for
him what must be his measure as to eating.

2. It Is not all delight in meat, or pleasing the appetite, that is a sin, but
only that which is made a man's ultimate end, and is not referred to an higher
end. When the delight it self is not directed to health and more alacrity in
our duty toward God, and in serving of him.

3. A difference as to diet ought to be allowed to persons and to times. (1.)
To persons. Some persons may have better diet, and more costly than others. The
same diet that is fit for one man is not fit for another. A great man may have
those sorts of meats, which would be unfit (ordinarily) and too chargeable for
a poor man. (2.) To times. Times of Thanksgiving and rejoicing may be allowed a
more liberal provision, and large exceedings, than is convenient at other
times. As we see our Savior at a Wedding in Cana in Galilee turned water into
wine, that the guests on such a day of cheerfulness and rejoicing, might have a
more plentiful provision. Yet temperance is then also to be observed, excess
being never allowable, but always to be avoided. Having thus spoken of
Gluttony in the general, I come now to show more particularly wherein it
consists?

1. It Is sometimes an excess in quantity, when more is eaten than is meet and
fit, or than the stomach can well carry off or digest. And so by imperfect
concoction abundance of crudities and vicious humors are bred, which prepare
and dispose the body to sicknesses.

2. Sometimes in quality, when the meats that are eaten are too young, or too
delicate and costly, and when there is too great a curiosity in dressing and
saucing of them, or when such meats are delighted in, which are apt and proper
to excite and pamper lust and wantonness, or when they are such as are intended
to revive the appetite after it is well satisfied, and needs no more.

3. Sometimes in the manner of eating. As (1.) When men eat too eagerly and
with too much greediness, and too voracious an appetite. (2.) When they eat too
often and too soon, before their former meal is digested, not allowing nature
sufficient time of concoction. And so much of the nature of Gluttony.

2. I come now to inquire into the causes of it. There are several causes of it.

1. An inordinate appetite, and a mind too much set upon Flesh-pleasing. They
that are after the flesh do mind the the things of the flesh, says the
Apostle, Romans 8.5. There are some who too much delight in eating and feeding,
making their belly their God, like Philoxenus who wished he had the neck of a
Crane that he might have the longer delight in swallowing, and tasting his meat
and drink. These people should remember, that the flesh is one of the enemies
they are engaged by their baptism to fight against, and therefore should not
pamper it unto wantonness.

2. Want of due understanding what is truly conducing to health, and to the
furthering of us in our duty toward God and man. A decaying body ought
carefully to be supported, but an unruly body ought carefully to be subdued.
And they that do not duly consider their own constitution and what is the duty
incumbent upon them in reference to their particular Temper and the state of
their bodies, will be apt to err in this matter.

3. Making appetite the rule and measure of our eating and drinking, whereas
appetite was given to us to make that grateful to us which reason bids us to
eat, and not to be our measure. Many a man's appetite is stronger than his
concoction, and many healthful people have an appetite to more than they ought
to eat, or than nature can well digest. We see in Swine and many greedy
Children, that they would many times even kill themselves with eating, if they
had not the reason of others to govern them. Appetite therefore is not to be
our rule either for quantity or quality of meats, but reason in this (as in
other things) is to be our guide and governor. When reason has nothing against
it, then appetite shows what is most agreeable to nature and what the Stomach
is like best to close with and digest. But God has given us reason as well as
appetite, and though (as the common saying is) Venture non habet aures.
the belly and the appetite has no ears, yet reason should make them hear, yea
and obey too.

4. The exceeding deliciousness and pleasantness of some meats tempts the
appetite to desire more than nature requires. So the quality oftentimes tempts
and invites to an excess in quantity.

5. The evil custom of urging and importuning others to eat more than they have
a desire unto. This is many times a great cause of Gluttony. We are all more
prone to exceed than to fall short, and we need no incitation to eat, our own
appetite is apt to incite us too much. But many people think it a piece of
civility to urge, importune, and almost force their friends to eat, though they
will not urge them, in the like kind to drink more than they have a mind unto.
And so much of the causes of Gluttony.

3. I come now to the third thing I propounded to speak to, namely, the great
evil and danger of this sin. And this I shall show in sundry particulars.

1. It Is a great enemy to the Body. Plures gula Quicquid avium volitat,
quicquid pis^ium natat, quicquid ferarum discurrit, nostris sepelitur
ventribus. Sen.
quam gladius. The throat has killed more than the sword. Many men dig their
graves with their teeth, and dye because they put not the knife to the throat.
Prove. 23.1. Pone cu^trum i. e. modum adhibe gulae tuae, eamque velut cultro
gutturi infixo, refraena. Menech.
How hard soever it has gone with some people in the World at some particular
times, yet more have been killed by their own Gluttony than ever were starved
to death through want. It may well be supposed that a little more than half the
quantity of meat and drink which many people take, would afford them as lasting
and as healthful a state of body as the over measure they ordinarily use.
Intemperate men are Valetudinis suae proditores (as he said) betrayers of their
own health. For Gluttony though it kills not suddenly, yet it does it surely
and certainly like the Dropsy, of which it is said, it kills as it fills,
that is, by degrees and insensibly. Gluttony fills the body with crudities
which are the root of most sicknesses. There are few diseases but are the
effects of Gluttony, or excess in drinking; it is excess that commonly breeds
them, and lays the matter and foundation of them. And if this were well
understood, I wonder that wicked men if they do not believe a life to come, yet
should not be afraid of shortning this their present life by their
intemperance.

2. It Is a great enemy to the mind, and to all the exercises, operations and
employments of it, both religious and civil. It makes men heavy, drousie, dull
and shathfull. The body ought to be the instrument of the Soul in the service
of God. But Gluttony makes it a clog to the Soul, and exceedingly indisposes it
for the duties we owe either to God or man.

3. Gluttony is a great symptom of a carnal mind, and a carnal mind is enmity
against God, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.7. And that which opposes God is
sure to be destroyed. And the spirit of God further assures us (at the
thirteenth verse of that Chapter, that they that live after the flesh shall
dye, and that not only a temporal death, (but except they be converted) an
eternal death also.

4. It breeds lust and furthers the power of concupiscence. As dunging the
ground makes it fruitful, especially in weeds, so Gluttony fills the mind with
the weeds of filthy thoughts, filthy desires and inclinations, and thence come
filthy words, and filthy actions. He therefore that feeds his body high, does
plainly and evidently pamper his enemy, but he that beats down his body and
keeps it in subjection, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 9.27. by fasting and
abstinence, takes a right course to mortify the lusts of the Flesh.

5. It Is a shameful abuse of Gods good creatures which are given us for our
use. Would you not think those men exceeding blameworthy, who should take good
and wholesome meat and throw it into the channel or sink, Gluttons by their
great excess do that which is much worse. For they not only abuse Gods good
creatures by their ex^ess and riot, but they thereby hurt their own bodies also.

6. It Is a most ungrateful sin. It carries Gods good provisions over to his
enemy, even to the strengthening of fleshly lusts, and turns them all against
the giver of them. Is it not a horrible disingenuous thing so to provoke and
dishonor God with his own mercies? Pride, Idleness, fullness of Bread, and
hard-heartedness to the poor were the provoking sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16 49.

7. It Is a kind of idolatry to mind the belly inordinately. The Apostle tells
us of some, Phil. 3.19. whose belly was their God. And such persons worship a
craving God that will not let them alone except they serve him.

8. A gluttonous appetite makes our very table become a snare to us, Deuteronomy.
6.11, 12. When thou have eaten and art full, then beware lest thou forget thy
God. How apt are people at a full table to offend with their teeth yea and with
their tongues also. The table of a Glutton is usually a snare not only to his
body but to his soul.

9. It Is a time-wasting sin. Long sitting at meals and feasts how much precious
time does it devour, which should be better employed?

10. It Is a costly expensive sin. It overthrows and wastes many a man's estate.
How great a part of the riches of many Kingdoms are spent in riot, excess and
luxury. God threatens, Prove. 23.20. That the glutton shall come to poverty: And
so it very frequently happens.

11. It hinders mercy and liberality and relief of the poor. For frugality is
the purse-bearer to Charity. The Prodigal Housekeeper is not usually the most
charitable to the poor. True and prudent hospitality is one thing, and prodigal
housekeeping is another. They that spend so much upon their own bellies,
seldom are so charitable to the poor as they might and ought to be.

12. Gluttony is always a great crime, but much more heinous in times of
public calamity, and when the people of God are under great afflictions. See
what God says by the Prophet, Amos 6.1, 4, 5, 6. Woe to them that are at ease
in Zion, who lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches,
and eat the Lambs out of the Flock and Calves out of the stall. That chaunt to
the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of music; that
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they
are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. Observe also what God says by
the Prophet Isaias, Chap. 22. Verse 12.13, 14, And in that day did the Lord God
of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning and to baldness and to girding with
sackcloth, and behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep,
eating flesh and drinking wine, (let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
dye;) And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye dy^, says the Lord.

Lastly. The greatness of this sin may appear in this, that it is so often and
so frequently committed. Gods own people I suppose are not often tempted and
overcome by drunkenness or uncleanness, but let them take heed of Gluttony. For
this sin is apt to steal upon people before they are aware. It Is a sin that is
apt to incorporate it felf with our appetite and desire of eating for the
preservation of our health. Our corrupt nature is as prone to excess in this
kind as any other, and therefore we had need be the more watchful against it.
And so much of the great evil and danger of this Sin.

4. I come now in the last place to prescribe some, helps and remedies against
it.

1. Look upon all your food as given you by God. Receive it as from his hand,
and beg his blessing upon it. And remember the Apostles rule, whether ye eat or
drink or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. And if you have Gods
glory in your eye, it will be a great means to keep you from intemperance in
this kind.

2. Labor to mortify and subdue the irregular inclinations and desires of the
flesh. What a horrible thing is it that a man's heart should be set upon the
pleasing of his belly? They that are true Christians ought to crucify the
flesh with its affections and lusts.

3. Remember how the first sin came into the World by eating. O sin not as our
first Parents did by an inordinate pleasing of your appetite.

4. Check your appetite and resolve, that shall not be satisfied to the full.
Be afraid of sinful excess. The Apostle speaks of some, Jude verse. 12. that
did eat without fear. A man that would be temperate in this kind, must be
watchful over himself, and must exercise some authority over his appetite. For
the belly is a Brute that commonly has its ears stopped to Scripture or reason.

5. Use all sensual delights in subserviency unto as means to their right end,
namely, to make you more thankful, more fit, and more cheerful in the service
of God.

6. Labor to understand well what is most conducing to your health, and let
that be the ordinary rule and measure of your diet both for quantity and
quality. Man in endued with reason as well as appetite; and reason, if we will
listen to it, will tell us that our health is more to be regarded than our
appetite. God allows us that which is most for our health, and forbids us
nothing but that which will hurt us. God would have us temperate, that a
healthful body may be serviceable to our Souls in our Masters work. The common
rule that most people do go by in cating is their appetite. They think they
must eat as they have appetite, and if they could eat more with an appetite and
not be sick after it, they think they have not been guilty of Gluttony and
excess. Mr. Baxter (who is not only a learned Divine but a skilful Physician
also) writing about this sin of Gluttony and the frequency of it [in his cases
of conscience page 378.] Conjectures that most sorts of people do usually
offend herein, and that particularly laboring people do ordinarily eat near a
fourth part more than they need; that Shopkeepers, and persons of easier
Trades near a third part; that voluptuous Gentlemen and their attendants do
often exceed near half; and that the children of such Parents as govern not
their appetites (but let them eat and drink as often and as much as they will)
do usually exceed above half, and thereby lay the foundation of the miseries
and diseases of their whole life after. And therefore he judges that children
should be taught betimes some common and necessary precepts about their diet,
and what tends to health and prolonging their life, and what to sickness and
death; and that these principles should be instilled into them with other moral
precepts, in the books that they first learn. For it is certain that none love
sickness and death, but all love health and life. And therefore those whom the
fear of God does not restrain from this kind of excess, may possibly be
restrained from it through the fear of sickness and death. But alas! few grown
people, much less children, have any considerable knowledge what measure is
best for them to use, but the common though deceitful rule they go by, is their
appetite.

7. Sit not too long at meals. For by that means people are tempted to eat a
little and a little more, and so at last they fall into excess.

8. Do not over persuade and importune others to eat more than they have a mind
to, notwithstanding it is counted so great a piece of civility so to do. We
think them highly culpable who urge people to drink more than is fit for them,
why then should we tempt people to eat more than they judge conducing to their
health?

9. Look upon the practice of the ancient Christians, those great patterns of
Abstinence. They were much in fasting and prayer, and strangers to Gluttony and
excess. Nay among the Heathens themselves we may find some great examples of
temperance in this kind. We read of the Platonic Suppers that were frugal and
learned. They cared not so much to fill the bellies as the minds of their
Guests. Their meat was good and sufficient but their discourse better. We read
also what Socrates said to his friends at his moderate Supper, If ye be
virtuous this will suffice? If ye be not, ye are not worthy of this? And we
read of some famous men of old who to divert and keep them from intemperance in
this kind, used to have some good Book read to them at their Tables, that
minding what was read might make them less mind their appetite. This is
reported particularly of Pomponius Atticus, and Carolus Magnus, and this
custom came afterward into Colleges and Religious houses, and is observed in
some of them at this day.

10. Go sometime into the houses of the Poor, and see what mean sare and
provisions they live upon. The very sight of a poor man's diet now and then,
methinks (in all likelihood) should do a voluptuous Glutton good. Seeing
affects more than hearsay.

11. Yet after all that has been said, take heed of running into the contrary
extreme, place not more Religion in external abstinence and fastings than you
ought to do. Do not think that abstaining from flesh on such and such days,
and glutting your selves with fish or other delightful meats is pleasing to God
or acceptable in his sight. Neither think that abstinence from meats will prove
you holy without abstinence from sin. Where has God required of you that you
must eat no Flesh for forty days together at one time of the year, or for two
or three days in a week? God has indeed enjoined us temperance at all times.
And every one should duly consider his own constitution and temper, and how far
either eating or fasting may be a help and furtherance to him in his duty
toward God, and so (without raising perplexing scruples to himself) make use
of them accordingly.

CHAP. V. Of Drunkenness.
IN treating of this subject, I shall proceed in this method.

1. I shall show what is to be esteemed Drunkenness.

2. What are the causes of it.

3. The heinousness of this sin.

4. Shall answer the vain excuses that persons addicted to this vice do usually
make for themselves,

5. Shall give some remedies and directions against it.

For the First. What is to be esteemed Drunkenness.

Drunkenness is a voluptuous excess in drink to the depravation of reason.
Drunkenness and Gluttony are sins much of the same nature, only there is this
difference. The understanding usually is more hurt and the reason more
disturbed by excess in drink than by excess in meat. Drunkenness does usually
more brutifie a man, and make him more like a beast, than excess in eating
does, and so is a more scandalous sin. And therefore humane Laws have provided
a penalty against Drunkenness, but not against Gluttony. Now Drunkenness in the
largest sense extends both to the affection and to the effect. He is a
Drunkard reputatively and in the sight of God; who would drink to excess if he
had it, and would lie at the Alehouse or Tavern, and drink as others do, but
cannot by reason of his want of money; so that he is not restrained by his
will, Voluntas est homo, nihil aliud sumus nisi voluntates. August.
but by his necessity. And further, you must observe that it is not only the
highest degree of drunkenness that is to be called by that name, but lower
degrees of it also that disturb and disorder the reason and understanding of a
man, may justly so be called. There are several degrees of drunkenness short of
the highest. They that drink beyond what nature or moderate refreshment
require, and spend whole days, or a great part of them at Taverns or
Alehouses at that vile exercise of drinking, though they do not drink
themselves drunk and can bear it and carry it away better than others, yet they
are very culpable in the sight of God. Some men that can bear much drink
without intoxication may be more guilty (in the sight of God) of excess than
others, who by a small quantity upon a surprise are drunk before they are
aware. He that has by drinking disturbed his reason, and disabled and hindered
it from the performance of its proper work and office, is drunken in some
degree; But he that has quite disabled it, is stark drunk. I know it will here
be said that a glass of wine or strong beer moderately taken is many times very
useful to give a man an assistant alacrity in his work and duty, and the
service God requires of him. No doubt a man may lawfully add the refocillation,
refreshment and alacrity to his Spirits which makes him more ready and
cheerful in the duties of his general or particular calling. But the excess is
that which we here speak against, as that which is always to be avoided And so
much of the first particular what drunkenness is.

2. We come now to inquire into the causes of drunkenness. And we shall find
there are many causes of it.

1. An inordinate love unto and an eager appetite after drink, which some have
brought themselves unto by their deboshes and excesses. These persons have so
much of the brute in them, and so little of the man, that their appetite is
quite too hard for their reason. They will tell you (possibly) that they know
they should abstain, but they cannot; and why can they not, namely, for want of
a resolved will. And thus going on in this wicked course, their immoderate
appetite to drink draws them to drink till they are drunk and that drunkenness
causes a praeternatural thirst, and that thirst a new drunkenness, and so
adding drunkenness to hi^st, Deuteronomy. 29.19. They by degrees inslave themselves to
this vice.

2. Love of good fellowship (as they call it) and merry company, where they
drive away all thoughts that favor of sound reason, the fear of God, or care
of their Souls. They love such company where they may talk their pleasure over
their cups, and may laugh and scoff at those that are seriously Religious and
dare not do as they do But alas! the end of such mirth what is it but
heaviness and grief and vexation of spirit. Poor Wretches! Is this the
merriment you so much covet and delight in? keep it to your selves. No wise or
good man envies you or would be your Partner in it upon any terms. Were I your
enemy, I would not wish you so much harm and misery as you voluntarily choose
for your selves.

3. Slight thoughts of this sin, not considering that it is one of the black
list which excludes out of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And yet
notwithstanding this dreadful sentence denounced by God in his holy word
against this sin, there are some so vile and miserably depraved, as to think it
a piece of bravery to drink stoutly and a sign of a strong brain to be able to
bear much drink, and a great conquest over another man to drink him down, not
considering in the mean time that while they conquer others in this vile manner
at their Cups, they themselves are shamefully conquered and overcome by the
Devil.

4. Not considering nor understanding the extreme hurt that this kind of excess
does unto their bodies. They apprehend not how much it spoils the temper of
their stomachs, ruins their health, and ordinarily shortens their lives.

5. Another great cause of drunkenness is idleness. They that are of an idle
sloathful temper, and love not to take pains in an honest calling, usually seek
out idle companions like themselves, and so (that they may drive away the time
as they call it) they go a potting together.

6. Another very frequent cause of drunkenness is that vile custom of drinking
Healths and constraining others to pledge them, which constrains many a man to
drink more than he should. There are many reasons may be alleged against this
evil custom. (1.) To urge a Health is a great and unsufferable usurpation
Peccatum est provocare ad aequales Calices, nec fas est respondere, Lessius de
Justitia and jure. Lib. 4. c. 3.
upon another. Why may not another enjoin me to eat as much and as big pieces
and portions as he eats as well as enjoin me to drink Una salus sanis nullam
potare salutem. Non est in pota vera salute salus.
as full bowls and as many glasses as he drinks? It Is very likely that I can
neither eat nor drink so much as he. And what authority has he over me to
compel me to it? In Ahasuerus's feast, ( Hester 1.8.) none was to be compelled
to drink more or oftener than it pleased him, and shall we (that profess our
selves Christians) be worse than civil Pagans? (2.) It Is unreasonable that my
health (and consequently my life) should be at the mercy of another man, which
it must needs be if he may compel me to drink so much as will destroy my
health, as is frequently done. How many have gotten a great fit of sickness
(and some their death) by one drunken bout? And besides, If I to comply with
another drunken humor (who begins an health) should drink so much as to make
may self sick, besure he will neither feel my pains nor pay my Physician nor
answer to God for my sin. (3.) We ought not to encourage others to drink more
than is fit, as the custom of pledging Healths manifestly does. Possibly
another would not have pledged the healths that went about if he had seen me
stick at it, and not to have done it before him. My example may in all
likelihood have induced him the rather to do it. And why should I be accessory
to draw another man into intemperance? And possibly had I stoutly refused it,
it might have prevented the urging of any more healths at that time, and so I
might have prevented a great deal of evil. And further, why should I encourage
such a vile custom as makes it a crime and an high offense against civility
and good manners to refuse a health, when I have so much reason to do it.
Surely all manifest occasions and provocations to sin ought to be avoided, as
the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, but rather reprove them. It Is notoriously known that healthing is
a frequent occasion of drunkenness, and not of that only, but of quarrelling,
fighting and sometimes of murder also. And why should I encourage such a
custom which is the occasion of so much mischief? I do not say it is simply
evil in it self to drink a glass of wine, or keep off my hat whilst another is
remembered. But by accident it may be evil, namely, if I thereby encourage an
evil custom (which is a great occasion of drunkenness) and give scandal and
offense to such who (upon that account) have a great aversation to it. Yet so
it may happen that this accident may be outweighed and overballanced by a
greater accident, namely, if I see my life in apparent danger if I refuse it.
And any other accident which will really outweigh the former hurtful accident
may make it lawful. As in some cases and companies the offense given by denying
it may possibly be such as will do more hurt far than the yielding, to it would
do. As in that case when a man's loyalty to the King is laid upon it, (though I
confess it is a very unreasonable thing to make that a Test of Loyalty which
many good men and very faithful and loyal to the King do scruple, and which his
Majesty himself in his first Proclamation after his return declared against)
yet (I say) if such a thing should happen, then Christian Prudence must be the
present decider of the case, by considering whether more good or evil be like
to ensue thereupon, and must determine accordingly. To be bare when others lay
the honor of our superiors upon it, is a ceremony which on the foresaid
reasons may be complied with. But when to avoid a greater evil, we are
extraordinarily put on any such ceremony, it is fit we should add some such
words as may declare upon what account we do it, that so we may prevent scandal
and offense. But the best way of all is to avoid (as much as possibly we can)
such company as are like to put us upon these scruples and inconveniences, And
so much of the causes of drunkenness.

3. I come now to show the heinousness of this sin which will the better appear
to us if we consider these following Particulars.

1. It Is a high provoking offense against God who has declared his high
displeasure against it in his holy word. Let drunkards read these places and
tremble, Isa. 5.11, 22. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning that
they may follow strong drink, that continue until night till wine inflame them.
Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine and men of strength to mingle strong
drink, Habakkuk 2.15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that puts
his bottle to him, and makes him drunken, that he may look on his nakedness.
Isay. 28.1. Woe to the Crown of Pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, etc. and Verse
7. They have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way;
the Priest and the Prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed
up of wine they are out of the way terough strong drink, they err in vision,
they stumble in judgment. Prove. 20.1. Wine is a mocker and strong drink is
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. Prove. 23.29, 30, 31, 32.
Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has babbling? Who has
wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at the
wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Look not thou upon the wine when it is
red, when it gives its color in the cup, when it moves it self aright. At
the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Addar, Luke 21.34. Take
heed to your selves l^st at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. Romans 13.13, 14. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

2. It greatly hurts the mind, the Prophet tells us, Hos. 4.11. that Whoredom
and Wine, and new Wine take away the heart, that is, they besot the
understanding. O what a wonder of sottishness and stupidity is an habitual
drunkard, whose filthy mind closes with sin and vanity, but is wholly averse to
any thing that is wise and holy, such a frame of mind renders a man unfit for
prayer, reading, meditating, or any good and religious duty. And such persons
are usually very foolish also in ordering their very worldly affairs and
concerns.

3. It greatly hurts the body. Excess causes indigestion, and indigestion
causes crudities, and crudities are the cause of most diseases. Hence proceed
vicious humors, and a multitude of sicknesses and distempers. Gout, Dropsy,
Stone, Apoplexy, and many times Consumption are the fruits of this kind of
excess. And therefore (O Drunkard) if thou art so sottish as not to fear Hell;
yet methinks the fear of the Gout or Dropsy, Consumption or Apoplexy should
deter thee from this vice.

4. It unfits and disables a man not only for the service of God but the duties
of his particular calling. Should we take it well to have our horse or beast
which we (in kindness) lent to our neighbor for his use and benefit, to be
lamed and spoiled by him, and made unfit for our service? Why then should
thou unfit and disable thy self to serve God in thy particular calling? who
gave thee all thy faculties and abilities? have we not heard it often said of
some men that they were very able and useful in their profession till they fell
to that vile trade of drinking and company-keeping, and since that they are
become mere sots and good for nothing.

5. It Is a great wast and mispence of Gods good creatures. O drunkard, thou
vilely and basely consumest the good creatures of God, that are given thee for
thy necessity refreshment and comfort, and not to abuse to luxury. Wine was
given to cheer the heart and not to oppress it, to comfort the stomach and not
to load it. There is oftentimes more drink sinfully spent at one mad revelling
meeting than would maintain several poor families many weeks or months. When
our Savior at the marriage at Cana turned water into wine that the Feast might
be furnished with sufficient plenty, Joh. 2.7. Surely he did not intend that
they should abuse that plenty. Indeed there may be a more free and liberal use
of the creature at one time than at another, provided it exceed not the bounds
of sobriety. Wine was given to make glad the heart of man. Psalm. 104.15. And so
far as it delights and refreshes us and more fits us for our duty, we may
make use of it. Give strong drink unto them that are ready to perish, and wine
to those that be of heavy hearts says the wise man, Prove. 31.6, 7. Thus and no
otherwise (I suppose) it is said of Joseph's brethren that they drank and were
merry. Primum poculum necessitatis and sanitatis; secundum voluptatis and
hiloritatis; tertium ebrietatis and insaniae. Ancharsis.
Genesis 43.34.

6. It occasions the wast of a great deal of precious time which should be
better employed. Those that are given to drinking and company-keeping, how many
days and nights (or at least great part of them) do they spend in that wicked
way? And what a sad account will such persons have to give to God of their time
so spent?

7. It blots the name and brings a stain and reproach upon it. Indeed it is not
only a dishonor to the Christian profession, but a shame to even humane
nature. There is hardly a more ugly loathsome sight in the World than to see a
reeling, staggering, staring, showing Drunkard. O drunkard! thou destroyest thy
reason, Nihil aliud est Ebrietas, quam voluntaria insania. Sen.
which is the glory of thy nature, and the natural part of Gods image in thy
mind. Thou do plainly dehominate and unman thy self Involuntary madness, I
confess, deserves pity and compassion, but voluntary madness the severest
scourging. Non homo, sed amphora said one of drunken Bonasus. He is not a man,
but a barrel. They say in Spain a drunkard is not allowed for a witness against
any man, as being not a credible person, or a man whose testimony is to be
valued. Regard therefore thy reputation if thou will not regard thy Soul.

8. It horribly consumes and wastes the estate and hinders charity to the poor.
He that prodigally spends his money in wine, or strong drink, cannot relieve
the poor as he ought to do. He that loves wine (says Solomon, Prove. 21.17.)
Shall not be rich, that is, he that loves it inordinately, is like to bring
himself thereby speedily to poverty. O wretched drunkards! the woeful tears and
pitiful tears and pitiful complaints of your poor neighbors cannot many times
wring one penny from you, but at Taverns and Alehouses you can spend without
measure, and there be ready in bravery to contend who shall pay most.

9. It Is a great injury to a family, not only by reason of the great expense it
occasions, but by the infectiousness of the example. O drunkard! thy example
may infect many others in thy family, and possibly in the neighborhood.
Would thou have thy Wife, Children, and Servants to be drunkards? Surely if
all these were given to this vile vice, thy house would be a very Bedlam, nay
worse. For in Bedlam there are some wise and discreet persons appointed to
govern those that are mad. But if thou (who art the head of thy Family) be a
drunkard, who shall govern thy mad family if they be all like to thy self?

10. Drunkenness is usually the cause of many other sins. When the drink is in,
we use to say, the wit is out, what horrid sins does the Devil then tempt men
to commit? drunkenness usually inflames the mind with anger and rage. It
teaches the tongue to swear, curse, rail, revile and slander and to deride
Godliness and those that are good. When the head is full of vapors, the tongue
is usually full of vanity and lewd discourse. From drunkenness usually proceeds
lust, filthiness, and uncleanness. Nunquam ebrium putabo castum. Hieron.
Nay it makes thieves by breeding necessity, and then emboldning to villainy to
supply that necessity. The reason why Mahomet so severely prohibited his
Disciples the use of wine (they say) was this. Being once invited to dinner by
a friend of his, in his way thither he called at a house where (as it happened)
there was that day a Wedding. Being courteously invited to come in, he found
the company in a very gay humor, full of love and kindness one to another, and
caressing one another in the most obliging manner. Which pleasing humor he
looked upon as the effect of the cheerful spirit of the wine that was stirring
among them, and so blessed it as a sacred thing, and departed. In the evening
(calling again at at the same house in his return) and expecting to find the
love and kindness he had before observed to be augmented; quite contrary, he
found the house full of broils and noise, full of fighting, quarrelling and all
confusion. The guests instead of embracing were now throwing the Pots at one
another heads. This he perceiving to be the effect of the wine taken in
excess, he changed his former blessing into a curse, and for ever after made it
Haram or a cursed thing for any of his Disciples to drink wine. But Mahomet
should have considered that ab abuti ad non uti, non valet consequentia. The
abuse of a lawful thing is no good argument against the use of it.

11. Consider what a dreadful woe is denounced against such persons as purposely
and designedly strive to make others drunk? How many Prophets do thunder out
their woe against it? See Hab. 2.15, 16. Esaias. 5.22. Joh. 1.5. Certainly that
man buys his merriment at a very dear rate that takes it with such a woe. O
what an horrible impiety is it for any one to rejoice in another man's sin,
whereby he is laid open and exposed to Gods fearful Judgments? O what monsters
are they that can take pleasure in seeing the drunkenness of their neighbors,
and make themselves sport in beholding their nakedness? Surely there is not a
greater sign of hardness of heart than for a man to make his own or another
man's sin the matter of his glory and boasting, or the matter of his joy and
merriment. God bless me and all my friends from such pleasures that have so
dreadful a woe and curse annexed to them.

12. Consider that drunkenness is often attended with dreadful judgments in
this life. We read that Amnon was murdered by his Brother Absaloms command,
when his heart was merry with wine. 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
Nabal was struck dead by God shortly after his drunkenness. 1 Samuel 36.38. Elah
King of Israel was murdered when he was drinking himself drunk. 1 Kings 16.9,
10.
Belshazzar King of Babylon was slain that very night, when they had been
carousing themselves in the vessels of the Temple. Thou see (O drunkard) that
God spared not Kings themselves in their drunkenness, and think thou that he
will spare thee? certainly; a drunkard puts himself in the very way of Gods
vengeance. It Is very observable what a strange kind of punishment God appointed
for incorrigible drunkards and gluttons. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. If a man have
a stubborn and rebellious Son which will not obey the voice of his Father or
the voice his Mother, and that when they have chastned him will not hearken
unto them. Then shall his Father and Mother lay hold on him, and bring him out
unto the elders of his City and unto the gate of his place. And they shall say
unto the Elders of his City, this our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will
not obey our voice, he is a glutton and a drunkard. And all the men of his City
shall stone him with stones, that he dye, so shall thou put evil away from
among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Surely these were heinous crimes
in Gods account, when Parents themselves were to bring forth their own Son (who
was guilty of these crimes if they could not reclaim him) to have him put to
death by the Magistrate. And you see further that youth was no excuse for these
crimes, whatever may by corrupt men be pretended.

13. It is one of those sins that draw down wrath upon a Nation, especially
when it grows to be a general and epidemical vice. And alas, among us what City
or Town or Village is there, what Market or Meeting or Fair that is not defiled
with drunkenness? and when sin grows National it usually brings down National
Judgments. But It Is most sad of all when persons of great quality and high
place are addicted to this vice. When the Priest Ebrietas in plebeio est
simplex peccatum, in sacerdote multiplex, quia multos offendit, and secum in
eandem foveam, and ruinam tra^it. A. Lapid.
and the Prophet shall err through wine, Isa. 28.7. and shall say, come let us
fill our selves with strong drink. Isa. 56.12.

14. It Is a sin that is very often attended with hardness of heart and final
impenitence. How few habitual drunkards have we known to reform, and abandon
their former wicked ways? Such drunkards are usually desperate incorrigible
and impudent in their sins. Now as perseverance in piety and godliness (in
spite of all opposition) is a very high pitch of goodness, so perseverance in
wickedness (in spite of all good counsel) is the height of impiety.

15. Drunkenness exposes a man to that desperate danger of dying drunk. Think
with thy self (O drunkard) what would become of thee if thou should die in a
drunken fit? Would not thy case be very dangerous if not desperate. This has
been the case of many a drunkard, and it may be thy case for ought thou
know. However if thou go on in this course of drinking and
company-keeping, thou will die a drunkard though thou dyest not drunk.

17. Lastly, this sin (if continued in) exposes a man to eternal misery. The
Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 6.10. No drunkard (that is no impenitent drunkard)
shall enter into Gods Kingdom, See also Gal. 5.21. Drunkards may scoff at their
faithful admonishers and reprovers and brazen it out here, but in the other
world they shall be sure to pay dear for it. Dives had his full Cups here, but
there not one drop to cool his tongue. And so much of the heinousness of this
sin.

4. I come now to speak to the vain excuses, that those Improbitas praetextu
nunquam care^. Arist.
who are addicted to this vice do usually make for themselves.

1. They will pretend that drinking and company-keeping maintains kindness and
friendship and love among neighbors. To this I answer, can any rational man
imagine that the helping to destroy the soul, the body, the estate, the
good-name, the family of their neighbor is any argument of kindness to him?
Surely such persons as draw one another into such courses are the greatest
enemies to one another imaginable.

2. They will allege that those holy men Noah and Lot fell into this sin. I
answer, Noah fell into it but once, and that (as it seems) upon ignorance and
surprise, not knowing at first the property, quality and operation of the wine,
Genesis 9.20.21.
which was the fruit of the Vineyard he himself had planted. And possibly he
was the more easily overtaken, as being over-joyed when he tasted such
excellent fruits of his own labors, and allowing himself a little more freedom
in drinking thereof than (in all likelihood) he would have done, had he known
the power and virtue of the wine. And accordingly we do not find that he was
ever overtaken so again. As for Lot indeed we read that he was twice overtaken,
but both times by the persuasion of his own Daughters Genesis 19.33.35.
to which he was (possibly) the more ready to give ear, because their hearts
being oppressed with grief for the destruction of Sodom, the loss of their
goods and sudden death of his wife, he thought they might take a little more
liberty in the use of wine at that time for their comfort and refreshment, and
supporting their spirits under such great and sore afflictions. And we know
that they that venture to go near the brink do sometimes fall into the water.
So that however those holy men were overtaken once or twice, yet they were no
drunkards. They fell into this sin by surprise; it was not their usual
practice. And these examples no more justify those who live in this vice than
Peter's once denying his Lord and Master excuses those who make a total and
final Apostasy from him. The spirit of God has purposely recorded the Sunt
cavendi, non cadendi exempla
slips of these holy men, to show us how frail our nature is, and to caution us
not to presume upon our own strength, but to be the more watchful; and also to
show us that they who fall through infirmity into the like sins, should not
despair of Gods mercy in Christ, if they seriously repent of them and forsake
them. No Pilot in his wits when he sees Sea-marks purposely set up to give
warning of rocks, sands, or shelves (upon which others have made Shipwreck)
will take occasion thereby to run his Ship upon them, but rather will employ
all his care and skill to avoid them, that he may escape the like danger. And
this is the use we should make of these examples.

3. They say they do it to drive away care and trouble of mind and melancholy.
For answer to this, I desire first to know what cares and troubles they are
they desire thus to drive away. Perhaps they are some checks and rebukes of
their consciciences for their sins. If so, they may possibly by such
divertisements stop the mouths of their consciences for the present, but they
will roar louder upon them hereafter. It were a thousand times better for them
to go alone than into such wild company, and to think soberly of their
condition, and of their misery, and the true way of coming out of it. To go
into merry and vain company is but a bad remedy to drive away melancholy or to
stop the mouth of an accusing conscience. We may say to such persons, as
Solomon does Eccles. 2.2. I said of laughter it is mad, and of mirth what does
it? And Chap. 7. Verse 4. The heart of the wise man is in the house of
mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house mirth. If we saw a mad man
whoop and hollow and make a great noise, we should not envy but pity such
mirth. The vain and foolish merriment of wicked company is that which a sober
and serious mind can never be pleased with. And therefore they that seek such
company to divert and drive away their melancholy, take the direct way to
increase it. Now melancholy is of two sorts, either such as arises from the
mind or such as arises from the body. As for that which arises from the mind,
the best way to drive it away is to clear the Soul of all guilt by true
repentance and flying to the blood of Christ for pardon. For they are happy
(and they only) whose sins are forgiven and whose iniquities are covered, and
to whom God will not impute transgression. Secret and fervent prayer also to
God (which gives vent to the mind and so eases it) is an excellent remedy in
this case. To which I may add the imparting the troubles of our mind (if they
be urgent) to some wise and faithful friend, and craving his advice and counsel
as a good way and means also to obtain ease. But if the Melancholy arise from
the body by reason of darksome fumes and vapors it casts up into the mind, some
proper Physic is then requisite, and the moderate use of such things as may
exhilerate the spirits. Yea, business and employment is a great remedy in this
case. For standing waters stagnate and gather mud, whereas running waters are
clear and sweet. Good company also (I mean of wise and sober Christians) is a
great help against this malady. And striving to be cheerful (in an innocent and
inoffensive manner, that our pectorals may be shaken and fumes dispersed) is of
great use likewise. But as for going to the Alehouse or Tavern (and consorting
with such company as usually frequent those places) in my opinion it is far
from being a proper remedy for Melancholy, but ordinarily does more increase
it, especially when people come to reflect how greatly God has been dishonored
and their souls hurt by such meetings.

4. They say they do it to pass away the time. Damna fleo rerum, sed plus fleo
damna dierum.
Blind wretches! Are you so near Eternity, and know not how better to improve
your time? Can you sit tippling and prating away your precious time over your
Pots, when the mudwalls of your bodies are daily crumbling down, and when you
know not how soon you may be summoned to appear before Gods dreadful Tribunal?
But it may be you will say you are Gentlemen, and so have more time and leisure
at your own disposal than other men have, who must earn their bread before they
eat it. But hark you in your ears. Where there is much leisure from worldly
business, God expects more time should be spent and employed on the soul, and
not spent in idle merriment and sinful jollity.

5. Some will pretend their heads are very weak and a little overturns them,
and so they hope they are the more excusable. I answer, they that know their
own weakness should be more especially watchful over themselves, and take heed
of such liquors, and such company that may endanger them. If you know that less
poison will kill you than another man, you should be the more fearful of it,
and shun it with greater care, and not with a fool-hardiness encourage your
self to take it. And so you should do in this case.

6. Others will say, that though they drink much, yet they can bear it well
away, their heads are strong, they seldom are drunk. I would advise such
persons seriously to consider of that place beforementioned, Isa. 5.22. Woe
unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong
drink. Let such strong-braind drunkards consider what the prudent Lord Burley
said in his advice to his Son. That to carry much drink is a commendation
fitter for a Brewers horse than for a Gentleman.

7. Some will say, They shall be jeered and laughed at, if they should be so
precise as not to do as others do. I would advise such persons to consider what
the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ
happy are ye. To be reproached for obedience to any of Christ's commands is to
be reproached for his name. And shall the reproaches of vile and wicked men
more terrify us than the wrath and displeasure of God? A good name indeed is
highly to be valued. But is that a good name to be commended and praised by
drunkards and such lewd livers? A good name is to be well-reported of among
wise and good men. Therefore if you fear reproach, fear drunkenness and avoid
company-keeping which will make you hear ill among such as are wise and sober.
Remember what our Savior says, Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me
and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy
Angels. I suppose there are none but would be glad to be owned by Christ at
that day. Therefore let us not be ashamed to own his ways, and to own our
selves for his Disciples here. And so much by way of answer to the vain
pretenses and excuses that people make for continuing in this sin.

5. I come now in the last place to give some remedies and directions against
this vice.

1. If thou have before been guilty of this sin, humble thy soul to God by deep
and serious repentance, and fly to the blood of Christ for thy pardon. True
repentance for sins past, is a good means to preserve us from them for the time
to come.

2. If thou find company-keeping to be a strong temptation to thee,
earnestly beg grace of God to help thee to resist that temptation, and to keep
thee from delighting in such company among whom thy soul is in so much danger.

3. Awaken thy reason and understanding to consider of the manifold evils of
this sin. Ask thy self whether the displeasure of God, the brutifying thy self,
the blotting thy name, the wasting of thy estate, the destroying of thy health,
the corrupting of thy Family, the damning of thy Soul are not things that ought
to be considered of by thee? Weigh in the balance of reason how much the joys
of a good conscience and the favor of God outweigh the sottish mirth of
good-fellows.

4. Shun the occasions of this vice and (as much as thou can) keep off from
the places and houses where such drinking companions use to meet. Be not their
companion in sin, lest thou be their companion in hell. Declare thy fixed
resolution (by the assistance of Grace) of living soberly, that so thy old
companions may be discouraged from assaulting or tempting of thee at any time.
Never mind either the persuasions or reproaches of such vile and profligate
persons.

5. Send to thy former drinking companions and advise them to leave off those
evil ways. Think with thy self how blessed a thing it is to convert a sinner
from the error of his way, and to save a soul from death and eternal misery.
Regard not their frowns or scorns or reproaches, but labor to do them good
even against their wills, and thy reward will be with the Lord.

6. Think how much more joy and comfort there is in sobriety than there can be
in drunkenness. Consider with thy self whether sober and temperate persons do
not live not only an honester and safer, but a more comfortable and pleasing
life than Drunkards do? They have none of those sour belchings and vomitings,
none of that preternatural thirst and eager desire after drink that drunkards
have. Certainly drunkenness carries its own punishment with it, and temperance
its joy and comfort.

7. Consider what a strange difference there is between a sober man and a
drunkard. Look upon a sober man, how calm is his mind? how wise are his words?
how regular and amiable is his conversation? how is he reverenced and respected
by all that are wise and scrious? Then look upon a drunkard, how ugly and ill
favored a creature is he, and how unlike a man of reason and understanding? O
wholesome Temperance! how much better art thou than loathsome debauchery? what a
loveliness and beauty is there in sobriety? how sweetly does a sober man enjoy
himself? how is he honored and esteemed by others? whereas a drunkard is the
mark of common obloquie and reproach.

8. Think of that cup of trembling that shall be put into the hands of
drunkards to drink hereafter. Consider how drunkards for their full cups here
must drink the Cup of Gods wrath unmixed in the other life, and for their short
pleasures here must loose the pleasures that are at Gods right hand for
evermore.

Lastly, Understand well thy own measure, and let no man force thee to exceed
it. Think of that excellent advice of the learned and pious Mr. Herbert in his
Church Porch.

Drink not the third glass, which thou can not tame
When once it is within thee, but before
May rule it as thou list, and pour the shame
Which it would pour on thee, upon the floor.
It is most just to throw that on the ground
Which would throw me there if I keep the round.
He that is drunken may his mother kill,
Big with his Sister, he has lost the reins,
Is outlawed by himself: all kind of ill
Did with his liquor slide into his veins.
The Drunkard forfeits man, and does divest
All worldly right, save what he has by beast.
Shall I to please another wine-sprung mind,
Loose all mine own? God has given me a measure
Short of his can, and body: must I find
A pain in that, wherein he finds a pleasure?
Stay at the third glass, if thou loose thy hold
Then thou art modest, and the wine grows bold.
If Reason move not Gallants, quit the Room
(All in a Shipwreck shift their several way)
Let not a common ruin thee intomb;
Be not a Beast in courtesy; but stay,
Stay at the third cup, or forgo the place.
Wine above all things does Gods stamp deface.
I shall conclude all with this earnest prayer to God that he would please of
his infinite mercy timely to awaken the hearts of all those who are addicted to
sin, that by a speedy and serious repentance and forsaking of it they may
escape that dreadful wrath, which will be the portion of impenitent and
unreformed Drunkards.

CHAP. VI. Of Uncleanness.
THE Nature of man is so vile and corrupt and so prone to this sin of
Uncleanness, that we had need use all care and caution lest while we are
writing against it, and endeavoring to beat it down, we should any way stir it
up and excite it. In treating therefore of this Subject, I shall proceed in
this method.

1. I shall show the odiousness and heinousness of this sin, and what great
reasons we have to abhor it.

2. Shall answer the vain excuses that men who are addicted to this sin do
usually make for themselves.

3. Shall give some directions and prescribe some remedies against it.

For the Fitst. The Odiousness and heinousness of this sin may appear to us, if
we consider how strictly God has forbidden it in his holy word, and how
severely he has declared his displeasure against it. And that man that is not
awed by the declared will of his Creator, I know not what will awe him. It Is in
vain to think to convince a man of the evil and danger of any sin by other
arguments, whom the express word and declared will of God cannot convince. I
shall therefore set before you what God both in the old and new Testament
declares concerning this sin, and then leave every one to judge whether it be
not our duty to abhor it, and with all care and conscience to keep our selves
from it. Read therefore and well consider these following Scriptures. Genesis
20.3. And God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, behold,
thou art but a dead man for the woman which thou have taken, for she is a man's
wife.

Genesis 26.10. And Abimelech said, what is this thou have done unto us? one of
the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou should have
brought guiltiness upon us.

Genesis 38.24. And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told
Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law has played the Harlot, and also behold
she is with child by whoredom; and Judah said, bring her forth and let her be
burnt. Observe these things. happened before the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai.


Exodus 20.14. Thou shall not commit adultery.

Lev. 18.20. Thou shall not lie carnally with thy neighbors wife, to defile
thy self with her.

V. 23. Neither shall thou lie with any beast to defile thy self therewith,
neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto, it is
confusion. V. 24. Defile not your selves in any of these things: for in all
these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you. V. 25. And the Land
is defiled; therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the Land it
self vomiteth out her inhabitants. Therefore commit not any of these
abominations. V. 28. That the Land spue not you out also, when ye defile it; as
it spued out the Nations that were before you.

Lev. 20.10. And the man that commits adultery with another man's wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.

Deuteronomy. 22.22. If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then
they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and the
woman. So shall thou put away evil from Israel.

Verse 23. If a damsel that is a Virgin be betrothed to an husband, and a man
find her in the City, and lie with her,

V. 24. Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of the City, and ye
shall stone them with stones that they die, the damsel because she cried not
out, being in the City, and the man because he has humbled his neighbors
wife. So shall thou put away evil from among you.

Job 24.15. The eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, no eye
shall see me, and disguises his face.

Prove. 2.16. When wisdom enters into thine heart it shall preserve thee from
the strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with her words. V.
17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth and forgets the Covenant of her
God. V. 18. For her house inclines to death, and her paths to the dead. V. 19.
None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life.

Prove. 5.3. For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and her
mouth is smoother than oil.

Ver. 4. But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two edged sword. V. 5.
Her feet go down to death, her steps take hold on hell. V. 8. ^emove thy way
far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house. V. 9. L^st thou give
thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel. V. 11. And thou mourn
at last, when thy flesh and thy ^^^y are consumed. V. 12. And say, how have I
hated instruction and my heart despised reproof. V. 20. And why will thou my
Son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger.

Prove. 6.23. For the commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light.

V. 24. To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a
strange woman. V. 25. Lust not after her beauty inthine heart, neither let her
take thee with her eyelids. V. 26. For by means of a whorish woman a man is
brought to a piece of bread, and the adulteress will hunt for the precious
life. V. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be burnt?

V. 28. Can one go upon hot coals and his feet not be burnt? V. 29. So he that
goes in to his neighbors wife, whosoever touches her shall not be innocent.
V. 32. But whosoever commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding, he
that does it destroys his own soul. V. 33. A wound, and dishonor shall he
get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.

Prove. 7 5. My Son keep my words, that they may keep thee from the strange
woman, from the stranger which flattereth with her words.

V. 6. F^^ at the window of my house I looked through my casement. V. 7. And
beheld among the simple ones, a young man void of understanding. V. 8. Passing
through the streets, near her corner, and he went the way to her house. V. 9.
In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night. V. 10. And
behold there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot and subtle of heart.
V. 11. She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house. V. 12. Now is
she without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner. V. 13. So
she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him. V. 14.
I have Peace Offerings with me, this day have I paid my vows. V. 15. Therefore
came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee.

Verse 16. I have decked my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved works,
with fine linen of Egypt.

Verse 17. I have perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon.

Verse 18. Come let us take our fill of love until the morning, let us solace
our selves with love.

Verse 21. So with her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lisp she forced him.

Verse 22. He goes with her strait-way, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, as a
fool to the correction of the stocks.

Verse 23. Till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the
snare, and knows not that it is for his life.

Verse 27. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.

Prove. 9.1. A f ^lish woman sits at the door of her house to call in
passengers

Verse 16, ^hoso is simple let him turn in hither, and as for him that wants
understanding she says unto him.

V. 17. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

Verse 18. But he knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests are
in the depths of hell.

Prove. 22.14. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit, he that is abhorred
of the Lord shall fall therein.

Prove. 23.27. A whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit.
Verse 28. She lies in wait as for a prey, and increases the transgressors
among men.

Prove. 29.3. He that keeps company with Harlots spends his substance.

Prove. 30.20. Such is the way of an adulterous woman, she eats and wipeth her
mouth, and says she has done no wickedness.

Eccles. 7.26. And I find more bitter than death, a woman whose heart is snares
and nets, and her hands as bands, whosoever pleases God shall escape her, but the
sinner shall be taken by her.

Jer. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me and
sworn by them that are no Gods, when I fed them to the full, then they
committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the Harlots houses.

Verse 8. They were as fed horses in the morning, ever one neigheth after his
neighbors wife.

Verse 9. Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord, and shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

Jer. 29.23. Because they committed villainy in Israel, and have committed
adultery with their neighbors wives, and have spoken lying words in my name
(which I have not commanded them) even I am a witness against them, says the
Lord.

Ezekiel. 16.38. And I will judge thee as women that break wedlock and shed blood
are judged, and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.

Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and wine, and new wine take away the heart.

Mal. 3.5. And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, and the
widow and the fatherless, that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear
not me, says the Lord of Hosts.

Mat. 5.27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, thou shall not
commit adultery.

Verse 28. But I say unto you whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her,
he has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Mat. 19.17. Jesus said unto him, if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments, viz. thou shall do no murder, thou shall not commit adultery,
etc.

Acts 15 20, 29. But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions
of Idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood. From
which if they keep themselves, they shall do well. Romans 1.28. And even as they
did not like to retain God in their knowlede. God gave them over to a reprobate
mind and to do those things which are not convenient, Verse 29. Being filled
with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness,
etc.

1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God, be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,

Verse 10. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

1 Cor. 7. v. 2. To avoid fornication let every one have his own wife, and
every woman her own husband.

Verse 19. But if they cannot contain let them marry, for it is better to marry
than to burn.

1 Cor. 10.8. Neither let us commit fornication as some of them committed, and
fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, V. 10. Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, V. 21. Envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like, of the which I tell you now,
as I have told you in times past, that they who do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God.

Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication, and all uncleanness or covetousness let it not be
once named amongst you, as becomes Saints.

Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence and
covetousness which is Idolatry. For which things sake the wrath of God comes
on the children of disobedience.

1 These. 4.3. For this is the will of God even your sanctification, that ye
should abstain from fornication. V. 4. That every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honor. V. 5. Not in the lust of
concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God.

Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

1 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptations, and
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. V. 10. But
chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, etc. V. 14.
Having eyes full of adultery, etc.

Judge. v. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them in like
manner, giving themselves over to fornication and going after strange flesh,
are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers,
and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters and all liars shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is the second
death.

Rev. 22.15. For without are Dogs and Sorcerers, and whoremongers and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

2. This sin wherever it is found and continued in, is a sign and mark of a man
whom God hates, Prove. 22.14. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit, and
he that is abhorred of God shall fall therein; that is, he whom God is highly
offended with for some former wickedness shall (in a just way of punishment) be
delivered up to this ruining sin.

3. God declares that he himself will judge those that commit this sin, Heb.
13.4. Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. God will judge all other
sinners, but the Apostle seems to intimate that God will judge these in an
especial manner. (1.) Because this sin being usually committed in secret, man
cannot so easily come to the knowledge of it, nor can he prove it by sufficient
witnesses. (2.) Many great and potent men are oftentimes guilty of this sin,
whom ordinary Magistrates either cannot or dare not, or (through remisness)
will not meddle with. Therefore God will take the matter into his own hands,
and he himself will judge it. And it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hand
of the living God. Crimes among men are oftentimes extenuated by reason of the
greatness of the Person that commits them. But God will judge every man
according to his works.

4. It Is a sin that is usually attended with hardness of heart, and very often
with final impenitence. When once men have so far debauched their consciences,
that Adultery and Fornication seem small matters to them, they are seldom
recovered. By frequent committing this sin they give their consciences such a
dose of Opium, that the lowdest threatenings of Gods word cannot awaken them.
The Prophet tells us, Hos. 4.11. that whoredom, wine, and new wine takes away
the heart, that is, besot the understanding. Terrible are those words, Prove.
2.18.19. The house of the strange woman inclines unto death, and her paths
unto the dead. None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of
the paths of life. O the extreme hazard and danger, that all Adulterers, and
Fornicators expose their precious souls unto for a short pleasure! Travelers
Doctor Browns travels into Germany. p. 111.
tell us that at Presburg, Metz, and some other places in Germany they have a
strange way of executing capital offenders, which is this. They have an Engine
made in the form of, and finely dressed up, like a young maid or Lady with her
hands before her. The malefactor being brought to the place of execution
salutes her first, and then retires. But at his second salute she opens her
hands and cuts his heart asunder. Methinks this is a notable emblem and
representation of the horrible danger that adulterers expose themselves unto by
their lascivious embraces. Cito praeterit quod delectat and permanet sine fine
quod cruciat. Aug.
Which if they did but duly consider beforehand, they would as much tremble to
venture on them, as the poor condemned Malefactor does to make his second
salute to the fatal Engine.

5. Adultery Adulterium quasi ad alterius thorum accessus.
is one of the greatest plagues imaginable to private families. For thereby a
spurious bastardly brood is brought in to inherit and share the estate instead
of a legitimate issue. Like as the Cuckoo lays her filthy eggs in another
birds nest, making it to hatch and nourish them as if it were its own
offspring. So that this sin usually breeds dismal confusion and fatal jars and
strifes in those miserable Families where it is found.

6. It Is a great mischief to the Church. For by Lawful Wedlock among
Christians, a seed foederally holy is brought forth; but by this sin a spurious
and unclean brood.

7. It Is a sin that defiles a Land and provokes God to send down most heavy
judgments upon it. We read that the Land of Canaan (where Israel dwelt) spewed
out the Nations that were before them, for their uncleanness, Lev. 18.27, 28.
And therefore every honest person should have a great zeal for chastity, and an
utter abhorrence and indignation against uncleanness, as that which is a ruiner
of a Nation, and a mischief to the community by drawing down Gods Judgments
upon it.

8. It Is a sin that exceedingly blots the name. A Learned man writing of a
great Prince who was also a great Captain, says of him, that he was egregius
bellator sed non adversus carnem suam. So that great men (one would think)
should be afraid of this sin, lest they should be recorded to Posterity under
the Characters of fi^thy persons.
There are few fornicators or adulterers (who do not by great and solemn
repentance and amendment of life break off that sin) but leave an infamous name
and memory to posterity, Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed, but the
name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 6.32, 33. He that commits adultery with
a woman, lacks understanding. He that does it destroys his own soul. A
wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.

9. It usually blasts the estate, Prove. 6.26. By reason of a whorish woman a
man is brought to a morsel of bread, Job 13.10. It Is a fire that consumes to
destruction, and will root out all their increase. I appeal to every wise man's
observation, whether this be not usually the fruit of uncleanness.

10. It Is a sin that very frequently wastes and destroys the body. The Apostle,
1 Cor. 6.28. Exhorts to flee fornication because (among other reasons) it is a
sin that so much hurts the body. In other sins that men commit, commonly they
abuse something without the the body (as the drunkard does wine) but this sin
hurts and abuses the body it self in a more remarkable manner by an
intemperate and excessive exhausting the vital spirits, and consuming the
natural heat and moisture, which are the preservers of health, strength, and
life. And besides, this sin is frequently attended with that loathsome disease
which makes the committers of it to rot and stink above ground. So that if
there be any men so sottish as not to fear Hell or punishment in another life;
yet methinks they should resolve to live chastely for fear of rotting their
bodies by uncleanness, and so shortning this life wherein they expect all their
happiness. The Apostle indeed in that Chapter beforementioned uses another
argument of another nature to true believers why they should keep themselves
from uncleanness. Verse 15. Know you not (says he) that your bodies are the
members of Christ, and will you take the members of Christ and make them the
members of an Harlot? God forbid. For as wedlock makes man and wife one body
lawfully, so fornication makes the fornicator and the harlot one body
unlawfully. Further, he shows that the bodies of true believers are Temples of
the Holy Ghost (who is freely given of God to dwell in them) and therefore
their bodies ought to be kept pure and undefiled. The Apostle therefore in this
place uses these arguments to true believers and not impure Fornicators. For
their bodies are not members of Christ nor Temples of the Holy Ghost. But it
seems some filthy Heretics in that time went about to persuade those
Christians at Corinth that fornication was no sin, or at least no great sin,
and the Apostle levels his arguments against such wicked suggestions as these.

11. Adulterers and Adulteresses violate the sacred ordinance of marriage and
the solemn covenant they made before God, and before their friends as
witnesses. In our form of Matrimony the man solemnly promises that forsaking
all others he will keep himself only unto the woman he marries as long as they
both shall live. And the woman does the like unto the man. And therefore
Adultery in either party is the most abominable breach of faith that can be
imagined, and they that are guilty of it, what can they expect but vengeance
from God?

12. The Adulterer highly sins against him whose wife he defiles. He robs
him of the heart-love and affection of his wife which is an irreparable injury.
Besides, he brings an odious nickname and reproach upon him. And which is to
be taken notice of to the shame of our Nation (as Dr. Hammond well observes)
the innocent and injured person he is by a kind of national custom laughed at
and made the object of common scorn and obloquy whilst the filthy adulterer
(who robbed him of his honor) is in the common vogue rather applauded, at
least passes without any such mark of infamy and contempt One or two such
ponderous guilts as this (as that reverend Author phrases See Dr. Hammonds
Sermons page 175.
it) are enough to ruin a Nation, how light soever some profane wretches make
of the matter.

13. By the Law of God Adultery was to be punished with death, Lev. 20.10.
Deuteronomy. 22.22. And whereas other crimes were not capital nor to be punished with
death except proved by two or three witnesses, God permitted the jealous
husband to make a special trial of his wifes chastity and honesty, and gave him
an extraordinary way and means for convicting of her (if she were guilty) when
no witnesses could possibly be produced against her, namely, she was to drink
of the water of jealousy which if she were innocent did not hurt her at all,
but rather did her good and made her fruitful. But if she were guilty, then
upon drinking thereof her belly should swell and her thigh rot, and so the
woman should be accursed among her people. So that rather than God would have
this heinous sin of adultery go unpunished, he himself appointed an
extraordinary way for the discovery of it. Nay before this law was given (it
seems) it was in use among Gods own people to punish adultery with death. For
Judah adjudged Tamar his daughter in law to be burnt for this sin, as appears,
Genesis 38.24.

14. The very Heathens by the light of nature adjudged adultery to be a capital
crime and to deserve death. For instance, Nebuchadnezzar roasted two men in the
fire for it as we read, Jer. 29.23. And of them shall be taken up a curse by
all the Captivity of Judah which are in Babylon, saying, the Lord make thee
like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the fire,
because they have committed villainy in Israel, and have committed adultery with
their neighbors wives, and have spoken lying words in my name which I have not
commanded them. Among the Athenians Draco's Law made adultery capital. Among
the Romans 'twas a law of the Twelve Tables Moechum in adulterio deprehensum
necato, so also by the lex Julia it was made capital. Thus we see that the
punishing adultery with death seemed a thing very fit and just, and a matter of
common equity among the more civilized Nations, and was not merely a judicial
Law proper and peculiar to the Commonwealth of the Jews only. Other Nations
that did not inflict death upon adulterers, yet punished them with tortures
almost as bitter as death. The Egyptians decreed that the nose of the
adulterer should be cut off, and the adulteress should be beaten with a
thousand stripes almost to death. Diodor Sicul. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Zaleucus the King of the Locrenses made a Law that the adulterer should loose
both his eyes. Which Law his own Son transgressing, that he might be just in
keeping up the vigor of the Law and yet show some mercy to his Son, Aelian. var
hist. lib. 13.
he caused one of his Son's eyes to be put out and one of his own. By which it
plainly appears what a detestation was in the hearts of civilized Pagans
(guided only by the light of natural conscience) against this sin. And so much
of the first particular, the odiousness of this sin, and the great reasons we
have to abhor it.

2. I come now to answer the vain excuses that men who are addicted to this sin
are apt to make for themselves. There is no sin so odious but love to it and
frequent committing of it will in a sort reconcile even the judgment to it, and
make it seem either no sin, or but a little sin, and easily pardonable. Let us
consider therefore what are the excuses such men do usually make for themselves.

1. They allege that Poligamy (or having more wives than one) was practiced
among the Jews.

Answ. One man and one woman were conjoined in the Primitive institution, Genesis
2.24. compared with Matthew. 19.5. For this cause shall a man leave Father and
Mother and cleave to his wife, and they twain To duo non exprimitur, Genesis 2.24.
sed necessario subauditur, nam de duobus tantum ibi sermo est non pluribus,
unde and dictum uxori suae non uxoribus suis. Hinc damnatur Polygamia, ut quum
dictum est uxori suae numero singulari.
(not they three or four) shall be one flesh. And the special reason why
plurality of wives was connived at among the Jews was for the fuller peopling
of that Nation, they being the only people in Covenant with God, and being but
few among many enemies encompassing of them, their strength and safety depended
much (in an ordinary way) upon their number and increase, and therefore some
inordinancy was connived at for their multiplication, but never absolutely
allowed or approved of. But though their having more wives than one (for the
aforesaid reasons) was connived at, yet fornication was punished severely among
them, and adultery with no less punishment than death.

2. They allege that David was an Adulterer, and Solomon had many wives.

Answ. David sinned heinously therein, and it is easier to forbear this sin than
to undergo the sorrows and punishment that David underwent for it. For besides
the bitterness that his Soul was in for it, his Son Absalom rebelled against
him, drove him out of his Kingdom, and openly defiled his wives. And this sin
is left as a perpetual blot upon his name and memory. As for Solomon, his sin
was so great that it almost ruined him and his Kingdom. Ten of the twelve
Tribes fell off from his house as soon as his Son came to the Kingdom, and
though his own experience taught him to say more against this sin than is said
by any other in the Old Testament, yet it is a controversy among Divines
whether ever he were perfectly recovered, and at last saved or no. And is this
an encouragement to any man to imitate him in this sin?

3. They allege that Our Savior did not condemn the woman taken in adultery,
John 8.

Answ. Our Savior asks the woman whether any man had condemned her according
to the Law made in that case; whereby he intimates, that if the sentence of
death had been lawfully passed upon her, he would not have repealed it; for he
came not to violate the law but to fulfill it. But our Savior himself refused
to condemn her, because he came not into the world to execute the office of an
earthly judge, but of a mediator who was to procure the pardon of our sins
through his merits and intercession. He came not to condemn but to save, and to
give his life a ransom for many. And therefore he would not execute the office
of a Magistrate in adjudging her to death, but of a Minister in calling her to
repentance and amendment of her life. And so much by way of answer to the
excuses that such as are addicted to this sin do use to make for themselves.

3. I come now in the last place to give some directions and to prescribe some
remedies against it.

1. Frequently pour forth thy soul in fervent and earnest prayer unto the Lord
that he would please to keep thee from this sin and all tendencies to it. When
Paul prayed so earnestly to be delivered from the thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan, God answered, my grace is sufficient for thee, my strength
shall be perfected in thy weakness, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.

2. Use fasting and abstinence and beating down the body. This unclean Devil
goes not out by any means so soon as by fasting and prayer. A weak body indeed
must be carefully supported, but a wanton and unruly body must be carefully
subdued. Antisthenes his wish to his enemies was hostium filiis co^ ingat n
delitiis vivere.
It Is storied of a virtuous maid, that to rid her self of an importunate Suitor
she told him that if he had that affection for her which he pretended, he
should manifest it by joining with her in a resolution she had made; which was,
that for twenty days together she would eat nothing but bread, and drink
nothing but water. (The young man (though very unwillingly, yet to satisfy
her) undertook it. But when he had observed it about ten days, he found his
body so mortified and enfeebled that he had no mind to marry, and so his
Mistress was delivered from her importunate Suitor. This story applies it self.
And if any shall say that abstinence is an hard lesson, let such consider that
the suffering of hell fire, and the wrath that is to come is a thousand times
harder.

3. Labor that the fear of God may rule in thy heart. This was that which kept
Joseph innocent, Genesis 39.9. and preserved him from the inticements of his lewd
Mistress; how can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? The fear of
God in the heart is a great preservative against this sin.

4. Reverence thy conscience and hearken to it, and mark what it speaks to thee
now, lest hereafter it speak to thee in a more terrible manner; hear it
voluntarily now lest it force thee to hear it hereafter (against thy will) when
it will be thy tormentor. It is reported of a chaste woman that being tempted by
a fornicator, she desired him first to hold his finger in the fire a lit^
b^while, which when he refused, she said, why should I then burn in hell for
you?

5. Labor to cast out of thy mind all unclean thoughts and phansies. Drive
them out with abhorrence, as our Savior did the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple. Take heed of speculative wantonness. Unclean thoughts usually infect
and corrupt the heart and stir up in it unclean lusts and inclinations; and
heart defilement makes way for corporal. Remember what our Savior says,
Matthew. 5.24. Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her has committed
adultery already with her in his heart. There are fornicators in heart and
adulterers in heart as well as in outward act. Therefore says Solomon, keep
thy self from the evil woman, and lust not after her beauty in thy heart. Prove,
6.25. A great means to prevent uncleanness lies in this, to keep a holy
government over our thoughts and to abhor and cast out lustful thoughts out of
our minds with detestation.

6. Keep a strict guard and watch over thy outward senses, particularly thine
eyes Oculi sunt in amore duces. (...), ut est in veteri verbo.
and ears. Job said he had made a Covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. that is, he
was careful to keep his eyes from gazing upon, and his mind from thinking upon
a maid, so as to lust after her. Stop thy ears also against all filthy and
unclean discourse. For filthy tales and stories do strangely corrupt the
Fancy and stick odiously in the memory. Therefore if thou be so unhappy at
any time as to fall into such company where such discourse is used and such
tales are told, show thy dislike of them, and be sure never to tell them again.
For such discourse is pestilential and infectious.

7. Be diligent in thy particular calling, and keep thy mind well employed.
Otia si tollas periere cupidinis arcus. Avoid idleness, Quaeritur Aegystus
quare sit factus adulter? In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.

Facito aliquid operis, ut semper inveniat te diabolus occupatum.

Vitium libidinis facile ex otio nascitur. Nam d^finitio amoris est animae
vacantis passio, Chrysostom. in Math.


and you take away a great occasion to lust. It Is observed of David, that when
he was idle, he fell into that dreaful sin of adultery. A laborious diligent
person has his body subdued and his mind employed and taken up with better
things. The rich and the idle are usually the persons that are most under this
temptation.

8. Keep modest and sober company where thou shall neither see nor hear any
thing unseemly. Fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be named among you
as becomes Saints, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.3. Evil communication corrupts
good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. The filthy talk and tales and stories, and sonnets
of some profane persons, how exceedingly do they corrupt the minds of others.
Let dogs and crows feed on Carrion: Rational men loath such rotten and
abominable stuff. True Chrians abhor all impure discourse and all immodest
actions.

9. Shun and avoid such things as may be occasions, incentives and temptations
to this sin. Such as these.

1. Lascivious dancings. I say lascivious. For I acknowledge there may be
dancings that are modest, decent and inoffensive. But there are some that are
not so, especially among the meaner sort, which many times are rude and
uncivil, and too often are introductions to worse evils and mischiefs.

2. Stage Plays. That there are some of them less evil and offensive than
others is not improbable. But if we may believe those that have much frequented
them (as they are commonly used in our Nation) they do a great deal of
mischief. For besides the danger that does often arise from the ill company
that frequents them, and the great mispence of precious time (which should be
better employed) in the seeing and hearing of them; it is said they represent
vice in such a manner (especially this sin of uncleanness) as makes it seem a
very small matter and a thing merely to be laughed at The morals of some of our
Comedians seem to be little better than his in Terence. Non est flagitium (mihi
creed) adolescentulum scortari neque potare. Mitio in Adelphis.
and many of their expressions and gestures seem rather to teach it than to
make people out of love with it and to abhor it as God would have us. If these
things be so, I see not that he did much mistake who called them the Devils
Lectures. For as the pious and serious exhortations of faithful Ministers are
bent to beat down lust and concupiscence which is so dangerous to the Soul, so
it seems (quite contrary) these Plays design with all the wit, art, and
eloquence they can to stir it up and excite it, and by their lascivious and
immoral expressions infuse such an infection into the Fancy, and put such
thoughts into the mind, which the corruption of nature in those that have had
modest education would hardly ever have suggested. And it is no wonder that they
are so much frequented. For as 'twas observed by the Philosophers of old, many
turned from other Sects to the Epicureans, but scarce any from the Epicureans
to other sorts. The reason was because man's nature is so inclined to
sensuality. I shall say no more upon this particular but only this, I never
knew any get good by frequenting of them, I believe many have got a great deal
of hurt.

3. Lascivious books, such as are Play-books, Romances, amorous Poems and
Sonnets; such books as these certainly do a great deal of hurt, especially to
the youth of the Nation. If one great remedy (as I have showed before) against
all sorts of uncleanness be the preserving of our thoughts (as much as possibly
we can) from all unclean imaginations and phansies, surely those books that
suggest ugly and immoral things to the mind (as amorous books usually do) must
needs be great depravers of mankind, and great teachers of vice and immorality.
And they that desire in such arguments to show their wit to the poisoning of
the minds of men, do therein declare that they want very much the true wisdom
which would teach them better things. There is indeed a kind of scurrilous and
obscene wit that makes fools laugh, but wise men frown. And they that love to
have their sensuality tickled and excited, delight in such things and in such
Books. There is a grave Author who has this conceit concerning good men who
write and leave good books to the world that instruct it in Piety and Virtue,
namely, that as their books (after their decease) do good and turn men to
righteousness, so their joys in heaven shall be increased. And contrarily,
that wicked men who write, and leave such books to the World which corrupt it
with error and immorality, as their books do hurt and mischief, (after their
decease) so their torments in hell (they dying impenitently) shall be
increased. Methinks the very apprehension of this should make all men take heed
what books they send out into the world, and should put them often upon serious
consideration beforehand whether the r books be like to do good or hurt to
mankind. And if those that write corrupting books did but consider this; surely
they would burn their papers before they should ever see the light.

4. Lascivious Pictures, which are dangerous provocations and incentives to
Lust. There are in some Families strange and shameful pictures framed no doubt
to excite the lusts of the flesh, which all good Christians should remember
they are engaged in their Baptism to fight against and to endeavor to subdue.
Such Pictures as these no modest eyes can endure to behold. Methinks where
there is any thing of virtue or civility, any thing of humanity or good
breeding. Such odious Pictures should be abominated and cast away as a
detestable thing. And though there may be much art shown in such draughts, yet
the exquisiteness of such Pictures as these no modest eye can endure to behold.
Methinks the art will never compensate for the immorality and infectiousness of
the Picture.

5. Lascivious dresses. A modest and comely adornment of the body does very
much declare the modesty and purity of the mind. But a garish, immodest dress,
naked breasts and shoulders, what do they declare but a vain and frothy mind,
to say no worse. And what a great offense do these things give to those that
are serious and sober. Nay, (they say) the Pope himself has severely
prohibited this practice to the Ladies of Rome, as being immodest and unseemly.
And methinks we that are Protestants should have a greater zeal for chastity
and purity than the Pope. And as for painting and spotting the face and hanging
out the signs of half moons and stars and the like, why do they do it (said
once a Reverend Divine of our Church) if they do not intend to entertain
strangers? But alas! he that shall go about to reprove these things in so
corrupt and degenerate an age as this is, is like to get little more by it,
than to be laughed at for his pains. But let them laugh on and laugh to the end
if they can, while the faithful reprover having discharged his conscience,
leaves the success to God.

10. If other remedies will not do, make use of the remedy of Gods own
appointment, which is lawful wedlock, observe what the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
7.2, 9. For the avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife, and
every woman her own husband. For better is it to marry than to burn. And if any
shall say they fear poverty and a great charge will come upon them if they
should marry, let them consider that it is a thousand times better to lead a
poor life in the fear of God (according to his own ordinance which he has
sanctified) than to defile their bodies and Souls with uncleanness and impurity
though they might gain never so much of the world by such a course. I shall
shut up this discourse with the advice of pious Mr. Herbert in his Church Porch.

Wholly abstain, or wed: Thy bounteous Lord
Allows thee choice of paths: take no by-ways
But gladly welcome what he does afford;
Not grudging that thy lust has bounds and stays.
Continence has its joies, weigh both, and so
If rottenness have more, let heaven go.
CHAP. VII. Of Discontent.
IN treating of this Argument, I shall speak to these six Particulars.

1. I shall show what Discontent is.

2. The great sinfulness of it.

3. The Folly of it.

4. Shall show what true Christian Contentment is, and wherein the nature of it
consists.

5. Shall show the amiableness, and excellency of it.

6. Shall give some directions and means for the attaining of it.

For the First. Discontent is an unquiet frame of heart under our present
condition, and expresses it self in murmuring and repining thereat. For
commonly inward vexing and repining, and outward complaining and murmuring go
together.

2. The great sinfulness of it may appear to us in these Particulars.

1. It Is a quarrelling the wisdom of God, and a secret accusing and taxing his
Providence, Non judicandum de providentia divina ante quintum actum.
as if he did not wisely order the Lots and Conditions of his People. Holy Job
under his great afflictions was far from this temper; For though he suffered so
deeply, yet he charged not God with folly in that severe dispensation toward
him. But said, the Lord gives and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of
the Lord, Job 1.21, 22.

2. It Is a quarrelling his Fatherly care over us, as if he had not any love or
affection to us or any regard of us.

3. It Is a quarrelling his Faithfulness, as if he would not perform the many
gracious promises he has made for our good.

4. It Is a secret accusing of his Justice, as if he dealt hardly with us, and
punished us more than our sins deserved. Qui in poenis murmurat, ferientis
justitiam accusat.


5. It Is a carriage very unworthy of the hope and expectation of a Christian.
He that has his Peace made with God in Christ, and a title to an heavenly
inheritance, should endeavor from that consideration to calm and compose his
soul under his greatest sufferings.

6. It Is unanswerable to the experience we have had of Gods former gracious
dealing with us, and helping of us out of straits and difficulties.

7. It Is a great gratification to Satan. We cannot gratify the Devil more (who
is a Male-contented Spirit) than to murmur against our Creator. To be of a
discontented unquiet Spirit is to be like the Devil. He is restless and
unquiet, always in opposition to God, always fretting at his dispensations.

8. It Is a betraying and exposing us to great temptations. The Devil scarce
ever has so great power over any as over those that are discontented. Oh the
direful things he draws such persons unto. My heart even aches when I think of
them, and my hand is ready to tremble while I write of them. Some of them he
draws to make a formal Covenant with himself. Others to do such things against
themselves that even nature abhors. So that all that love themselves should beg
of God to keep them, and should watch over themselves as to this particular
sin. For let them assure themselves that nothing betrays us sooner into the
Devils hands than discon^ent. It is a stock he uses to graffe his temptations
upon. The Devil will desire no greater advantage against a soul than to find it
in such a temper. He is never more busy about any than such persons, and
usually makes dangerous use of the unquietness and repining of their spirits.

9. It Is such a temper as exceedingly unfits us for holy duties and for the
service which otherwise we might do for God. And so much of the sinfulness of
Discontent.

3. I come now in the third place to show the folly of it.

1. It Is vain and bootless. For as one of the Ancients well said, the miseries
and evils we suffer, and at which we are so apt to be vexed and troubled, are
either such as we can remedy or such as we cannot remedy. If they be such as we
cannot remedy, then what a folly is it to vex and fret at them, seeing it is
impossible to help them. Our Lesson then is Patience and Submission. Levius fit
patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas.
But if the evils we suffer be such as are remediable, then let us not vex or
fret at them, but let us use all care and diligence to help our selves and to
remedy them; And this is good advice, though given by a Heathen Philosopher.

2. It takes away the comfort of what we enjoy. If a man enjoyes a thousand
mercies (in which he ought to rejoice, and for which he ought to be thankful)
yet if his mind be discontented they will all seem as nothing to him. So that
no one thing bereaves a man more of the comfort he might enjoy in his life than
discontent.

3. It makes our afflictions worse: A discontented person is like a man in a
fever, that by his tossing and tumbling more increases his heat; Or like a
Bird in the lime-twigs which the more it flutters the more it intangles it self.

4. It provokes God oftentimes to send new and more afflictions upon us. What
did the Israelites get by mumuring in the Wilderness but a longer stay in the
Wilderness. Children that sob and are stomachful after whipping commonly get
another another whipping for their pains.

5. It makes a man's life very uneasy both to himself and his relations and to
all that are about him. No body cares to be near such persons as are always
murmuring and complaining. And so much of this folly of Discontent.

4. I come now in the fourth place to show what Christian Contentment is, and
wherein the nature of it consists.

It Is a sweet quiet gracious frame of Spirit freely submitting to Gods alwise
and fatherly disposal of us in every condition. There are some things that this
gracious frame may consist with, and some things that are opposite to it. (1.)
It may consist with a due sensibleness of Gods hand in afflicting of us. It Is
not a Stoical apathy or insensibility. The Apostle gives us an excellent Rule
(taken out of the Proverbs of Solomon, Prove. 3.11.) how we should carry our
selves under afflictions, Heb. 12.5. My Son despise not thou the chastening of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. Some bold and secure sinners
are apt to despise and disregard the correcting hand of God; the weaker sort of
Christians are apt to sink in spirit, and faint under their afflictions. Now
the Apostle advises us to steer between these two, namely, to be sensible of
Gods hand when it is upon us, and yet not to faint or despond under it. (2.) It
may consist with an humble complaint to God or man. We may groan under our
Afflictions but we ought not to grumble. (3.) It may consist with seeking out
for help and ease in a lawful way. For that is our duty and God expects it from
us. But now the things opposite to it are. (1.) Inward fretting, vexing, and
tumultuation of spirit, and rising of the heart against the Almighty. (2.)
Sinking of Spirit desponding and despairing of help. (3.) Outward murmuring
complaining and repining. (4.) Sinful shifts to help our selves. And so much of
the nature of true Christian contentment.

5. I come now to show the amiableness and excellency of this frame of Spirit.

1. True Christian contentment is not a single grace but a constellation, a
cluster of many graces, particularly of Faith, Patience, Humility, and
self-denial. As the perfumed oil that was poured upon Aarons head was made up
of several sweet ingredients; so is this grace a compound of many other graces;
Where this is, we may assure our selves there are many graces exercised.

2. It Is a frame and temper highly pleasing to God. The Apostle tells us, 1
Pet. 3.4. That a meek and a quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price.
There is hardly a higher commendation of any grace in the Scripture. That must
needs be very excellent which is by God himself so highly esteemed.

3. It Is a frame of Spirit that gives God his due. They that are endued with it
do acknowledge God as their Lord and owner. They acknowledge his plenary
dominion over them. And it is fit and comely that we who received our life and
being from God, should own his Sovereignty and dominion over us.

4. It Is a frame of Spirit that will be greatly rewarded; For the more
contented any man is the greater is his obedience to God, and the greater his
obedience the greater will be his reward. Besides, even in this world a placid,
quiet, sedate frame of heart makes our life easy and delightful and so carries
its reward along with it, whereas a turbulent discontented frame of Spirit
disorders and disquiets a man beyond all expression. And so much of the
amiableness of this s^^.

6. I come now to give some Directions for the attaining of it.

1. Mortify Pride which is the seminary of many sins, especially of this of
repining. Compare your sufferings and your sins together, and see whether your
sins be not far more than your sufferings. Consider therefore not so much what
you feel as what you deserve.

2. Consider how many mercies and blessings you daily enjoy, and stir up your
self to be exceeding thankful for them. Thankfulness and discontent cannot
stand together. Therefore when ever you find your self tempted to unquietness
of mind, think of your mercies, and provoke and stir up your heart to be
thankful to God for them; and that will drive away your discontent.

3. Consider wherein the happiness of man consists, and labor to secure that
happiness to your self. Do not estimate the happiness of man by the opinion of
worldly men who think those men only happy who are rich and enjoy the pleasures
and delights of the world. But remember that man's true happiness consists in
reconciliation with God through Christ, in conformity of our natures to him, in
living holily and righteously, and being serviceable to God in our Generation
according to our several capacities. If it be thus with us, we are happy what
ever our condition be in this world. People are much mistaken in the nature of
good and evil and have not the true measures of it. That is good to a man which
makes him better, and that is evil to him which makes him worse. Now ordinarily
ten to one receive more hurt by prosperity than by adversity.

4. Look downward on those beneath you and not upward on those above you. It Is
a very ill natured thing for any man to think himself miserable because he sees
another to have higher enjoyments than himself. There is scarce a greater folly
and unhappiness incident to humane nature than a fond admiration of other men's
enjoyments and a contempt of, and discontent at our own. Look not upward
therefore on those above you but look downward and you will find the world to
be like a great Hospital full of poor, sick, distracted, diseased, pained,
afflicted persons, and how many thousands will you find with whom you would be
loath to change conditions. 'Twas a good speech of one of the Ancients who
said, if all men's sufferings were put into one common bank men would choose
rather to go away with their own share than take their dividend of the common
calamities. Nay, consider how many of Gods own Children have suffered for worse
things than any you have suffered. He that has his understanding and all his
senses entire, has in that an overbalance to most outward adversities.
Consider therefore how many mercies thou do still enjoy. Murmur not at what
thou have lost but be thankful for what thou have left.

5. Consider no affliction comes out of the dust. It is the Lord that brings us
and our afflictions together. No warrant comes to arrest our bodies with pain
but it comes under the hand and seal of heaven. No Habeas-Corpus to remove any
friend or relation of ours, but it comes under the hand and seal of the great
judge. No affliction happens to us but it is reached out by the hand of God our
Creator to whom we ow subjection as having received our being from him. Let us
look therefore beyond instruments, for they are but the servitors to put the
cup into our hands which our heavenly Father has given us to drink.

6. Let us consider what part God has appointed every one of us to act in this
World, and let us labor to act that part well not troubling our selves about
the parts that others are appointed to act. The world is a great stage; It Is
not so much material what part we are to act, provided we act it well. He that
is appointed to act the part of a Servant and does it well is as much commended
and rewarded as he that acted the part of a Master. In the body of man the foot
is of great use though not of so much as the head; It must not therefore
complain because it is not the head. Let every one duly consider the place and
station God has put him in, and the part and particular duty he requires of
him, and let him set himself with all faithfulness to perform it, not murmuring
at the part given to another.

7. A great help to contentment is to enjoy the present thankfully and not to
be over solicitous about the future. Would thou live contentedly? Be not over
thoughtful for to morrow but cast all thy cares on God, who has promised that
he will never leave nor forsake those that are his, Heb. 13.5.

8. Interpret all Gods providence so as intended to draw thee nearer to him
and none of them to drive thee away from him. In very faithfulness have thou
afflicted me, says David, Psalm. 119.75. Consider, God has very gracious ends
in afflicting his own people. (1.) Sanctified affliction is one of the most
awakening calls to repentance imaginable, and to this end God usually designs
it. As he says by the Prophet, Hosea 5.15. I will go and return to my place
till they acknowledge their offense and seek my face. In their affliction they
will seek me early. Joseph's Brethren are a great instance of this, who when
they were put into prison and brought into distress, then their consciences
began to tell them how they had used their Brother Joseph, Genesis 24.21. Verily
we are guilty concerning our Brother in that we saw the anguish of his soul
when he besought us and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon
us. (2.) By sanctified afflictions he calls for the exercise of their Faith,
Patience, Humility, Self-denial, and will crown and reward the exercise of
these graces which he himself has planted in them. (3.) Hereby he crucifies
their hearts to the world. As Nurses lay wormwood or some bitter thing upon
their nipples when they intend to wean their Children, so God imbitters the
world oftentimes to his own Children, to wean them from it. We read how
Antigonus seeing a Soldier of his venture upon any danger, and observing withal
that he was very sickly, took care to have him recovered to good health; which
done, the man would not expose himself as before he had used to do, alleging
that now his life was of more value to him and not to be hazarded as when it
was only a burden. Thus we see how prosperity makes men love the World whilst
afflictions wean them from it. (4.) Hereby he quickens their devotion and
excites the spirit of prayer in them, whereas before (possibly) they were too
cold and formal in their prayers, now they pray earnestly. How did Daniel pray
in the Lions den? How did Jonah pray in the Whales belly? How did the three
Worthies pray in the fiery furnace? People under afflictions pray at another
rate than those do who are at ease and in prosperity. (5.) Hereby he conforms
them unto his Son who was a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs. And the
Apostle tells us, Romans 8.17. If we suffer with him we shall also be glorified
with him.

9. Take heed of all eager and inordinate desires. There is scarce any thing in
this world more dangerous to a man than such vehement desires. Omnis
inordinatus appetitus sibi ipsi poena est. Commonly God crosses eager desires,
and there is not a more ready way to miss any thing we have a mind unto, or to
have it cursed to us, than over eagerly to desire it. Strong affections breed
strong afflictions. Alas! we are very unmeet choosers for our selves. We see
not what that person or that place or that thing we so eagerly desire, may
prove. Many have been ready with Rachel to say, give me children or else I die,
when those children (they have so earnestly desired) have afterward broken
their hearts with grief and vexation at their ill-carriage. Whenever therefore
we find any eager desires or longings in our selves after any wordly thing, we
should be afraid of them and check them as foreboding ill to us. And further,
we should consider how much our eager desires after worldly things do shame and
aggravate the weakness of our spiritual desires. We can eagerly long for this
or that worldly accommodation, can hardly sleep for thinking of it, but for
heaven or heavenly things how cold, how indifferent are we.

10. Seeing true Christian contentment is a lesson taught only in Christ's
School, let us all be willing to be his Scholars and put our selves into his
School. Paul learnt this lesson here. I know how to be abased, and I know how
to abound, I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and
to suffer need. I can do all (these) things through Christ strengthening of me.
Phil. 4.12, 13. Philosophers have many precepts and directions about
contentment; but alas they are all short of teaching this lesson effectually.
Lipsius that had written a book de Stoica Philosophia, and had gathered
together many of their precepts of Patience, when he came to dye, a friend of
his told him of that book, and advised him to remember what he had there
written (yes says he) but Domine da mihi patientiam Christianam. Lord give me
Christian Patience; for that is it which I now need. But if this lesson be only
taught in Christ's School, you will ask me how does Christ teach it? I answer,
he teaches it three ways, by his word, by his example, and by his Spirit. (1.)
He teaches it by the Precepts of his word, whereby he enjoins and commands it,
Luke 21.19. In your Patencei possess your souls, 1 Timothy 6.11. Follow after
righteousness, Faith, Love, Patience Meekness, Jam. 1.4. Let Patience have its
perfect work that you may be entire, wanting nothing. 2 Pet. 1.6. Add to Faith
Temperance to Temperance Patience to Patience Godliness. Because thou have kept
the word of my Patience (says the Angel to the Church of Philadelphia) that
is, my word which I commanded thee, to be Patient. I will also keep thee from
the hour of temptation. (2.) Christ teaches it by the Promises of his word. He
has made many gracious promises in his word, which are a great means to
support his people and to frame their hearts to contentation in every
condition. In Heb. 13.5. He has made a promise of provision for them. Be
content with such things as you have, For he has said I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee, Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but
they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. In Psalm. 91.11. He has
made a promise of protection unto them. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee to keep thee in all thy ways, Heb. 1.14. Are not they all ministering
Spirits sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of Salvation. In
Jam. 1.5. He has made a promise of counsel to those that are in perplexity and
under trouble. If any man lacks wisdom (that is, to dir^ct him how to govern
himself under any afflicted condition) Let him ask it of God who gives
liberally and upbraideth not, 2 Cor. 7.6. He has made a promise of comfort to
those that are under great fears and apprehensions of dangers. There the
Apostle tells us that He is a God who comfort those that are cast down. In
Esai. 41.10. He has made a Promise to strengthen his People under great
pressures. Fear thou not for I am with thee, Be not dismayed for I am thy God;
I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. In Romans 8.28. He has made a promise to order
all things for their good. We know (says the Apostle) that all things work
together for good to them that fear God. (3.) Christ teaches it by his own
example. Learn of me (says our Savior, Mat. 11.29.) For I am meek and lowly
in heart, and ye shall find rest to your Souls. How ready was he to comply with
his Fathers will? The Cup that my Father has given me to drink, shall I not
drink it, says he, John 18.11. and Luke 22.42. Father if thou be willing
remove this Cup from me, yet not my will but thy will be done, 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ suffered for us leaving us an example that we should follow his steps,
who when he was reviled reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. 4. He teaches this
lesson by his Spirit. Now the spirit teaches contentment these ways. (1.) By
convincing the Soul of the reasonablnest of it. He shows that it is most fit
and reasonable, that God being our Creator and having absolute sovereignty and
dominion over us, and being infinitely wise, holy, just and gracious, we should
submit to him and lie at his feet. (2.) By strengthening our faith in the
promises of God. (3.) By strengthening our hearts to bear the burden of
afflictions, Ephesians. 3.16. We are strengthened (says the Apostle) with might by
his spirit in the inner man. And Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might
according to his glorious power unto all patience and long suffering with
joyfulness. And 2 Timothy 1.7. God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of
power, of love, and of a sound mind. (4.) By shedding abroad a sense of Gods
love into our hearts, Romans 8.16. The spirit bears witness with our spirits
that we are the Children of God, and if Children, then heirs, heirs of God and
j ynt heirs with Christ. And so we rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Romans
5.2. And this hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the H^ly-Ghost which is given unto us. And thus we see how
Christ teaches this lesson by his word, by his example and by h^s Spirit.
Would yo^ learn this lesson, put your selves under Christ's institution.
Particularly labor to practice these things.

1. Break off your sins by true repentance, and secure the pardon and
forgiveness of all your transgressions by Faith in Christ's blood. A condemned
man has no contentment in any thing he enjoys. But a man pardoned is content
and well pleased with a Morsel. The Apostle tells us, Rom, 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. There may be much tribulation to
such, but (thanks be to God) no condemnation.

2. Labor to be holy in all manner of conversation. For Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the promises of this life and that which is
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8 Keep and cherish a good consci^^ce and a good conscience,
will cherish and comfort you.

3. Prepare for afflictions, and think it no strange thing when they happen to
you. And when they come, meet them as discreet Abigal met David. Let not my
Lord be angry. Beg of God that though he do chastise thee, yet he would not be
angry w th thee. Earnestly implore him that though there be much bitterness,
yet there may be no wrath in thy Cup. And pray also that all your afflictions
may be sanctified to you and may do you that good which God sent them for. And
be more careful of your carriage under afflictions than troubled at them.

4. Moderate your desires after worldly things. Though God cut you short as to
the things of the world, yet think often of your portion and inheritance in the
other life. Take Mr. Herberts pious counsel. Page 131.

Content thee greedy heart!
Modest and moderate Joys to those that have!
Title to more hereafter when they part,
Are passing brave.
Let the upper Springs into the low
Descend, and fall, and thou do flow.
What though some have a fraught
Of Cloves and Nutmegs, and in Cinnamon sail,
If thou have wherewithal to spice a draught,
When griefs prevail,
And for the future time art heir
To the Isle of Spices, is it not fair?
5. Be humble under a sense of your own weakness, and earnestly beg strength
from Christ to enable you to be content in every condition. A Believers
strength both for doing and suffering the will of God, is from Christ, Psalm.
131.3. When I cried unto thee (says the Psalmist) thou strengthnedst me with
strength in my Soul.

6. When thou art strengthened to bear afflictions with a quiet placid and
sedate mind, give all the glory unto Christ, and say as Paul did, 1 Timothy 1.12.
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me.

7. Be not secure but watch and pray lest you enter into temptation. Moses
though the meekest man upon the earth in his time, yet once fell into such a
fit of discontent and passion, and spoke so unadvisedly with his lips, that God
was angry with him and would not let him go into Canaan. Now if a person of so
eminent grace so failed, what eruption of discontent may we be subject to, if
left to our selves.

CHAP. VIII. Of Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness.
IN handling of this Subject I shall proceed in this Method.

1. I shall show what Covetousness it. 2. In what particulars it discovers it
self. 3. The causes of it. 4. The marks and characters of such as are covetous.
5. The great evil of it. 6. I shall give some directions, and prescribe some
remedies against it.
For the First. Covetousness is an inordinate and excessive love of riches, and
an immoderate desire and hankering after them. The simple desire so riches is
not Covetousness, but an inordinate and over-greedy desire of them. And
therefore this sin is especially in the heart. One may have little and yet be
Covetous. One may be rich and yet free from Covetousness.

2. Covetousness discovers it self in these Particulars.

1. In getting wealth unconscionably without regard either to Piety, Equity,
Justice, Charity or Humanity. When men have their hearts so bent and set upon
the World that they use indirect means to get it, such as are Oppression,
Overreaching, Cheating, Lying, Stealing. And so in treasuring up Wealth they
treasure up wrath to themselves.

2. In an unduede taining and withholding from the Poor (through
hard-heartedness and penuriousness) what is fit to be given to them. When a man
is so strait-hearted and strait-handed in works of Charity, so cruel, so hard,
and miserable that he gives not at all to the poor, or very little, and only
what is extorted from him with great difficulty and importunity. When men are
continually hoarding up for themselves, but have no bowels or pity for the poor
or their indigent relations; and though they have enough and abound, yet are
inordinately carking and caring for more still, being perplexed with an Infidel
fear lest they should want when they are old. Like Symonides who being asked
why he was Covetous in his old age, Answered, I had rather leave riches to my
enemies when I die, than stand in need of my friends while I live.

3. In spending too sparingly and niggardly, when men that have plentiful
estates have not hearts to allow themselves necessaries Avaro deest tam quod
habet quam quod non habet. Haec est manifesta p^renesis ut locuples moriatis,
egen it is vivere fato.
neither decent apparel nor convenient food. When they pinch their own bellies,
and the bellies of those they are to provide for. Like the man described by
Solomon, Eccles. 6.1, 2. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and
it is common among men. A man to whom God has given riches and wealth, yet he
has not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it. This is vanity, and an
evil disease. And so likewise Eccles. 4.8. There is one alone and there is not
a second. Yea he has neither Child nor Brother, yet there is no end of all his
labor nor is his eye satisfied with riches. Such men (as one expresses it) are
like the Ass that carries Gold for others, but it self feeds on thistles.

And so much of the Particulars wherein Covetousness expresses it self.

3. I come now to consider the causes of Covetousness. And they are such as
these.

1. False notions and apprehensions about riches, and too high an esteem of the
things of the World. They think the happiness of man consists in having plenty
and abundance. And upon this conceit wealth so steals away their hearts that
they make it their God. They will tell you what Solomon says, that money
answers all things, Eccles. 10.19. that is, it will buy any thing that can be
bought here; and therefore they that have money in their purse have the world
at their will. But I shall tell them also what the Apostle says, Godliness is
profitable for all things (which Money I am sure is not) having the promises of
this life and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness makes men rich
without riches, rich in Faith and Holiness, rich in this, that God is
reconciled to them in his Son, and they have his favor shining upon them here,
and have a good title to Heaven hereafter. I know the World is ready to say of
a man that has gotten wealth, O such a man is made, whereas (except God give
him grace with his riches) he may thereby be marred. He may be made indeed in
one sense, that is, made more proud more imperious, more irreligious, more
idle, more luxurious than he was before, but that is far from being any
felicity to himself, or any benefit to others. The World has very little
judgment in the true nature of good and evil. That is truly good for a man
which makes him better toward God, and that is evil for him which makes him
worse. Indeed riches when honestly got are Gods blessings, and so ought to be
esteemed by us, and we ought to be very thankful to God for them. But by reason
of the corruption of man's heart they are often to many men snares, yea, very
dangerous snares. Riches without grace usually hurt the Possessor. I have seen
riches reserved to the hurt of the owners thereof says Solomon, Eccles. 5.13.
And not only to their hurt, but to the hurt of many others round about them.
Many men had never been so great sinners nor had they dishonored God nor hurt
and corrupted others at so high a rate, if they had not been so great and rich
in this World. Our Savior therefore Mark 10.23. says, How hardly shall they
that have riches enter into the Kingdom of God? that is, that have riches, but
not grace to make a right use and improvement of them. There are indeed great
temptations in Poverty. But I think we may truly say, that if the temptations
of Poverty have slain their thousands the temptations of riches have slain
their ten thousands. I know Solomon says no man can know love or hatred by
these outward things, Eccles. 9.1. that is, we cannot know Gods love or hatred
to us by the mere outward dispensations either of riches or poverty, prosperity
or adversity; but we may by the inward impressions that are made upon our
hearts by those dispensations. He to whom God gives riches and withal an
humble, thankful, charitable, beneficent frame of heart, to him they are given
in mercy. But he who has riches and by them is made more proud, insolent,
vain, wanton, intemperate, oppressive, injurious than he was before, I think
has no great cause to imagine his riches are given him in mercy.

2. Another cause of Covetousness is man's diffidence and distrust of Gods
fatherly care and providence over them. Ignorance of God and distrust of God
usually go together. They that know thy name will trust in thee (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 9.10.) For thou have not forsaken them that seek thee. They
that know thy name, that is, thy nature and attributes, they that know how
infinitely wise, gracious, merciful, faithful thou art, will put their trust in
thee, but they that are ignorant of thee will not trust in thee but in their
own wisdom and providence. Men usually take it very ill, when they see they are
not trusted. How much more may the great God of Heaven, take it ill from us
when he sees we dare not trust him. It is an engagement upon the Almighty (to
speak with reverence) to trust in him, to depend on him and to cast our cares
on him. But it must needs be a great provocation to him to distrust him.
Therefore our Savior in Mark 6. from 25. to the end charges his Disciples
three several times to take no thought for their life what they should eat or
drink, or for their body what they should put on, for about these things the
Gentiles (that knew not God nor acknowledged Providence) inordinately carked
and cared. But those that professed themselves his Disciples should seek in the
first place the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and for other things they
should not be over anxious, but believe that God in the use of lawful and fair
means would bestow them upon them, as far forth as he saw to be good for them.

3. Another cause of Covetousness is this, men live by sense more than by
Faith. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.2. that Faith is the evidence of things
not seen; that is, it does convincingly show and demonstrate the reality of
things not seen. And 2 Cor. 4.18. He shows the different temper of the true
Christian from the man of the World. The true Christian chiefly minds the
things unseen. The men of the World mind chiefly the things seen. The one minds
things temporal the other things eternal. Some persons have three eyes (as one
observes) the eye of sense, the eye of reason, and the eye of faith. Worldly
men have the two former the eye of sense and reason, but they want the eye of
Faith. They see what it is to have a good estate, a good house, a good stock,
to have pleasant accommodations for this life. But for Heaven and the other
life they never spoke with any body that came from thence, and they do not much
give themselves to consider what kind of life that is that is there lived. They
savor and relish earthly things, but spiritual things seem to them to have no
taste in them. But the true Christian exercises himself in the meditation of
things invisible, and lives in the believing views of the excellency and
reality of those things, and by faith ascertains them to himself. The Martyrs
had their hearts set on things unseen. The invisible comforts and recompenses
of the other life bore up their hearts against the terrors of visible and
present torments. And so much of the causes of Covetousness.

4. I come now to show what are the marks and characters of such as are
Covetous and Earthly-minded, and who may be styled men of the World.

1. Men whose knowledge and skill lies only or chiefly about the things of the
world. They are shroud understanding men in worldly matters, but in the things
of God and such as concern their Souls and their everlasting welfare mere
Children. In the things that concern their trades or professions they are
notable men, but talk with them about the Covenant of Grace, about Conversion
and Regeneration, about the true nature of Repentance or Faith, and they know
little.

2. Their hearts are chiefly set on these things. The things of the World they
love and affect, as being suitable to their spirits. The Apostle commands us 1
John 2.15. Not to love the World nor the things of the World; for all the
things of the World may be reduced to these three heads, the lust of the flesh
or sensual pleasures, the lust of the eye or riches and such things as are seen
with the eyes, and the pride of life, that is, preferments and honors. But
though the Apostle commands we should not set our hearts or affections on these
things, yet this is the Worlds Trinity, and more adored by them than Father,
Son and Holy Ghost.

3. Their discourse is chiefly about these things. 1 John 4.5. They are of the
World therefore speak they of the World. Their breath is earthy which they say
is a sign of death. Talk with them about worldly things, none more free to
discourse than they. But speak to them of matters that concern their Souls,
they have nothing to say. Such discourse is usually unpleasing to them.

4. Their pains and endeavors Rem Rem, quocunque modo Rem -- Ocives querenda
pecunia primum est. Virtus post nummos.
are only or chiefly for the things of the World. They take little pains about
their own Souls or the souls of those under their care, but are mighty
industrious about the things of the World; They rise early and sit up late to
acquire them, but a short attendance upon religious duties and exercises what a
weariness is it to them and they are ready to snuff at it as the Prophet
speaks, Mal. 1.13. They take a great deal of care and pains how they may live
here it may be ten or twenty or thirty years, but they take no thought how they
should live a thousand years hence when they have left their bodies in the
earth. Oh were the endeavors of these men for the saving of their immortal
precious souls but any thing answerable to the pains they take to get the
World, how happy might they be? God is not always pleased to bless and succeed
the endeavors of men who are very diligent in their calling, and painful and
laborious to get wealth. God sees it best to keep them low. But what man ever
was diligent and serious in seeking the things of eternal life, and working out
his Salvation that did not find God assisting of him and prospering his
endeavors?

5. They are very careful to secure to themselves those temporal things, but
use no answerable care to secure to themselves things eternal. They are very
careful about the Titles of their Lands and Purchases, and hardly ever think
themselves secure enough. Let a Minister come to one of these men on his
Deathbed and ask him concerning the evidences of his estate, he will tell him
they are all safe in such a trunk or chest. But let him ask him what evidences
he has that his Soul is in a safe condition. Alas! He has nothing to say; He
has not minded those things. His Soul is left upon miserable uncertainties. He
has taken no care to secure to himself erernal Nulla satis magna secu^itas ubi
periclitatur aeternitas.
happiness. He has taken care to leave a clear estate to his children, but no
care to clear his Soul of guilt or to deliver himself from the wrath that is to
come.

6. They are commonly very solicitous about their own private interest, but
little or nothing concerned about the interest of Christ or his Church. They
are wholly and only for themselves. We read 1 Samuel 4.13. that old Eli's heart
trembled for the Ark of God, which was the symbol of his gracious presence
among them. But how little are worldly and earthly-minded men concerned how it
fares with the Church of God, provided their own private worldly concernments
be safe and secure?

7. These outward things they make their trust and confidence. They set their
prime affections of love and trust upon them in that measure which is only due
to God. The rich man's wealth is his strong City. Prove. 10.16. They make Gold
their hope and fine Gold their confidence, Job 31.24. Their wealth is the Idol
upon which they dote. Their confidence and trust is taken off from God and
placed upon their riches. As the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 52.7. Lo these are the
men that make not God their strength but trust in the abundance of their
riches. And this their way is their folly and a course very injurious to God
who should be the only object of our trust, and can only help us in a day of
trouble. The Scripture does frequently dissuade men from such carnal
confidence. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that be rich in this World that they be
not high-minded nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God. Psalm.
62.10. If riches increase set not your hearts upon them. And our Savior
himself gives us this precept, Matthew. 6.19. Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon earth where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal; but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where
neither moth nor rust does corrupt and where thieves do not break through nor
steal. For where your treasure is there will your hearts be also. And so much
of the marks and characters of such as are earthly-minded.

5. I come now to show the great evil of Covetousness and earthly-mindedness.

1. It Is a sin the Scripture testifies very much against. (1.) It Is called
Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. because the Covetous man loves Amor tuus, Deus
tuus.
his money more than God, and more trusts in it. (2.) It Is called the root of
all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. It Is the cause of Oppression, Extortion, Cheating,
Lying, Theft, False-witness-bearing, breach of Promise, etc. It occasions a
great deal of trouble to the World by Quarrelling, Contention, Law-Sutes and
the like. He whose affections are inordinately set on money will not stick at
the breach of any of Gods commandments. There is scarce any sin so base and
vile but he that is under the power of Covetousness will venture to commit it
for gain and advantage. Avaritia Christum vendidit.
Therefore David's prayer was, Psalm. 119.36. Incline mine heart to thy
testimonies and not to covetousness. He might have said and not to lust, or not
to pride; but it seems he looked on Covetousness as a Mother-sin which was like
to produce many other sins wherever it prevailed.

2. It Is a very close sin. It Is a sin hardly discerned, and so more hardly
cured. It Is a secret subtle sin that hides it self under the cloak of frugality
and good husbandry. A man may be free from unlawful getting, from deceit and
injustice, and yet be earthly-minded for all that. If God should suffer a
Professor to fall into drunkenness or uncleanness, his conscience would be sure
to fly in his face, and severely talk with him. But people that are Covetous
and Earthly-minded hardly discern themselves to be so, or think it no crime to
be so, though the Apostle 1 Cor. 6.10. reckons the Covetous among those that
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

3. It Is a very insnaring sin. They that will be rich says the Apostle (that
is, that are resolved so to be either by hook or by crook) fall into temptation
and a snare, 1 Timothy 6.9. Such persons will not stick at any thing that may
promote their gain. They will not care to make shipwreck of their consciences
to gain the world. And therefore Covetousness is many times the root of
Apostasy. Dem^s has forsaken me says the Apostle (2 Timothy 4.10.) having
embraced the present world. Luke follows a suffering Paul, but Demas through
the love of the world forsakes him.

4. It Is a great dishonor to the Christian Profession. What shall they that
have Heaven set before them for a reward dote upon the earth? Shall they that
pretend to understand the surpassing excellency of the things above, have their
hearts and affections set on things below? The Psalmist says, Psalm. 135.15.
The Idols of the Heathen are silver and gold. It Is a shame that silver and gold
should be the Idols of Christians. Therefore the Apostle writing to the
converted Colossians Chap. 3. v. 1, 2. tells them that if they be risen with
Christ they must set their affections on things above and not on things on the
earth.

5. It much hinders profiting by the Wo^d. The Cares of this life choke the
Word, Matthew. 13.23. There are many come to hear the word, and sit before the
Lord as his people, whose hearts go after their Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. and
so the word profits them not.

6. It unfits a man to be a good Magistrate or a good Minister. A Magistrate
should be a man fearing God, and hating Covetousness, Exodus 18.21. A Gospel
Minister should not be greedy of filthy lucre, 1 Pet. 5.2. If either of them be
under the power of Covetousness they are never like to discharge their duties
faithfully.

7. It Is a very disquieting sin. It disquiets the hearts of men and deprives
them of inward peace. They that covet after money pierce themselves through
with many sorrows, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.10. It creates also a great deal
of trouble and disquiet to particular Families. He that is greedy of gain
troubles his own house says Solomon, Prove. 15.27. A covetous Master of a
Family will make his Children and Servants very slaves and drudges and will
hardly allow them things necessary and Convenient.

8. It exceedingly hinders a due preparation for death. They that have their
hearts overcharged with Covetousness and the cares of this life seldom take
their latter end into due consideration. How hardly (says our Savior) shall
they that have riches enter into the Kingdom of God, Math. 10.23. that is, that
have their hearts set on their riches, and trust in them. Corpulent birds
seldom fly high. Neither do they whose great care is to load themselves with
thick Clay, Heb. 2.5, 6. mind Heaven or the things of the other life.

And so much of the evil of Covetousness.

6. I come now to give some directions, and to prescribe some remedies against
it.

1. Labor to understand wherein the true happiness of man consists. Riches and
wealth are not the distinguishing marks of the favor and love of God. Men may
have them, and yet be of the number of them who have all their portion in this
life, Psalm. 17.14. God indeed does sometimes give riches to his own children,
that they may appear to be his blssiengs. And to many of his own children he
denies them, that they may appear not to be his chief blessings. The true
happiness of man consists in reconciliation with God, in conformity of his
nature to him, in having his Spirit dwelling in him and in being serviceable to
him in his generation. He that has these is truly rich, though he be poor in
this World. And he that wants these though he flow in riches and wealth, yet I
am not afraid to tell him he is for the present but a miserable man and in an
unsafe condition.

2. Consider the people of God ought to have a great confidence in Gods
Fatherly care over them. We are much pressed in Scripture to cast our care on
God, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden on the Lord and he shall sustain thee, 1 Pet.
5.7. Cast all your care on him for he cares for you, Matthew. 6.31. Take no
thought for your life wha^ you shall eat or what you shall drink, or for your
body what you shall put on, but seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. What makes
children and servants less solicitous and anxious, less careful and covetous in
their Parents and Masters house than when they are for themselves? Why, they
depend on their Parents and Masters to provide for them, and that sets them at
ease as to that particular. And should not we then depend on the care and
providence of our heavenly Father? Why should we not trust God for our bodies
as well as for our souls, considering the many gracious promises he has made to
take care of us? The Apostle uses this as a great argument against Covetousness
and that we should be content with such things as we have, because God has
said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

3. We should labor to moderate our affections to the things of this World.
Holy Agurs prayer was, Prove. 30.8. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, but feed
me with food convenient for me. Our Savior tells Martha, Luke 10.42. that one
thing is necessary. It Is not necessary we should be rich or learned, or
healthful, or have a great name in this World; but it is absolutely necessary to
our happiness that we should break off our sins by true repentance, that we
should be converted, that we should savingly close with Christ by Faith, that
we should be new creatures, that we should live to the honor of God and good
of the World. If these things be found in us, God has given us the best
portion, and therefore we may well be contented though he give us not so large
a portion of the things of this life. Yea, upon this account in a good cause we
ought to take joyfully the spoiling of our goods, or the loss of our estates,
remembering that God has given us a better portion that cannot be taken from us.

4. We should consider our Souls are Spirits and were made for higher things
than merely to grovel on the earth. Our Souls are our best part, and our
greatest care should be to secure them. If it go well with the soul it will go
well with the body also. But if the soul be lost and must suffer everlasting
punishment, 'twere better we had been made Toads or Serpents than Men and
rational creatures. Certainly it argues the great depravation of man's Soul that
it should take so much care for the body how it may be clothed and fed and how
it may enjoy all the delights which are suitable to it, and that it should take
so little care of it self to secure unto it self eternal happiness. In order
therefore to the securing of our souls we should labor to possess our minds
with right and sound principles, such as these, That the best part of man ought
to have most care bestowed upon it, That things of everlasting consequence
ought to be sought before things of mere temporal concernment, That things
absolutely necessary ought to be sought in the first place, That he is a wise
man that takes due care to save his soul, but he is a fool that to gain the
World loses his Soul. Such Principles as these laid deep in our minds may be a
great means to preserve us from an eager and greedy pursuit of the things of
the world.

5. We should consider our time here is but short, 1 Cor. 7.29. therefore we
had not need act the part of children and only follow bubbles. We have but a
short winters-day of life to live. If a man come to a great City and have a
great deal of business to do and but a short day to do it in, he had not need
trifle, but mind the business seriously for which he came thither. Let us
therefore mind our great business for which we came into the World, let us look
to the main whatever else be neglected.

6. We should take heed of earthly-mindedness and pursuing the things of the
World too eagerly, lest that happen to us which sometimes happens to those that
dig in the mines of the earth, while they are eagerly digging and delving
there, the earth falls on them on a sudden and miserably buries them. Let those
that follow the World so hard (with the wretched neglect of their souls) and
are loading themselves continually with thick clay take heed they be not at
last crushed under it and perish by it.

7. We should set before our eyes the examples of the most eminent Saints and
servants of God in all ages. They counted themselves but Pilgrims and strangers
here, Heb. 13.37. and yet they were such of whom the world was not worthy.
Scultetus observes that none of the Saints mentioned in the Scripture were
spotted with this sin of Covetousness. The Apostle tells us that Abraham
sojourned in the Land of Promise as in a strange Country because he looked for
a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And the truth
is, they that have God for their Father, Christ for their Redeemer, the Holy
Ghost for their guide and comforter, the holy Angels for their Protectors, the
Promises of God for their present support, and Heaven for their inheritance
hereafter, should have their hearts withdrawn from worldly things and should
more mind and think of their Country that is above. Dum mala pungunt bona
promissa ungunt.


8. Those to whom God has given riches in this World should consider that
these are their particular duties.

1. They should labor to get the spiritual riches of grace which they may
carry with them into the other World.

2. They should not overvalue their riches nor esteem them too highly, nor set
their hearts upon them. Psalm. 62.10.

3. They should not put their trust or confidence in them, 1 Timothy 6.17.

4. They should not glory in them, nor boast of them. Jer. 9.23.

5. They should not be tempted by their riches to scorn or despise the poor,
Jam. 2.6.

6. They should not by reason of their wealth and power oppress the poor.

7. They should honor the Lord with their substance, Prove. 3.9. (1.) By
promoting Piety and the service of God. (2.) By works of Charity Quas dederis
solas semper habebis opes. Habeo quod dedi, perdidi quod servavi.
and beneficence to the poor, and so make to themselves friends of their
riches, Luke 16.9. Now riches are made friends when they are so used as they
may be evidences, and give testimony of our Piety, Charity, Justice and
Mercifulness. A poor man's hand (whom we have relieved) is a bill will be
accepted in Heaven, Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the poor lends to the
Lord, and he will pay him again.

8. They should often and seriously meditate on the account they must give how
they have used their wealth. They should consider they are not absolute Lords
of their estates but Gods stewards, and to him they must give an account.

9. They should be willing to let go whatever God shall call them to part with,
and that without regret or murmuring, as if a piece of their heart were rent
away with it.

And so much of the remedies and directions against Covetousness.

I shall now shut up this discourse with this one Caution, that seeing
Covetousness does especially consist in the inward desires of the heart which
are best known to a man's self (and which no man knows save the spirit of a man
that is in him, 1 Cor. 2.11.) We should therefore be very wary and tender of
charging Covetousness upon others. We may more safely and securely judge our
selves in this matter than we can others. For we can better know the nature and
qualification of our own desires than we can possibly of another man's. Let us
therefore take heed of evil surmizes and ungrounded suspicions of others. Some
persons are apt to surmize a man to be covetous upon such grounds as these.

1. He will not be bound for a friend or relation though in never so great a
strait. I Answer, I think no man ought to be bound for another any further than
he finds himself able and willing to pay in case the person for whom he is
bound cannot. For so the person to whom the bond is made looks upon him; and if
he be not so, he deceives him in being bound. This being premised, I shall now
tell you what Solomon says of surety-ship, Prove. 17.18. A man void of
understanding strikes hands and becomes surety in the presence of his friend.
Chap. 22.28. Be not thou one of them that strike hands or of them that are
surety for debts. Chap. 11.15. He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for
it, and he that hates surety-ship is sure. Chap. 6. v. 1. My Son if thou be
surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand with a stranger, thou art
snared with the words of thy mouth; Do this now my Son, go humble thy self and
make sure thy friend, give not sleep to thine eyes nor slumber to thine
eyelids; deliver thy self as a Roe from the hand of the Hunter, and as a Bird
from the hand of the Fowler, etc. you may see by this what Solomon's opinion was
of surety-ship. The truth is, many an easy and good natured man has been
utterly undone by being drawn into bonds for his friend or relation. And
therefore I think it is not a sign so much of a covetous mind as of a prudent
mind to be shy of surety-ship.

2. He lives very nearly and sparingly and much under his estate. Answ. Thou
may surmise his estate to be greater than it is. Thou do not know his
losses nor his manifold charges. Or it may be, having seen the difficulties and
dangerous temptations that others have been put upon through want, he spares
that he may not be exposed to the like temptations. Or it may be he spares and
in many things denies himself that he may have to give to the poor. His
frugality is the purse-bearer to his Charity. Or possibly he will tell thee
(who vainly and foolishly spendest thy money) that thou do not know the value
of a penny. One single penny will buy a yard square of good Land worth twenty
pound an acre, as may appear by the demonstration in the margin In every Acre
there are a hundred and sixty square Poles or Rods. In every Pole (consisting
of five yards and an half) there are thirty yards square, and one quarter of a
yard, as may appear by the Diagram hereunto annexed. So there are four thousand
eight hundred and forty yards square in an Acre; which if sold at one penny a
yard comes to twenty pound three shillings and four pence.

diagram of a pole (unit of measurement)


and therefore he is not willing to spend his money so idly and prodigally as
thou do. And in the last place possibly he will tell thee that he is sparing
because (as the Proverb goes) a penny saved is better than two pence got; yet
for all that his heart is not set on his riches, but he can freely part with
his money when God calls for it.

3, It does not appear that he is Charitable and liberal to the Poor. Answ. He
may be prudent in well ordering his Charity and Conscientious in observing that
rule of Christ, Mat. 6.3. When thou give alms let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand does. He may possibly give much more to the poor than thou
know of.

4. He lays up much.

Answ. Thou can not tell what part of his estate he lays up yearly, nor to
what ends. The Apostle prescribes it as a duty belonging to Parents to lay up
for their Children. 2 Cor. 12.14. and 1 Timothy 5.8. He says that if any man
provide not for his own house he is worse than an Infidel.

To conclude all, seeing Covetousness is so secret and close a sin and consists
chiefly in the inward desires of the heart, let us all carefully observe the
frame of our own hearts, let us be severe and rigid in examining our selves,
but let us be charitable and candid toward others.

CHAP. IX. Of Anger.
IN treating of this Subject I shall proceed in this Method.

1. I shall speak of the nature of Anger. 2. Of the kinds of it. 3. Give some
directions for the right regulating of it, that we may not offend therein. 4.
Answer the vain excuses that angry persons are apt to make for themselves.
For the first. Anger is an affection by which the blood and spirits are heated
upon the apprehension of some injury or wrong offered to us or those for whom
we are concerned. Or Anger is the rising up of the heart in a passionate
displeasure against an evil which we apprehend will cross or hinder us of some
desired good.

2. Anger is either good or evil according to the circumstances with which it
is attended. It is good.

1. When the cause for which we are angry is good and warrantable and such as
we can give a good account of to God, Mark 3.5. Jesus looked round about on
them with anger, being grieved at the hardness of their hearts. When we are
angry, (and our anger is accompanied with grief) because God is dishonored, or
because we see people offend against Piety, Justice, Humanity, or because we
see them neglect their duties and hurt their own souls, or the Souls of others,
or do that which is wicked and sinful or prejudicial and hurtful to us or
others. This is a just cause of Anger.

2. When the object is right. The object of our anger must not be the Person
offending, but his offense, his vice, his sin, his immorality, his folly, his
fault. These we may be angry at, yea hate, but not the offenders person.

3. When the End is right. When the end of our anger and displeasure is, that
the fault we are angry with may be amended, and the Person offending for the
future may be warned not to offend in the like kind again.

4. When there is no excess in the measure of our anger or the time when our
anger is only a rational and temperate displeasure; when reason commands it,
thus far it shall go and no farther, when it neither is too hot nor too long.

Now Anger is good when it is thus qualified and circumstantiated, namely, when
it arises upon a good and justifiable ground; when it is directed upon the
right object, the sin and fault of the offender; when it aims at the right end,
the reformation of the Person offending; and when it is neither too hot nor too
long, but when it fails in these circumstances, it is evil.

3. I am come now in the third place to give some directions for the right
regulating of our anger that we may not offend therein.

1. Make account every day that you may meet with many occasions that will be
apt to provoke you to anger, Praesume animo multa tibi esse patienda, Sen. de
ira.
if you be not very watchful over your self. Every morning think with your self
that you may that day meet with some cross and finister accidents, some
unexpected injuries, troubles or inconveniences, which (without great care and
taking heed to your self) may disorder and discompose you.

2. Consider that you your self are subject to manifold errors and failings,
and you must not expect to meet with or converse with any that are totally free
from failings and infirmities. Who is there also who has not a blind side on
which he does not see? In many things we offend Tangat memoriam communis
fragilitas.
all says the Apostle, Jam. 3.2. Keep alive therefore a sense of your own
weakness and what need you have of forgiveness both from God and Man, and that
will more dispose you to patience toward others.

3. Take heed of being soon angry; Multos absolvemus si prius coeperimus
judicare, quam irasci. Sen. de Ira.
He that is soon angry deals foolishly, Prove. 14.17. Give leave to your
judgment to consider before you be angry. The discretion of a man deferreth
his anger, Prove. 19.11. Augustus was advised not to be angry at any time till
he had first said over the Greek Alphabet. It Is a shame that we that are
Christians should not prescribe as good Rules to our selves to keep us from
falling too suddenly into Passion as the Heathens did. Shall their Morality do
so much toward the curing the irregularities of practice, and shall not our
Christianity do much more? Solomon tells us, Prove. 16.37. He that is slow to
anger is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit than he that
takes a City. And the Apostle Jam. 1.19. advises us to be slow to anger.

4. Be not angry upon every trivial occasion. He that is angry without cause
(says our Savior) is in danger of the judgment, Matthew. 5.22. We should not be
angry for any thing that is not material in it self, or in its consequents. We
should not be angry for mere involuntary and casual offenses, such as without
great care could not have been prevented. To be angry for every toy debases the
value of our anger. A man must not (as one says) fire the Beacon of his Soul
for the landing of every Cockboat.

5. Take heed you be not angry too often. For when a man is frequently and
often angry, his anger grows into contempt and works no good effect. Anger must
be used as a medicine, only now and then, and that only upon just occasion.

6. Take heed your anger be not too hot nor too vehement and excessive. It must
be serious indeed, and have some life and warmth in it, that it may be
effectual for the reformation and amendment of the offending Person, and may be
a warning to him to avoid the like faults for the future. But yet we must take
heed of all excesses, and transports of this Passion. Ira sic dicta quia
hominem facit ex se ire, and non esse apudse.


7. In your anger make no rash vows or resolutions. Make no irrevocable decrees
like the Laws of the Medes and Persians. Say not you will never trust, or never
have to do with such or such a man again, etc. Sudden, rash and desperate
resolutions are very dangerous, and usually men have cause to repent of them
very quickly after.

8. In your anger be sure to reveal no secrets formerly committed to your
trust. For that makes a man a Bankrupt for society ever after. No man will care
to have any thing to do with him, who has so little wit or honesty in his
anger as to reveal what was before committed to him under the seal of secrecy.

9. Take heed of bitter provoking speeches when you are angry. When you find
your heart to begin to be hot within you, then watch over your self especially,
and either be silent (which is a good way to preserve your innocence) or else
give a soft answer. For as Solomon says, Prove. 15.1. A soft answer puts
away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger, Prove. 17.27. He that has
understanding spares his words and is of a cool spirit. I know people are apt
to say words are but wind. But wind you know many times kindles a fire and
increases it being once kindled, Prove. 21.23. The wise man tells us, as coals
be to burning coals and wood to fire, so is a contentious man to kindle strife.
Fire cannot long continue, if the wood and fuel be taken from it, so neither
will anger long endure if words and cross answers be not multiplied. For such
kind of speeches and perverse and provoking replies, usually make a Choleric
man to proceed from anger to rage, Prove. 25.15. A soft tongue breaks the
bones (or as the original will bear it,) a man of bone, that is, such an one as
is stiff and hard, Virum durissimum and ri^idissimum. Jun.
an eminent example hereof we have in Abigail who by her discreet and soft
speeches quickly appeased David's furious anger, 1 Samuel 25.24. And therefore
well might the same wise man say, Prove. 21.23. Whosoever keeps his mouth and his
tongue keeps his Soul from troubles. The Counsel of the Son of Syrac is here
also worthy to be considered, Chap. 8. Verse 4. Contend not with a man full of
words, neither heap up wood on his fire. For as the heaping up of wood
increases the fire, so multiplying of words increases anger.

10. Do not peremptorily break off any business in a fit of anger. Consider
that nothing can be done in passion but may be done better without it. For
Passion is no good counselor. It usually blinds the mind and hinders due
consideration, and so exposes a man to do things very unreasonable.

11. Ponder beforehand with your self what are the usual causes of anger, that
so you may take heed of them. And they are such as these.

1. Pride. This is a great cause of anger. Proud and high minded men are
usually apt to be very angry and to conceive a great indignation, if their
judgments and understandings be not veiled unto, and their wills and pleasures
complied with, Prove. 13.10. Only by Pride comes contention, Prove. 21.24. Proud
and haughty Scorner is his name who deals in fierce wrath.

2. An opinion of being contemned either in word or deed. A sense of contempt,
or that the injury received had much of contempt in it does usually more stir
up anger than the injury it self, and so the manner aggravates the matter.
Therefore when men study to find out circumstances of contempt in an injury
received, they kindle their anger to a great height. If you would therefore
prevent anger, sever the injuries you receive (as much as you can) from
contempt or malice, and impute them to rashness, weakness, inconsiderateness,
to any thing rather than contempt, which the nature of man can so hardly bear.

3. Covetousness. They that are eager upon the world, and have their hearts set
upon earthly things, are apt to be very angry and choleric when things fall
out cross to their minds. They are usually very angry abroad when they meet
with losses and disappointments, but almost mad at home; displeased with Wife,
Children, and Servants; scarce any thing can please a covetous man when his
profit and commodity is crossed. Every little trespass or loss touches him to
the quick and makes him impatient.

4. Overmuch niceness and delicateness. Nulla res magis iracundiam alit quam
luxuria.
Tender and delicate persons are subject to be angry. Any little thing is apt
to put such persons into a fit of choler. Those that are rich and great in this
world many times take liberty from their greatness to give scope to their
Passions, and so not only disturb themselves but disquiet those about them, and
make their lives uneasy to them.

5. Weakness and over much tenderness of Spirit. We see that anger usually
reigns most in weak persons, as in old folks and sick folks, in women and
children. A great imbecility certainly it is, for a man to have too tender a
sense, Dure tractandus est animus, ut ictum non sentiat nisi grav^m. Proprium
est magnitudinis verae non sentire se esse percussum.
like a man whose arms and shoulders have the skin flayed off, every thing that
touches him makes him winch and cry out. Take heed therefore that your mind be
not too delicate and tender and womanish and apt to be moved at every toy. We
should harden our minds that they may not have too quick a sense of injuries. A
man should not think his credit or reputation in danger by every idle word
spoken against him. The remedy of this is (as a learned man observes) to get
telam honoris crassiorem; a thicker web of honor that will not so easily ravel
out.

6. Gecundless suspicions. Suspitiosi omnia ad contumeliam acc piunt.
They that are apt to be jealous and suspicious are also very apt to be angry,
though commonly when matters are well examined they find no true cause or
ground for it.

7. Credulity and an easy belief of reports and listening to Tale-bearers is
another cause of anger. He that is very inquisitive and has an itch to know
what people Non vis esse iracundus? ne sis curiosus
say of him, will sometimes hear things that will dispose him to anger. They
therefore that desire to keep themselves from this disquieting passion must
take heed of this, and the other forementioned causes of anger.

12. A twelfth direction is this. Represent to thy self the odiousness and
deformity of Anger. Quibusdam iratis profuit aspexisse s^eculum.

Difficile dictu an magis detestabice vitium, an deforme.


Some of the Ancients advised an angry man to look himself in a glass. O what a
deformed sight is a man in a great fit of anger or rage? His tongue stammering,
his eyes flaming, his mouth foaming, his heart panting, his teeth gnashing, his
fists knocking, his voice loud and clamorous. Did an angry man with Narcissus
see his face in a glass, surely he would never fall in love with himself.

13. Represent to thy self the mischievous nature and hurtfulness of
intemperate Anger.

1. It Is a great enemy both to the mind and to the body. It fills the mind with
vexation and a bitter discontent. It unfits it for any holy duty, for prayer,
meditation, hearing the word, receiving the Sacrament, or any communion with
God. And should not that be very odious to us which unfits us for the worship
of God, or receiving any benefit by his ordinances? And for the body, it
inflameth the blood and stirs up and awakeneth ill humors and so causes
diseases. Nothing does sooner cut the thread of life than the sharpness of
fretting anger and grief. So true is that common saying, an angry man seldom
wants woe.

2. It Is a great disquieter of private families and societies of men. It Is the
Devils bellows to kindle men's corruptions and set the World on fire. O how many
dreadful sins do some angry men commit in one hour? A high fit of passion makes
men like Lions and Tigers. It may well be called a short madness. It disarms
the Soul of its chief defense which is reason and consideration. It sets the
tongue on fire, causing it to vent it self in swearing, cursing, railing,
reviling, and sometimes it flies out even into Blasphemy. An angry man
abounds with transgressions says Solomon, Chap. 29.22. How many thousands
has intemperate anger wronged and injured, hurt and wounded? Yea, how many
thousands has it destroyed and murdered? What villainy has not sinful anger at
one time or other been guilty of?

3. It Is a great disquieter of the Church. The anger that is vented about
matters of Learning or Religion is commonly the most irreligious, most
outrageous and worst of all. The contentions about points of Learning or
Religion are usually very hot and fierce and yet one would think Learning
should civilize the minds of men. 'Twas said so of it of old Emollit mores nec
sinit esse feros. But alas! who are they that write against one another with
greater sharpness and keenness, who are there that mingle more gall with their
ink than learned men do? And for Religion, certainly where it is in reality it
is the best principled and best natured thing in the world. It breaths in
meekness, patience, forbearance, and forgiveness, and yet so powerful is the
Pride and Corruption of man's heart, that there are no controversies managed
with so much bitterness, sharpness, and exasperation as the controversies about
Religion are. Let any man look into the books that are witten by the Papists
against the Protestants, by the Lutherans against the Calvinists, by the
Arminians against the Anti-arminians; or look into the several Sects and
Parties that not long since prevailed in these Nations; or let him cast his eye
on the late disputes between the Conformists and Dissenters, and he shall
quickly see what abundance of intemperate heat and anger, what abundance of
disingenuity and incivility, what abundance of ill will and uncharitableness
does appear in these writings. No man cares to go to a Physician who will rail
upon him and revile him and tell him that he is not worthy to live, and 'twere
better the world were rid of him. And yet thus do some men treat their
adversaries who pretend to write books for their information, and to reduce
them into the right way. Certainly it is the duty of all real Christians who
agree in the main fundamentals of Religion to forbear one another in matters of
less moment, and which belong not to the vitals of Christianity. For we are all
apt to err and mistake in some things, and we cannot see with any bodies eyes
but our own. And it is a horrible uncharitableness to say that any man is
wilfully blind, who opens his eyes as wide as he can. We must all see for our
selves and judge for our selves and our own practice, and make account to
answer to God for our selves. And therefore surely it would become us to be
more charitable one toward another than usually we are. But it is a vain thing
to complain in this matter. I shall rather turn my complaint into a fervent
prayer unto God, that he would please by the all-powerfull influence of his
grace to change the hearts of men, and to give them a better frame of Spirit.

14. Let not anger rest in your bosom lest it putrify and turn into malice and
hatred. Anger rests in the bosom of fools says Solomon, Eccles. 7.9. Anger
lodged in the heart all night is very like to become malice by the morning.
Anger kept in the heart till next day does putrify and corrupt like Manna, save
only that Manna corrupted not at all, and anger does most of all if kept to the
next Sabbath. Therefore says the Apostle, Let not the Sun go down on your
wrath, neither give place to the Devil. You need not open the door to him, who
is so apt to intrude himself. Take heed therefore that thine anger by
continuance do not turn into hatred. For hatred is nothing but an old anger or
grudge arising from several provocations and continuing long. Anger is a sudden
Passion, and has (many times) but a short course; but hatred is more durable
and lasting. Anger often flies at the offense not at the person, but hatred
flies at the person, whose hurt it earnestly desires.

15. Take heed especially that your anger do not sour into revenge. God
challenges revenge as peculiarly belonging unto himself, Vengeance is mine I
will repay says the Lord. Romans 12.19. For a creature to avenge himself is a
plain intrenchment upon Gods Prerogative. For he is the Judge as well as the
Creator of the World. Remember, we all stand in need of Gods pardon and
forgiveness, and except we forgive we cannot expect to be forgiven, Mat. 6.14,
15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you, but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Heavenly
Father forgive you, There are some men that are slow to anger, but being once
incensed are hardly ever reconciled. An irreconcilable temper is a dangerous
sign or mark that a man is in a bad state toward God. I have heard of a man
lying upon his deathbed whom his Minister persuaded to be reconciled unto, and
to forgive a person whom he knew he had a great displeasure against. The sick
man answered, yea, I forgive him with all my heart if I dye, but if I live I
will be revenged of him. I wish this wretched man did not speak the sense of
too many others. Our Savior, Mat. 18.23. shows us the necessity of forgiving
one another by the Parable of a Servant to whom his Lord had forgiven Ten
thousand Talents, and yet took his fellow servants by the throat for an hundred
pence, at which his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors till he
should pay all that was due. Even so likewise (says our Savior) shall my
Heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
Brother their trespasses. One of the Ancients upon this Parable, makes this
remark. Servi Parabolam utinam nos non faceremus historiam. I wish (says he)
that this that is related of the Servant in the Gospel were only a Parable, and
that our practice did not give too much occasion to have it related of us as a
true history and a thing really done by us.

16. Take heed of envy. Be not angry or displeased at the prosperity Nunquam
erit foelix qnem torquebit foelicior. Sen.
of others. To be pleased with another man's happiness is to increase our own.
But envy is as rottenness to the bones, Prove. 14.13.

17. Represent to thy self what a beauty and amiableness there is in meekness.
Divines speak of a threefold meekness.

1. Natural, springing from a good temper. 2. Moral, springing from a good
education. 3. Gracious, which is a fruit of the Spirit. Gal. 5.23.
Now this gracious meekness has reference either to God or Man.


Meekness toward God consists in patiently submitting to his will without
murmuring or repining. Meekness toward Man consists in having a heart ready to
pass by offenses, to forgive wrongs and injuries and to do good against evil.
And there is not a greater magnetism or attractive in nature than such a frame
of Spirit.

The great amiableness of meekness will appear to us if we consider these
particulars

1. Meek persons are like unto our Lord and Savior, who expressed his great
meekness in submitting to his Fathers will without any repining, and in bearing
patiently great injuries from men, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me for I am meek and
lowly of heart. Our Savior seems to say to us as Gideon to his followers,
Judges 7.17. Look on me and do as ye see me do. And accordingly the Apostle, 2
Cor. 10.1. obtests and beseeches the Corinthians by the meekness and gentleness
of Christ (which he uses as a powerful motive to them) that they would not
interpret his humble and mild carriage among them otherwise than they ought.

2. Gracious meekness does plainly show the soul to have been under the forming
and workmanship of the Spirit of God. We may by the work know the workman.

3. It Is a temper highly prized by God himself, 1 Pet. 3.4. A meek and a quiet
Spirit is in the sight of God of great price, Moses's meekness exalted him so
highly that God spoke unto him face to face, as a man speaks to his friend,
Exodus 33.11.

4. It Is a temper that much adorns our Christian Profession. It Is a walking
worthy of our high calling, Ephesians. 4.1^. I Paul beseech you that ye walk worthy
of the vocation wherewith you are called, with all lowliness and meekness, and
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, and Verse 31, 32. Let all
bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from
you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to another, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. The Apostle also expresses
himself to the same purpose, Col. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.

5. It Is a temper to which many gracious promises are made, Psalm. 25.9. The
meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way, and Mat. 5.5.
The meek shall inherit the earth, that is, they shall enjoy that which God
gives them here with much more Peace, Quietness and Comfort than others do.
Meek persons are not given to Lawing and quarrelling as other men are, if they
be oppressed at any time God does usually interest himself in their quarrel,
Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord he makes his very enemies to be
at peace with him. And if God does sometimes for gracious ends suffer the meek
to be oppressed, (namely, for the exercise of their faith and patience) he will
recompense them abundantly in the other life.

6. It Is a temper of great benefit and advantage to the life of man. It takes
the edge off from sufferings that they cannot wound and hurt us; Whereas he
that frets and rages makes that troublesome to him which else would not be so.
As in case of reproachful words, which in themselves neither hurt our bodies
nor lessen our estates, but the great danger of them is if they drive us into
anger. For then our anger may run us into abundance of other sins. Whereas he
that meekly passes them by is never the worse for them, nay the better, (as God
orders it) For he shall be rewarded for his Patience. And so much of the
excellency and benefits of meekness.

16. Another Direction is this. Be humbled seriously before the Lord for all
former irregular and exorbitant Passions thou have been guilty of, and seek
pardon of them in the blood of Christ, and pray earnestly unto the Lord to keep
thee from falling into the like again, and to give thee the wisdom which comes
from above which is first pure then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, and full of good fruits. And when thou art surprised on a sudden
with any unexpected accident or violent temptation that is apt to disorder
thee, then send up a fervent ejaculation to heaven as a speedy messenger for
help and succor in that time of danger.

17. Lastly, Set a high price and value upon quietness, meekness, and a calm
frame of Soul, 1 These. 4.11. Study to be quiet and to do thy own business. And
so much of the directions for the right regulating of our anger.

4. I come to consider the excuses Vitia nostra quia amamus defendimus and
malumus ea excusare quam excutere. Sen.
that those that are prone to be angry do use to make for themselves.

1. They are ready to say that their afflictions are so great and so heavy
that they cannot bear them with any patience. And therefore they may say as
Jonah did, that they do well to be angry, and that it is better for them to dye
than to live.

Answ. Be silent all flesh before God. What art thou O Man, O Worm, that thou
reply against God? Aaron had two Sons destroyed at one stroke by fire from
Heaven. And they both dyed (for ought appears to the contrary) in their sin,
and that is a sharper affliction than ever thou mettest with. And yet the text
says, Lev. 10.3. Aaron held his peace, he uttered not one word of murmuring or
discontent against the Almighty. To murmur against God is to throw a stone
upward, that will be sure to fall on his head that threw it. Take heed
therefore of inward repining, or outward murmuring against the Almighty, how
heavy soever his hand be upon thee. Shall a living man complain? (says the
moanful Prophet, Lam. 3.39.) Man suffers for his sin. God is always just,
though his ways to us are sometimes amazing and past our finding out.

2. They are ready to say that the provocation upon which they were angry, was
so great that flesh and blood could not bear it.

Answ. Flesh and blood neither in a natural nor a moral sense (except it be
changed) can enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. And the Apostle tells
us, that they that live after the flesh shall die, Romans 8.13. and that not a
temporal death only but an eternal. And Gal. 5.24. He tells us that all that
are Christ's have (in some good degrees though not all equally) crucified the
flesh with its corrupt affections and lusts Sanabilibus aegrotamus malis. Sen.


3. They are ready to say that they are Choleric by nature, and therefore they
cannot help falling into Passion. Alas! how can they (will they say) except God
give them patience.

Answ. A Choleric temper I confess may strongly dispose them to anger, but
cannot necessitate them to it. And if they did pray earnestly to God for the
assistance of his grace and set a watch over themselves, they might bring
themselves into better order. But some people seem to expect that God should do
all for them and neither earnestly beg grace from him to help them, nor
endeavor seriously in the power he vouchsafes to them to mortify the
corruptions of their hearts. If a great reward were propounded to a Choleric
man on condition he abstained from falling into any unseemly passion for one
day whatever provocation were offered him, surely he would do it. And if a man
may by great watchfulness abstain one day for a temporal reward, why should he
not do it the next day, and the next after that out of obedience unto God?
There are several gracious Christians that are not easily, frequently, or
furiously angry nor mis-behave themselves in their anger by word or deed. Do
you endeavor to do so likewise.

4. They are ready to say that such a man was excessively hot and angry with
them, and why should not they be so with him?

Ans. No man must go about to cure an evil with an evil or to correct a vice by
a vice, fire is not quenched by fire nor anger with anger. It Is more
Christian-like to give place to wrath, and and overcome evil with good.

CHAP. X. Of Idleness.
THE Prophet Ezekiel Chap. 16.49. tell us, that this was the iniquity of Sodom,
Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness, neither did she strengthen
the hands of the Poor. I wish abundance of Idleness were not at this day a sin
found in England as well as in Sodom, and that among the wealthiest, and those
of the best rank and quality in the Nation, whose education one would think
should have taught them better things, Seneca complained of old that men spent
their time either in nihil agendo or aliud agendo, or male agendo, either in
pure idleness and doing nothing, or doing things of small moment and
consequence, or in doing things evil and wicked. I wish this were not too true
of many among us in these days, who either idle and squander away their
precious time or unusefully and impertinently employ it, or else employ it in
sin and wickedness, little considering that diligence in doing evil is but a
making haste to hell. A discourse therefore that tends to show people how
necessary it is to their happiness, that they should well employ their time,
and not foolishly and carelessly squander it away, I hope cannot be
unseasonable. The Apostle, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. makes circumspect walking and
redeeming time to be the great Character to distinguish those that are wise
from those that are foolish. See that ye walk circumspectly (says he) not as
fools, but as wise, redeeming the time. This is the Subject therefore that I
shall now speak to, and in the handling of it I shall show, 1. What is meant by
redeeming time. 2. For what purposes especially it is to be redeemed. 3. From
what we must redeem it. 4. What are the reasons and motives that should press
this duty upon us. 5. I shall give some directions as to the manner how we
should redeem it. 6. I shall show who are the persons that should especially be
persuaded to the practice of this duty.


For the First. What is meant by redeeming time.

Time may be considered either as past, present or to come.

1. For Time past, there is no recalling of that; the loss of it ought to be
bewailed by us and that with great bitterness. Damna fleo rerum, sed plus fleo
damna dierum.


2. For Time to come, that we are uncertain of. Only two times we are assured
will come; the time of Death and the time of Judgment. And he is no wise man
that does not provide and prepare himself against both these.

3. The Time present. This only is our time and this we should labor well to
employ, improve and husband to the best advantage. And so much of the first
particular, what is meant by redeeming Time.

2. To what purposes are we to redeem time?

There are many excellent purposes for which we should do it. Particularly.

1. To consider our ways, and find out the sins of our lives, that we may
humble our Souls before the Lord for them, and may undo them again by true
Repentance.

2. To sue out our Pardon and make our Peace with God by betaking our selves to
Christ Jesus, and giving up our selves to him to be Pardoned through the
infinite merit of his active and passive obedience, and to be sanctified by his
Spirit.

3. To consider what unruly affections are in us, that we may set our selves
(through the aids of grace) to subdue and mortify them.

4. To consider how we may frame our outward conversation so, as may tend to
the honor of God and credit of our Profession.

5. To consider what is the part that God has appointed us to act in this
world and what are the peculiar duties incumbent on us, in reference to our
particular calling and station, that we may perform them, wisely, faithfully,
and diligently;

6. To consider that this life is our seed-time, and that we shall reap
hereafter according to what we sow here. And therefore we had need look to it
that we sow good seed and do what good we can while we have opportunity. He
that sowes to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, and he that sowes
to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7.

7. To consider that we are not only to take care to clear our own Souls of
guilt, but to humble our selves for the crying sins of our Nation by which our
Heavenly Father is highly dishonored, that so we may do our part to stand in
the gap, and divert the wrath of God. And so much of the purposes for which we
are to redeem Time.

3. I come now in the third place to consider from what we must redeem time.

There are many things from which we must redeem it.

1. From the ordinary business and affairs of this life. For though we are to
be diligent in our particular callings, yet we must not suffer our worldly
business to ingross all our time. We must labor so to contrive the business of
our callings that they may not entrench upon that time which we are to employ
for the good of our Souls.

2. From the lawful refreshments of our lives, such as eating, drinking,
sleeping, recreations, etc. In which there is very often too much of our time
spent.

3. From Conversation and company, especially such company among whom we cannot
expect either to do good or to receive good.

4. We must be especially careful how we employ our solitary hours and when we
are alone; that we do not spend that time n melancholy and impertinent musings
and rovings and wanderings of thoughts, but employ it in meditation on things
profitable and useful. And if we had the care and skill to keep our minds to
good works when we are alone, It would be of incredible advantage to us both
for the improving of our reason, and much more to improve us in real piety and
Christianity. And so much of the third Particular, From what we must redeem
time.

4. What are the reasons that should press this duty upon us?

1. Our time is but short, we have but a little of it. We have not seven or
eight hundred years of life, as the Patriarchs had before the flood. Man's life
is now ordinarily very short. Few live to threescore years and ten, and very
few to four-score. And take out of the longest life that any live here (1.) The
folly and inconsiderateness of Childhood and youth. (2.) The time spent in
eating, drinking, and sleeping, though with moderation. (3.) The time of
sickness and indisposition of health. (4.) The time spent in journeys and
travel. (5.) The time spent in recreation and visiting of friends. (6.) The
time of weakness, valitudinariness, unusefulness in old age, I say take out all
these; and the residue that remains for our business of greatest moment and
consideration we shall find will be but a small pittance or portion. And
therefore having so little time, we had not need waste it prodigally.

2. Our time flies away very swifly. Job 9.25, 26. compares it to three very
swift things, to a Post, to a Ship on the Sea and to an Eagle flying to her
prey. Let any one consider how soon a year is gone, and then tell me whether
time does not fly away apace.

3. A great deal of our time we have already misspent; Let us reflect on our
infancy, Childhood, and youth, Alas! How many years have passed over our heads
ere we came to have any consideration for what end we came into the world, or
what work we had here to do? Nay how many in their youth have weaved those
cursed wehs of sin which must be afterward unweaved and undone again with
great sorrow and shame? Nay how much of the time which we have spent in Gods
own worship may be reckoned to our lost time? God commands us to use the World
as if we used it not. But we are apt to pray as if we prayed not and to hear as
if we heard not, and to worship God in such a cold and formal manner as if we
minded not what we were about.

4. Consider what a damned soul in hell would give for a little time to recover
himself out of that woeful misery, if it were in his power to purchase it. O how
cutting must it needs be to him to think how he might have procured everlasting
joy and bliss to himself, but he foolishly neglected his time and season for
the doing of it, which is not now to be recovered. If God by an extraordinary
dispensation should grant to a damned Soul one month or week to come out of
hell upon trial, surely such a person would better improve his time than before
he had done. When people come to die, at how dear a rate would they be willing
to purchase some of those hours, which they foolishly misspent and squandered
away before.

5. Consider, time is a Talent which we must account for. As we must not vainly
waste and mis-spend our estates, so neither may we our time. Time is an
Universal Talent that every one that lives to the years of discretion is
entrusted with. Every man has not a Talent of Learning or Wealth, but every
man who lives to years of understanding is entrusted with a Talent of Time,
which he may improve to his great advantage: if he be not wanting to himself.
How highly guilty then are those careless wasters of time, and those voluptuous
livers, whose time lies upon their hands, and if they have not almost every day
a new divertisement to pass away their time (as they wickedly phrase it) they
know not what to do with it. O wretches! do you study to pass away that which
flies away so fast? You had need clip its wings or hang leaden Plummets upon
it, to stop its course and keep it from flying away so fast, if you could
possibly do it. You say you are for a short life and a merry. Surely you think
to live in the World like Leviathan in the Sea, merely to sport and take your
pastime therein. Hark you in your ear, you that are such prodigal spenders and
wasters of your precious time, This is the time that God has allotted you to
work out your salvation in with fear and trembling. If a condemned Malefactor
had but two or three days allowed him to sue out his pardon, do you think that
he would spend that time in sports and pastimes in feastings and merriments, in
idle visits and complements without any sense or regard in what condition he
was, and how his life was certainly and unavoidably at an end, if he did not
procure his pardon? I suppose you would not think him in his wits, if he should
so do. 'Twas a woeful speech of that dying person who cried out on his
deathbed, call Time again, O call Time again. But that could not be done.

6. Another reason why we should redeem time is that given by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.16. Because the days are evil. 'Twas not in our power to order in
what part of time since the Creation we should be born. God (in whose hands our
times are and who determines our times and the bounds of our habitation, Acts
17.26.) has appointed us to live in these evil times, and therefore we should
now more especially endeavor to redeem our time and improve it for all those
excellent purposes before mentioned. There are three things that speak times to
be evil.

1. When iniquity abounds and little restraint is laid upon it, but there are
great examples to encourage it. 2. When great troubles and sufferings befall
the people of God, and such as desire to walk in all good conscience toward
God and man. 3. When the times are full of snares and temptations whereby
multitudes are intrapped. And if these things be found among us at this day; We
had need from this consideration as well as the former, endeavor to make the
best improvement of our Time.
5. I come now to give some directions as to the manner how time should be
redeemed.

1. Consider there is no part of your time you should be more careful well to
improve than the seasons of grace which God affords you. The Scripture speaks
of a time of visitation, Luke 19.44. Of a day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Of a
time wherein the Lord may be found, Isa. 55.6. Of a time wherein the Spirit of
God striveth with the children of men, Genesis 6.3. And this time of all times
ought to be well improved. But you will say possibly, how shall we know this
day of Gods visitation and of the striving of his Spirit with us? I Answer, you
may know it by these things (1.) When he casts you by his providence under a
powerful and awakening Ministry, whereby you are showed the great evil and
danger of your sins, and the absolute necessity of your conversion, if you
intend to be saved.

2. When his holy Spirit co-operates with that Ministry and draws and persuades
your hearts to break off your sins by repentance and to turn to God and to lay
hold on the offers of his grace in Christ.

3. When he sends some awakening afflictions, either public or private upon
you, whereby he makes your hearts soft and tender and ready to embrace good
counsel.

4. When he affords you the company and example of pious and faithful Chistians
who are ready to help and forward, and encourage you in the way to Heaven. When
God affords you these helps, highly value and prize them as special favors
from heaven and account that this is the day of your visitation, this is your
season of grace, and therefore be very careful to make a right improvement of
it. All wise men are careful to lay hold on, and to improve all fit seasons and
opportunities for the effecting the business they design. For that may be done
in its fit season which cannot be done out of it. How easy is it to sail with
the wind or to form iron while it is hot. But these things cannot be done at
another time. The case is thus also in reference to the Soul. Seasons of grace
must by no means be neglected. For as there is a time of visitation which God
affords to the children of men, so there is a time wherein (men having outstood
their visitation) the Spirit of God will no longer strive with them. And though
we cannot certainly determine this time; yet there are some things that are
shrewd signs of it, which it will behove us all well to consider and to examine
our selves whether such signs be found in us or no. Those signs are such as
these

1. When people have long lived under the powerful means of grace and are
nothing bettered by them, but are as ignorant or worldly, as carnal and sensual
as before, Observe what our Savior says, Luke 13.7. These three years have I
sought fruit on this fig tree and have found none, cut it down, why cumbreth it
the ground?

2. When people have had many convictions and secret workings of the Spirit of
God in their hearts, and have resisted and quenched them. Observe what God
says by the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 24.13. of that people, because I have
purged thee (that is, have used means to purge thee by sending my prophets unto
thee,) and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. And dreadful are those
words of the Lord also, Hosea 4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols let him alone.

3. When God sends affliction after affliction upon them, and they are nothing
amended by them, Esaias. 1.5. Why should you be stricken any more, you will
revolt more and more?

4. When they come to have a vile esteem of the Ministers of Christ, and of his
Ordinances.

5. When they go on confidently and presumptuously in their sins,
notwithstanding all the warnings and threatenings they have had to the contrary,
Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. When they shall bless themselves saying, I shall have peace
though I walk after the imaginations of my heart, adding drunkenness to thirst,
the Lord will not spare that man, but his anger and jealousy shall smoke
against him.

Where these black marks are found, we have great cause to fear that such men
have out stood the day of their visitation. But whatever others do, let us look
to it that we carefully improve our day of grace. And that is the first
Direction.

2. Dispatch in the first place, and with the greatest care and diligence thy
great work which must be done or thou art undone for ever. Secure thy interest
in Christ and the pardon of all thy sins in him, thy state in grace and thy
title to Heaven. And when that great work is once well done, thou may go
quietly and cheerfully about thy worldly affairs and businesses. The generality
of men are the veriest children and fools as to their main concernment
imaginable. They mind the world seriously but neglect the one thing absolutely
necessary. If a King should send his Ambassador and give him among the rest,
one principal instruction, charging him above all things to mind and observe
that; which if he did he should be highly rewarded at his return, but if he
neglected it he should forfeit his head. I question whether any instance can be
give since the world began of any Ambassador so stupid and careless as to
neglect a matter that so much concerned him. But alas! how often is this done by
the children of men in a matter of greater moment? Thou that would, it may
be severely have censured and condemned this Ambassad^r, if he had so grossly
neglected his duty, de te fabula narratur thou art the man; This thing is more
than verified of thee who mindest the things of this life but neglectest the
great business for which thou came into the world, and which above all other
things thou should have minded. There is no necessity that thou should be
rich and leave such an inheritance to thy Son, or so many hundreds in thy
inventory, but it is of absolute necessity thou should be converted and
repent of thy sins, and get thy soul cleared of all thy guilt by faith in
Christ, and should honor God in this world, and should be in such a
posture and frame of mind and heart that thou may be fitted to dye. These
things are necessary to thee, the other are not. Labor therefore to do thy
great work in the first place, and do not defer it and put it off; God calls
thee now to repent; do not put God off and say thou will do it hereafter. Ask
thy self this one serious question, whether thou ever do intend to repent or
no? If not, thou declarest thou intendest to damn thy Soul. If thou do intend
to repent, why will thou not now do it? The longer thou delayest, the more
unfit thou will be. Besides, consider this, thou in thy distresses and
necessities cryest to God to relieve thee and to help thee presently. When thou
art in pain or under a grievous sickness thou would think it hard if God
should say, I will ease thee of thy pain seven years hence, why should thou
then put God off with delays? And it is a sad observation that some make
concerning those that wilfully delay to turn to God, namely that few of them
are converted at last. Therefore upon all these accounts defer not thy main
work thy conversion to God, and securing thy peace with him, whatever else thou
neglectest.

3. Labor to keep certain set times for thy private devotions, and be constant
to them. Especially be careful to observe the Lord's Day well. From our
conscienciousness and diligence in the duties of Gods worship and service on
that day, we may make a probable conjecture of the success of our worldly
affairs and businesses the week after. This a learned man The renowned J^dge
Hale in his Meditations.
says he could not but take notice of in himself and as to his own concerns,
though otherwise he was not addicted to superstitious observations.

4. Keep conscience tender and that will reprehend thee for wasting thy time or
ill employing it. Thou will then be careful not to spend it in any thing that
thy conscience will reproach thee for, and which must be repented of
afterward. Remember, God and conscience must be pleased whoever be displeased.

5. Promise not to thy self long life, but live as one that is uncertain of
another day. The groundless expectation of long life makes people many times
less careful rightly to improve the present time. Men will spend prodigally out
of a full purse, who otherwise would be sparing if they knew they had but
little. It Is observed of some that have promised themselves long life, that
they have been cut off very suddenly. Thou reckonest possibly upon years;
whereas, it may be, thou have not months to live. However, say this to thy
self every morning. I am now brought to the beginning of a new day; O my soul!
let me improve this day well, so as I may give a comfortable account of it unto
God. The Sun may return again after it has set. But this day when it is once
gone I shall never see again.

6. Take heed of those things that rob people of their time, and watch
carefully against them. And they are such as these.

1. A sluggish and sloathful habit of mind. Spontanea lassitudo aspontaneous
lassitude or weariness is a sign the body is out of order. And a voluntary
sloathfulness and sluggishness is a sign of a distempered Soul sloth is an
averseness from that labor which is our duty through a carnal love of ease. He
is most sinfully sloathful who is most voluntarily sloathfull. It Is certainly a
very dangerous life for any man to live out of a calling or to be idle and
slothful in his calling. But the worst kind of sloth is a backwardness and
listlesness to our greatest duties. The Apostle cautions us not to be sloathful
in business, but fervent in Spirit serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. And if we
would but take pleasure in the work God calls us unto, we should not then be
weary of it or slothful in it.

2. Overmuch sleeping and drouzing and lying a bed. Suppose there be two young
scholars, whereof one sleeps but six hours usually in a night and the other
nine. The one of these out-lives the other 21 hours in a week, how much will he
gain of him a year?

3. Too long dressing and finefying the body. Indeed neatness and cleanliness
are very commendable; but overmuch curiosity in dressing and adorning the body,
as it is a great vanity so it is a great and unnecessary expense of time.

4. Long visits Amici sures temporis.
and unprofitable and impertinent discourse, of which I spoke something before
under the third head. Indeed visits may be prudently ordered, and spent in such
discourse as is very profitable, and then they will not be only testifications
of civility and respect from one friend to another, but a great advantage and
improvement to them many ways.

5. Immoderate and too long sports, games and recreations. Indeed some fiting
recreation may be needful to him who has wearied himself in honest labor. He
that mowes must sometimes whet his sithe, and he that travails must sometimes
bait. And therefore recreations that are lawful, moderate and seasonable, and
conduce to the refreshment of nature, and fitting us more for our business, are
very allowable; but too much and too long recreation is a most prodigal expense
of time. Nay there are some who labor hard and take great pains at their
sports and recreations, who are very idle in their due work. And what a folly
is this to be so active and labourious about their pleasures and to neglect
their main business?

6. Vain impertinent and ungoverned thoughts are a great consumption of time,
especially in melancholy persons. But this also I touched before.

7. Reading of vain and corrupting books, such as Play-books, etc. is another
great waster of precious time. Surely we should not employ our time in reading
any books but such as tend to make us either wiser or better, or more useful;
not in such as tend to the depraving and corrupting of our minds. Such wasters
therefore of precious time as these are, should be carefully avoided by us. And
so much of the sixth Direction.

7. Consider how exceeding comfortable the review of time well spent will be
when you come to dye. What a strong cordial is it to a departing soul when he
can say with the blessed Apostle, I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at his
appearing, 2 Timothy 3.7, 8. Or with Hezekiah, Esaias. 38.3. Remember now O Lord how
I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which was good in thy sight? 'Twas once said by a holy man in this Nation, that
if any uncomfortable Passion could betide a Saint in Heaven, it would be that
he had spent his time no better nor had done God more service here. And
therefore the pious and renowned Usher cried out on his Deathbed Lord pardon
my omissions. But as the review of our time well spent and employed will be
exceeding comfortable to us at our dying hour, so the contrary must needs be
exceeding cutting. O how do people wish then they had spent their time! Which
of these two accounts do you think will then be most comfortable? Item so much
of my time spent in Alehouses, Taverns, in idle company, in pleasures, and
pastimes, in foolish mirth, and jollity, etc. or so much of my time spent in
fervent prayer to God, and praising of him, so much in hearing his word, in
meditation, in self-examination, in pious discourse, etc. It Is hardly possible
for voluptuous persons, who have their minds filled with vanity and pleasure,
to imagine what a different sense they will have of things when they come to
dye, from what they have now; and how precious that time will then appear to
them which they made so little account of before. They will then begin to see
their folly, as they say Moles have their eyes opened just before they die. And
as Hagar sat down and wept when her water was spent, Genesis 21.15. So these
people will then weep and howl when their time is gone and can never be
recalled. And so much for the direction as to the manner how we should redeem
time.

6. I come now in the last place to show who are the Persons that should
especially be persuaded to the practice of this duty.

1. Those that are young. They should take heed of Satan's grand delusion, who
will persuade them (if he can) that it is too soon for them as yet to think of
improving their time, and if they should do so now they will lose their prime
time of pleasure. But I shall refer them to my directions to the young in my
book of knowledge and practice for the answering such suggestions. They should
consider how many great advantages will accrue to them if they now improve
their time well. Hereby they will prevent many sins and sorrows; hereby they
will come to some eminency of knowledge grace and spiritual experience; hereby
they will do God more service in their lives, and their joys and comforts will
be greater when they come to be old, and their death will be more comfortable
and their reward in Heaven much greater.

2. Those who have lost much time before. If a traveller has loitered in the
morning, he had need spur up and ride hard in the remaining part of the day,
lest the night overtake him and so disable him from accomplishing his journey.
They that have lost much precious time in the former part of their life, had
need use double diligence in well improving of it afterward.

3. The sick and aged. They ought to look upon their Sun as setting and their
glass as almost run out. And therefore if ever they will bestir themselves to
secure to themselves a happy eternity they must do it now.

4. Those that at present enjoy more then ordinary Spiritual helps and
advantages for the good of their souls, or such opportunities as they have not
before met with. As when God casts them into a good Family, or vouchsafes to
them the help of some faithful Minister, or the example of some exemplary
Christians whose help they had not before. Those to whom God vouchsafes such
advantages should especially be careful to improve them remembering that
opportunity is the quintescence of time. A man may have a great deal of time
and yet but few opportunities to effect an important business, and it is the
character of a wise man to make a right improvement of the opportunities
vouch-safed to him.

5. Those that are in any office of Magistracy or Ministry, whereby they have
an especial opportunity of doing good to many. They should be very careful to
improve this season, for it will not always last. If therefore thou art a
Magistrate, consider thou have now a great opportunity to encourage Piety,
Virtue, and Honesty, and to beat down Sin, Vice, and Wickedness. Do what thou
can for God while thy Magistracy lasts. If thou art a Minister, Preach the
word faithfully in season and out of season, Exhort, Reprove, Rebuke with all
long-suffering and patience; strive to win as many souls to Christ as thou
can. Thou know not how soon thy mouth may be stopped. And I may make the
like address to others also. If thou art rich, distribute and communicate to
the poor whilst thou have an estate; possibly it may be taken from thee, and
then thou can not do it. If thou art a Parent or a Master of a Family, do
good to the souls of those under thy care while thou have time. Remember that
both thy life and their lives are uncertain, and thou know not how long thou
may have opportunity to do it.

6. The Ignorant. They that have been hitherto ignorant should consider they
must get knowledge if they intend to be saved; for without the knowledge of the
main fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion, how is it possible they
should be good Christians or know what God requires of them in order to their
Salvation.

7. Those that have been lately recovered from any dangerous sickness. They
should remember that God has renewed the lease of their life, which possibly
both themselves and their friends thought expiring. They should remember the
resolutions and promises which they then made to God, and possibly to others in
their sickness. It is said of the Mariners that were in the Ship out of which
Jonah was cast, that when the Sea ceased from raging and all was safe, that the
men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a Sacrifice to the Lord and made
vows, Jonah 1.16. Observe, they made vows after their deliverance. Many make
vows in their danger that are little careful to perform them when the danger is
over. But let all those that love their Souls be careful to perform the vows
they made to God in their sicknesses and distresses. And so much of this last
particular, namely, the persons who ought especially to be persuaded to the
practice of this duty.

FINIS.

