THE ARRAIGNMENT, AND CONVICTION OF ANABAPTISM; OR A Reply to Master TOMBS his
Plea for Anti-Paedobaptists. By refutation of his Examen of the Dispute at
Aberga^veny, and Sermon on Mark 16. 16. Wherein the Antiquity, Universalitie,
and Succession of Infant Baptism since the Apostles days, until the
Anabaptists sprung up in Germany is maintained, necessity of Dipping refuted.
The Arguments for it from the holy Scriptures holden out, and the objections
against it assoiled.

By John Cragge M. A. and Preacher of the Gospel at Lantilio Pertholy in
Monmothshire.

The promise is to you, and to your children Acts, 2. 39. (...). Athanas.
Quaest. 114. ad Antioch. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for H. Twyford, N Brooks.
Tho. Dring, J. Place, and are to be Sold at their Shops. 1656.

The Anabaptists ANOTAMIZED and SILENCED in a PUBLIC Dispute
Engraved frontispiece with four illustrated compartments, showing religious
scenes: 1) Anabaptists baptizing adults in a river; 2) the Anabaptist ritual of
the laying on of hands; 3) Anabaptists observing the practice of foot-washing;
4) a public disputation, with a preacher speaking to a crowd from the pulpit.
The man^er of the Anabaptists Dipping

Their Laying on of Hands

Their Washing of Feet

The Disputation

T. Cross fec


To the Right Honorable Henry Lord Herbert, Thomas Morgan of Machen, John
Scudamore of Kent-Church, Henry Herbert of Colbrook, Colonel Thomas Hughs of
Matherine, Benjamin Hoskins, George Gwynne, Edmond Jones Esquires, Members of
Parliament for their respective Counties.
Worthy Patriots,
WHom heroic Excellencies have advanced into the Consistory of Gods, and
lifted in that Sanhedrim of Angels Tutelar of three Nations,) I present with
all humility to your vigilant care, a defense of that cause which is, and
ought to be infinitely dearer to you, than any private interests; as whereupon
infallibly depends the Peace of Church, and State, which (me thinks) should
seem a Paradox to none, who seriously weighs the former sad disasters of
Germany compared with our present distractions, both taking their spring, and
growth in a great measure from Anabaptism; which reason with experience
dictates; for by their principles whole Nations are unchurched, and none
received into Communion but by re* baptizing, all former members esteemed as
Publicans, and Heathens; hence Magistracy, and Ministry that dissents, are by
them wholly disgusted, if not discarded. Though doubtless a respect ought to be
had of tender consciences, in patronage whereof (its known) I have suffered as
much as the most of my condition, yet I never judged promiscuous toleration
without distinction to be Gospel-proof. The pious watchmen of the Church have
been always cautious, least under that notion Schism, and Heresy should creep
in; The starved Snake, when she begins to warm, infects the whole house, and
puts out the sting to the disturbance of her fosterer. The Church Christ's
spouse is but one, a Dove without Gall, harmoniously agreeing in fundamentals,
not quarrelling seditiously in superstructures, but submitting with meekness to
authority, that the unity of the spirit may be kept in the bond of Peace. The
rule by which the keys, and sword are steared, ought to be certain, which is
the Scripture, not private men's pretended consciences, which too often are
defiled, like Lesbian r^les, bendable any way, differing one from another like
Clocks, and all from the Sun Dial of the Word, and Spirit. Magistrates are
custodes utriusque tabulae, Guardians as well of the first, as second table,
Romans 13. 4. executing wrath on them that do evil, false teachers are called
evil workers, Phil. 3. 3. Error is a sin, especially held with pertinacie,
and a high transgression of the Law. Liberty in Religion is like free
conversing without restraint, or watch in time of Pestilence, one house easily
infects a whole City, and destroys the main end of Magistracy, and Ministry,
whose essential work is to preserve peace, and piety: It is destructive to
Peace, for the Apostle says, that when men do not consent to the Doctrine
which is according to godliness, but dote about questions, and strifes of
words, thence arises envy, railings, and evil surmisings, 1 Timoth. 6. 3, 4.
Difference in opinion causes difference in affection, and both these abett
difference in practice, hence the Apostle so often exhorts Christians to be of
one mind, and judgment. Phil. 2. 2. Heresy is called a fruit of the flesh,
Galat. 5. 20. that deprives of the Kingdom of God. The spirit of God commends
the Church of Ephesus for not bearing with them that are evil, that is false
teachers, Revel. 2. 2. condemns the Church of Thyatira for suffering the woman
Jezebel to teach, and seduce Christ's servants, Revel. 2. 20, Reproves the
Church of Pergamos for suffering them that taught the doctrine of Balaam, for
entertaining them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, Revel. 2. 14, 15.
The Apostle prays that such may be cut off, as trouble the Galatians with
false doctrines, Gal. 5. 12. we are commanded to buy the truth, not sell it,
Prove. 23. 23. to d^ nothing against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8.
to rebuke our brother plainly, and not suffer sin upon him, Levit. 19. 17.
Hence unsound doctrine is compared to a canker that corrodes the sound flesh, 2
Timoth. 2. 17. The Abetters, and fomenters thereof are resembled to thieves
that spoil, to ravenous Wolves that devour, to deceitful workers that
undermine the truth, 2 Cor. 11. 13. Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Nehemiah, were commended for punishing abuses in the worship of God, and
setting things aright in matters of Religion. The Canons of ancient Councels
had an eye to this; Those that are termed the Apostles Can. 11. and 45.
Clements constitutionis lib. 6. Cap. 13. The four first general Councels, next
in Gregory's judgment, to the four Evangelists, bended their styles against
those grand Heretics Arius, Eunomius, Nestorius, and Eutyches; with them
concur the Primitive Fathers: Tertullian says, Heretics must be compelled, not
prayed to do their duty, for heresy is not to be persuaded, but to be overcome
by rigor, Tert. advers. Gnost. Cap. 2. Athanasius says Arius, Eudoxius, and
Patrophilus, when they write such things (unsound doctrines) how I pray you,
are they not worthy of all punishments? Augustine has golden sayings to that
purpose, think thou; says he to Vincentius, no man ought to be forced to
righteousness: When as thou read, that the Master said to his servant,
compel all that you find to come in? and also that Paul was forced to receive
and embrace the truth by the violent compulsion of Christ, except thou judge
goods, and lands dearer unto men then their eyes? Epist. 48. Hezekiah served
God by destroying the Groves, and temples of Idols, the King of Nineveh
enforcing the whole City to please God, Darius by delivering the Idol into the
power of Daniel, Nabuchadnezar in restraining all his subjects from blaspheming
God, August. Epist. 50. Jerome observes that Arius in Alexandria, was but one
little spark, but because he was not presently suppressed, the flame thereof
consumed the whole world* Cap. 5. ad Galat. Gregory Nazianzene says, cut off
the Arian impiety, cut off the pernicious error of Sabellius, this I say unto
the Laymen, this I say unto the Clergy, and this I say unto the Magistrates,
my words fighting for the holy Trinity shall not have as much efficacy, as the
Edict shall, if thou will suppress such as are infected with pernicious
opinions: Nazian. Homil. in dict. Evang. for this cause John the Evangelist
left the bath wherein was Terinthus, Iren. advers. haeres. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Polycarpus called Marcion Primogenitum diaboli The devils first begotten son,
Origin refused to come to prayers with Paulus Samosatenus, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap.
3. Placilla the Empress would not suffer Theodosius to confer with Eunomius,
Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 7. Constantine prohibited the exercise of all unsound
Religions, either in public or private places, commanding their books to be
burned, their goods to be sold, their houses to be pulled down, and proscribed
them as traitors to his Person, and enemies to the Truth, Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. lib. 3. cap. 63. whereupon ensued the conversion of many Heretics,
and Schismatics, as Eusebius, Zozomenus and Nicephorous testify. Constantine,
Constantius, and Constans the sons of Constantine the great, decreed that no
Sect should have liberty to exercise, or profess their Heresy, as Aug.
records, Epist. 166. Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius enacted that all
people within their Dominions should embrace one Religion, even the same which
the Apostles taught, that Damasus maintained at Rome, and Peter at Alexandria,
branding the contrary professors with the odious name of Heretics, Theod.
lib. 5. Arcadius, Honorius, and Constantius sons of Theodosius persuaded
themselves that their Father got all his victories bccause of his care for the
Church, and severitie against Heretics, decreeing that all former pains,
punishments, and mulcts of their noble Progenitors should be executed against
the pertinacious, and obstinat spirit of Heretics, Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 1.
Justinian amongst other constitutions of the Empire composed matters touching
religion, and banished all Sectaries, rejected the suit of Theodoricus King of
the Goths soliciting for the Arians, Justinian, Novell. 42. When Theodosius
was somewhat indulgent to Arianism, the Authors whereof denies the deity of
Christ, Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium having suffered a former repulse,
assaulted him with this Stratagem; entering his presence, saluted him with due
reverence, but slighted his son Arcadius compeer in the Empire with him, at
which the Father was enraged, till the grave man replied, Art thou offended O
Emperor, that I attribute not to thy son equal honor with thy self? and do
thou not think that God is angry at those, that ascribe not equal glory to his
son Christ with himself? whereupon he was convinced to act new Laws against the
Arians, Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 6.

Mixture of religion has been adjudged dangerous for many reasons, first, it
dissolves the bond of obedience, unrivets the sacred tie of love amongst
subjects, breeds exacerbation of mind, and exulceration of affections, lays
secret trains, and privy mines, for tumults, uproars, seditions, massacres,
and civil wars, as in Germany, where the Anabaptist grew so populous, that (as
Sleiden records) they could not be vanquished, till almost a hundred thousand
of them were slain by the united forces of the Empire, Sleid. lib. 7. Secondly
collusion in religion, and immunity of profession has been the Prodrome, and
Harbinger of the confusion, and ruin of the greatest States, and most
flourishing Churches: The Sects of the Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, and
Herodians were a Prognostic Crisis of the Jewish dissolution; The diversity
of opinions without restraint in the Emperor Heraclius his time, gave fuel,
and fomentation to the Embrio of Mohammedan superstition, and the Apostacy of
the Eastern Churches. Thirdly it has been the cause of defection, and ruin of
the most famous Churches; for the Pagan, and Apostate Emperors, because they
would supplant the true Christian profession, granted liberty, and immunity
unto all Sects of Heretics; So Julian at the request of Rogatianus, and
Ponticus, granted liberty of perdition (so Optatus Milevitanus calls it) unto
the Sect of Donatus, thinking by that means to root out the Christian name from
off the earth, and envying the unity of the Church, from which he fell, freely
permitted all sacrilegious dissension, Optat. cont. Parm. lib. 2. Fourthly, it
brings a judgment upon those Princes, who for sinister ends tolerate
Heretics, and Idolaters; upon those Kingdoms, or Commonwealths, where
Heresy, and Idolatry is exercised: Gregory Nazianzene relates that
Constantius falling into an Apoplexy, before his death repented of three
things too late. 1. That he had elected Julian to be Caesar. 2. That he had
banished Athanasius. 3. That he had granted toleration of religions; Julian was
wounded to death with an arrow in Persia, as he was advancing his army,
throwing out handfulls of blood into the sky, and crying (...), Thou have
overcome O Galilean, Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 20. Valens being put to flight by
the Barbarians, was burned in a Village with his Soldiers, Theodor. lib. 4.
cap. 28. Constantius calling a Synod at Nicomedia in favor of the Arians, a
sudden earthquake overthrew the whole City, Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 39. During
the reign of Julian the Apostate it was not safe to tarry within doors by
reason of earthquakes, nor to walk abroad by reason of great tempests of
thunders, lightnings, hail; and the City of Alexandria was overflown, and
drowned in the Sea.

But why do I press these things? holding out my gloe-worme amongst so many
shining tapers? knowing we live under authority that is sufficiently wise to
distinguish betwixt truth, and error, conscientiously careful to put a
difference between tenderness, and obstinacy; He that searches the heart,
bears me record, that I urge them with no further approbation, than may suit
with the glory of God, advancement of truth, and Peace of the Nation; Nor would
I wish any further influence upon the Anabaptists, than on my self, were I in
their condition, which is first, that they may be enlightened, and convinced, or
if not so, that they would peaceably keep their Tenets to themselves, and not
corrode further, like Gangrenes infecting the sound parts; which is the end of
this my writing; Not that I can add any thing to what has been formerly
discussed; or that my weak endeavors may be compared to the learned labors
that are gone before; But that divine providence has so disposed, I was called
suddenly to a conflict with the greatest Beauclerk of the faction, and God
giving success to the honestness of the intention beyond the means, The
relation of the dispute, and Sermon were put in Print, which he in his Plea for
Anti Paedobaptists has endeavored to overthrow; Hence diverse godly persons
(some out of scruple of conscience, others for other motives) have importuned
me to reply; which I humbly present unto your view desiring that it may be
protected under the shadow of your wings; And if I may contribute any thing to
the discovery* and making plain the truth* I have the fruit of my labor, and
my wish, who desire to live to no other end, than to do service to Gods Church,
my Country, and your Honors in the quality of

Lantilio Pertholy Ian. 1. 1654. Your most humble, and devoted Servant in the
Lord Jesus. John Cragge.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
TO please my self, and perhaps thee, I shall displease many; First, my Friend,
for making his private token a public frolic. Secondly, Mr. Tombs, for
bringing him in this last Catastrophe wounded in the heel by Troilus and Paris,
who vaunts that in former Scenes, (like Achilles, so far as he was dipped in
the River by his Mother Thetis) he has been unpierced by the Weapons of the
stoutest Hectors. Thirdly, Mr. Cragge, and Mr. Vaughan, for exposing their
Disputes, conceived in an hour and an half, and the Sermon contrived in a day
and a half, to long censure. Fourthly, the Anabaptists (as they will deem) for
too uncourteously galling their soars. Fifthly, their Adversaries the
Paedobaptists, for too courteously, or (as they will fancy) partially
concealing Mr. Tombs harsh language, and his Favorites Incivilities. Sixthly,
the Learned in general, for bringing these Nilus-like hatched Births in a
moment into the open Amphitheater with those Elephants that have been ten years
in conception. My Apology for the whole is as follows; The bulk of this
Manual is small, some may reach to the price of it, that cannot of those larger
Volumes; may have time to read it, that cannot them. The method of this is
facile, the language plain, some will understand this, that cannot them.
Besides, we naturally love the transactions of those, whose persons we know;
Some heard them transiently as they were delivered, and would be glad
deliberately to read them; Some heard them not, but at the second hand, as they
were variously reported (according to the Judgment and affection of the
Relator) who would be willing to know the business truly stated. If any of the
Parties concerned find themselves aggrieved, and intend to bend their style
against me, I Will answer them at the Day of Judgment, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed: In the mean time, if Truth may be advanced, Error
discouraged, Godliness countenanced, Hypocrisy unmasked, thou edified, God
glorified, I have mine ends. Farewell.

Yours in the Lord, I. T. P.

A relation of a Conference had between Mr. John Tombs B. D. and Henry Vaughan
M. A. in St. Mary's Church in Abergavenny, Sept. 5. 1653, touching
Infant Baptism, briefly and punctually set down to the sense of both.
V. INfants may lawfully be Baptized; for they be admitted into the covenant of
grace now by Baptism, as they were before, and under the Law, admitted into the
same covenant by Circumcision.


T. I deny your consequence.


V. You must deny it, either because the covenant of grace made with Abraham,
and his seed, is not the same in substance with that which is now actually in
force with believers, and their Children, or Secondly because Baptism
succeeds not in the room of Circumcision.


T. I could deny your division: yet I say, to gratify you, for both those
reasons.


V. For the former. That the covenant made with Abraham, and his seed, is the
same which is now actually in force with believers, appears by comparing Genes.
17. 2. with Galat. 3. 14. where it is clearly set forth, that the promise made
to Abraham, came unto the Gentiles through Jesus Christ.


T. Here he distinguishes of a towfold seed of Abraham, the natural, and
spiritual, and says, that the covenant was made with Abraham's spiritual
seed, and not the natural.


V. Even all the children of Abraham were Circumcised, and consequently
admitted into the covenant, not one excepted; for every Man-child was to be
Circumcised, Gen 17. 10. It appears by what happened to Moses for not
Circumcising his Child, Exodus 4, 24. Even Ishmael was circumcised Genes. 17.
23. who belonged not to the promise, but was of the natural seed*


T. Ishmael, and the natural Children of Abraham were admitted to the
external part, namely outward privileges, and temporal blessings, and not to
the internal, or spiritual part thereof.

By the Internal part he must needs mean that part of it expressed Genesis 17. 7.
in these words, To be a God unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee, and in the
end of v. 8. I will be their God.

To justify this his destinction, he referred us to Romans 9. and I think v. 8.
where the Children of the promise are contradistinguished from the Children of
the flesh, or the natural Children of Abraham; So that the covenant was made
not to the natural Children of Abraham, but to such of them as were elect, and
faithful.


V. This covenant was made alike in the same extent, and latitude promiscuously
with all the seed of Abraham; and those that lost the promise, and the benefit
of this covenant (which men you call the natural seed lost it not,) because
they were not at first comprehended in the covenant, but because of their own
unbeleef, Romans 11. 20. I confess that the children of Isaac are, Romans 9.
called the Children of the promise, not in regard of any peremptory election,
or designation to Faith, and Salvation, or on the contrary of any absolute
reprobation of the seed of Ishmael.

For if it had been Paul's design to declare the Children of Ishmael, yea, the
greatest part of the Jews, to have been rejected by a certain absolute decree,
why should he v. 1. 2. so much lament their incredulity? wish himself accursed
for their sakes, v. 3. and Romans 10. v. 1. desire, and pray for their
conversion? since upon such an absolute decree of reprobating them, all that
happened to them was inevitable.

But the Children of Isaac are called the Children of promise, First, because
they only were to inherit the land of Canaan; and Secondly, because Christ
according to the flesh was to descend from the progeny of Isaac, not of
Ishmael.

I might have added, that if none but the elect, and faithful, can be admitted
into the covenant, there is no subject left for the ordinance of Baptism, it
being impossible for man to know who are elect, spiritual, and true believers.
Neither can you Baptize with right, or safety, all such grown persons as you
Baptize, since you cannot be assured that they are elect, Spiritual or true
believers, ( Revel. 2. 17.) nor have any light to guide you, save that of
charitable opinion, and conjecture.

Again, it being admitted that none but the Spiritual, elect, and believing,
can be Baptized, the same charity that swayes your judgment for grown persons,
must much rather move you to hope the best of innocent infants, guilty of no
actual sin, since it hopes all things, and thinks no evil, 1. Cor. 13. 2.
They may have faith ( in semine and habitu) in the seed (as they have the habit
of principles, and reason) though they cannot exercise it till ripe years. 3.
Though they have not actual faith, yet the faith of their parents may, and
does, put them into a capacity of being admitted into the covenant, nor is it
news that the parents faith advantageth the Children. Joh. 4. 50.


T. I could wish you could prove that Infants of believers might be admitted to
Baptism by virtue of their parents faith.


V. They were admitted into the same covenant by Circumcision, into which we
are admitted now by Baptism, but Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of
faith, Romans 4. 11. 12. Whence it will follow, that either they had the
righteousness of faith inherently in themselves, or that of their parents
imputed to them (choose you whether) or else it will follow that Circumcision
was a false seal.


T. It is not said there that Circumcision was the seal of righteousness of the
Childrens faith, but only of Abraham's own faith in particular.


V. But the covenant, or promise, was the same and alike to Abraham, and his
seed, Romans 4. 13. Genesis 17. 7. and alike to us believers, and to our Children,
Act. 1. 39.

2. This truth appears yet further from. 1. Cor. 7. 14. Where we find that the
faith of either of the parents make the Children holy, at least in that degree
of holiness (which is the meanest imaginable) to be in capacity of being
admitted into the same covenant with their Parents.


T. The scope of the Apostle here, is to satisfy a scruple of the Corinth.
viz. whether the believing yoak-fellow might live in the enjoying and use of
the unbelieving yoak-fellow? he resolves them in the affirmative, saying, The
unbeleeving husband is sanctified in ( as it is in the Greek) or to ( not for or
by) the wife, etc. That is, he may lawfully use, and enjoy her, and she enjoy
him -- and their are Children holy, that is, legitimate.


V. But here is certainly some special privilege set forth to the Children of
believers accruing to them from the believing Parents. Besides, it had been no
news to tell them they might have the lawful use of one another, and that
their Children were legitimate and no bastards. For where both husband and
wiefe were unbeleevers, no man ever doubted but their enjoyment of one another
was lawful, and their issue legitimate.


T. The case is meant where both parties at their entrance into marrriage were
unbelievers, but afterward one of them happens to be converted, whether then
they might cohabit, and enjoy the use of one another.


V. Though this were granted (which I shall not contend about) yet the Apostles
sense can not be of the lawful use, and enjoyment of each other, for the word
(...) sanctified, never denotes to be lawful. Or if ever you show me that
(...) which is rendered holy, signifies lawful, I shall urge no further.


T. There Is that acception of the word 1. Tim. 4. 4, 5. Every creature of God is
good, and not to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified ((...)) by the word of God, and prayer; here sanctified is for
lawfully used, as standing in opposition to that which is refused.


V. The sense is, that such use of the creature is pleasing to God, as
acknowledging him the author, and sender; for suppose a sinful man eat his meat
without invoking God for a blessing, has he not a lawful use of the creature?


T. His next instance was 1. These. 4. 3, 4, 7. Where sanctification is used for
chastity, and might bear that sense in this place, 1. Cor. 7. 17. in agitation.


V. I deny it, for sanctification is there used in its full latitude, as
appears by the context.

But I will descend to prove the second ground of my consequence, at the
beginning, which you denied, viz.

That Baptism succeeded in the Room of Circumcision.

Mr. Tombs had told us that it was impossible, for then women should not be
Baptized, because they were not Circumcised, [which is Bellarmines Argument] To
which I answered, that indeed the males only were mentioned in the covenant of
Circumcision, for in the eyes of all laws whatsoever, the women are but as
ignoble creatures, and therefore the usual style of laws, and covenants is Si
Quis and Qui in the masculine [except such as particularly respect their sex]*

2. That they are included in the word Seed, and because descended from man,
did partake of the privilege, and promise, annexed to the covenant. [I thought
also to have told him, that I well knew that before Christ's time Baptism and
Circumcision were both practiced on the Proselites called Proselitae Justitiae
(as I co^ld have showed out of several authors) yet that hindered not, but
that Baptism now under the Gospel should be the sole mean^ to admit us into
the same covenant, into which the Jews w^^ ^dmitted by Circumcision. Even as
the bread and wine we taken by the Jews at the eating of the Passover, and now
that the Jewish Passover is abrogated, the bread and wine were only by Christ
retained to commemorate his Passion, the true Passover. 1. Cor. 5. 7.

And in like manner when Circumcision was abolished, yet was Baptism retained
to admit the Infants of Christians, as Circumcision admitted them of the Jews;
But the time, and his close manner of disputing, not permitting this enlarging
by recourse to the original, and institution of Baptism, which served more to
Illustrate than convince, I kept to the tether allowed, and came at length to
prove that proposition] from Col. 2. 11, 12. Where 1. the circumcision of
Christ is set in opposition to the Jewish circumcision made with hands. 2. An
explanation of what is meant by the circumcision of Christ in these words,
being buried with him in Baptism.


T. Paul here disswades them from the use of Jewish ceremonies (which some
would have introduced amongst them) and particularly of Circumcision, because
all those were but shadows, but the body and realitie was of Christ.


V. It Is confessed the Apostle speaks here against imposers of Jewish (and also
Pythagorean) doctrines and practices.

But see ye not here a double Circumcision, and the Circumcision of Christ
described by being buried with him in Baptism. The word buried implies but the
resemblance betwixt Christ's death, and resurrection, with what is done in
Baptism, where there is an Immersion or plunging in the water, to shadow his
burial, and Emersion or rising up out of the water, to represent his
resurrection, which resemblance is more fully set forth Romans c. 6.


T. Here Mr. Tombs interrupted me, and desired the people to take notice of my
ingenuous confession, that Baptism was then practiced by plunging. He read also
a passage out of Casaubons annot* on the New Test* where he says that (...) to
Baptize, denotes a plunging of the whole body etc. Had he read out the
passage, he might have found how that great scholar affirms this to be a
slender Argument against such as only sprinkle at Baptism: for, says he, the
virtue and efficacy of Baptism consistes not in that, meaning the manner of
washing.


V. I shall satisfy the Auditors herein anon, in the mean time I desire
Answer to my Argument, the Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism being so
evident in this place; But receiving none, I addressed my self to the people,
according to promise, saying, That indeed it seemed to me that for i^ me
Centuries of years, that Baptism was practiced by plunging: For sprinkling was
brought first in use by occasion of the Clinicks (as Cyprian Epist: a Magnum
relates) being men which deferred their Baptism till some extremity of
sickness, who then in such case were only sprinkled with water, lest the
plunging of their bodies might over-offend them in that feeble desperate
condition.


T. Here take notice that sprinkling took its rise from a corrupt custom.


V. Though plunging be confessed the more ancient way, yet is this no ground
for that over-uncharitable speech of yours, in your sermon yesterday: That our
Baptism, meaning of Infants, and by sprinkling, was but a nullitie, and
Mockery, which concludes our selves, and all our Ancestors, even all in the
Western Church for 1500. years, under damnation.

For the Church has power upon the sight of any inconvenience, and for order
and decencies sake, to alter the circumstantials and externalls of any
Ordinance.


T. What have they to do to alter any thing from the form of Christ's
institution?


V. That they have such a power is confessed by all divines, and he is none
that denies it, yea, I believe it is acknowledged by your own practice.


T. Wherein?


V. In the administration of the Lords supper, which was done by Christ in the
Evening, and also then by his Apostles after their Love Feasts: The whole
Church of God, (and your self I suppose) take it in the morning, which custom
has taken place, and obtained every where for very many ages, even from their
days who immediately succeeded the Apostles.

Thus advising him to be wise to Sobriety, and cease to imbroyl the Church of
God (so infinitely torn already) and to submit to the judgment, and
scarce-interrupted practice of the Western Churches even for 1500. years, To
which Gods providence could not be so far wanting, as to suffer them to fall
into such an Error of admitting and retaining a Baptism (which in his account
was none) we broke off.


A relation of the dispute had between Mr. John Tombs B. D. respondent, and
John Cragge Mr. A. opponent, in St. Mary's Church in Abergavennie, September. 5.
1653. touching Infant Baptism.
Mr. Cragge having briefly expressed that he was forced to undertake this task,
on a sudden, and unprovided, against so experienced a champion; desired, first,
if he should fail, the cause might not suffer prejudice in men's opinions for
his sake.

2. That liberty might be granted of a premeditate, and treatable dispute
hereafter, not doubting that if he should but study the Question so many hours
as Mr. Tombs has done days, so many days as he has done weeks, so many
weeks as he months, or so many months as he years, the truth was so evident on
his side, he would not fear (Maugre all opposition) to make it clear. In the
mean time trusting to Gods assistance, (whose cause it was) he would attempt it
beginning with this Enthymema.

C. Some Infants may not be Baptized, therefore some Infants may be Baptized.

T. Having repeated, he denied the consequence.


C. Which he proved thus, Subcontrary propositions in a Contingent matter may
be both true: But these, viz: (some infants may not be Baptized, some infants
may be Baptized) are Subcontrary propositions in a Contingent matter. Therefore
they may be both true.


T. Having repeated the Syllogism, he said there were four terms in it*


C. He enquired where?


T. He answered in these words (may be both true) in the Premises, and (are
both true) in the Conclusion. C. He returned, that was Mr. Tombs Syllogism,
none of his, reciting that distick of Martial.

Quem recitas meus est O Fidentine, logismus,

Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.


T. Repeating it over again after him, said, that he ought to have brought in
the conclusions, and both true.


C. Which he took thus away; That which proves the thing denied, is sufficient;
But that Subcontrary propositions in a Contingent matter may be both true,
proves the thing denied, that some infants may not be Baptized, some infants
may be Baptized; Therefore it is sufficient.


T. He denied the Minor, though it be an Axiom, Subcontrary propositions in a
Contingent matter may be both true, yet it was not consequent that these
subcontrary contingent propositions (some Infants may not be baptized, some
Infants may be baptized) may be both true.


C. Which was proved thus. That which is affirmed and predicated of the
Species, may, and is affirmed of every Individuum, and particular under that
Species: But it is affirmed of the Species, that Subcontrary Propositions in a
Contingent matter may be both true, therefore it may be affirmed of these
particular Propositions (some Infants may not be baptized, some Infants may be
baptized) that they may be both true,


T. He said it was a fallacy, he went about to entrappe him, in confessing that
subcontrary Propositions may be both true, where the subject is capable, but
here the subject, (to wit infants) are not capable of Baptism.

C Then replies he, they are not Contingent (which is here required) but
Necessary Propositions, in materia necessaria, if the subject be not capable,
but we speak of Contingent Propositions, the Predicate whereof may be affirmed
or denied of the subject without contradiction; which while he was framing into
a Syllogism.


T. Mr. T. interrupted him, saying, what would the man say if he could speak?

C: You love not to hear truth speak, but would strangle it in the birth, like
the Egyptian Midwives; but to give you further Satisfaction, I will prove that
they are actually both true, especially that some infants may be baptized, for
of the other there is no controvesie. Which he did thus, To whom belongs the
Essence of Baptism, they may be Baptized; But to some infants belongs the
Essence of Baptism; therefore some infants may be Baptized.


T. He denied the Minor, that the Essence of Baptism did belong to some Infants.


C. Which was proved thus; To whom belongs the definition of Baptism, to them
belongs the Essence; But to some infants belongs the definition of Baptism;
Therefore to some infants belongs the Essence of Baptism.


T. He answered first to the Major, (to whom belongs the definition of Baptism,
to them belongs the Essence,) it was idem per idem, proving of the same thing
by the same.


C. To which was replied, why then says Aristotle, that (...), the definition
is a manifestation of the Essence, and Logicians describe a definition to be
explicatio rei Essentiae, the expression of the Essence of a thing, now that
which expresses a thing; and which is expressed, are two distinct things. Then
he denied the Minor, which was proved thus.


C. The definition of Baptism, as of all other Relations, is made up of the
fundament, correlative, and termini. But all these three fundamentum,
correlatum, and terminus, belong to Infants; Therefore the definit on of
Baptism belongs to Infants.


T. He denied the Major, that Baptism was a Relation, or was made up of those
ingredients.


C. He replied, that seemed strange to him, seeing all the Divines, and
Logicians that he had read, affirmed Baptism to be a Realation, and it was
evident, it could be put in no other Predicament, (as might be proved by
Induction, but that the people understood it not) seeing the whole nature of
Baptism is (...) in Relation to another.


T. He said he cared not for authorities, but bid him prove it.


C. Which he did thus; Every Sacrament is a Relation ^ But Baptism is a
Sacrament; Therefore Baptism is a Relation.


T. He said he might deny both Propositions, first the Major, for any thing he
knew, every Sacrament was not a Relation; And the Minor too, that Baptism was a
Sacrament, for the word Sacrament was an invention of man, not grounded upon
scripture.


C. Which both Propositions together were proved thus; That which is an
outward, and visible sign, of an inward, and invisible grace, is both a
Relation, and a Sacrament; But Baptism is an outward, and visible sign, of an
inward, and invisible grace; Therefore it is both a Relation, and a Sacrament.


T. He denied the Minor, that Baptism was an outward, and visible sign, of an
inward, and invisible grace.


C. He told him, it was St. Austens definition, avouched by learned men in
succeeding ages, confirmed, and approved by the Church of England in the old
Catechism.


T. Mr. Tombs said he looked for Artificial or divine Arguments, not humane
Testimonies, at which answer while Mr. C. seemed to be astonished, he took
occasion to triumph, contumeliously saying he never heard such an Argument.


C. To which he replied, Nor Alexander ever saw such a knot, as the Gordian,
which made him cut it, when he could not untie it; you teach me by experience
to know that there is no disputing against them that deny all Principles; as
where you think the people do not understand, you make no scruple to deny clear
truths in Logic, and Divinity; Therefore I see I must go to plain scriptures,
that all the people may understand the absurdities. Now that the Definition of
Baptism (which was the thing denied) belongs to Infants, I prove thus.

If God institute Baptism for infants, Christ merited it for them, and they
stand in need of it, then to infants belongs the Definition of Baptism; But God
instituted, Christ merited, and infants stand in need of Baptism; Therefore to
infants belongs the Definition of Baptism.


T. He denied the Minor, that God did not institute Baptism for infants, Christ
did not merit it for them, nor Infants stand in need of it.


C. Which he promised to prove in order, First that God did institute Baptism
for infants. He that appointed infants Churchmembers under the Gospel, did
institute Baptism for them; But God appointed Infants Church Members under the
Gospel; Therefore God did institute Baptism for infants.


T. He said first the Major might be questioned, because, to be Church Members
(whereas he should have said Church Members under the Gospel) and to be
Baptized, were not termini convertibiles.


C. He confessed it, for infants under the Law were Churchmembers, and yet not
Baptized, but Circumcised, and before the Law Church Members, and yet neither
Circumcised, nor Baptized; but under the Gospel they were so convertible, that
all that were Baptized, were Church Members, and all that were Church Members
were to be Baptized, which is that which he affirmed now, and is a truth so
clear, that Master Tombs confesses it all along in his Books, and upon that
confessed ground, Mr. Baxter goes in many of his Arguments.


T. He would have denied it, till a Gentleman told him, that he heard him
affirm the same in his Sermon the day before, Then he denied the minor, that
God did institute infants Church Members under the Gospel.


C. That I Will confirm (says he) with a threefold cord, which will not easily be
broken, before the Law, under the Law, under the Gospel, which he framed into
an Argument thus, Those whom God did promise before the Law, foretell under the
Law, actually receive into covenant under the Gospel, those God did appoint
Church Members under the Gospel; But God did promise before the Law, foretell
under the Law, and actually receive Infants into Covenant under the Gospel;
Therefore God did appoint Infants Church Members under the Gospel.


T. He denied the Minor, That God did not promise before the Law, foretell
under the Law, and actually receive infants into covenant under the Gospel.


C. Which was proved in order, first that God did promise before the Law that
infants should be in covenant under the Gospel, thus.

That which God did promise to Abraham, was before the Law; But God did promise
to Abraham, that infants should be in covenant under the Gospel; Therefore God
did promise before the Law, that infants should be in covenant under the
Gospel. The Minor being denied, he proved out of Genesis 17. 7. I will establish
my covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations
for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and unto thy seed after
thee. Thus framing his Argument; He that makes an everlasting covenant to
Abraham, and his seed after him in their generations, promised that infants
should be in covenant under the Gospel; but God makes an everlasting Covenant
with Abraham, and his seed after him in their generations: Therefore God
promised that infants should be in covenant under the Gospel.


T. He denied the Major, saying, that everlasting signified only a long time,
not that it should be so under the Gospel to the worlds end; and was to be
interpreted by the verse following, I will give unto thee the Land of Canaan
for an everlasting possession, and yet the Jews are now dispossessed of Canaan.


C. They are now dispossessed, but shall be possessed of it again at their
conversion, and so have an everlasting possession, in the type to the end of
the world, in the Antitype for ever, but that the covenant that God made with
Abraham is to continue to the end of the World appears, in that it is a
Gospell-covenant; That which is a Gospell-covenant is to continue to the end of
the world; But the covenant that God made with Abraham and his seed to all
generations, is a Gospel covenant, Gal. 3. 8. and the scripture foreseeing
that God would Justify the Heathen, through faith, preached the Gospel before
to Abraham, saying, In thee shall nations be blessed; Therefore it is to
continue to the end of the world.


T. Without repeating, he confusedly answered thus, that it was an everlasting
covenant, and to continue to the end of the world, but not to infants.


C. He told him first that it was a denying of the Conclusion, then took away
his answer thus; If God command infants to stand before him in covenant, then
it is to continue to infants; But God commands infants to stand in covenant
before him; Therefore it is to continue to infants. Deuteronomy, 29. 10, 11. Ye stand
this day all of you before the Lord, your God, your captains of your tribes,
your elders, and your officers, with all the men of Israel, your little ones.


T. He said that he should have proved that it should continue to infants to
the worlds end, for he did not deny but that infants in some sense were in
covenant under the Law, but not under the Gospel.


C. Yes under the Gospel; If Christ has obtained a more excellent Ministry,
and is a Mediator of a better covenant, which is established upon better
promises, then if infants were in covenant under the Law, they are in covenant
under the Gospel; But Heb. 8. 6. Christ has obtained a more excellent
Ministry, was a Mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon
better promises; Therefore if infants were in covenant under the Law, they are
in covenant under the Gospel.


T. He denied the consequence of the Major, that though the covenant of the
Gospel was a better covenant than that of the Law, yet infants were not in
covenant as well under the Gospel, as under the Law.


C. Which was thus taken away; That which unchurches the one half of
Christendom, and leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation, cannot be a
better covenant; But to deny infants to be in covenant, unchurches the one half
of Christendom, and leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation: Therefore it
cannot be a better covenant.


T. Without repeating the Syllogism, or denying either of the Premises, or
formally applying any distinction, he said, the covenant under the Gospel was
made only with the spiritual seed of Abraham.


C. Which was thus disproved; If the covenant was made in the same manner, and
extent, to the Gentiles, as to the Jews, then under the Gospel it was not
only made to the Spiritual seed; But it was made in the same manner, and
extent to the Gentiles, as it was to the Jews; Therefore under the Gospel it
was not only made to the Spiritual seed.


T. He denied the Minor.


C. Which was proved by this Enthymema: The partition wall is pulled down, and
Jew and Gentile are all one in Christ Jesus; Therefore the covenant is made in
the same manner and extent, to the Jew, and Gentile.


T. He denied the consequent, that, though the partition wall was taken down,
and both Jew and Gentile are all one in Christ Jesus, seeing the Gospel was
offered to all nations; Yet under the Gospel the covenant was only with the
Elect, and believers.


C. Which was confuted thus; That which is made with the whole visible Church,
is not only made with the Elect, and true be^^evers; But the covenant is made
with the whole visible Church; Therefore not only with the Elect, and true
believers.


T. He denied the Major.


C. Which was proved thus; That which is made to the kingdom of God upon earth,
is not only made to the Elect; But that which is made to the whole Church
visible is made to the kingdom of God upon Earth; Therefore it was not only
made to the Elect.


T. He denied the Major, that, that which was made to the kingdom of God upon
earth, is not only made to the Elect.


C. Which was proved thus; In the kingdom of God, that is in the Church
Militant, there are not only Elect, but reprobates, Saints, but hypocrites,
for all that are outwardly called, are of the kingdom of God in this sense, and
many are called, but few chosen, The kingdom of God is compared to a field,
where there are tares, as well as wheat; a fold, where there are goats as well
as sheep, to a noble man's house, where there are vessels of dishonor, as well
as honor; And if the Church in regard of outward administration of ordinances
(which is the Question) were only the Elect, then it would follow that there
were no visible Church upon earth, the Jews had no more visible Church than the
heathens, the distinction of the Church visible, and invisible were frivolous,
for no man, nor angel, knows who are Elect, nor any but God.

To which issue the first branch of the Argument being brought, Mr. C. referred
the judgment of it to the people, And proceeded to the second, that God
foretold under the Law, that infants should be Church Members under the Gospel.


T. Mr. T. perceiving that the people apprehended* that he was brought to an
apparent absurdity, would have waded into a large discourse to wind himself out.


C. But Mr. C. told him, that it was his office) being Respondent) to deny or
distinguish, but not authoritatively to determine the question, as if he were
the Dr. of the chair; And with much ado (the Anabaptists crying let him have
liberty to speak on) brought him to dispute again, and to turn to Esaias 49. 22.
Whence he framed this Argument. He that foretold that he would lift up his hand
to the Gentiles, and set up a standard to the people, and that they should
bring their sons in their Arms, and their daughters shall be carried upon
their Shoulders, foretold that infants should be Church Members under the
Gospel; But thus says the Lord God, Behold I will lift up my h(...) to the
Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons
in their Arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders;
Therefore God foretold that infants should be Churchmembers under the Gospel.


T. He denied the Major; And said the meaning was, that the Jews should bring
the Gentiles children.


C. To which he replied, God says, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and
they, that is the Gentile, shall bring thy sons, and Mr. Tombs says the Jews,
shall bring thy sons; Then a Gentleman read the words, and said it is the
Gentiles shall bring, etc.


T. Then Mr. T. recollecting himself said, the meaning was, the Gentiles should
bring the Jews children from captivity; And that it did not point at the time
of the Gospel.


C. To which was replied, the contents of the Chapter says that it points at
the time of the Gospel; Mr. Tombs says it points at the time of the Jews
captivity, whether shall we believe? and repea^ed the contents: Christ being
sent to the Jews, complains of them to the 5. verse, he is sent to the
Gentiles to the 13. verse, Gods love to his Church to the end; then the people
laughed, etc.

The p^th of which was framed into an argument thus; That which is the
judgment of the Church of England ought to be entertained before the groundles
assertion of one private man; But that it points at the time of the Gospel is
the judgment of the Church of England; Therefore it ought to be entertained
before the groundles assertion of one private man.

T. He denied that it was the judgment of the Church of England.


C. Which was thus proved, If the Church of England causes it to be printed,
and commands it to be read before the Chapter; then it is the judgment of the
Church of England; But the Church of England causes it to be printed, and
commands it to be read before the Chapter; Therefore it is the judgment of the
Church of England.


T. Mr. T. said it was not commanded to be printed, and read s^ before the
Chapter, for he knew not what kind of Bible his was.


C. He told him, it was the same with the great Church Bible, which was not
only authorized with a Proclamation, but an Act almost fifty years ago, and
will Mr. Tombs without giving of a reason condemn a whole nation to have slept
in such an error all that while? Then Mr. Abbets preacher resident there, one
who has been dipped, being in pulpit with Mr. Tombs, stood up and said, the
words were, They shall bring thy sons in their Arms; To which Mr. C. replied,
what then? may they not be Gods sons by adoption, and their own by natural
generation?

Mr. Tombs fell upon expounding the Chapter from verse to verse. Mr. C. told
him, that they came not to hear him expound, but dispute, and repeating the
last Argument, wished him to answer; at which Abbets stood up again, and said
the words of the text were, that they, that is the Gentiles, shall bring thy
Children, that is the Jews. To which Master C. replied, that was an addition
to the text, for there is no mention of the Jews; But grant it were, must it
be therefore meant of the Captivity the 20. and 21* verses of this Chapter
confutes it, intimating that the Jews after Christ's coming shall lose their
own natural, and the Gentiles Children shall be adopted, and engrafted into
their place; They, that is the Gentiles converted, shall bring thy sons, thine
by a kind of adoption, and spiritual succession, for the Gentiles Children
were ingrafted into the stock of the Jews Children broke off; And this is so
clear from the Context (compared with Romans 11.) That with reason it could not
be denied; But he was to speak to Mr. Tombs who understood the nature of a
dispute, and not to him, and if he would take upon him to moderat, it was fit
thate he should have another.


T. Mr. Tombs asked Mr. C. what he understood by standart, what by Kings, what
by nursing Fathers, etc.


C. He told him, that it was not his place to dispute Socratically by asking of
questions, but to answer ad Appositum. But to give him Satisfaction (which he
needed not) by Standart he understood some visible Gospell-ordinance, as
Baptism, by Kings supreme Magistrates, by nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers,
patrons, and protectours of the Gospel.


T. He said that it was a Metaphorical speech, and that nothing could be
gathered from it.


C. He replied, that he would grant him that it was more than a Metaphorical
speech, (for a Metaphor consisted but in one single trope) but it was a
continuation of several tropes, and therefore Allegorical; yet it does not
follow, that nothing could be gathered from it, for then nothing could be
gathered from any Parable in the Gospel; Nay nor any part of the New
Testament; for there is scarce a sentence without somes Tropes in it.


T. Mr. T. said it was fulfilled in Hesters time, which was a nursing Mother to
the Jews.


C. To which was answered; Hester was a Jew, and a friend to the Jews, what is
this to the Gentiles bringing Children upon Shoulders? And though that should
be waved, and Hester granted to be a nursing Mother in the type, yet in the
Antitype it ayms principally at the times of the Gospel, else gross
absurdities would follow; for what Kings, or Queens in Hesters-time did bow
down to the Jews with their face toward the Earth, and lick up the dust of
their feet? verse 23. Isles are summoned in the first verse, which must be
meant of the time of the Gospel: Christ is promised to be given for a light
for the Gentiles, that he may be their Salvation to the end of the earth. 6.
Kings shall see, and arise, Princes also shall worship. 7. And the holy Ghost,
quotes verbatim, and applies to the time of the Gospel the 8. verse, and that
expressly 2 Cor. 6. 2. There is an employed cutting off to the Jews, 20. An
ingrafting in of the Gentises, the Children of the wild olive in the stock of
the natural olive, 21. And a Bringing of Children to visible ordinances, 22.
All which he offered to frame into Arguments.


T. But Mr. T. prevented it, saying, that though it should be understood of the
times of the Gospel, yet by sons in Arms, and daughters upon Shoulders, was
meant grown men, for any thing he knew, and men and women of a hundred years of
age might be carried upon arms, and upon shoulders.

Which indeed is the same answer Mr. T. gives in his scepticall exercitation;
(like foxes, and bodgers being beat out of one hole, has another to fly unto:)
Where (as Mr. Hussy quotes him) he uses the same words, that Mr. Abbe^s, and
he found fault with in Mr. C. Major proposition, for these are his words, It is
foretold that Gentiles should bring their Children in their arms, therefore
the Prophet foresaw the Baptism of infants; he might have seen the beam in his
own eye, turpe est doctori, etc. But to return to Mr. T. answer.


C. Which Mr. C. took thus away; Them that they should bring in their bosoms
were Infants; But it was foretold that they should bring them in their bosoms;
Therefore they were Infants.


T. He enquired where it did appear that they should bring them in their
bosoms.


C. Out of the text, for the word in the original (which is translated arms)
is bosom, and so the Septuagints read it (...), intimating that they should
bring sucking Children hanging upon their breasts.


T. Then Mr. Tombs said it was an analogy, and performed when the Gentiles
persuaded their Children to embrace Christ.


C. Well then, it is their Children, not thy children, oportet esse memorem;
But not that neither; for that Scripture which in the letter suits with many
other Scriptures, but in the pretended analogy with no other, cannot be the
meaning; But to interpret it literally of bringing Children to Christ in the
bosom, suits with many scriptures, and to persuade them to come to Christ,
with no scriptures; Therefore it can not be the meaning.


T. Mr. T. could not name one text of scripture, where to bring in arms, or
bosom, was to persuade to come to Christ.


C. So Mr. C. referred the judgment of it to the people, and named another
text, Es. 65. 20. There shall be no more thence an Infant of days, etc. But
the child shall die an hundred year old.


T. Mr. Tombs bid him read the rest of the words, and the verse following.


C. He said he had read as much as he intended to raise his Argument from.


T. Take notice (says he) he will not read that which makes against him.


C. Not so; for nothing of it makes against me, but that an Argument must be
terminus simplex, and homogeneal, and that you know well enough, but that in
place of solid Satisfaction you must say something to deceive the people. The
Arguments I raise hence are two, the first is this, There shall be no more an
Infant of days, that is, Infants shall not be incapable of the seal, while
their age is measured by days, as the J^ws Infants that might not be
Circumcised till a week had passed over them; Therefore Infants new born are
capable of the seal; The second Argument is this, The child shall dye an
hundred year old, that is, as an hundred year old, or as well a Churchmember
as if he were a hundred year old; Therefore Children may be Baptized under the
Gospel.


T. Mr. T. found fault with that interpretation, shall dye an hundred years
old, that is as if an hundred years old.


C. He answered, to take it literally would imply a contradiction, for it was
impossible to be a child, and a hundred years old, and was better than his, and
the Anabaptists exposition of 1 Cor. 10. 2* they were Baptized under the Cloud,
that is (say you) as if they were Baptized under the cloud, when nothing
hindered, out they were really Baptized under the cloud. And Romans 11. 19. the
branches were broken off, that is (say you) as if they were broken off, when it
was both possible, and apparent, that they were broken off.


T. Then Mr. T. said it was not meant of the times of the Gospel.


C. To which was replied; Mr. T. will still be wiser than the Church of
England; and read the Contents of the Chapter; The calling of the Gentiles v.
1. the Jews rejected 17. the blessed state of the new Jerusalem to the end.


T. Mr. T. said it was verifyed Zacha. 8. 4 Thus says the Lord of Hosts, there
shall yet old men, and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every
man with his staff in his hand for very age, and the streets of the City shall
be full of boys, and girls playing in the streets thereof.


C. To which was replied; what is this to an Infant of days, or a child dying
a hundred years old? when it is apparent both from the Contents, and Texts that
this of Zachary is meant of the Jews return from Captivity, and more apparent
that that of Es. is meant of the state of Christ's kingdom under the Gospel,
which I prove thus; That Interpretation that brings with it absurdity,
untruth, blasphemy, is not to be admitted; But to ^nterpret it of the Jews
return from Captivity brings with it absurdity, untruth, blasphemy;
Therefore it is not to be admitted.


T. Mr. Tombs denied the Minor*


C. Which was proved in order; first that it brought with it absurdity, To
apply the 25. verse to the return from Captivity was absurd, that the wolf and
the lamb should feed together, and the Lion should eat straw with the bullock,
and dust should be the serpents meat; Therefore it brought with it absurdity.
Secondly that it brought with it untruth; But to apply the 19. v. to the return
from Captivity brought with it an untruth, that the voice of weeping should be
no more heard in Jerusalem; for it was twice destroyed after, once by
Antiochus, then by Vespatian, and Titus; Therefore it brought with it an
untruth.

Thirdly that it brought with it blasphemy; for to interpret the 17. verse,
(Behold I create new heavens, and new earth, and the former shall no more be
remembered, and come into mind) of the second temple, is blasphemous; Therefore
it brought with it blasphemy, for it crosses St. Peter's interpretation 2 Pet.
3. 13. We according to his promise look for new heavens, and a new earth; For
can any rational man think, that the new temple built at Jerusalem in Cyrus
his time, was this new heaven, and new earth, that the former should be no more
remembered? When the ancient men are said to weep, because the glory of the
latter temple was short of the glory of the first, Ezra 3. 12. [It was
inferior to Solomon's temple, first in respect of the building, that was lower,
and meaner; secondly, in respect of the vessels, before of Gold, now of Brass;
thirdly of five things that were lost, first the Ark of God, secondly, the
Urim* and Thummim, thirdly, fire from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices,
fourthly, the glory of God between the Cherubims, fifthly, the gift of
prophecy, for after the second temple there was no prophet.]


T. Mr. T. fell to his wonted course of impertinent exposition, wherein Mr. C.
told him he violated the rules of dispute, and did lasciviously wanton it out
into a wilderness of words, that the truth might be obscured or lost, and like
a lapwing* carry the hearers far from the matter. Then C. P. an Apothecary
began to interpose, as he had done once before, till a gentleman of authorite,
told him, that it was not fit for a man of his place, and calling, to speak;
Yet Master Tombs would not be satisfied, but went on saying that Dr. Prideaux
in Oxford, when a place of Scripture was cited, was wont to give a large
exposition.


C. Mr. C. Replied; that Dr. Prideaux was Doctor of the Chair, and Judge of the
Controversy, and might do that which a Respondent may not do, whose office is
only to repeat, deny, distinguish, and when a Text is quoted, to give a brief
exposition, that the Opponent may have something to fasten upon; And what Dr.
Prideaux did, he knew not; but what Dr. Collins, and Dr. Ward did, he could
tell him; but that it was not to the present purpose. And that his judgment in
this, was but the same with his own University of Oxford, as he knew of late by
a sad experiment.


T. Mr. Tombs, Asked what that was?


C. He told him an explosion, not for disability (for his dispute was plausible
enough) but that he would neither be satisfied with Dr. Salvage his answer, nor
the Doctor of the Chairs determination; but fell to repetitions, and
extravagances, as now.

Mr. Tombs launched into a tedious discourse to vindicate himself till he had
tired the Auditors, who cried out this is but to waste time; And a learned
Gentleman spoke aloud, this is but to spend the time in parling, that he may
avoid the gunshot, for he is afraid the great thunderbold is behind: and so
with much ado, he was brought to dispute again, where Master C. falling upon
the third branch of his Argument, That God did actually receive Infants to be
Church Members under the Gospel, began thus.


C. Those whom Christ commanded his disciples to Baptize, they may be Baptized;
But Christ commanded his Disciples to Baptize infants; Therefore they may be
Baptized. The Minor being denied, was proved thus; He that commanded his
Disciples to baptize all Nations, commanded them to baptize infants; But Christ
commanded his Disciples; Matthew. 28. 19. to baptize all Nations; Therefore
Christ commanded them to baptize infants.


T. Mr. T. denied the Major.


C. Which was proved by this Enthymema; The whole includes every part; Infants
are a part of Nations; Therefore he that commanded to baptize all Nations,
commanded to baptize infants.


T. He denied the consequent, though the whole included every part and Nations
were the whole, and Infants were a part of Nations, yet it did not follow that
Infants were to be Baptized.


C. He returned, that, that saying of Aquinas (posito toto generali pars ejus
negari non potest, a general whole being granted, no part of it can be denied)
was an axiom both in Logic, Philosophy, and Divinity, as Psalm 117. 1.
Praise the Lord all ye Nations, is interpreted by another Psalm, Old men, and
babes, young men, and maidens, praise ye the Lord.


T. Mr. T. Said it was an Axiom that the whole includes every part, where
there is no exception, but here is an exception.


C. He replied, Saint Ambrose upon the place says there is no exception, Qui
dixit omnes, nullos exclusit, neque parvulos, etc. He that said baptize all
Nations, excepted none, no not infants.


T. Mr. T. Pished at it, sleighting Ambrose his Authority.


C. Then said Mr. C. whether we shall obey Ambrose Bishop of Millain with
Scripture, or Mr. Tombs Vicar of Lemster against Scripture, judge you. But
that there is no exception thus I prove, If infants be excepted from Baptism,
it is either because they are not named in the text, or because we find no
instance that any were Baptized, or because they are not capable; But for none
of these three; Therefore infants are not excepted.


T. Mr. T. Denied the Major, and said that a fourth reason might be given,
because they were not Disciples.


C. He told him that in this answer he showed himself to be no good Logician;
for it is an Axiom, that in no division, one member can be affirmed of
another, because they are opposite, now to be Disciples, and capable of Baptism
were not opposite but subordinate; And to be Disciples, if it made them not
capable, it was no exception at all, if it made them capable* it was the same
with the third, to which Dilemma when he could receive no answer, he demanded
where it was required that those that are to be Baptized, must be Disciples?


T. He said out of the Text, for that which is translated Teach all Nations, is
(...) make Disciples of all Nations.


C. He replied; at Ross you found fault with me for that translation, asking
me, was I wiser than the translators? and now when it seems to make for you,
you urge it. Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea modo? I confess it is (...), in
the Aorist, ye shall make Disciples, for it must be interpreted by the future
(...), baptizing, or by baptizing in the present tense, as if Discipling were
the end, and baptizing the means, and required no qualification before (as
learned men with great probability press) but I will not insist upon that now,
But that which you denied, I prove, that infants may be Disciples, from that
place Romans 15. 10. compared with the 5. verse, for so Mr. C. said, mistaking it
for Acts 15. 10.


T. At which Mr. Tombs insulted, saying he was a good text-man.


C. He replied, he was in have, and did not think of this before, but that his
answer did drive him to it, and he in his elaborate books did oftentimes quote
one place for another, then how much more might he, that was extemporall: it
had been enough to have said, as our Savior to the tempter its written: but to
leave these catches, and come to the proof. They upon whom the Pharisees would
have laid the yoke, were Disciples, verse 10. Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the Disciples; But many of them were Infants; Therefore
Infants are Disciples.


T. He denied the Minor, that many of them were not Infants.


C. Which was proved thus; The yoke was Circumcision verse 5. the Pharisees
saying, that it was needful to Circumcise them; But they upon whom the yoke
was to be imposed by Circumcision, were only infants amongst the Jews, and
Infants together with Parents amongst the Gentiles; Therefore many of them were
infants.


T. He denied the Major, and said the yoke was not Circumcision.


C. He replied it was apparent, by comparing the 5. and 10. with the foregoing
verses. 1. verse Certain men came down from Judea, and taught the brethren,
except ye be Circumcised, after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved; where
observe that Circumcision is the subject of the Question. In the 2. verse they
determined that Paul, and Barnabas, and certain others of them, should go up to
Jerusalem unto the Apostles, and Elders, about this Question, to wit
Circumcision. In the 5. certain of the Sect of the Pharisees said, that it was
needful to circumcise them. In the 6 the Apostles came together to consider of
the matter, that is Circumcision, and when there had been much disputing, Peter
rose up in the 7. and determined the Question in the tenth verse, why tempt ye
God to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples?


T. Mr. T. Said, that Circumcision could not be the yoke, that neither they nor
their fathers could bear.


C. He returned, that it was a bloody, and a heavy yoke, therefore the
Israelites had a dispensation for 40* years in the wilderness; Moses neglected
the Circumcision of his child probably for this cause; and his wife (when the
Child was Circumcised) called him a bloody husband. The Sichemites were slain,
as unable to defend themselves, while they were sore of the wound of
Circumcision.


T. Mr. T. Said, that the Doctrine of Moses was the yoke of which Infants were
not capable.


C. He replied; that Circumcision was principally meant, and the doctrine of
Moses only as an Appendix of it, and children were as capable of the doctrine
then, as they were in Abraham, and Moses his time, when all in the moment of
Circumcision were tied to the observation of the doctrine, though they of ripe
years (to use Vossius his distinction) were taught the doctrine antecedenter,
before Circumcision, infants of eight days consequenter, after Circumcision,
when age made them capable; I know (says God) Abraham will teach his Children;
So it is apparent all those upon whom Circumcision with the doctrine of Moses
was to be imposed, were called Disciples; But some of these were Infants, for
only Infants were Circumcised among the Jews, and Infants with the Parents
among the Gentiles; therefore some infants are Disciples.

Mr. T. Without any distinct answer would have broke through the pales to rove
abroad again.


C. But he pressed him to keep within the lists, urging this Argument. They to
whom is the promise, they may be baptized, its the Apostles own inference, Acts
2. 28. Be baptized, for the promise is to you; But to Infants of believing
parents is the promise, the promise is to you, and your Children; therefore
Infants may be baptized.


T. He denied the Minor, that to infants of believing parents is the promise.


C. He told him, it was the words of the text, The promise is to you, and your
Children.


T. Then Mr. T. Said they were not believers yet.


C. Mr. C. Replied, they were believers in fieri, though perhaps not in facto.


T. That Is Latin (says Mr. T.) what do you understand by it?


C. He said, I mean this, they were believers by outward assent, and
disposition, sufficient to make them members visible; but perhaps not believers
by inward assent, and habit to justify them. For I know you will not say that
none are to be baptized but they that have a saving faith, which none but God
is able to discern. Ministers must act according to rule, which in adultis, is
outward profession, or a willingness to receive the Ordinance, and that they
were thus qualified (which is sufficient) it is apparent.


T. Mr. T. Denied that they were sufficiently qualified.


C. Which was proved thus; They whom the Apostle commanded to be baptized, were
sufficiently qualified; But the Apostle commanded them to be baptized;
Therefore they were sufficiently qualified.


T. Then Mr. T* Without repeating the Syllogism, or applying any distinction,
inquired where the Apostle commanded them to be Baptized.


C. He told him verse 38. (...), be baptized every one of you.


T. Yes (says Mr. T.) Upon condition of Repentance, repent and he Baptized.


C. That is a condition of your own making, and an adding to the Word of God,
for where does the Scripture, either expressly, or implyedly say, that
Repentance is a condition of Baptism? if it be meant of complete repentance,
true it is, ^t was their duty both to repent, and to be baptized, to repent in
relation to crucifying of Christ, to be baptized in relation to Judaism, which
they were to put off, and Christianity which they were to put on; But that they
must have complete repentance before baptism, it is not so much as hinted at.
And if you mean incomplete repentance (which is indeed all that is required)
they had that already, for they were pricked in conscience, saying, Men, and
brethren what shall we do?


T. Mr. T. Said that was not all that was required, nor was it a sufficient
qualification for Baptism.


C. Against which answer was concluded thus; That upon which the Apostles
Baptized three thousand the same day, was a sufficient qualification; But the
Apostles upon that baptized ^000. the same day; Therefore it was a sufficient
qualification.


T. He denied the Minor, and gave his reason from the 40. and 41. verses. And
With many other words did he testify, and exhort, saying. Save your selves from
this untoward generation, then they that gladly received the word were Baptized.


C. It was replied, that this was but a recapitulation, or reciting of the
heads of Peter's Sermon that he preached to them, before they were pricked in
conscience, or were exhorted to be baptized, and no new act; which was a thing
usual in Scripture, as Genesis 1. God having expressed the creation of Man, and
Gods blessing of him, and all creatures to him, by a (...) recites the manner
of his creation in the second Chapter. But howsoever it made nothing against
him, for whether it be taken thetically without any condition, or
hypothetically upon condition of repentance, the Children were to be baptized
together with the Parents, the promise is to you and your Children, and that
was all that he contended for; from whence arises this Argument, To whom the
promise of Grace belongs, to them baptism belongs also; but the promise of
Grace belongs to believers and their Children; Therefore Baptism belongs to
both.


T. Mr. T. said, the Promise of Grace belonged to Believers, and there Children,
when their Children actually believed, and not before.


C. He replied, there were two Arguments in the text to overthrow that: The
first might be drawn from the Indicative praedication in the present tense, the
Promise is you, and your Children, is, for the present, as well to your
Children, as to you. The second, from the opposition betwixt you and your
Children, and them that are afar off. They, and their Children, which are,
(...) near (as the Greek Scholiast, and the Syrian Interpreter says) are
opposed to them that are (...), a far off. The Jews were near, and in Covenant,
for to them is the promise in the present tense, but the Gentiles were afar
off, Romans 2. 15. Ye who sometimes were a far off, are made nigh by the Blood of
Christ, therefore it is expressed in the future tense, as many as God shall
call; So that to the Jews being called, their Children were in Covenant with
them; when the Gentiles shall be called, their Children shall be in Covenant
with them.


T. Mr. T. said, he granted that Children were in Covenant, and might be
baptized.


C. Well then observe, good People, the Dispute is at an end, he grants that
Children are in Covenant, and may be baptized.


T. Yes, but by those Children are not meant Infants, but Grown Men.


C. He replied, there are many circumstances in the text overthrows that;
first, the word is (...), which comes from (...), to bring forth, given
sometimes to Children in the womb, for the most part to them that are newly
born, or young.


T. Mr. T. said, it was also given to Men of ripe age.


C. Yes sometimes, by a figurative speech, (as that of Julius Caesar to Brutus
in Plutarch) (...), and thou my Child. And well might he call him his Child,
for he had adopted him in the night before; but properly it signifies a young
Child, and so it ought to be taken here, unless some convincing reason can be
given to the contrary, according to that rule, Omne analogum per se positum,
stat pro famosiore significato. Mr. T. gave no answer, but with a jeering Echo
repeated the last words, pro famosiore significato.

The second circumstance in the text, is the substantive verb, (...) is, the
promise is to you, and your Children, not is to you, and shall be to your
Children; now what Children had they at this present, but young Children?
unless Master T. will imagine that they were all old Men and Women that were
present, and their Younger Men and Women were absent.

The third circumstance in the text is the finis cui, the end to whom the
promise is, to you, and your Children; the Jews Children under the Law were in
Covenant with their Parents, the Charter is confirmed under the Gospel to them
and their Children. The Jews when they crucified Christ, called for a Curse
upon themselves, and upon their Children, here the Apostle gives them a Remedy
as large as the Disease, the promise (that is, of Freedom from the curse) is
to you and your Children.


T. Mr. T. Still kept his conclasion in despite of the Premises, that it was
to their Children when they actually believed, and not before.


C. Yes, and before they actually believe, which I prove thus: The blessing is
as large as the curse; But the curse extended even to children, before they
could actually believe ( his blood be upon us and upon our children) Therefore
the blessing.


T. Master T. answered to the Major thus: If by blessing was meant the inward
and spiritual part of the Covenant, it might be true; but that was nothing to
the present purpose, seeing it was not known to us: But if the outward, and
visible part, he denied that Infants were capable of the blessing, as well as
liable to the curse.


C. Which distinction was took away thus: They that are holy with a
Covenant-holinesse are capable of the outward and visible part; But Infants of
believers are holy with a Covenant-holiness; Therefore they are capable of the
outward and visible part.


T. Mr. T. denied the Minor, and said that Covenant-holiness was gibberidge,
which they that spoke did not understand themselves.


C. Master C. replied, it was the language of learned men of all ages, amongst
whom were Volsius, Bullinger, and Hugo Grotius; and that Children of believing
Parents were holy before baptism, and that baptism did not make, but declare
them to be Christians.


Then cried out a cobbler, [I. E.] that has been dipped) this is Blasphemy. C.
Well, you discover of what spirit you are, and your ignorance; Are not these
the words of the learned assembly of Divines in the Directory confirmed by
Ordinance of Parliament? That Infants are Christians, and federally holy before
baptism, and therefore are they* baptized [ Page 12.] And that Infants of
believing Parents are thus holy, with a federall, or Covenant-holiness, I thus
prove from, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children unclean, but now they are
holy.


T. That says Master T. Is meant of Matrimonial holiness, or a lawful use of
the Marriage Bed, that they are no Bastards.


C. That Answer I thus infringe. That which in Scripture is taken almost six
hundred times in a distinct sense, and not so much as once for Matrimonial
holiness, cannot be so meant here; But it is taken in Scripture almost six
hundred times in a distinct sense, and not once for Matrimonial holiness;
Therefore it cannot be so meant here.


T. That Argument (says Master T.) I will retort upon you, That which in
Scripture is taken six hundred times in a distinct sense, and never once for
Covenant* holiness cannot be meant here; But it is taken six hundred times in a
distinct sense, and never once for Covenant-holiness; Therefore it cannot be
meant here.


C. To which was replied, this is to invert the order of the dispute, you are
to answer, and not to oppose.


T. I may oppose by retorting of an Argument, and I will answer anon.


C. Well, to satisfy you, I deny your Minor, for its taken often in Scripture
for Covenant-holiness.


T. Where?


C. The proof lies upon you, that it is not, yet I Will give you one instance, or
two, Romans 11. 16 if the first fruits be holy, the Lump is also holy, and if the
root be holy, so are the branches.


T. That is not meant of a Covenant-holyness.


C. Yes, its as clear as the light, and so you your self interpreted it at
Ross, as there are hundreds that will witness, which was upon this occasion. I
pressed that if the immediate parents were holy, the children were holy with a
Covenant holiness; you denied the inference, and said the meaning of it was,
that Abraham the father of the faithful was the first fruits, and root that
was holy, and therefore his posterity was holy, and in covenant [And in this
exposition, as he agreed with truth, so with Beza. who says that children are
holy, that is comprehended in covenant from the womb, and with Bowls who
says, that they are holy with outward holiness, by which they are judged to be
in covenant.]

But to return from whence, by your retortion, we have digressed. I am to prove
that holiness is never taken in Scripture for Matrimonial cleaness in
opposition to Illegitimation. Not in that place Ezra 9. 2. the holy seed have
mingled themselves with the seed of those lands; which is either your only, or
principal hold, (as far as I can gather out of your books) therefore in no
place.


T. He denied the Antecedent.


C. Which was proved thus. If it be meant of Matrimonial cleanness, then this
must be the meaning of the words; The holy seed, that is the lawfully begotten
Jews, have mingled themselves with the seed of those lands, that is the
bastards of those lands; But that cannot be the meaning, for happily there were
some Bastards among the Jews, and in that sense not holy, and no Bastards among
the Nations, but all, or the most Legitimate, and therefore in that sense not
unholy; Therefore it is not meant of Matrimonial holiness.


T. He denied the Major, affirming that both Jews, and Nations, were holy
before their mixture, but then, both they, and their Children became unclean,
because God had forbidden them to marry with the Nations.


C. To which was answered, they that are Saints are not unholy; But some Saints
have been begot by this mixture, or unlawful bed, as Jepthah, who Hebr. 11. is
said to be justified by faith; Therefore they are not unholy.


T. He denied the Major, saying, they may be unholy by their Natural
Generation, and first birth, and yet holy by Regeneration, and new birth.


C. This strikes not home; Moses had children by his Ethiopian woman, but they
were not illegitimate; therefore those that were begot by mixture with the
Nations were not Illegimate.


T. Master Tombs said, that was before the Law was given.


C. Well, that Answer will do you little service; after the Law was given,
Solomon had children by Rahab, who was a Cananitish, and Boaz by Ruth, who was
a Moabitish woman; and yet they were not Illegitimate, or unholy, as you would
have it.


T. They became Proselites, and received the Religion of the Jews.


C. Well then, while they were not of the Jews Religion, though no Bastards,
they were unholy, when they embraced the Jews Religion (by your own confession)
they became holy; what is this but a Covenant holiness which you have opposed
all this while, and now grant it?


T. Mr. T. Used many words to clear himself, but with little satisfaction to
the greaiest part of the hearers, and still denied that children were holy, and
in Covenant.


C. Which was further proved thus. They that Christ took up in his arms,
blessed, said, the Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon
those that despised, and would receive, are holy with a Covenant-holyness; But
Christ took up little children into his, arms, blessed them, said, the Kingdom
of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon those that despised, and
would not receive them; Therefore little Children are holy with a
Covenant-holiness.


T. Mr. Tombs began to be netled, as if something in this Argument galled him,
saying it was a fallacy, and that he went about to entrap him by sophistry.


C. What fallacy?


T. A heaping of many things together that belong to several matters.


C. I confess they were spoken upon several occasions, but they all concenter
in my Conclusion, that children are holy, and in Covenant; I am in have, and
named them all together, but if you will have patience, I Will prosecute them
severally.


T. I am willing to continue till midnight, but I like not this kind of arguing.


C. You like it not, because it does jugutum pel^re, cut the throat of your
tenet.


T. No not so much as touch the skin of it, says he.


C. Well I beseech you in the spirit of meekness to answer.


T. It is a fallacy of heaping many particulars together.


C. I confess there is a fallacy they call (...).


T. Take notice, he confesses it is a fallacy.


C. No such thing, for (...) is an asking of many Questions, which is your
usual fallacy, Socratically to ask, when you should solidly answer, but in my
Syllogism there is not so much as one Question.


T. It is a Copulative proposition says Mr. Tombs, and if one member of it be
false, the whole is false.


C. It is not an explicit Copulative proposition (says Master C.) neither is
any member of it false (for every branch of it is Scripture,) Instance in any
of the particulars that you think makes the least for me, and I Will begin with
that; then he mentioned Matthew. 18. 2. Which words being read, from thence he
raised this Argument. They to whom belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, are holy, and
in Covenant; But to little children belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; Therefore
little children are holy and in Covenant.


T. Those little Children were not Infants.


C. They are called (...) of (...), because they could scarce speak.


T. What are these called (...)?


C. If not here, elsewhere, and of other Evangelists, and here they are called
(...), by the diminutive, which the great Master of the Greek Hippocrates
interprets, to signify a Child under seven years of age, and therefore not
capable of actual faith, when the Apostles themselves were yet ignorant about
fundamentalls.


T. They were converted verse 3. Except ye be converted, and become as little
Children, etc.


C. The meaning is not that the little Children are converted, but it has
relation to the Disciples in the first verse, who must be converted from their
actual sins, and become as little children which have no actual sin.


T. O how unhappy are the people that are seduced with these toys, are you not
ashamed?


C. I see you have learned of that man in Lucian to cry out (...), and to
vilify that Argument you cannot answer, and besides that, I see nothing that
is shame-worthy.

He has answered nothing at all (says one under the Pulpit) but shifts and
denies all.


T. Thou art an impudent, brazen-faced fellow, whosoever thou art, I have
answered all, confuted all my adversaries Books, and amongst them one of my
greatest Antagonists, I have turned Master Richard Baxter the most of his
Arguments against himself.


C. Sir, let that worthy man alone who is absent, you are now to answer me.


T. Here is nothing to answer, is it not in the sixth verse, Who so shall offend
one of these little ones which believe in me? were they not believers?


C. Yes, the Disciples were believers, which are here meant, and not the
children; which the Grammatical construction will tell you, for it is in the
masculin gender, (...) one of these little ones, meaning (...) disciple, not ^n
the N^uter Gender to answer to (...), little child; so that my Argument remains
unanswered.


T. I am weary of this Pedantrie, and looking upon his watch, said, I promised
but one hour, and its above four hours; with that he clapped his Book
together. [T. J.] Good Master Tombs ( says an Anabaptist) continue a little
longer for satisfaction of the people; he gave no answer, but put on his hat.


C. Well, Sir, I will not press you any further now, I should have urged John
3. 5. Romans 11. and other places, to prove Infants Church membership, and have
come to the second and third branches of mine Argument, that Christ merited it
for them, and Infants stand in need of baptism; but those I must leave to
another opportunity; Therefore I desire that we may have a set day about a
Month hence, seeing I was hurryed to this extemporall discourse through
importunity.


T. No, I will have no more dealing with you, unless it be by writing, that
what both of us shall set down, may be read in the public Congregation.


MARK. 16. 15, 16. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and
Preach the Gospel to every Creature.

16. He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes
not, shall be damned.


THese two verses hold out the rich Charter of the Gospel, which our Savior
delivered to the Apostles after his Resurrection; The parts are two, First a
Precept, in the former verse, Go ye into all the world, and Preach the Gospel
to every Creature; Secondly a Promise, with a Commination in the latter. He
that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned.

In the Precept, we have two particulars, First a Mission, he sends them, Go ye
into all the world; Secondly a Commission, he authorizes them, and Preach the
Gospel to every Creature.

In the latter verse, or promise, we have First the thing promised, laid down
affirmatively, shall be saved; Secondly the qualification, and that either
absolute, he that believes, or conditional, and is Baptized; he that
believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved; Or a Commination shall be damned,
with a qualification negative, and absolutely without any limitation, he that
believes not shall be damned.

We Will only hint at the former verse for introduction to the latter And he said,
(that is Christ,) Observe, that it is only God, Christ God and Man, that can
give Mission, or Commission to Preach, and ordain Sacraments. Matthew. 28. 18.
All power is given me in Heaven and Earth, Go ye therefore, and teach all
Nations. Go ye into all the world, there is the largeness of their Commission,
to all the world, as he, to all Nations as Matthew. Hence observe, the
Apostles, and by them the Evangelists had an extraordinary Commission, which
extended through the world, but our Commission ordinarily is limited to certain
places; True it is, there may be itinerants upon special occasions, (and they
also confined within their verges,) But as Doctor Buckeridge observes well when
Christ speaks to Apostles, he says, Go ye into all the world, but when to
ordinary Pastors, and Teachers (...) he fixed some to be Pastors, and some
Teachers.

And Preach the Gospel to every Creature, there is the Commission, wherein we
have First the Act Preach, that is proclaim, Secondly the object of the
Gospel, which in the Original, and other languages signifies good news, or a
good speech; from the connection between the Mission and Commission coming from
the same Author Christ, and extended to the same persons, the Apostles, and
their successors, observe, that none may Preach as Church Officers, but they
that are sent in a Gospelway; our adversary in the common cause spoke so home
to this, that we need not press it further. The last thing is the extent of the
Commission, and that a very large one, unto every Creature, as here, to all
Nations, as Matthew.

Now the Quaere will be, what is meant by every Creature? Some limit it to
every rational creature, Angels, men, Devils, as Origin, and his misericordes
Doctores who held the Devils and reprobates should be saved; but that cannot
be; for 2 Pet. 2. 4. They are cast down to hell, and reserved to judgment.
Some more strictly restrain it only to man, and that when he is come to age,
and understanding, excluding Children; this is too strict, True it is, Infants
are not capable to be taught of men, but they may be taught of God; they cannot
actually understand the Gospel, but they may actually receive the benefit of
the Gospel; a noble man's Child has interest in his Fathers ^atent, and pardon;
a sucking Infant (though he knows it not) may be joined in a lease with the
Parents. Some extend it, and it is conceived more fitly according to the
Letter, without any Syneedoche, or figure, to every creature, as if he should
say, Go^ and proclaim the benefit that comes by Christ to every Creature; for
as by the first Adam all creatures were accursed, so by Christ the second Adam,
all creatures shall be blessed, Romans 8. 22. (...) every creature groans
desiring to be nelivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God,
answerable to this, Preach the Gospl (...) to every creature, telling them,
that they are now by Christ to be delivered into the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God.

Object. But the creature cannot hear, nor understand.

Answ. Its true not properly, no more could John Baptist in his Mothers Womb,
and yet (...) the Babe sprang for joy; Nay the Holy Ghost ascribes a hearing to
the creature, Hosea 2. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the
Lord, I will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth
shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.
Hence observe, that every creature in a sense is sensible of the benefit they
have by Christ; but every one in their kind: men come to years, and discretion
are capable of actual understanding, actual profession, actual faith; Infants
only in actu primo, are capable of the first seeds of understanding, of
profession, of Faith, which will show it self in the fruits when they come to
years; The rest of our fellow creatures as by a natural instinct they groan for
the curse, so by an other instinct, they lift up their heads in expectation of
the blessing, and that (...), with an earnest expectation, or a stretched out
neck, as the word in the original signifies, Romans 8. 9.

Thus we have paraphrased upon the first verse for introduction to the second,
wherein is First, a Consolatory promise, he that believes, and is Baptized,
shall be saved; Secondly a Comminatorie Curse, he that believes not, shall be
damned. In the former, we have first the qualification, and that either
absolute, he that believes, or conditional, and is Baptized.

Q. Now the Quaere will be, what belief is here meant?

Sol. First the event tells us, that belief that saves us, he that believes
shall be saved. Secondly the opposition, its contrary to that unbelief that
damns; Observe that a saving faith is necessary to salvation; without faith it
is impossible to please God, all they and only they that have a saving Faith
shall be saved; so that you see that Faith is a necessary and absolute
condition.

And is Baptized, that is upon supposition, if Baptism conveniently may be had;
hence observe, that Baptism is not absolutely necessary by necessity of means
(as they call it) as if none could be saved without it, but by necessity of
Precept, if conveniently it may be had. The Israelites for forty years in the
Wilderness were not Circumcised. Bernard, that saw not all things, could see
this, that, non absentia sed contemptus Sacramenti damnat, not the want, but
the contempt of the Sacrament damns: Valentinian the Emperor dyed, as he was
going to be Baptized in Jordan, and Ambrose being asked what he thought of him,
answered, that he was Baptizatus vote, and voluntate, etiam si non revera aquae
la^acr^, Baptized inwardly with wish, and will, though not outwardly with the
la^er of water; Austin is conceived here to be mistaken, who denied salvation
to Infants Un-Baptized, hence he is called durus Pater Infantum, a hard Father
of Infants; and many of the Doctors of the Church of Rome, who hold that
Infants that dye Un-Baptized are kept in limbo Infantum, in a Purgatory of
Infants, where they shall never behold the beatifical vision.

Object. But here is first placed Believing, and then Baptized, so that from
the order of placing the words, some would gather that we are first to Believe
before we be Baptized.

Answ. That will not follow; for Mark 1. 4. There is placed first Baptizing,
and then Preaching, and repentance after, whence they might as well gather that
we must be Baptized, before we can hear the word Preached, or repent;
Repentance in Scripture is often placed before Faith, and yet is a fruit, and
effect of Faith; some of the Evangelists place Judas his receiving of the sop
before the Sacrament, some after it; it is a rule in interpreting of holy Writ,
that Scriptura nescit prius, and posterius, the Scripture does not always
observe the precise order in which things were done.

Q. But I beseech you consider what Faith it is that is here meant?

Sol. A saving Faith; Must then a saving Faith be the rule of our Baptism? and
must we Baptize none, but those we know have a saving Faith; then we must
Baptize none at all; never any Minister upon that ground had ever Commission to
Baptize any, no not the Apostles, for they did not infallibly know that those
they Baptized had a saving Faith; nay, they actually Baptized many that were
hypocrites, as Simon Magus, Alexander, Hyme^aus, Philetus, and others; hence
observe, That no rule for Baptizing in general can be gathered out of this
Text, And to say that none are to be Baptized, but they that have a saving
Faith, which is the Faith that is only here meant, or none but they which make
an outward profession of Faith (which is not here meant) is an untruth not
gatherable from this Scripture, and an adding to the word of God, against which
he has proclaimed a solemn curse.

The Commination, or curse follows in the last words, He that believes not,
shall be damned; he does not say, he that is not Baptized shall be damned

For though the contempt of it is dangerous, yet a man may be saved without
Baptism; he does not say that h^ that ^s not dipped over head is damned, that
is a thing indifferent, any wash^^g in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, is Baptism; he does not say, that he that is not Rebaptized, or
Baptized again, is damned, for that is the invention of Man, never hea^d of (in
that sens^) before John of Leydens time, who confessed this execution, that he
had that, and the rest of his poysone^ Doctrine from Satan. Hence observe, That
all unbelievers, though Baptized, shall be damned; men believing, though
(through i^vincible necessity) Un Baptiz^d, shall be saved; thus we have given
you the lively meaning of the Holy Ghost in the Text.

Having laid this foundation, we will make further inquiry into two things which
are in controversy, First what is meant by Baptism, or Baptizing, Secondly
whether Infants ought to be Baptized or no.

First, Baptism in the Original, signifies nothing but a washing, as Pareus
upon the Hebrews says, Baptismus Graecis est quaevis ablutio, Baptism is in
Greek any washing, whether by dipping, or sprinkling; to Baptize is to dip, or
sprinkle says, Ravenel so says the Churches old Catechism, dipped, or sprinkled
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; so the Directory, Baptize the
child, by pouring, or sprinkling of the water on the face of the child, without
adding any further ceremony. And as many kinds there are of washing, so many
there are of Baptizing, whereof the Pillars of the Greek Tongue, Hesyehius,
Budeus, Stepha^us, Scapula, Arius Montanus, Pasor, mention four; First tingere,
to die, or tincture, Secondly mergere, to drown, or plunge, Thirdly madefacere,
to wet, or moysten, and lastly abluere, to wash, or cleanse.

I confess there are some that distinguish betwixt (...) to rantise (as they
call it) or sprinkle, (...), which is to plunge to the bottom, (...) which is
to swim upon the top, and (...), which is, as they criticize upon it, to swim
betwixt the top, and bottom; these three last are mentioned by Casaubon in his
notes upon the third Chapter of St. Matthew, as was quoted by our adversary, but
with what fidelity, or advantage to his cause, I leave it to the Godly, and
learned to Judge, for he left out the last words, wherein the whole state of
the question is determined by Casaubon against him, for thus he concludes,
horum sententia jampridem merito est explosa, etc. the judgment of those men
is deservedly long since exploded, and trampled down, that would have Baptizing
to be by dipping, and he gives a reason, quum non in eo posita sit mysteri^
hujus vis, and (...), seeing the force, and efficacy of Baptism, this mystery,
consists not in that, that is the manner of washing. Which is confirmed by
Aquinas, Immersio non est de necessitate Baptismi, dipping is not of the
necessity of Baptism, And Dominico Sotus, Ablutio est de essentia Baptismi,
washing is of the essence of Baptism, but the manner of washing, whether by
dipping, pouring, or sprinkling, is accidental.

Many places of Scripture confirm this, 1 Cor. 10. 2. there the Israelites were
Baptized in the red Sea, when their feet did but touch the water, not as if
they were Baptized, when they were not (as the Ana-baptists gloss upon this
place) and that the Egyptians were really Baptized, for the Egyptians were not
Baptized in their sense, but sunk to the bottom like stones. Exodus 15. 5.

Baptized under the Cloud, not that the Egyptians were Baptized, and the
Israelites as if they were (as they descant) under the Cloud, for the Egyptians
were never under the Cloud, for the Israelites went before the Egyptians; and
the Cloud, part of it was over the Israelites, part of it went before them.

There is mention made in the Gospel of Baptizing, or washing of themselves
when they came from Market, of Cups, of Vessels, of Tables, which cannot be
meant of plunging* in water so often, where that Element was so scarce, but
rincing.

John's Baptizing in Jordan, Philip's going down to the River with the Eunuch
proves nothing at all; for what strange consequence would this be, especially
from the Anabaptists (that must have express Scripture for all things) John
Baptized in Jordan, Philip went down into the water (...) or to the water.
with the Eunuch, therefore, they were dipped, seeing it might as well be by
pouring, or sprinkling of water upon them, for any thing that appears out of
the Text.

Object. John Baptized in Enon, because there was much water.

Answ. This will seem to be no wonder in those hot Countries, where there are
many miles without a Spring of water, especially seeing Geographers, and
Travelers tells us, that Enon is a little Brook that one may stride over,
scarce Knee deep, and therefore not capable of dipping.

Object. But Baptism, say they, must resemble the death of Christ, Romans 6. 4.
We are buried with him by Baptism, which is not by sprinkling, but dipping.

Answ. I answer, the scope of the place is to show, that one end of our Baptism
is to Seal our Communion with Christ in his death, but to press a necessity of
resemblance by descending into the water, and coming out again, we see no
ground in Text, and if our abiding under the water must answer Christ's Burial
in exact representation, then as Christ lay three days, and three nights in the
Grave, so they must lie three days, and three nights under the water, which if
it were put in execution, the dispute would quickly be at an end.

But should we grant this resemblance, I appeal to any man, whether our pouring
on of water in Baptism, does not more resemble our Christian Burial, which is
by pouring on of Earth, or Dust, than by plunging over head.

Thus you see it proved, that Baptizing is any kind of washing, In the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we do not deny with Master Perkins, that if we
were to Baptize converted Turks, or Pagans of ripe age, in hot Countries, we
might Baptize them by dipping, Provided that their Garments were not first
Baptized, or washed, for that is conceived to be no less superstition, than
Beptizing of Bells; Baptism (says Vossius) non est immersio vestium, sed humani
Corporis, is not a washing of the Garments, but of the Body; we account the
Church of Rome Idolaters, for presenting that worship, First to the Image,
which is terminated in Christ; the Garments are first washed, or dipped, and
the Body but at the most wet, or moystned through them.

But to affirm that no Baptism but that which is by dipping is lawful, is a
will worship, much more, that Baptism otherwise is a nullitie, and those that
are Baptized so, ought to be Baptized again, or Rebaptized, which the Senate
of Syrick understood well, when they made an Act, that all that did presume to
Re-Baptize such as were Baptized before, should be drowned.

So we have resolved the former doubt, that Baptizing is not dipping, and come
to the latter, that Infants may, nay ought to be Baptized. And (Brethren) I
beseech you to give me leave a little to speak for Infants, those poor Souls,
that cannot speak for themselves.

And before we come to the Question, take with you these two Considerations;
First, that those truths that were not in controversy in the Primitive times,
the Apostles were not so punctual in pressing of them, seeing there was no
need; Solon being asked why he made no Law against murderers of Parents,
answered, because he conceived none would commit that unnatural Act; If the
Apostles had been asked, why they did not put down Infant Baptism in plainer
terms, I suppose they would have answered, that they thought none would have
denied it.

Secondly observe, that those things that are pressed often in the old
Testament, are mentioned more sparingly in the New, as the Sabbath, and
Magistracy in the old Testament, line upon line, and precept upon precept, but
scarce a Syllable for a Christian Sabbath, or a Christian Magistracy in the
new. Nothing is more clear then Infants Church Membership in the old Testament,
therefore not so clear in the New, and yet clear enough to those that have eyes
to see it, as will appear by these reasons following.

1. Arg. First, those that are in Covenant with God, ought to have the Seal of
the Covenant, which is Baptism.

But Infants of believing Parents are in Covenant with God.

Therefore Infants ought to have the Seal of the Covenant, which is Baptism.

The former Proposition is firm by Confession of all Divines, even our
adversaries, Haec est fundamentalis ratio paedobaptismi (says Daneus) this is
the fundamental reason of Baptizing of Infants, that they are in Covenant,
Esse foederatum sufficit ad accipiendum signum foederis, says Davenant, to be
in Covenant is sufficient to receive the sign, and seal of the Covenant, Omnes
foederati sunt Baptizandi, says Wendel, all that are in Covenant are to be
Baptized, Si in foedere sunt, impie agunt, qui eis signum foederis negant,
says Ferus, if they be in Covenant, they do wickedly that deny them the sign
of the Covenant; in a Civil contract (says Mr. Perkins) the Father, and the
heir make but one person, and the Covenant's for himself and his posterity.

The Minor proposition that Infants of believing Parents are in Covenant, is
grounded on many Scriptures, Genes. 17. 7. Where God establishes a Covenant,
not only with Abraham, but with his seed after him in their generations, for
an everlasting Covenant, everlasting, and therefore to last to the end of the
World, as Cornelius a Lapide says, absolute aeternum est in semine spirituali
fidelibus, It is absolutely everlasting in the spiritual seed to the
faithful. Galat. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel to Abraham; therefore if
Isaac was in Covenant with his Father when he was but eight days old, and had
the seal by virtue of the Lamb to be slain, much more the Children of believing
Parents, by virtue of the Lamb that is already slain Deuter. 29. 11. When all
the people stood in Covenant before the Lord, their little ones are mentioned
amongst the rest, which is further confirmed, Acts 2. 38, 39. Be Baptized every
one of you, for the promise is to you, and your Children; to say that they were
not yet believers, is but a shift, the Text makes it clear, as soon as they
were believers, their Children were in Covenant with them, and to be Baptized.

Arg. 2 Such as were Circumcised under the Law, may be Baptized under the
Gospel.

But Infants of believers were Circumcised under the Law. Therefore they may be
baptized under the Gospel.

Huic Argumento non omnes Anabaptistae resistent (says learned Whitaker) all
the Anabaptists shall not be able to resist this Argument; the Minor, that
Infants under the Law were Circumcised, is confessed.

The former proposition is only questioned, that Baptism under the Gospel to
Infants, does not necessarily follow from Circumcision under the Law; Augustine
is clear for it, saying, Mutatis signis manet eadem gratia sine aetatis
discrimine, the outward visible signs being changed, the same grace remains
without any difference of age, and he gives a reason, because the grace of God
is not straiter in the new Testament than in the old; Therefore Christ, Hebr.
8. 6. Is said to be Mediator of a better Covenant, but how were it a better
Covenant, if all poor Infants that were in Covenant under the Law, were out of
Covenant under the Gospel? Titus 2. 12. The grace of God has appeared unto
all, and therefore surely to Infants; as Irenaeus says, Christus pro parvulis
parvulus factus est, Christ became a little one, for little ones sake, that he
might redeem the little ones. Little ones were the first Martyrs that suffered
for Christ, in Rama was a voice heard; and that Baptism came in place of
Circumcision, the Apostle clears it, Coloss. 2. 11. 12. Ye are Circumcised with
Circumcision made without hands; How is that? Buried with him in Baptism. Hence
arises another Argument.

Arg. 3. Those that were once in Covenant, had the Seal of the Covenant, and
were never disfranchized, and put out of Covenant, have title to the Covenant,
and Seal of it still.

But Infants were once in Covenant, had the Seal of the Covenant, and were
never disfranchized, and put out of Covenant. Therefore Infants have title to
the covenant, and seal of it still.

Let any man show one syllable, one tittle in Scripture, that ever Infants were
put out, and we will yield the gantlet; nay, the Gospel is so far from expressing
of them that they are put out, that it gives them large commendations beyond
them of riper years, making them the rule of our perfection, as new born babes,
receive the sincere milk of the Word. Unless you be as little Children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; which is a case so clear, that even
Bellarmine himself includes, Nullum est impedimentum, etc. there is nothing
that hinders, but that Infants may as well be Baptized under the Gospel, as
they were Circumcised under the Law; for neither has God forbidden Ministers
to give them the Sacrament, neither are they incapable to receive it.

Arg. 4. That which God has commanded may lawfully be practiced by the
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But God has commanded Infant Baptism.

Therefore it may be lawfully practiced by the Ministers of Jesus Christ. That
God has commanded it, appears, Matthew. 28. 19. Go Baptize all Nations; its a
general command and (as Aquinas says) posito generali mandato pars ejus
negari non potest, a general command being given, no part of it can be denied;
Infants are a part of Nations, and included in them.

Object. But here is no mention made of Infants.

AnsW. No nor of them of age; we might retort it upon our adversaries, there is
no mention made of Dippers, no, nor of them that are to be dipped, therefore
they ought not to dip, nor be dipped: Generals include particulars in all
Laws; Psalm. 117. Praise the Lord all ye Nations, Nations includes old men and
babes, young men and maids all without exception, as another Psalm interprets
it.

Now if Infants be excepted, contrary to that saying of Saint Ambrose, Qui
dixit omnes nullum excepit, neque parvulos, etc. He that commanded all to be
Baptized, excepted none, no, not little ones. If (I say) they be excepted, its
either because they are not named, or because we never read in Scripture that
any Infants were Baptized, or, because they are not capable; (that fourth
cavil being the same with the third, I Will take away anon) but for none of
these three; therefore Infants are not excepted from Baptism.

Not for the first, because they are not named, for so neither old men, nor
nobles, nor Ministers are named. Not because we read not of their Baptism, so
we neither read of the Baptism of the Apostles, nor of the Virgin Mary, yet we
piously believe that they were Baptized; De negatione facti ad jus non valet
consequentia, such a thing is not mentioned, that it was done; therefore it was
not done, or was not done therefore it ought not to have been done, is no
consequence; Christ did, and said many things that are not written; so did his
Apostles.

Not for the third, because they are incapable, which is denied; for if Infants
be incapable, it is either because they have not repentance and faith in act,
which cannot hinder them; Christ was Baptized, had not repentance, for he had
no sin to repent of, had not faith, for faith presupposes one lost in himself,
that depends upon another for salvation; Christ is that Rock of salvation, upon
whom all mankind being lost depends; Neither because they cannot hear the word
preached; then they that are born deaf should be excluded from Baptism; or
because they are not otherwise qualified; but that cannot hinder them, for God
requires no more of them that are in covenant, and born, of believing parents,
but a pure capacity, and receptability, which Divines call Potentiam
objectivam; as God in the beginning created the World of nothing, so in the
beginning of the new creature he does regenerate and recreate us of nothing,
upon this account it is, that we read of many whole families Baptized not
excluding, but rather including* Infants, Cornelius was Baptized with his
household, Acts 10. 47 48. Lydia, and her household, Acts 16. 15. Crispus, and
all his house, Acts 18. 8. and the hoshould of Stephanus, 1 Corinthians. 1. 16. the
Jayler (...), all that were his, Acts 16. 31, 32. His Servants, his Children;
for can we imagine so many families without a child?

Arg. 5. They that are c^pable of the Kingdom, and the blessing which is the
greater, are capable of Baptism, which is the ^esser.

But Infants are capable of the Kingdom and the blessing which is the greater.

Therefore they are capable of Baptism which is the lesser; forbid not (says
our Savior) little Children to come unto me, for unto such belongs the Kingdom
of God; for surely, if the Kinggom of Heaven receive them, the Church may not
exclude them; for the Church must receive such as glory receives, Acts 2. 47.
There were daily added to the Church such as should be saved. Now for proof of
this Argument, take these places Mark. 10. 13. to 17. Mark. 9. 14, 36, 37.
Matthew. 18 2, 3, 4. Matthew. 19. 13, 14, 15. Luke 9. 14, 15. Luke 18. 15, 16.
Which though they be spoken upon several occasions, all prove Infants to be
Church Members, and capable both of grace, and glory; we will insta^ce in two,
Jesus called a little child unto him, the word is (...), which (as Hippocrates
in his distinction of ages says, and Beza seconds him,) signifies a child
under seven years, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say
unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, that is,
endeavor to be free from actual sin, as they are, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The other is that of St. Luke 18. 15* wherein observe, First a Precept, Suffer
little children to come unto me.

Secondly, we have a prohibition, and forbid them not.

Thirdly, his displeasure against his Disciples, for hindering them from coming
to him, he looked on this act with indignation, and was much displeased at it.

Fourthly, he adds a reason why little ones should be brought to him, because
to such belongs the Kingdom of God, that is, the Kingdom of grace here, and
glory hereafter; they are visible members of his Church, and Kingdom, and
therefore none may hinder their access to him.

Fifthly, he confirms this reason, a majori, from the greater to the less, Gods
Kingdom does not only belong to them, but I tell you more, whosoever will come
into this Kingdom, must resemble Infants in Innocence, humility, simplicity.

Sixthly, he adds his benediction of them, he took them up in his arms, put his
hands upon them, and blessed them; and tell^ us that their Angels always see
the face of his Father, which is in Heaven; and the danger of them that offend
one of these little ones, and all this recorded by three Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark, Luke, as if it were of purpose to check the sacrilegious insolency of
these latter times that denies them the seal. Christ is not more punctual by
his Spirit, in declaring his own Birth, Passion, Resurrection, than he is in
this precious Truth so much trampled under foot.

And if any object, these were not young Children, the text easily confutes
them, they were (...), Children under seven years of age, (...), Children that
could scarce speak, they did not lead them, but (...), they carried them unto
him; Christ is said twice in St. Mark, (...), to take them up in his arms, and
embrace them; Christ was already instructing the people that were able to
understand, the Apostles were offended for bringing of Children which could not
understand.

Well then, does Christ take Children in his arms, and would he have them all
put out of his visible Church? would he have us receive them in his Name, and
yet not to receive them into his visible Church, nor as his Disciples? How can
Infants be received in Christ's Name, if they belong not visibly to him, and his
Church? Nay, does Christ account it a receiving of himself, and shall we then
refuse to receive them, or acknowledge them the subjects of his visible
Kingdom? will it not follow then that whosoever refuses them, refuses Christ,
and him that sent him? For my part (to use the word^ of a godly, and learned
divine) Seeing the Will of Christ is that I must walk by, and his Word that I
must be judged by, and he has given me so full a discovery of his Will in this
point, I will bo^dly adventure to follow his rule, and had rather answer him
upon his own encouragement for admitting an hundred Infants into his Church,
than answer for keeping out of one.

Arg. 6. All Disciples may be Baptized.

But Infants of believing parents are Disciples.

Therefore some Infants may be Baptized.

The Major, or former proposition, is granted by our adversaries, who translate
that place, Matthew. 28. 19. (...), go make Disciples of all Nations, which is in
our last translation, Go ^each all Nations, confessing, as soon as they are
Disciples they may be Baptized

Now for the Minor, that Infants are Disciples, is evident from Acts 15. 10.
Why, tempt ye God, and put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples? this yoke
was Circumcision, and the attendants of it, as will appear by comparing it with
the fifth verse, and the context from the beginning of the Chapter. Now among
the Jews, children were only to be Circumcised, and amongst the Gentiles,
children together with parents when they were converted, and became Proselites.
To say that not only Circumcision, but the Doctrine, and Observation of the
whole Law, by the yoke is meant, is but a shift; Circumcision was the Seal, or
Ordinance by which the Jews were bound to observe the Doctrine, and the Law,
and all those upon whom the yoke was laid by Circumcision are called Disciples;
whereof Infants were a great part.

And if it be objected, that children are not capable of instruction, as it is
nothing to the purpose, so it contradicts Scripture, Esaias 54. 13. And all thy
Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy
Children. And if any one carnally interpret this of the Jews return from
captivity, as they do other places of Esa. our Savior checks them, John 6. 45.
And It is written in the Prophets, And they shall all be taught of God.

Arg. 7. All that have faith may be Baptized.

But some Infants have faith. Therefore some Infants may be Baptized.

The proposition none will deny, the Minor may be proved by several reasons.

First, Christ expressly calls them believers, Matthew. 18. He attributes humility
to them, and faith; and commands Elders to imitate them; and that you may see
they were Infants, Mark 9. 36. tells us they were such as Christ ^ook up in his
arms.

Secondly; they are said to receive the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. that is, the
grace of God. Remission of sins, and life eternal; now the Kingdom is not
received, but by faith in Christ.

Thirdly, they please God, therefore Christ blesses them; but without faith it
is impossible to please God.

Fourthly, either faith must be allowed them, or salvation denied them; but the
latter is cruel, and impious; therefore the former must be godly, and pious;
faith only purifies the heart, but no unclean thing shall enter into Heaven.

Fifthly, though Infants cannot make actual profession of faith, yet they may
have inward roots of sanctification, and faith.

John Baptist and Jeremie were sanctified in their mothers wombs; let
carnalists say what they will, that is the principal meaning of that place,
Esaias 65. 20. There shall be no more a^ Infant of days; The Jews thought they
were not sanctified, unless a Sabbath went over them; the child shall dye an
hundred year old, that is, as well in Covenant with God, or a visible
Churchmember, as if he were a hundred years old. Therefore Paraeus says,
Infantes Ecclesiae etiam ante Baptismum censentur fideles; Infants of the
Church, even before Baptism, are judged faithful. Hommius says, Infants have
faith, in semine, in the seed, though not in mess, in the harvest; Beza says,
they have faith (...), in power, though not (...), in operation. Faith (says
Trelcatius) is twofold;

1. Active which the Elder have by hearing the Word.

2. Passive, and by imputation, which Infants have by virtue of the Covenant,
and Divine promise. Pelagius asks Austin where he places Infants Baptized? he
answers, in numero credentium, in the number of believers, and adds, nec
judicare ullo modo aliter audebis, si non vis esse aperte haereticus, neither
may thou presume to judge otherwise, if thou will not be a plain Heretic. We Will
conclude this with that of Vossius, As in naturals, so in supernaturals we must
distinguish these three things, power, habit, and act; there is the power of
reasoning in Infants, the habit in men sleeping, but the act, and exercise, in
them that are waking; the power answers the seed, the habit the tree, the act,
and exercise, the fruit; the seed of Faith may be in Infants, the habit in men
of age, but the act, and exercise, in them that work according to the habit.

8. Arg. Those that are Holy, with a Covenant-holiness, may be Baptized. But
Infants of believing Parents are Holy with a Covenant-Holiness. Therefore
Infants of believing Parents may be Baptized. Eor the former Proposition,
foederatis competit signum foederis, (says Vossius) the sign of the Covenant
belongs to them that are in Covenant; Holiness is twofold (says Bullinger)
either of Faith, or of the Covenant. Ezra. 9. 2. Ye have mingled the holy seed,
that is them in Covenant, with the Nations, that is them that are out of
Covenant. Thus you see, that Covenant-holiness is no gibberidge, but grounded
upon Scripture, and avouched by learned men: as shall more fully appear.

The Minor, that Children of believing Parents are holy with a
Covenant-holiness, is clear from 1. Cor. 7. 14. Else your Children were
unclean, that is, not in Covenant, but now they are holy that is, in Covenant,
thus (besides the ancients) Sharpius, and Peter Martyr interpret it, and Hugo
Grotius himself, Non loquitur Apostolus de Sanctitate naturali, etc. The
Apostle (says he) speaks not of natural holiness, and inhering to the nature of
Children, but of an holiness adhering to them, that is, the holiness of the
Covenant, for the Children of believers are comprehended in the Covenant of
grace, and therefore accounted holy of God. To interpret it (as the gross
Anabaptists do) that they are holy, that is, no Bastards, is a new holiness not
heard of in Scripture, and as (Doctor Featly says) a Bastard exposition; and
Pareus gives the reason, if the Children of believers be therefore holy,
because they are no Bastards, the Children of Pagans are as well holy, for they
are also no Bastards. If the first fruits be holy, the lump is holy, and if the
root be holy, so are also the branches. Romans 11. 16. The first fruits and the
root, that is the parents; the lump, the branches, that is the Children, and
posterity.

And Rom 11. 17. if the Jews were broken off, and the Gentiles graffed into
their place, it will follow, that if the Jews were broken off, Parents with
Children, then the Gentiles shall be graffed in, Parents with Children.

But the Jews were broken off, Parents with Children. Therefore the Gentiles
shall be graffed in; Parents with Children.

9. Arg. If Infants should be out of Covenant under the Gospel, many dangerous
absurdities would follow.

First, Infants would be losers by the coming of Christ, and be put in a worse
condition than the Jewish Infants were; they with the Parents were admitted to
the Seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision, and not Children with Parents
to Baptism.

Secondly, if Infants should be in Covenant then, and not now, Grace would be
larger under the Law, than under the Gospel.

Thirdly, there would be no difference betwixt the Child of a Christian and of
a Pagan, but all the Infants of Christians would be as vile as the Children of
Turks, Tartars, or Cannibals.

Fourthly, they would be without God, without Christ, without hope in the
world; not the Children of God, but of the Devil; would all be damned, for out
of Covenant, and visible Church (ordinarily) there is no salvation.

10. Arg. Lastly, that which has continued since the Apostles times with
blessed success, must needs be lawful.

But Infant Baptism has continued with blessed success since the Apostles
times.

Therefore Infant Baptism is lawful.

We Will begin with the first Centurie, or hundred years after Christ. Dionysius
the Areopagite, whom the Apostles converted at Athens, says, Holy men have
received a Tradition from the Fathers, that is the Apostles, to Baptize
Infants. Clemens (who is recorded by some of the ancients to succeed Peter in
his Ministry at Rome) says (...), Baptzie your Infants.

Irenaeus (who lived in the second Century) says, Christus pro parvulis
parvulus factus est, Christ became a little one for little ones sake, that
little ones might be received into Covenant.

Origin that lived in the beginning of the third Century says, The Church
received a Tradition from the Apostles to Baptize Infants, and gives a reason,
because they are born in impurity of sin; nay, Pelagius, a great Scholar, who
lived in the latter end of this Century, though he denied Original sin, yet
confessed Infant Baptism, for when they pressed him with this Argument, if
Infants had not Original sin, what need they Baptism, he answered, that Christ
appointed, and the Church practiced Infant Baptism, not to purge sin bypast,
but to prevent it for the time to come.

Cyprian in the fourth Century confirms it in his Epistle to Fidus, and gives
an account of a Council of sixty six Bishops that decreed that Infants should
be Baptized. Ambrose says, because every age is liable to sin, therefore every
age is fit for the Sacrament of Baptism. Nazianzene says it is better to Seal
Infants with Baptism, (though they know it not) than to leave them unsealed.
Austin is conceived to go too far, who denied possibility of salvation to them
that died un-baptized, pressing that place John 3. 5. Except a Man be Born of
water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

The Millevitan Council in the fifth Century decreed, That whosoever should
deny that Infants, even taken from their Mothers wombs, might not be Baptized,
should be accursed. All Churches, All ages since agree in this; the Harmonies
of confessions of all Reformed Churches, the Church of England in the Apology,
the old Catechism, the twenty seventh Article, the Directory, the greater and
lesser Catechism composed by the Assembly of Divines, the late Parliament by a
further Declaration, all confirm it; The Canons of our Church did not only in
former times declare, but the Laws of our Land did punish Anabaptists as
heretics. Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments approves of the Albigenses,
Waldenses, Wickliffists, Lollards, Poor men of Lions, Brownists, Barrowists, as
members of the Reformed Churches, but wholly excludes the Anabaptists, as
erring fundamentally.

I Will say no more for confirmation of this polemicall discourse, but wind up
all with a word of exhortation; I beseech you, brethren, consider what a
dangerous error this is, that robbs the Scripture of its truth, Infants of
their right, Parents of their comforts, the Church of its members, Christ of
his merits, God of his glory? That is the mother of many other errors; hence
sprung the Ranters, Socinians, Antitrinitarians, Shakers, Levellers, they that
are above Ordinances, Antiscripturians; An error that God has expressed many
signal judgments against, as Sleiden and Gastius in Germany, and some of our
worthies in England have declared. As reverend Mr. Cotton tells one of his
Apostated flock, that had his house burned, and his Children in it, No wonder
that fire seized upon his house, and God denied water to quench it, who denied
that water should be brought to Baptize his Infants.

Secondly, consider that much benefit redounds both to Parents, and Children by
Infant Baptism.

First, much comfort comes hereby to the Parents, when they consider Gods free
grace to them, and theirs, that he is not ashamed to be called their God, and
the God of their seed after them. Hebr. 11. 16.

Secondly, much benefit comes to Infants by Baptism, (which the Devil knows
well, when he causes Witches to renounce their Baptism, when they enter into
Covenant with him) for they are thereby addmitted into the bosom of the
Church, devoted, and consecrated unto God, his Name is put upon them, they wear
his Royal badge, and by it they are distinguished from Heathens. And this is
so clear from Scriptures, truly and spiritually understood, That the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it.

Now the God of Peace and Truth, by his Spirit, lead us into all truth, keep us
pure, and unspotted in this hour of Englands temptation, and trial, keep us
faithful to the death, that so we may receive a crown of life.

(...).
THE Arraignment and Conviction OF ANABAPTISM.
The first Part.
Mr. Tombs, 1 Section.
A Plea for Anti-Paedobaptists, against the vanity and falsehood of scribled
papers, Entitled The Anabaptists Anatomized, and silenced in a public Dispute
at Abergaveny in Monmothshire, Sept. 5. 165^, betwixt John Tombs, John Cragge,
and Henry Vaughan, touching Infant Baptism. By John Tombs B. D.

Job 11. 2, 3. Should not the multitude of words be answered? And should a man
full of talk be justified? Should thy lies (or devices) make men hold their
peace? And when thou mockest shall no man make thee ashamed?

To be sold at the sign of Sir John Old-castle in Py-Corner.

Reply.
A Plea for Anti-Paedobaptists, and why? Does Mr Tombs intend to commence a
suit against the Universal Church, and to overthrow the divine institution of
Infant Baptism with the Antiquity, Universality, and Succession thereof? Let
him first consider whether his Action will hold Plea, and whether there may not
be found a flaw in his title; for the term Antipaedobaptist is a new name, a
new thing, and upon farther enquiry will be found a new nothing. But before he
make so great an attempt (...) with the Giants to contest with Heaven, he might
do well Polyphemus like to grapple with Ulisses, and Traverse the Indictment
preferred by Mr. Halls Font-garded, page 74, in these words, Hold up thy hand
Anabaptist (or Alias Anti-Paedobaptist) Thou art here indicted by the name of
Anabaptist of the City of Munster in the County of Babel, for that thou
contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord and Savior, his Crown and Dignity,
have brought forth disorder, and confusion into the Church of God, together
with a bastard brood of Muntzerians, Augustinians, Hofniannians, Georgians,
Servetians, Silentiarians, Eucheldians, Swenkfeldians, Hamanarians, or
Dungwagons, Euchites, Huttites, Adamites, Gabrielites, Mennonites,
Melchiorites, Apostolists, Adiaphorists, Spiritualists, Enthysiasts,
Catharists, Separatists, Hemerobaptists Sebaptists, Libertines, etc. Together
with a Squadran of Arrians, Arminians, Socinians, Anti-Trinitarians,
Anti-Sabbatarians, Anti-Scripturists, Mortalists, Familists, Perfectists,
Origenists, Atheists, Millenaries, etc. And that this might be the better
effected let him except against the Jury, which is first the Ancient Fathers,
2. The Reformed Churches, 3. Calvin, 4. Ursin, 5. Apollonius, 6. Mr. Perkins,
7. Mr. Heron, 8. Mr. Pemble, 9. Dr. Usher, 10. Mr. Baxter, 11. Mr. Ward, 12.
Mr. Brinsley, 13. Dr. Tho. Goodwin, with many others: And having made good his
exceptions, let him reverse the sentence, which is as follows; Anabaptist
thou have been indicted by the name of Anabaptist, for cruelty and injury to the
Lambs of Christ; Thou have been found guilty, and art condemned both by God,
and man, by all reformed Churches, by Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, by learned
and pious Divines, both sorraigne and domestic, both old, and new, by friends
and foes: And therefore I adjudge thee to a Recantation, and Abrenunciation of
all thy loose licentious tenets, that thou no more disturb this Church and
State, least Justice do Arrest thee.

But he unmindfull of this, (as if the Anabaptist were the Plantiff, and not
the Reus, or party at the Bar in question) inveighs against the vanity, and
falsehood of scribled papers, Tria Cerberus extulit ora, and tres latratus simul
edidit. Ovid Metamor. 5. Three terms of diminution with three breaths. It was
Libanius, Porphyrie and Julians project to throw dung in the face of Orthodox
Writers: So does Mr. Tombs, calling Mr. Baxters learned piece, Plain
Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism, A cheat, and Mock-titled book: Mr.
Marshalls impregnable Defense, Ink and paper, and the relation of the dispute
had with him at Abergaveny, vanity and falsehood of scribled papers. Vanity
perhaps, because he thinks it is in vain to attempt the steely resolutions of
the fautors, and fomenters of Anabaptism, yet we have found the contrary in
some. Falsehood, not in respect of the fidelity of relating the Dispute, and
Sermon, nor of the Opponents Arguments, which are true in both; But of the
position maintained by the Respondent; which is a falsehood, and such an one as
may leaven the whole lump.

But why of scribled papers? It may be Mr. Tombs met with it before printed,
and not unlikely; because his Answer came out within three weeks after it,
which could not be, unless it had been mounted upon Bellerophons horse, and
Pegasus his wings: especially seeing he is known Elephant-like, to be long in
conception, and ursino lambere more partum, deliberately to lick into shape,
that which he has conceived. But he goes on saying, they were entitled The
Anabaptists Anatomized, and silenced. By whom? Not by the Relator, nor Mr.
Vaughan, nor me: I will not say by Mr. Tombs and his party, but I am confident
they knew of it long before any of us. But where Anatomized, and silenced? He
says in a public Dispute at Abergaveny in Monmothshire, he says; But neither
the scribled papers (to use his Tapinosis) nor printed papers mentions any such
thing: Indeed the engraven paper speaks of Anabaptists Anatomized and
silenced, but not at Abergaveny, Sept. 5. 1653 The place for any thing I see
may be Munster, the time when; when John of Leiden was confuted by the
Lantgraves preachers, so that the last words, are his own pure pute addition,
wherein we have found out the vanity, and falsehood before mentioned.

And further to bespatter his Antagonists, he closes his frontispiece page with
a text out of the book of Job, but very ominously, for they are the words of
one unjustly charging Job, as he does us; his name is Zophar, which in the
Syriak signifies A Goat, by country a Naamathite, which signifies Set on the
left hand, join them together and you know the sentence; And this book thus
frontispieced, and imbellished, is to be sold at the sign of Sir John
Old-Castle, a Traitor who was hanged on a gibbet, and burned in St. Gyles
fields. Stow Chr. page 599. v^no vendibili digna est hedera, like sign like
wine: By the tree we may know the ensuing fruits.

Mr. Tombs, 2. Section.
There came newly to my hands a pamphlet, wherein the Intitler speaks like a
vain Braggadochio, as if the book had ripped up the Anabaptists (as he terms
them) and like a Prelate had silenced them, though there was but one, whom with
any face it could be pretended that he was Anatomized, or silenced, who yet
speaks, and writes for the truth, which these opponents do endeavor to
disgrace, and rejoyc^th that he lives to find that these men have no other
thing to charge him with, than his contending for a reformation of that
profane abuse of Infant-sprinkling, and that they have no other encouragement
from him to persist in their Paedobaptism, but a fond hope of his returning to
that sinful practice.

Reply.
He says, There came newly to his hands a Pamphlet; And why a Pamphlet, and
yet scribled papers? Unless a Manuscript with a woman's ^oot, and all
contradictions ex adjecto may be reconciled: The Intitler (of it he say^s)
speaks like a va^n Braggadochio, as if the book had ripped up the Anabaptists;
The Intitler he means of the Anabaptists Anatomized and Silenced at Abergaveny.
What Intitler? the Man in the moon, or Oberam King of the Fairies? We see none
visible but himself, and then judge who is the vain Bragadochio. Besides he
alters the state of the question; In the Title page (he says) the Anabaptist
anatomized and silenced in a dispute at Abergaveny, and here he speaks of the
book Anatomizing and silencing the Anabaptists; how do these things suit with
the truth? or c^here one with another? There is not such a word in the book as
that the Anabaptists were anatomized and silenced at Abergaveny, or if
anatomized and silenced in the dispute at Abergaveny, does it follow that the
book did rip, and silence them, which was then, and some months after not in
being? The Dispute is one thing, the book another, which when Mr. T. writ this,
had not so much as seen Abergaveny He adds, to render it more odious, like a
Prelate had silenced them; Truly as there is no such thing as a Prelate extant,
to silence in the Church, so no such thing as this forementioned Silencing in
the book; I wish I could truly say so much of the third; No such thing as an
Anabaptist to be silenced; I mean the opinion, their persons I love, their
piety, and learning (where it is found) I reverence. But Mr. T. might have
found nearer home some more resembling the most Prelatical of Prelates (not
excluding the Pope) and that's they that Magisterially prefers their own private
opinions before the judgments of learned and godly Assemblies of Divines,
Harmonies of Confessions, Determinations of Counsels Oecomenial, censuring all
their brethren that dissents of profane abuse and sinful practice, as he does
in the words following.

In the interim he says, there was but one, whom with any face it could be
pretended he was Anatomized or silenced; Perhaps he means, because he was the
only Disputant, yet there were two in the Pulpit that interposed with him, some
f^w that spoke in the crowd, many that ostentatiously vaunted before the
Dispute, that were more modest or silent afterward. But yet he speaks and
writes for the Truth; So said Copp and Collier; I wish he did so, we would be
so far from opposing, or disgracing his tenet, that we would endeavor to
maintain it with him, and advance it. Truth commonly goes attended with
humility, and self-denial, which I fear the words following little relish of,
for he rejoices that those that d^ssent from him, have no other thing to
charge him with, than his contending for a reformation of that profane abuse
of Infant-sprinkling: Well, be it so, or the contrary, we had rather with Sem
and Japhet cover the nakedness of Fathers in Israel, than with Came to expose
it to open shame: yet we think that the poor Publican that abaseth himself will
rather go away justified, than the proud Pharisie that rejoices, or thanks God
that he is not as other men, nor as those that are for the profane abuse of
Infant-sprinkling; A high charge, and dangerous, if he make it not good, which
he will never do by his pretended reformation, otherwise than (to use the
homely comparison of a godly man) the devil did, when going to streighten his
dammes leg, he broak it; In the mean time, the less hope we have of his
return, the more is his loss; yet who knows, but he that like Saul reviles
this way, which he calls of sinful practice, may with the stray sheep be
brought home at length to see his error to the joy of men and Angels.

Mr. Tombs. 3 Section.
The Libel has a frontispice, which pretends to show the manner of the
Anabaptists dipping, but most falsely, since it represents it to the ey^ of the
beholders, as if they held persons by the heels when they baptize them, which
is otherwise than their practice. The pretended manner of laying on of hands,
and washing of feet, is unknown to me; if they do use it, yet they have such
likely proofs from Heb. 6. 2. and our Saviors practice and command, John 13.
as might have deterred the Author of this frontispiece from exposing the
Ordinance of Baptism, and those other Rites to contempt, had he any reverence
to holy things, and regard to Christ's appointment. But the frontispiece of Dr.
Featlies book, and this, with the Epistles, and other passages, do give
occasion to intelligent persons to conceive that this sort of men do make but a
sport of Christ's Ordinance, and that they have little mind to search for, or
receive truth, but to expose them that are for believers Baptism, and against
Infant-sprinkling, to the contempt of light, and profane wits, and to the
hatred of the ignorant, and supersticious common people. And I conceive that
this book is published by men of that spirit, who seek to make odious the
endeavored reformation of ignorance, superstition, profaneness, and
ungodliness, which abounds in those parts, and to uphold those either loose,
or formal pretended Ministers, who take upon them to teach, but indeed as
Elymas the Sorcerer Acts 13. pervert the right way of the Lord.

Reply.
Still more venom, he calls it a Libell; why? because unlicensed? So is his
Plea, and the most of his works, except his Exercitation, and Examen, and they
but conditionally, which being violated, renders them more obnoxious. Or
because dissonant from the doctrine of the reformed Churches? So this falls
under that guilt, and it is cleared. A Libell (as my Lord of St. Albans
Etimologized it) has its name from a Ly, and a Bell; A Ly hatched at home, a
Bell to ring it abroad; So Mr. Tombs his Plea for Anti-Paedobaptists was
hatched in private in his study, rung abroad through the Country; A Lie, nay
like the man possessed with devils amongst the Tombs, its name is Legion,
because they are many.

This he says, has a Frontispiece, (he should have said an Anti-frontispiece)
which pretends to show the manner of Anabaptists dipping, but most falsely, since
it represents to the eyes of the beholders, as if they held persons by the
heels, when they baptize them, which is otherwise then their practice; To which
I return in his own language, he relates it most falsely, seeing the
representation is otherwise than he says; for if he had not been (I will not
say like to Elymas the Sorcerer to whom he compares us) smit with blindness,
he might have seen they hold them by the hands and not by the heels; unless
their heels be-continued, and immediately joined to their neck, and shoulders,
which cannot be imagined, unless like Ulisses companions, when thrown into the
water, they are Metamorphized into swine, their arms turned into legs, their
hands into heels. And what strange Prodigy, if they had been represented as
held by the heels? Its a known thing that some have been thrown in by the
hands, but have been pulled out dead by the heels, with this funeral sermon
preached over them; (I tremble to utter it) You see that no sooner are they
newborn, but God takes them to himself.

But this Anti-Paedobaptist has another quarrel at the Anti-frontispiece page,
which he fastens upon the Paedobaptists, and the frontispiece page; which is,
that the pretended manner of laying on of hands, and washing of feet is unknown
to him, and yet he seems to call it Christ's appointment, and says that they
have likely proofs from Heb. 6. 2. and our Saviors practice and command John
13. whence we may gather that there are some things of Christ's appointment, and
have proof from Scripture and our Saviors practice, and command, which are
unknown to him; It seems he is but yet a Seeker, and though it were true he
dissented in nothing from the Church of England, save in the Question of
Infant Baptism; By this principle he is liable to stray as far as the German
Anabaptists. I will not impeach him with Judaism, for making a Jewish ceremony
a binding command; nor fasten contradictions upon him for applying that here to
laying on of hands in Baptism, which in his Examen he interprets to be laying
on of hands in Ordination of Ministers; Let those pass; Yet I cannot but take
notice, that he is so confident of his present interpretation of those places,
that he says they might have deterred the Author of the Frontispiece from
exposing the Ordinance of Baptism, and other Rites to contempt, had he any
reverence to holy things.

To which I reply, who was the Author of the Anti-frontispiece page, I know
not, and as little whether it was to Idolize, or to expose to contempt dipping,
or rebaptizing which he calls the Ordinance; But if it were Christ's
Institution, me thinks they should not be afraid to have that exposed to the
eye, which they preach to the ear.

But he marches on furiously like Jehu with whole Waynes laden with reproaches,
inveighing against the Frontispiece of Dr. Featlies book, and this, with the
Epistles, and other passages, which (he says) do give occasion to Intelligent
persons to conceive that this sort of men do make but a sport of Christ's
Ordinance.

As for Dr. Featlie, he has given his account already before a higher Bar:
some like Kestrils love to be preying over dead carcases, and with Thersites to
trample upon the graves of those Achilles's, whom they durst not look in the
face when living. The Author of the other is unknown to us, Yet let him know
thus much, we reverence Christ's Ordinance, and have as great a mind to search
out, and receive the Truth, as himself; and are so far from exposing them that
are for re-baptizing, and against Infant Baptism, to the contempt of light, and
profane wits, and to the hatred of the ignorant, and superstitious common
people (as he uncharitably scandalizes them,) that we rather pity them; and
would not only spend our breath, but our dearest blood to bring them into
unity, and unanimity with their brethren. And whatsoever he conceives; The Book
was published by men of that spirit, who endeavored to bring those home to the
fold of Christ, who of late had been poisoned in judgment, and imbittered in
affections against the reformed Churches, and their Ministers, which he further
confirms them in, calling them loose, or formal pretended Ministers; Which
argues a great deal of rash ignorance in him, seeing, he neither knows
Pastor, or people of these parts, saving two or three censorious Anabaptists,
upon whose credit he takes this uncharitable prejudice, whereas if he had been
willing to have been truly informed, he might have found Ministers as free from
looseness, and formalities, and more constant to the principles of truth, and
conscionable, than they that vilify them, and labors as much for reformation
of ignorance, superstition, profaneness, and ungodliness (which abounds less
in these parts, than under his wing) as the Anabaptists does to gain Proselytes
by re-baptizing; which whosoever in the spirit of meekness opposes, and would
keep their flock free from infection, he brands them with the mark of formal
pretented Ministers.

Who take upon them to teach, but do indeed as Elymas the sorcerer, Acts 13.
pervert the right way of the Lord; This censure falls as heavy upon all
Ministers of the Reformed Churches, as us, which we spread before the Lord as
Ezekiah did Rabsheca's blaspheming letter, and submit to the Judgment of the
whole Church, whether Mr. Tombs or we more pervert the way of the Lord, or
resemble Elymas the Sorcerer, who (like him) did seek to turn away the Deputy
from the Faith, and withstood Barnabas and Paul, as he does all Orthodox
Ministers; like Johannes ad oppositum, or Ishmael, his hand is against every
man.

Mr. Tombs. 4 Section.
SVrely did they seek the truth in love, they would not so insult over tender
consciences as they do, encourage the looser sort, and deter the enquiring
souls from the ways of Christ. For my self, as I have found from others, so I
deprehend in these men the same unrighteous spirit in their reporting my
Answers, and publishing them in Print, without my revising of them, though it
were proposed, and as I remember yielded, by one, that in a private way, I
should have his Arguments sent to me in writing; And for the other after two
Copies of his Sermon sent me, yet I wrote to know whether he would own them,
nor did publish any thing, though I had sent some An^madversions on the notes I
received, of which I was told one copy w^^ showed to Mr. Cragge himself, and
not disowned by him.

And I do account it a shameful practice which these men, and another before
have used toward me, that after I have been drawn to a verbal Extemporary
dispute, and no common Notary agreed on, yet my Answers are published by them,
without ever allowing me the sight of them; that I might either own them, or
amend them, before the Printing and publishing them. But I see faction so
prevails with them, that like as if they were of the Romists minds, they allow
themselves liberty to use any arts, as pious frauds to bear down the truth of
Anti-Paedobaptism. And this they do with so much insolency, as may stir up the
inconsiderate to trample upon their Antagonist, and create prejudice against
the truth, which has necessitated me in this have to write this.

Reply.
SOme Truths we are impregnably settled in, Scripture is a river (as Gregory
said) where a lamb may wade; others are more obscure, where the Elephant may
swim, in these we seek the Truth in love; yet not so, as to be wherried about
with every wind of new doctrine; But after the Apostles advice. 1 John 4. 1. We
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, because
many false prophets are gone out into the world: Otherwise the Socinians, and
Ranters might impose upon us, who vent their blasphemous notions with as much
confidence, as do the Anabaptists. And we are so far from insulting over
tender consciences, that wheresover we see any spark of piety, we encourage it,
any looseness, we reprove it, yet we think not that it is to deter enquiring
souls from the ways of Christ; meekly to dissuade them from questioning one
Ordinance after another, till Satan have disputed them out of all; as we know
some by woeful experience, who first denied Infant Baptism, then all Baptism,
except spiritual, (as they call it,) then the Lords Supper* and so one
Ordinance after another, till they were above Ordinances, and at length turned
Atheists.

What unrighteous spirit he found in others concern not us, though we believe
he had fair dealing from Mr. Baxter whom he girds at. And in relation to our
selves, we conceive his Answers are reported with as much faithfulness as our
oppositions, and published with no more prejudice to him, than us, though also
without his revising, nescit vox dicta reverti, if* he and we come upon the
public stage, we must not be offended, if our words and actions be made
public. What was in private proposed unto, and yielded by Mr. Vaughan is a
mystery to me, I doubt not but he will clear himself: But whereas he says he
had two copies of my Sermon sent him, and within two lines after calls it notes
received, and afterward imperfect notes, and that he sent some Animadversions
of them to Abergaveny, and yet did not publish any thing, seems to me a Chaos
of contradictions. Untrue it is, that I did own the Copy that was shown me,
otherwise than misshapen rapsodies, and snatches here, and there, as the Gospel
may be owned in the Turks Alcoran, and as tunrue that he writ to know whether
I would own them, as may appear by his letter, and my answer, which I subjoyne.

SIR,
I Am informed that you have preached at Abergaveny since my being there, and
have pretended to overthrow what I preached against Infant Baptism, on Mark 16.
16. and to maintain it even from that Text, I request you that I may have a
copy of your Sermon, or the substance of your Arguments formed by your self, I
being unwilling to put any thing upon you which you will not own. And therefore
I have requested this bearer Mr. Price to deliver this letter unto you, and to
return me your Answer. As I shall judge meet, so you shall hear from me, who am

Your friend usque ad aras, so far as Love and defense of the Truth will
permit, John Tombs.


Reverend Sir,
I Received yours the 21th of this Instant, dated the 18th of November, wherein
I find that you have been misinformed as in circumstance, that I preached at
Abergaveny since your being there, so in substance that it was with a
pretension to overthrow what you preached upon Mark 16. 16. which could not be
unless I contested with Chimerae's and shadows, who neither heard you, nor
received any notes mediately, or immediately of yours. Only I was entreated by
many, whereof some in power, to deliver my sense concerning that Text, which I
did on a sudden, letting nothing fall, but what harmoniously agrees with the
present authorized doctrine of our Church continued since the reformation
ascending through the Saxons, and British Churches, till (besides,
Universality) it looses it self into Apostolical Tradition, and claymes divine
Institution for its first spring: Wherein if any thing casually cross what
others have delivered, they must impute it to the novelty, and singularity of
their by-path. And whereas you request a Copy of my Sermon, I must tell you, if
it be upon rational grounds, there is greater reason I should have one of
yours, as being first delivered, and entering in, or near, and imposing upon
our charges, whereof one of note told you they found themselves agrieved. But if
your request be out of courtesy* I must profess I would be willing to gratify
you in a thing incomparably beyond that, if I could find that it either tended
to the glory of God, who is dishonored by our divisions, or to the peace of
the Church, which is to much rent, and shivered already by factions. Too many
of us there are, that out of an itch of contradiction (like a Tetter, the more
its rubbed the more it spreads) with Nimrod to get us a name, builds up Babels
to the confusion of our common Mother, which causes divisions both of tongues,
and hearts. Sir, I should think under correction, that your eminent parts, and
mine (such as they are) might be better employed in applying balsoms, than
receiving the weak in faith to doubtful disputations. A time will come, (I
doubt not) when one conscionable Sermon, or godly exhortation to a drooping
soul, will render us more peace than a thousand swelling volumes of
controversy, I shall be sorry that any notions, or collections of mine shall be
made so public, as to be a ball of contention; Yet (if upon prudential ground
I find so) rather than the truth shall be disparaged, and God dishonored by my
tergiversation; for all the disadvantages (I will not fear) through his
protection, whose cause it is, to enter the lists, and take up the gentlet,
professing in the interim* while we differ in opinion without breach of
Christian charity, or affection, to remain

December. 27. 1653. Yours Sir, to serve you in the Lord Jesus, John Cragge.


By this I hope you see what truth is in his assertion; of the same leaven it
is, that he accuses us of a shameful practice, which justly reflects upon
himself, for calling that a verbal, extemporal dispute on his part, touching
that Question, in the study whereof he has spent so many years, preached so
many sermons, penned so many books, grappled with so many adversaries, and came
harnessed, as being invited by letters, and messengers several months before.
So that we see faction so prevails with the Anabaptists, that like as if they
were of the Pelagians or Arrians minds, they allow themselves liberty to use
any Arts or impious fraud to bear down the Truth of Infant Baptism; And this
our Adversary did at Abergaveny with that impetuousnesse, as has actually
stirred up the inconsiderate to trample upon us, and create prejudice against
Truth, calling Infant Baptism a nullity, a mockery, that no Baptism but by
plunging or dipping was lawful, all that would be saved must be rebaptized, or
baptized after profession; And now backed it with terming of us formal
pretended Ministers, who take upon us to reach, ^ut do indeed as Elymas the
sorcerer, pervert the right way of the Lord: His aim being this, to trample
down with disgrace the persons of them, the weight of whose Arguments he cannot
elude with wire-drawn distinctions, and evasions, making good the saying of
Maxentius Ap. Bign. in Biblioth. To. 4. Men's contentioni indulgens, and non
sanari, sed vincere cupiens, aversa ab eis quae recte dicuntur, tantum intenta
est in hoc, ut inveniat quod pro partibus suis loquatur. A contentious mind
desirous of victory, and not willing to be reformed, but averse from right
sayings, only devises how to elude truth, and to speak for his own part, and
this is all that necessitates him to write, either against us, or the whole
Catholic Church.

Mr. Tombs. 5. Section.
WHo the J. T. P. or J. W. is, I know not. ^ What the first Epistle says of
Austins rule, it is neither true, for then the observation of an Easter, and
sundry other superstitious Rites should be from the Apostles, nor if it were,
is ittrue of Infant-Sprinkling, that the whole Church held it, sprinkling being
not used in sundry ages instead of Baptism, and Infant Baptism, as it is now
used, opposed by Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen, and only the Popish
doctrine (disclaymed by Mr. Cragge) of the necessity of baptizing Infants to
the inheriting heaven, taught by the writers called Fathers.

Reply.
WHo the J. T. P. or J. W. is, he knows not, nor shall (...) for me: The six
heads, to which the former Epistle is reduced, he waves; The first is what is
the relaters sense of the Anabaptists, out of which he picks two propositions,
and then plants his Ordinance against them: The former is the saying of
Augustine, That, which the whole Church holds, was never begun by any Council,
but always observed, cannot otherwise be believed, but that it came from the
Apostles; The later is, The whole Church always held Infant Baptism; both these
he denies, which are both Austins; The former de Bapt. contra Donatist. lib. 4.
cap. 23. The later Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost.

I Will begin with the former; 1. Applying to the Test the proposition, then
examine the sandy ground upon which he denies it; The proposition which he
calls Austins rule is, That which the universal Church holds, and was not
instituted by Councels, but has been ever held, was not delivered but by
Apostolical Authority; This I undertake to make good, 1. Distinguishing of
Church, 2. Of the Object, or that which is holden of the Church.

Church, is sometimes taken for the representative of the Church, and that
according to the extent, or restraint, provincial, National, or Oecumenial:
Sometimes it is taken essentially (as some call it) or integrally for the body
of professors living at the same time, and this either for the major part,
which (as in Councels) obtaines the denomination of the whole, or of the whole
made up of integrall parts, without any considerable exception. Sometime it is
taken for all professors of all times, whether since the death, and expiration
of the Apostles, or since our Saviors commissioning of them, after his
resurrection, or full qualifying of them upon the day of Pentecost after his
ascension, while (as Egisippus said) the Church continued a pure Virgin.

Secondly, we must distinguish of the Tenets, or things holden by the Church,
which is either matter of Doctrine, or Discipline: Discipline grounded upon
Scripture binding, and necessary; Or Adiaphorous of Ecclesiastical institution,
and arbitrary. These grounds thus laid, I raise these propositions. First, its
confessed A representative Church, whether Provincional, National, or
Oecumenial may err, has erred de facto in superstructures, or things less
fundamental. 2. Neither Provincional, National, nor Oecumenial representative
can err in fundamentals, for then it would cease to be a Church. 3. The major
part of the Church, living at the same time, may err, as in the time of Elias,
I only am left (says he) that have not bowed my knee to Baal. Vnus Athanasius
contra cotum mundum. 4. The whole Church consisting of all the integral parts
cannot err in matter of Doctrine requisite to be holden, I have reserved seven
thousand (says God) that have not bowed their knee to Baal; and undoubtedly
many besides Athanasius that in his time were not infected with Arrianism. 5.
The whole Church, since the Apostles in all ages collectively considered,
cannot err either in Doctrine, or Discipline, then Christ should not make good
his promise, that the gates of Hell should not prevail against his Church,
that he would be with it to the end, that he would send them the Comforter,
that would lead them into all truth; Which promises, howsoever the Church of
Rome misapplies to themselves (whom Dr. Reignolds has proved neither are the
Catholic Church, nor any sound member thereof) yet it is true of the whole
Church. 6. It is possible that the whole Church since the Apostles may hold an
Adiaphorous, or indifferent Discipline, or Ceremony, which was not Apostolical,
or of Divine institution. 7. That which the whole Church holds, has in all
ages holden, including the Apostles, whether it be Doctrine or Discipline, must
needs be Authentic and infallible: Of th^s nature is the present Question, as
appears by the words of Austin in the fore-quoted place; if any ask for Divine
authority (observe it) not humane, in this matter; Although we most rightly
believe, that what the Universal Church holds, and was not instituted by
Councels, but has been ever held, he does not say since the Apostles, for that
is not ever, was not delivered but by Apostolical authority, because it is
impossible that any thing should generally be holden in the Apostles time, that
was not by their authority* and approbation: By this you see the truth of the
proposition; Now let us examine the ground upon which he denies it, for then
(says he) the observation of an Easter, and sundry other superstitious Rites
should be from the Apostles. His Argument put in form is this,; Easter and
other Rites have been held always, but Easter, and those Rites are not from
the Apostles, therefore that which has been held always, is not from the
Apostles. I deny the first proposition that Easter has been always, for by
what Cronologies, and Histories will he prove that Easter was observed in all
Centuries, in all Churches, East, West, African, Greek, Latin, in China,
Muscovia, India? For so much [alwayes holden] implies; have not our
Antiquaries, and Century-writers discovered a known beginning of Lent-fast, and
Easter; And after it began somewhat obscurely, like the heads of Nilus; as
Eusebius says in his fifth book, chapt. 24. it was left free unto all men, which
argues it was not always, but an Adiaphorous Rite of Ecclesiastical
institution: Therefore Irenaeus treated, and argued the business with Victor
Bishop of Rome, when he would have excommunicated the East Church, because it
agreed not with the Church of Rome about the keeping of Easter, What (says he)
may we not live at concord, although they use their own Rites, and we ours.

The time of keeping of Easter (as Venerable Bede stories it) was one of the
three Questions that occasioned the Massacre of eleven hundred Monks at Bangor,
the British Bishops pressed the observation of it upon the day of the month of
our Saviors resurrection. Austin the Monk from Gregory's authority, would have
it a movable Feast observed after the manner as the Church of England did of
late; Both sides hotly pretended Apostolical institution in circumstances so
different, which argued neither side had just claim to either. Now whether of
these will Mr. Tombs avouch was always? For he speaks indifferently, and
indefinitly, calling it the observation of an Easter, he must either both, or
neither; If both, his judgment will be l^ke his Holiness of Rome, who when the
Parisians in France, and the Inhabitants of Mentz in Germany laid claim to the
Relics of St. Dionyse enterred many hundred years before, he adjudged that
both places had the whole body: I should think a domestic sentence symbolizes
better with the present controversy, which was this: When, after the death of
Anthony Kitchen alias Dunstan, Bishop of Landaff, there were several suites
commenced by several men, all lay^ng claim to the house and lands belonging to
the Episcopal See, as sold by him, all of them respectively showing instruments
(as they pretended) with his hand, and seal; the Court rejected them all as
forged after his death; for it was conceived, if he had truly sold them, it
would have been but to one. So if Easter had been always, and had not crept in
obscurely, the necessary circumstance of the time would have been as precisely
observed, and agreed upon to be but one. Thus the former proposition is cleared.

The latter by him denied is this, That Infant Baptism was not always, he
cunningly alters the subject of the Question, and says that Infant-sprinkling
was not held of the whole Church, nor do we say so, for it was, and may be as
well by pouring on water or dipping (if infants bod^es in these cold Climates
would endure it) the usual way that we practice, is either by pouring on water
on the face of the Child, if it be weak, or dipping in part of the head, if it
be somewhat strong* Gods Ordinances are not destructive to Nature, who requires
mercy and not sacrifice: And that Infant Baptism was thus held always, is
apparent: To pass by divine Institution, and Apostolical practice, of which
anon; Dionysius the Areopagite, and Clemens in the Apostles constitutions both
makes for Infant Baptism, if the books be theirs (as they have been entitled
these many hundred years,) the cause is ours so far^; if not theirs, they must
not expect any proof of men living in the first Century, being extant none
beside them. Justin Martyr who lived Anno 150. in his 56 Question disputes the
different condition of those Children which dye baptized, and of those children
who dyed unbaptized. Two things are objected against this Testimony, 1. That
the reason of Baptizing of Infants, was not the Covenant of grace made to
believers, and their seed, but that they might obtain salvation at the
resurrection; This is so far from overthrowing, that it confirms the reason,
being in Covenant with the parents (for of such speaks the Author whose parents
are believers) gives the children capacity to be baptized, and they are
baptized, that they may have salvation at the resurrection, for we have no
promise of the salvation of any out of the pales of the visible Church. The
second objection is, that Perkins, Rivet, and others, questions whether it be
Justin Martyrs book or no. To which I answer, there is scarce a book in
Scripture, any Article of the Creed, or part of Antiquity but it has been
questioned by some; If we should reject all things that are questioned, we must
turn Academicks, Scepticks, and Seckers in all things; howsoever it gives
evidence to matter of fact, that Infants were Baptized in that age in which it
was written.

Irenaeus that lived in the same Century says lib. 2. cap. 39 Christ came to
save all that are new born by him into God, Infants, and little ones, and boys
etc. Who are those that are newborn? The Baptized: Which suits with the
language of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, Tit. 3. 5. The Apostle calls Baptism
(...), the washing of the new birth: which is so clear, that Mr. Mead in his
Diatriba upon the place thinks, that none will deny, that by washing of
regeneration baptism is meant or pointed at: Besides its the dialect of the
Greek Fathers near whose time he lived: Justin Martyr speaking of those that
are brought to be baptized, says (...), They are born anew, or regenerated
after the same manner we are regenerated, being washed (as it follows) in the
name of the father, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Ghost. Dio^ysius Hierarch. cap. 2. calls the materials of Baptism (...), Divine
signs of Divine generation. Basil and Nazianzene calls Baptism (...), the
regeneration of the soul; all this makes it appear that Irenaeus did drive at
the regeneration of Infants by Baptism, as well, as them of years.

Origin, whom Perkins places at the year 230. says upon Romans 6. lib. 5. The
Church received the Tradition of Baptising of Infants from the Apostles,
affirming the same thing in substance Homily 8th. upon Leviticus, and Homily
18. in Lucam. Parvuli baptizantur in remissionem peccatorum. Little ones are
baptized for the remission of sins. The exceptions against these are three. 1.
They are translations, Origens Greek in the Original is lost. The same may be
said of S. Matthews Gospel which he writ in the Hebrew, or Syriack, now lost,
the Greek Copy only extant; And of the Septuagints Translation of the Old
Testament, which our Savior himself followed more exactly than the Hebrew
Original, Translations agreeing with the Original Copy being equally
Authentic. But secondly it is said that the Translation is censured by
Erasmus, and Perkins as in something contracting, adding, or altering. What is
added is ingeniously confessed by Rufinus the Translator himself, neither does
acute Erasmus, nor Judicious Perkins, nor any of the Ancients most Critical
impeach him in the fore quoted Testimonies; Therefore this Exception is blank.
The third thing objected is, that he calls it a Tradition; So does the Apostle
things contained in Scripture 2 These. 2. 15. Epiphanius calls Baptism, and
other divine truths (...), traditions, and yet quotes Scripture for them.
Bellarmine calls Infant Baptism a tradition, and yet brings ten places of
Scripture to prove it. Austin affirms lib. 10. cap. 23. de Genes. That the
custom of our mother the Church, in Baptising of little ones is in no wise to
be despised, nor to be thought superfluous, nor at all to be believed; unless
it were an Apostolic Tradition, and yet proves the necessity of it from John
3. 5. Unless one be born again of water and the Spirit, etc.

Gregory Nazianzen, (who as Dr. usher, and Mr. Perkins says lived in the year
370, or 380.) commands Children to be Baptized, and gives a reason, Orat. 40.
(...), that they not miss of common grace; nothing is excepted against this,
but that he gave his opinion of others to defer their Baptism, unless they
were in danger of death, which I shall clear anon. To these may be joined
Athanasius, who interpret. Script. Quest. 94. says, (...), the dipping of the
Child quite under the water thrice, and raising of it up again does signify
the death of Christ, and the Resurrection the third day. In his second Question
ad Antioch. he enquires how one shall know that he was truly baptized, and
received the Holy Ghost, (...), who when he received Baptism was but an Infant?
He answers that it may be known by the motions of the Spirit, as the woman
knows she has conceived, when she feels the Child stir in her womb. And
Question. 114. he being asked whether Infants dying, go to be punished, or to
the Kingdom? Says, (...) your Infants are holy: here you see many hundred
years before Zuinglius, covenant-holiness is acknowledged, and that (...), that
Infants of Believers that are Baptized do as unspotted, and faithful enter
into the Kingdom.

Epiphanius amongst the Greek Fathers brings up the rear, avouching that
Circumcision had its time, until the great Circumcision came, (...) that is,
the washing of the new birth, or regeneration as is manifest to every one; Now
what is this washing of Regeneration, but Baptism? Which could not succeed
circumcision, unless children that were circumcised, were in his judgment
baptized.

These are the Evidences in part of the Greeks concerning Infants interest in
Baptism, proving that de facto in their times, and from the beginning of
Christianity they were baptized.

The Latin Fathers come up with a full body to join with them, whereof
Tertullian marches in the front, who (as Helvicus records) wrote his book of
Prescriptions about the year 195. Which was about 97 years after the decease of
St. John; So that by this calculation he lived about 70. or less years after
St. John, in which short tract of time the Apostolical practice of
Infant Baptism could neither be clouded, nor forgotten: Neither would he have
commended his private opinion as more profitable, that the Baptism of some
Infants for some respects should be deferred but have called it down, as an
Innovation, if the practice of it had not been as transparent to every man's
apprehension, as if it had been writ with the sunbeams.

That Infant Baptism was in practice in Tertullians days it appears by this
Question libr. de Bapt. cap. 8. Quid sestinat innocens aetas ad remissionem
peccat^rum? Why does innocent age (meaning children in their infancy) make
have for remission of sins? meaning Baptism; which is a clear case, whatsoever
Semi Socinian Grotius say to the contrary. That Tertullian was for Infant
Baptism himself, appears, that in his book de Anima, cap. 39 he presses it,
when the child is in danger of death, and gives his reason libr. de Bapt.* cap.
12. praescribitur nemini sine Baptism competere salutem, it is prescribed that
salvation is to none without Baptism, That cavil of his advice to deferr
Baptism in some cases, I shall answer anon.

Cyprian succeeds, who flourished (as Trithemius, and others observe) about the
year 240. in his 59 Epistle ad Fidum, is not only express for Infant Baptism
himself, but mentions a Council of sixty six Bishops, who had declared the
same, and all this to satisfy the said Fidus, who was not aginst the divine
Institution, and Apostolical practice of Infant Baptism, but conceived that
Infants might not be Baptized before the eighth day, because they might not be
circumcised. Cyprian tells him that Infants might not only be baptized before
the eighth day, but any day: Austin approves of this Epistle, and his judgment,
saying Epist. 28. ad Hier. Cyprianus non novum aliquod decretum condens, sed
Ecclesiae fidem firmissimam serva^s. That Cyprian did not devise any new
decree, but faithfully observed what the Church had done before him.

Augustine, that bright day star of Af^ick, gives further evidence; Sermon 15.
de v^rbis Apost. speaking of Infant Baptism says, hoc Ecclesia semper habuit,
semper tenui^, hoc a majorum fide accepit, hoc usque in finem pers^veranter
custodit. The Church always had it, always observed it, received it from the
faith of their Ancestors, keeps it with perseverance to the end: Neither do
those exceptions against him, any whit impeach the credit of it, much less the
fact. First because he calls it an Universal Tradition; Not denying that it is
grounded upon Scripture (as before) but with the Oxford Convocation avouching
that which in general terms, by consequence, and sub obscurely is delivered in
Scripture, is more plainly interpreted by Tradition, as following the River
Nilus, the heads that are somewhat obscure, are found out; And that
Constantine, Augustine, Alipius, Ad^odatus were not baptized when Infants, was
either because their parents were not Christians, or they were not converted
till of age, or were tainted with some heresy, or afraid of persecution, as
Philip the first Christian Emperor no sooner baptized, ^ut privately made away.

The second exception is, that Austin held that Infants dying without Baptism
were damned; This Rivet fathers upon him, de patrum authoritate, cap. 9
Augustinus aeternis flammis adjudicat infantes sine Baptismo morientes. Austin
adjudges to Eternal flames Infants dying without Baptism.

To which I answer he maintained Infant Baptism upon other grounds, though
partly upon this, which afterward he retracted.

Thirdly its excepted (for that of giving them the Eucharist is impertinent)
that he held a certainty of regeneration by Baptism, and he makes no question
of the regeneration of Infants.

I answer, he does indefinitly of the species, or sort of baptized Infants,
seeing God has promised to be a God of those that are in covenant with him,
and their seed, and we have a promise, and consequently faith of none else. But
he does not say that every individual baptized Infant without limitation is
regenerated, but the contrary, cort^cem sine nucleo, the shell without the
kernel, as he averres there are some, quirem Baptismi absque Sacramento
Baptismi consequuntur, that have the matter of Baptism, that is, the outward
Elements without the Sacrament of Baptism, that is without the inward, and
invisible grace. The other Ancients are of the same judgment, as Ambrose
^^stifies of Valentinian, quem in Evangelilio geniturus eram amisi, sed ille
non amisit gratiam quam poposcit. I have lost him, whom I was a begetting by
the Gospel, but he has not l^st the grace he desired, but enjoyes eternal
life, and how? seeing he was not baptized? He gives the reason, he was baptized
inwardly in will, though not outwardly with water.

The last exception is, that Austin maintained that not only Infants of
Believers, but Unbelievers also might be baptized: Its true, if Christians had
the Tuition of them, and would engage for them, they might as well be baptized,
as the children, Abraham's posteri^y bough^ with money, or captives might be
circumcised, therefore Tertullian pleads both prerogative of birth, and
education, as giving capacity to baptism To these I might add Ambrose that
says that every age is liable to sin, therefore every age is fit for the
Sacrament of Baptism. Lactantius, Fulgentius, Prosper, Aquatanicus, the
Milevitan Council with all the succeeding worthies (enough to swell a Volume)
goes in the same Equipage.

But (says Mr. Tombs) Infant Baptism, as it is now used, was opposed by
Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen* Which Argument made into form sounds thus.
That which was opposed by Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen was not held by the
whole Church; but Infant Baptism was opposed by Tertullian, and Gregory
Nazianzen. Therefore Infant Baptism was not held by the whole Church.

I deny both propositions, first the Major, for (if it were true) two men's
opposing does not weaken an Evidence of fact not interrupted for so many
Centuries: Secondly the Minor is most false, for it is formerly proved that
Tertullian and Gregory were both for Infant Baptism; True it is, the one
advised to defer it, till the Infants were two or three years old, unless
they were in danger of death, as it is conceived, least dipping impair their
health, what is this against Infant Baptism? could they be believers, and
Catechumem at that age? The other indeed would have the Baptism of some to be
put off, till they were of competent age to answer for themselves, but were
they not (as Pamelius, and others prove) children of heathens, which is
apparent, because he speaks of the danger Sponsorum of the Sureties, and
nothing of the parents; Secondly, the Author in that Chapter speaks of the
Baptism of such as were born of Jewish, or Heathenish parents (as S. Paul, and
the Eunuch,) and therefore he desires that the Baptism of such Infants may be
deferred, till they made confession of sins, and profession of faith, their
parents being Infidels, and their Sponsors Mortal, the most of their kindred
and neighbors (as it is probable) being Heathens; This doctrine differs
nothing from that we hold.

But Master Tombs further says, the Popish doctrine of the necessity of
Baptizing Infants, of their inheriting heaven, was taught by the writers called
Fathers. Called Fathers: and were they not so? This is in patrios mingere
cineres, to defile the urns of the Ancients.

Pinge duos angues pueri sacer est locus, extra
Mejite. Juvenal.
Paint here two snakes, it ill becomes
Children to piss on fathers Tombs.
In comparison of whom, (what conceit soever some have of themselves) they are
but Imps, and Zanies. But to the matter; two untruths are here by him asserted;
First, That the Fathers held the necessity of Baptizing to Salvation. Secondly,
That it is Popish Doctrine.

For the first, they maintained a threefold Baptism; 1. Fluminis, of water, 2.
Flaminis of the Spirit, 3. Sanguinis of Blood. Either of the two later might
supply the want of the first; So Basil the great discoursing of this point in
the Homily of the 40 Martyrs, says of one, (...), he was baptized not b^
another, or by the faith of another, but by his own faith, not in water, but in
his own blood. And Austin himself that was conceived to be a hard father of
Infants, and of all that dyed unbaptized, retracted his opinion, and
acknowledged that Baptism was not absolutely necessary to Salvation lib. 5. de
Baptis. contra Donatistas. Etiam atque etiam considerans invenio, etc. I, again
and again considering (says he) do find, that not only the passion for the
name of Christ to be able to supply that which was wanting of Baptism; but also
faith, and conversion of heart, if happily by reason of the strait of time they
can not be relieved by celebrating the mystery of Baptism. Thus the Fathers are
cleared from this aspersion. Neither is it Popish doctrine, or a general Tenet
of the Papists that Baptism is necessary for inheriting of heaven. Bernard,
that lived in the mists of Popery, and was an Abbot, confesses, that not the
want, but the contempt of the Sacrament damnes; and discoursing upon this
subject in his 77 Epistle avouches out of Ambrose and Augustine that invisible
sanctification was sufficient to Salvation, without a participation of the
visible Sacrament.

Blesensis another Papist, that lived near Bernards time, says, sufficient
Spiritus solus, quia ipsius testimonium pondus habet; The Spirit alone, that
is, the spiritual, and inward Baptism will be sufficient, because the witness
thereof has weight; intimating that the party might be saved, when outward
Baptism through invincible necessity was denied. True it is Baptism does not
conserre grace ex opere operato, all are not saved that are baptized, nor all
damned that are not baptized, yet under the Gospel we have no promise of any to
be saved that are not Candidati, or to use Tertullians language designati
sanctitatis, in covenant visible, and capable of Baptism. Of which I have
insisted more largely to give light to that which follows.

Master Tombs 6. Section.
AS false it is that the Baptizing believers (called by these Anabaptism) had
its spring, and rise from Nicholas Stork, and others there named, it being
commanded by Christ, practiced by the Apostles, continued in the first ages
without any Infant Baptism, and when Infants were baptized, it was very rarely,
only in case of danger of the nearness of death to the Infant, and when
reformation of other Popish abuses was sought, the reformation of this was
sought with the first, some hundred of years before Luther.

Reply.
IN the former Section nine untruths (out-vying the number of the lines) are
asserted by Master Tombs. 1. that the Epistle affirms, that the baptizing of
believers had its rise, and spring from Nicholas Stork. 2. That we call
Baptizers of believers Anapaptists. 3. That it is false, (though the Epistle
mentions it not) baptizing of believers without infants, had it spring and rise
from Nicholas Stork. 4. That it was commanded by Christ. 5. Practiced by the
Apostles. 6. Continued in the first ages. 7. When Infants were baptized, it was
very rarely. 8. That it was only in case of danger of the neerness of death to
the Infant. 9. That when reformation of Popish abuses was sought, the
reformation of this was sought with the first some hundred years before Luther.
These are his nine Worthies, (besides which many more deserves censure) that
come now to be stripped, that their deformity may be discovered. First the
Epistle does not affirm that the Baptizing of Believers had its rice, and
spring from Nicholas Stork. The words are these, as all errors, so it, (that
is Anabaptism) had its beginning after truth, The husbandman first sowed good
corn, then the enemy tares; and then mentions the most notorious Heretics that
arose in the six first Centuries, at the end of which the Mystery of iniquity
began more fully to work, which was first nascent, then crescent, then Regnant,
then Triumphant; And no sooner appeared a Reformation in Luthers time, but
there were Herod's that sought the life of this Babe, Dragons watching while the
woman was traveling, to devour the child, amongst whom the Anabaptists of
Germany were most venomous, the Author whereof was one Nicholas Stork, then
Phiser, Knipperdoling, Muncer, with their Tailor King John Becold of Leyden.
Now by what Chymistery will Master T. extract from hence, that the Epistle
affirms, that the baptizing of believers had its rise, and spring from Nicholas
Stork? This will be strange Logic, the Anabaptists of Germany in Luthers time
were the most venomous, or greatest disturbers of Reformation, the first Author
whereof was Nicholas Stork, therefore baptizing of believers had its rise, and
spring from hence: It is as inconsequent as this, The Anabaptists of England
have been great disturbers of our late Reformation, the first Author whereof
was Master T. Therefore baptizing of believers had its spring, and rise from
Master T. True it is, it will follow secundum quid, that those Anabaptists of
Germany had their spring from Nicholas Stork; These of England from Master T.
But that simpliciter all Anabaptists had their spring, and rise from them is a
palpable inconsequence; much more that the baptizing of believers had its rise
from thence.

Baptizing of believers (we confess) had its spring from Christ, John Baptist,
and the Apostles; but not only of actual believers excluding Infants; Though
Master T. confesses that Infants may habitually believe, nay, by extraordinary
means have actual faith. And here by the way observe two things. 1. He
cunningly alters the subject of the Question from Anabaptists (that is denyers
of Infant Baptism, and Rebaptizers of Baptized) to Baptizers of believers.
Secondly his (...) calling him Nicholas Stork, or (as others) Pelargus, not
Stork, as it is apparent per Antiphrasin by the contrary, for he was so far
with the Stork (...) piously to relieve his Mother the Church, that he did
rather Viper-like eat through her bowels, as too many of his children do at
this day.

The second untruth is, That we call the Baptizers of believers Anabaptists: we
do (according to the Nottaion of the word) call those Anabaptists that refuse
to Baptize Infants of believing Parents, and being baptized by others,
rebaptize them, when they come to age, according to Master T. his judgment,
and practice, who calls Infant Baptism a nullity, a mockery, that all that will
be saved must be baptized again, when they become actual believers; and this
he puts in execution by making as many Proselytes by rebaptizing as he can.

The third untruth is, that baptizing of believers without Infants, or
excluding Infants, had not its spring, and rise from Nicholas Stork; The
Epistle affirmed Anabaptism, (which is an other thing) had its spring thence; I
am content to wave that, and trace him in his own words, and meaning. This is a
negative Question concerning matter of fact, and is best confuted by rendering
invalid his own Instances alleged against it in his writings. Constantine the
Great; Gregory Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Augustine, Adeodatus, etc. Were not
baptized when Infants (says he) therefore baptizing of believers without
infants was before Nicholas Stork. This is a strange consequence, and may be
paralleled with this, Abraham' Ishmael, Naaman, Ebedmolesh, men of forty years
old in the wilderness besides many Proselytes were not circumcised, when
Infants, therefore circumcising of believers without Infants was ancient, or
always.

The Question is not whether only Infants were baptized in every Century, for
we acknowledge that as Abraham was circumcised, when a hundred years old,
Ishmael when thirteen, the Proselytes at what age soever they became Proselytae
foederis, or entered into covenant with the Jews; So Jews and Gentiles of what
age soever were baptized as soon as they became Christians, not only in the
Primitive, but in succeeding ages.

But the Quere is, whether before Nicholas Stork, and John of Leydens time,
Infants of believers de facto were excluded from Baptism, which the foregoing
instances do not prove, They prove indeed that those parties were not baptized
when Infants; but they do not prove that they were Infants of believing
Parents: Here the Anabaptists shamefully begs the Question, being not able to
prove that the Parents of any one of these were in covenant or believers when
they were born, but rather the quite contrary, as those two worthies Master
Marshall, and Master Baxter, have cleared beyond exception out of Authentic
histories; And that they were not baptized as soon, as converted, as it is
impertinent to the present controversy, so it is fallacia non causae ut
causae, a Paralogism that would impose upon us, but frontlesly, that denial of
Infant Baptism was the reason; The consequence will be strange, Constantine,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Augustine, etc. deferred their baptism after their
conversion, therefore Infant Baptism was not in those days, either de jure, or
de facto. It concludes as this, Proselytes of the gate deferred their
circumcision after their conversion, therefore Infants then were not
circumcised.

The true reasons why they superstitiously deferred Baptism were these. 1. An
imitation of Christ, who was not baptized till he was thirty years of age. 2.
An ambition to be baptized in the same place where Christ was, that is Jordan,
thus Constantine, and Valentinian, but fell sho^^, the one was baptized at
Nicomedia, where he dyed, the other expired without Baptism. 3. Some deferred
Baptism, till they could receive it from some Bishop of an eminent Sea, which
ambition Nazianzen reproves. 4. Some thought Baptism washed away all their
sins, therefore they deferred it, as Gregory Nyssen records, sine carne abutar,
and turpi libidine fruar, etc. Baptismum tum demum suscipiam, cum a vitu^s, and
iniquitatibus desistam, give me leave to abuse the flesh, and to enjoy my
filthy lusts, then at the length I will undertake Baptism, when I can give over
my vices, and iniquities. 5. Some thought that Baptized persons might live, and
not sin, or if they sinned after baptism, their sin was unpardonable, abusing
that place, Heb. 6. 4. Thus the Novations, to one whereof the Emperor
Theodosius said well, if it be so that none can be saved that sins after
Baptism, fac tibi Acesi scalam, per quam ascendas solus ad Coelum, Acesius,
make thy self a ladder, by which thou may alone ascend to Heaven. 6. Some
put off Baptism, to avoid persecution: by Imperial decrees it was forbidden to
buy, sell, eat, drink, or converse with Christians, as Eusebius, and Socrates
records, the very name of a Christian was odious, bonus Vir Caius Seius in hoc
tantum malus quod Christianus, Caius Seius was a good man (says the story) in
this only blameworthy, that he was a Christian* 7. Even Infant Baptism out of
urgent necessity, not scruple of conscience might be deferred, which makes
nothing against the present Tenet, as upon these, or the like occasions. 1.
When a Christian lived amongst Pagans, and could not easily meet with a
Minister. 2. Though they lived amongst Christians, yet Baptism was not a thing
feisable, when they pleased, by reason of some violence; this Gregory,
Nazianzen hints at Orat. 4. (...) that though they would, they could not enjoy
the grace of Baptism neither for themselves, and questionless the reason is the
same, nor for their children. 3. It fell out sometimes, that the Orthodox lived
amongst Heretics, who corrupted the faith and grated the foundation, and
therefore they would not have their children baptized by them, like Antiochus,
who refused to be ordained by Jovinian an Arrian Bishop, which was not simply
to refuse ordination, but ad hoc from such profane hands: so they might deny
their Infants baptism, not absolutely, but ad hoc, to be baptized by Heretics
according to the judgment of Cyprian, and other Africanes, who held their
baptism null. 4. They might out of neglect, or some other humane frailty defer
Infant baptism being tied to no day, as Moses did Circumcision of his Infant
from the eighth day so precisely commanded, and yet for all this, baptizing of
believers without Infants (pressed as a duty) had its spring, and rise from
Nicholas Stork, and in the sense, as questioned, had no footstep before.

The fourth untruth is, that Infant Baptism was not commanded by Christ, which
neither Master T. nor any other Antipaedobaptist will ever be able to prove,
seeing the Commission extends as well to baptism of Infants, as other ages,
Math. 28. 19, 20. Thus says Christ, all power is given me in Heaven, and Earth,
go ye therefore Disciple ye all the Gentiles, or all Nations, baptizing them,
in the name of the Father, and the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Wherein four
things are considerable. 1. The ground of the Commission, all power is given me
in Heaven, and in Earth. 2. The act- Baptize. 3. The object, all nations* 4 The
End, make Disciples, all these agrees as well to Children, as them of riper
years.

First the ground of the Commission, all power is given me in Heaven, and in
Earth, as if our Savior had said, I that was virtually empowered from the
beginning, am now actually after my resurrection invested with authority and
Lordship, as (...) God-man over all creatures to order and dispose them, as I
please, but especially mankind, to save that lost sheep that was gone astray,
to lay him upon my shoulders, and bring him home unto the fold; And my
Commission extends as to save some of all ages, conditions, sexes, so to create
new Ordinances that may relate unto all, even Infants, and sucklings, as well
as the ancient, seeing they may be also the Lambs of my Flock.

Secondly here is the Act baptize, that is as the Jews Children, and
Proselytes were admitted into Covenant by Circumcision, oblation and washing,
which was but their Typical, so those that are Candidati, and designati
sanctitatis, whether those that are willing to receive the Ordinance, or their
children are to be initiated by baptism, or washing, which is to be the outward
badge, or Character of my Covenant.

Thirdly here is the object, all Nations, or all the Gentiles, that is all
degrees, all ages, all sexes of every Nation, as capable, not only of the
inward Call, but the outward Character, Psalm, 28. 8. God has given all
Nations to Christ for h^s inheritance, Isai 49. 7. his salvation is to the end
of the earth, Acts 4. 11. no other name is given under Heaven by which they
can, or may be saved. The Extent of the Commission for baptizing is as large
among the Gentiles, as was among the Jews, where it is, Luke 3. 21* (...) all
the people, and shall we conceive that Infants were no part of all the people,
of all the Nations, of so many families?

Fourthly here is the end, (...) make Disciples, or ye shall make Disciples;
Now every action is to an end, and to make Disciples is the end, to enroll them
by Baptism, and afterward to teach them, is the means: Disciple or Scholar is
a term of relation, the Correlative that Answers it, is Christ; every Disciple
is a Scholar of Christ: These are Relata disquiparantiae, The fundament, or
ground of the relation, is Gods love to enter into Covenant, the formal reason
of a Disciple is the union betwixt the Scholar, and the Master expressed by
some token, or badge of admission; Thus we are Discipled, or admitted Scholars
by baptism into Christ's School; whereof some Actively, knowing something of
Christ, before they be discipled, as Peter, Andrew, James, and John called from
their n^ts, and all that are of age ought to be willing to entertain Christ
before they be baptized; some passively (as Children that are put to School by
their Parents before they know a Letter) thus Infants are matriculated into
Christ's School without their own express consent, or any present capacity to be
taught of men, but of God, who has promised to take care of them, and teach
them, we shall all be taught of God, especially Infants, who being not capable
of the Isntrumental, must wholely depend upon the principal efficient, but of
this by the way; I shall have occasion to search this further hereafter.

The fifth untruth is, that Infant Baptism was not practiced by the Apostles,
which being denied by the Anti-Paedobaptists, the proof lies upon them, which
they will perform ad Graecas Calendas. A Negative Argument in matter of fact
of this nature is of no validity, no mention is made ^^ express terms, that
the Apostles baptized infants, therefore they baptized none is inconsequent, it
might fall out often de facto, that they baptized none but of ripe age, as
preaching to public Congregations, who had travalled far to hear them; might
baptize those that were willing, and yet have no leisure to go from house to
house to baptize their Infants, yet it will not follow that de Jur^, they might
not have baptized them, or that they did not actually baptize them, when there
was opportunity. When John baptized in Jordan all Judea, and Jerusalem, Math.
3. 5. (...) came (as the word properly signifies) by water, of which coming
Infants are capable. The Apostles had Commission to Disciple all Nations by
baptizing, of which Infants are a principal part, as was fore-prophesied,
Isai. 2. 2. all nations should flow in; they baptized many whole families upon
the faith, and account of the chief of the house, Zacheus believed and
salvation came to his house, They baptized Lydia, and her household Acts 16. 15.
mention is only made that her heart was opened, and that she attended to the
things that were spoken, not one word of the rest of her family, and yet the
text says they were baptized. This Argument would be far more concluding, no
mention is made, that any of Lydias household attended to the word, but she,
therefore they were baptized without giving attention to the word: Then this,
no mention is made that any Infant was baptized in her household, therefore none
was baptized. It will follow as well, no mention expressly is made that her
sons, or daughters, or servants, or sojourners were baptized, therefore they
were not baptized.

Generals includes particulars, household is a collective term, and comprehends
all the members, and branches of a Family; And seeing the Apostles were
commissioned to baptize all Nations, and questionless did execute accordingly;
All Judaea, and Jerusalem came to be baptized of John; Peter and the twelve
baptized so many families upon record, and doubtless thousands besides, how
dare any incur that curse of God by diminishing of the word, and make that
exception God never made, that the Apostles baptized all Nations, and whole
families, and yet by an employed contradiction, excluded Infants.

The sixth untruth is, that there were not any Infants baptized in the first
ages, which is an asse^tion so frontlesse, that it needs no other refutation,
but what has been formerly delivered: Mr. Tombs has rather shifted, than in
the least color answered many learned, and godly Divines that have proved the
constant practice of Infant Baptism in the primitive Church, by induction of
the Authorities of several Fathers to that purpose, like the Angels in Jacobs
ladder Genesis 28. 12. some descending, some ascending up the scale of Primitive
practice, till they loose it into Apostolical use, and divine institut^on To
pass by Dionysius the Areopagite contemporanian with the Apostles, Clemens the
Author of the Questions ad Orthodoxos. Justin Martyr who flourished 150. years
after Christ's Nativity, 48 years after St. John. Iren^us that lived in 180.
Origin in the year 230. Nizianz^n 280. Cyprian, and a Council of sixty six
Bishops 260 Augustine who flourished 405* do all harmoniously avouch the
Universal practice of Infant Baptism, of whom Augustine is the mouth, The
Church, says he, always had it, always kep^ it, received it from the faith of
their Ancestors, kept it perseveringly unto the end. To which I will only add
that of Pelagius which is unanswerable, a man who lived but 400 years after
Christ, a great Scholar of eminent parts, that traveled over Europe, Asia, and
Af^ice, whereby he gained great experience, knew the custom of most places;
Amongst many other dangerous opinions he maintained, that Infants were
conceived, and borne without Original sin, which came unto them when growing in
years not from an inward principle of corruption, but from their imitation of
outward ill Examples presented unto them; S. Austin confutes this by an
Argument drawn from the custom of the Church in all ages to baptize Infants,
and that expressly in his 150. Epistle unto Sixtus, in the 18 chapter of his
book of Marriage, and Concupiscence, in his four books to Bonifacius, in his
books against Julian, one of Pelagius his Scholars, to wave many more
instances, that might be produced. The Argument in form is this. Those who
according to the custom of the Church have been baptized in all ages, have
Original sin, But Infants according to the custom of the Church have been
baptized in all ages, therefore Infants have original sin If there had been the
least color, that he could without shamel^sse impudency have denied the
Minor, he might have said, I have been a travellour, and have conversed with
the most Churches in Christendom, have read over the Annals, Histories, and
Antiquities of these four hundred years since Christ (as doubtless he had) and I
find the custom has not been Universal, nor the spring, and rise from Christ,
and the Apostles: But he avouches nothing of this, as knowing it was such a
notorious unt^uth, as would render his other Tenets ignominious; But endeavored
to evade Austin's Argument by this device, namely by pleading that Baptism was
administered to Infants, not to wash away their Original sin, but to bring them
to the kingdom of Heaven. This Master Tombs confesses, (but his figg leaves
to cover the shame of it are most pitiful) that the Pelagians did grant the
baptizing of Infants, because they durst not oppose the custom of the Church
that was general; was it general then, and not before? When began it? Durst he
not tell them, that it was an innovation, encroachment, and not so from the
beginning, if there had been the least color of plea for a position so
advantageous for his interests; when he durst broach errors so pernicious, and
destructive, maugre the opposition of Prelates, Counsels, and the whole Church.

The seventh untruth is, That when Infants were baptized, it was very rarely;
The contradictory whereof has been sufficiently evidenced; Austin's, hoc
ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit, may well outvie Mr. Tombes's non habuit,
non tenuit. Let our Adversaries show (if they can) that the Baptism of Infants
in the primitive times was denied, or deferred, unless it be for the
foregoing, or the like reasons. Walfridus Strabo, his sayings, chapt. 26. de
rebus Ecclesiasticis (that in the first times the grace of Baptism was wont to
be given to them only, who were come to the integrity of mind, and body, that
they could know, and understand what profit was to be gotten in Baptism, what
is to be confessed, and believed, what lastly to be observed by them that are
to be newborn to Christ) is meant only of them that are converted when of
age, being not borne of believing parents, as appears by his instance of
Augustine, whose parents, cannot be proved out of any Authentic history to be
Christians when he was born, and the words following, backs this
Interpretation. Afterward being Christians, and understanding original sin
etc. ne perirent parvuli, si sine remedio regenerationis gratiae defungerentur,
statuerunt eos baptizari in remissionem p^ccatorum; least their little ones
should perish, if they dyed without the remedy of the grace of regeneration,
they appointed to baptize them for the remission of sins; Afterward being
Christians they understood Original sin, when they were not Christians, they
understood it not, and then it was not fit their Infants should be baptized,
but being Christians, and understand^ng it, their Infants were baptized.

That saying of Grotius, that many of the Greeks deferred the baptism of little
ones till they could themselves make confession of their faith, is a
groundless fiction, which he invented, partly to ingratiate with the
Socinians; partly with Cardinal Peronius, with both whereof he agreed like
Sampson's Foxes in the tail of this Question, though otherwise there were fire
brands of dissension between them. Photius a learned Grecian, who knew better
the custom of the Greeks, than either Grotius, or the Anabaptists his clyents;
produces an Imperial constitution, wherein it was decreed, that all baptized
Samaritans, and Grecians should be punished (...), who brought not their wives,
and children in their families to holy Baptism, Tit. 1. de fide, cap. 10. Here
you see that there was a Law that upon strict penalty required of Grecians that
were baptized themselves, that they should bring their children to baptism. He
alleges another imperial constitution that the Samaritans should not be
admitted to be baptized, till catechized in or after conversion, but their
children, though they knew not the doctrine, were to be baptized.

The Council in Trullo canon 84. requires that all the Graecians little ones
without delay should be baptized. One of the eight Canons in Carthage concluded
against Pelagius, affirmed, that whosoever denied Baptism for the remission of
sins to a newborn Infant should be Anathematized. Balsamon in his gloss upon
the forementioned Canon relates that the Romans buying children taken captive
by the Scythians, and Hagarens from a Christian Country, put it to the Question
whether they were to be baptized, or no? some pleaded they came from a Country
where Christians dwelt, and therefore it was to be presumed they were baptized
(...), in their Infancy, others doubted whether they were baptized or no, all
concluded if they were not, they ought to be baptized. All which clearly
testifies that Infant Baptism was generally in use amongst Christians, seeing
they presumed where Christians inhabited, Infant Baptism was in use. Now if
such among the Greeks as brought not their children to Baptism were to be
punished. If Imperial laws; and Synodical Canon required Infant Baptism, if
there were any Infants of whose Baptism they doubted, they required they should
be baptized, why should Master Tombs out of Grotius give this false Echo, That
Infants in the Primitive times were baptized very rarely.

The eighth untruth is, That Infants in the Primitive times were baptized only
in case of danger of nearness of death; the contradictory whereof is so
evident, that it need no other refutation but reflection upon the Premises, to
which I refer the Reader. None of the Anti-Paedobaptists have hitherto (which
their peremptory assertion requires) given us historical evidence, that either
all or the major part, put off their baptism till believers, except as is
alleged in case of danger of death; Nay that any dogmatically, and out of
scruple of conscience denied, or refused Infant Baptism. True it is that
Tertullian that lived about eighty years after the decease of S. John, and
Gregory Nazianzen after him, who lived about 370 years after the incarnation,
in some cases, (as has been formerly alleged) advised to put off
Infant Baptism, which irrefragably proves that Infant Baptism was generally in
practice in their times, that they approve of the lawfulness of it, only
advises the convenience of deferring in some cases forementioned, neither do we
find upon record, that either of them prevail^d. In case of urgent necessity
death approaching, they more veh^mently pressed the necessity of Baptism,
according to Tertullians own ground. Tertul. de Baptismo. Praescribitur nemini
sine baptismo compet^re salutem, none can be saved (says he) without baptism,
from that sentence of our great Master, unless one be born of water, he has
not had life, for he has tied faith to the necessity of Baptism; thus far
he; From whence we may gather, that as Tertullian elsewhere confesses the
universal custom of baptizing Infants; so here impliedly he approves of the
lawfulness, nay the conveniencie of it, seeing Infants every moment are liable
to death, and of a further necessity, death approaching, which necessity we are
not to suppose to be absolute, and Medii of the means, as if God could not save
Infants without baptism; but conditional and praecepti, because God has
commanded it; for I cannot find, that God has promised to save any that walks
not in his way, and are not actually; or at the least habitually disposed to be
admitted into the Church visible by his own ordinances. God could have cleansed
Naamans leprosy without washing in Jo^dan, but would not if he had stubbornly
refused, therefore that was good counsel of his servants, 2 Kings 5. 13. If
the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it?
How much rather then, when he says, wash and be clean; So that Tertullian's
advise to put off Baptism, was but either as before, till Infants were
strengthened to endure the water, or a mistake, as he also adv^s^d young men
unmarried, and widows though professi^g Christ, to delay their baptism, till
they were either married, or confirmed in chastity, that is, single life

Now as this would be a strange Argument, Tertullian advised young men, and
widows to delay their Baptism, till they were either married, or confirmed in
chastity, Therefore young men and widows in the Prim^tive times, when
converted from Paganism were not baptized; As strange is this, Tertullian
advised to defer the baptism of some Infants, therefore in his time, and the
ages before him infants were not baptized, save* in the case of danger of
death, every one may see the weakness, and this is their main fort, which being
taken, they must needs yield up their arms.

The ninth untruth is, That when reformation of other Popish abuses was sought,
the reformation of Infant Baptism was sought with the first, some hundred years
before Luther. Nunc ad Triarios perventum est. This is the Rereward, which our
Adversaries boast much in, as Nestor did of his in Homer; but being examined,
it will end like Nebuchadnezar's image in feet of clay; or as Jordan (the
Dippers talk so much off) in Sodomes gulf, or the dead sea. What! was
Infant Baptism instituted by Christ, practiced by the Apostles, used in the
first Centuries, a custom so sacred in Pelagius his days (by Mr. Tombes's own
confession) as he durst not oppose it? And yet a Popish abuse, when Popery had
yet no being: Did Augustine aver the Church was always Popish, when he said
the Church always held Infant Baptism? Did Origin say the Apostles practiced
Popery, when he said de peccatorum meritis Ecclesia traditionem ab Apostolis
accepit etiam parvulis dare baptismum, the Church received a Tradition from the
Apostles to give Baptism even to little ones? Was it used in Asia, Europe,
Greece before the Bishop of Rome was as much as a Provincial Bishop? Nay more
frequently (as Master Tombs would have it) in Africe, then Italy, and yet a
Popish abuse? This is a strange Prodigy. Indeed there are that under the
notion of Popery comprehnds the Trinity, Magistracy, Ministry, Sacraments, all
Ordinances, Scriptures, and even the truth of the deity, with the Persons and
Office of Christ. The Trinitarians and Anabaptists of Transilvamia, Anno 1568.
in their Antitheses of their false, and true Christ at Alba Julia have
delivered something like this, which our Seekers, Ranters, and Mortalists have
improved of late, impugning all glorious truths under the Notion of Popery. But
that Master Tombs would be esteemed a judicious and learned man, much versed
in Antiquity, should account Infant Baptism a Popish abuse, and
interpretatiuely accuse the Magistracy, and Ministry of all the reformed
Churches of Popery, is somewhat strange: But when, or in what hundred years was
the reformation of Infant Baptism sought? For he says, it was sought some
hundred years before Luther, Sought by whom? At the hands of what Council,
Magistracy, Presbytery? He mentions here none, but Pithagoras like, thinks his
(...) is sufficient. In his Examen of Mr. Marshals Sermon he gives four
instances for proof of his pretended allegation^ 1. Berengarius. 2. The
Albigenses. 3. A nameless Sect out of Bernard. 4. The Petro-Busians, which
whether any, or all of these sought reformation of Infant Baptism as a Popish
abuse, comes now to the Test.

For his first instance of Berengarius, he says that Cassander in his
Testimonies of Infant Baptism, in the Epistle to the Duke of Cleve, tells us
that Guitmand Bishop of Averse mentions the famous Berengarius, Anno 1030.
opposing not only the corporal presence of Christ in the Eucharist, but also
the baptism of little ones. For answer, observe it is nor said that Berengarius
desired reformation of Infant Baptism, but opposed it, nay, that Guitmund did
but say that he opposed it, and if he seek further he shall find, that Guitmund
took it upon the credit of Deoduinus Leodiensis and he took it up as a common
fame, how far does this fall short? Besid^s this fame was a liar, for in so
many Synods held against Berengarius, we never find any (says Bishop Usher)
thing of this nature laid to his change.

His second instance is of the Albigenses, called so of a Country of France,
and Cathari, or Puritans, of whom he says in the words of Cassander, hi
reliquis erroribus, quos a Manichaeis, and Priscillianistis mutuati sunt, etc.
These to the rest of the errors which they have borrowed of the Manichees, and
Priscilianists moreover have added this, that they say the baptism of little
ones is unprofitable.

To this I Answer; he took this also upon report of those who mistook their
meaning, when they said Baptismum nihil proficere parvulis ad salutem, Baptism
profited little ones nothing to Salvation, held no more as Bishop Usher says
than that it did not conferr grace ex opere operato, which we also say; which
is further evidenced positively, in that H^veden recording the confession of
the faith of the Albig^nses, does abundantly own their baptizing of Infants.
N^gatively that the Magde^u^gen^es that diligently related their doctrine, nor
Reignolds in his Caluinoturcismus, wherein he endeavors to reproach them, lays
any such thing to their charge. Aeneas Silvius delivering a large Catal^g^e of
their opinions in his History de Origin Bohemo^um, has no such thing, page
67, 68. These are his words, Hujus p^stifera, ac jam pridem damnatae factionis
dogmata sunt, Romanum Praesulem reliquis episcopis parem esse, inter sacerdotes
nullum discrimen. Presby^erum non dignitatem, sed vitae meritum, officere
potiorem, animas e corporibus excedentes, aut in aeternas e vestigio poenas
mergi, aut perpetua consequi gaudia: Purgatorium ignem nullum inveniri; vanum
esse ^rare pro mortuis, and avaritiae sacerdotalis inventum: Dei, and sanctorum
imagines, delendas, Aquarum, palmarumque benedictiones irridendas. Mendicantium
religiones malos daemones invenisse. Sacerdotes pauperes esse debere sola
contentos eleemosyna. Liberam cujusque praedicationem verbi dei patere. Nullum
capitale peccatum, quantumvis majoris vitandi mali gratia tolerandum. Qui
mortalis culpae reus sit, eum neque seculari, neque ecclesiastica dignitate
potiri; neque parendum ei: confirmationem, quam Chrismate Pontifices inducant
and extremam unctionem inter ecclesiae sacra minime contineri. Auricularem
confessionem nugacem esse. Sufficere sua quemque deo in cubili suo confiteri
peccata. Baptisma fluvialis undae nulla interjecta sacri olei mixtura
recipiendum, coemiteriorum inanom usum, questus causa repertum; quacunque
tegantur tellure humana corpora nil distare. Templum dei late patentis ipsum
mundum esse, coarctare majestatem ejus, qui ecclesias, monasteria, oratoriaque
construunt, tanquam propitior in eis divina bonitas inveniatur. Sacerdotales
vostes, altarium, ornamenta, pallas, corporalia, calices, patinas, vasaque
hujusmodi nil habere momenti: Sacerdotem quocunque loco, quocunque tempore
sacrum Christi corpus conficere posse, petentibusque ministrare; sufficere si
verba sacramentalia tantum dicat, suffragia sanctorum in coelis cum Christo
regnantium frustrae impetrari, quae juvare non possunt: in canonicis horis
cantandis, dicendisue frustra tempus teri. Nulla die ab opere cessandum, nisi
quae dominica nunc appellatur; celebritates sanctorum ^ursus rejiciendas;
Jejuniis quoque ab ecclesia institutis nihil inesse meriti.

His third instance of an Anonymous people out of Bernard in his 66. Sermon
upon the Canticles, that called themselves Apostolicos of whom he says
(amongst other things) irrident nos quia baptizamns infantes, they scoff at us
because we baptize Infants. To which I answer, these people were also
Albigenses, or Waldenses, who are cleared from this aspersion by the former
histories: Bernard also charged them with Manichism, and that the people threw
them into the water, as if they were witches, which Mr. T. himself does not
believe, why should we then believe the other contrary to so many authentic
Authors?

His fourth Instance is of Petrus Cluniacensis, who writ an Epistle to three
Bishops of France against Peter de Bruis, and Henricus charging them with this
error, that little ones may not be baptized. I answer Cluniacensis a railing
Abbot endeavored to render them odious to the people, because they opposed the
Monks idle, and unprofitable life, and casts this aspersion upon them that
they deny Infant* Baptism, when they only denied the trumpery that went along
with baptism in those days, as spittle, salt, exorcism; and that it did conferr
grace, ex opere operato: None charges them with laughing at Infant Baptism it
self, but they that charge them with Manichism; from both whereof their own
confessions clear them, one whereof was published by Baltazzar Lidius, and
presented to Vladislaus King of Hungary, Baltaz. Lid.. Tom. 2. page 285. In
their Apology, and defense of their Doctrine, they have a whole Chapter wherein
they assert, and prove Paedobaptism at large. The confession of the Taborites
has not a word sounding against it. The History of the Waldenses, lib. 1. cap.
3. p. 10. mentions amongst the calumnies unjustly cast upon them, that they
reject the Baptism of Infants, of which Bernard is cited the Author, Sermon 66.
And the same Author in the third part of his History, professedly setting down
the doctrine of the Waldenses, and Albigenses, says they present their
children to Baptism, which they ought to do, to whom the children are nearest,
as Parents etc. By these discoveries it may appear how far these obscure
testimonies taken from Cassander a modern Amphibious Naturalist, and Bernard
and Cluniacensis two Popish Abbots comes short of proof, that when reformation
of other Popish abuses was sought, the reformation of Infant Baptism was sought
with the first, some hundred years before Luther. Montes parcuriunt, nascetur
ridiculu^ Mus, great boasts, but small roast.

Master Tombs 7 Section.
AS vain is the assignation of the causes of Anabaptism (which is indeed true
Baptism) whereas the true cause is the shining-forth light from the Scriptures,
and other Authors not discerned formerly as now.

The true reason why our books and practice are permitted is, because they have
at least so much appearance of truth as is sufficient to make wise men let them
alone, least they happily should fight against God. The Epistlers reasons are but
his own ignorant surmises.

Reply.
IN the first Paragraph he undertakes to answer to the third head of the
Epistle, the reasons of the present grouth, and increase of Anabaptism, wherein
he forges a Chimera mounted upon these four wings. 1. That the assignation of
the causes of Anabaptism are vain, 2. That Anabaptism, that is repeating of
Baptism) is true Baptism. 3. That the true cause of Anabaptism, is the shining
forth of light from Scriptures, and other Authors. 4. That this light was not
discovered formerly as now. These Icarian engines wings him from his labyrinth
of error, but are in danger to betray him to the Sea of gross mistakes, as
will appear when they are exposed to the beams of the sun, that is, the true
light of discovery. First that the assignation of the causes of Anabaptism are
vain; This he affirms, and yet names not one of them, but turns his back (as
the Soldier did from Augustus Caesar) because he could not endure the darting
beams of his eyes. Oppressing N^mrods uses to send witnesses out of the Country,
that would overthrow their cause; so he having suppressed the reasons of the
present grouth of Anabaptism calls them vain; yet they shall once more appear
at the bair against him, which we submit to the judgment of intelligent, and
impartial Christians, they are these, 1. Times of division, wherein the hedge
of discipline is broken down; liberty in religion, is like free conversing
without restraint, or watch in time of pestilence, one house easily infects a
whole City. 2. Satan's malice like a river the further it goes the deeper, and
fiercer. 3. The corruption of man's nature more inclinable to error than truth.
4. The fitness of the engine for devastation, and ruinating all former Churches,
under color of first baptisms nullity, gathering of new ones (after their own
mould) out of the old ruins by rebaptizing. 5. The pretense that children are
incapable of Church Membership, or communion of Saints, as if there were not
the same capacity under the Gospel, which was under the law. 6. False
allegation that Infant Baptism is occasion of loose living, as if the native
Jews, that were sealed, when Infants, were more dissolute than the Proselites.
7. To limit it to ripe years increases piety; as if Jews, and Turks, and their
rebaptized converts, were not more frequently guilty of Apostacy, and
hypocrisy. 8. Not understanding that Infants Church membership in the Old
Testament is not repealed, but confirmed in the new. 9. A carnal estimation
that the Covenant made with Abraham was partly carnal, of which circumcision is
a part, as if godliness in both Testaments had not the promise of this life,
and of the life to come. 10. That circumcision was the seal of righteousness of
faith to Abraham, and not his posterity. 11. That the Covenant was made with
Abraham, and his spiritual seed only, and not with visible professors. 12. That
there is no such thing as national Churches, though Christ says, make
disciples of all Nations, and Isaiah says, all Nations shall flow in, yet they
say, all Churches must be gathered by actual profession as well in Christian
Nations as amongst Turks and Pagans. 13. Because we have no particular instance
in Terminis that any Infants were baptized, and because they are not expressly
named in the precept, as if generals did not include particulars, as well for
Infants as old men. 14. Denying equivalencies, and necessary consequencies from
Scripture. 15. A vilifying the judgment and persons of all godly, and learned
men of this present, and former ages, building up their rotten foundation upon
their ruins. 16. Temporal interests of the lowest of the people, which while
they dream it is countenanced by men in power, cry Hosanna, and perhaps
crucify to morrow. 17. A pretending to the Spirit of God. Numa Pompilius
feigned that he conversed with the goddess Egeria, Minos with Jupiter in the
Cave; Solon with the Delphian Apollo, Mahomet with the Angel Gabriel; Montanus,
and the Quakers with the Holy Ghost; the white Witches with the spirit in the
shape of a dove, and all but to palliate their unsound opinions, and practices.
18. The learning, subtilty, and industry of some Anab^ptists to gain
Proselytes; Arrius, Pelagius, Marcion were not wiser in their generation than
they, to invegle the poor simple people, especially women, and inferior
tradesmen; which in seven years can scarce learn the mystery of the lowest
profession, thinks half seven years enough (gained from their worldly
employments) to understand the mystery of Divinity, and thereupon meddle with
controversies, that they have no more capacity to pry into, than a bat to look
up into the third heaven. Thus far the assignation of the reasons of
Anabaptism which he says are vain; a censure how just, let wise men judge, who
clearly see that the meeting of several beasts at Nilus does not more properly
beget new Monsters, nor putrefaction engender several vermins, than the
fore-assigned reasons occasion the grouth, and increase of Anabaptism.

The second Allegation is, that Anabaptism is true Baptism, A strange Paradox,
which either implies that Infant Baptism is a nullity, or that true baptism may
be iterated, or received more than once; The confutation of the former is the
scope of this present treatise rectum and sui, and curvi index. The latter that
true Baptism may be iterated (as the notation of the word, and their practice
interprets it) is now to be questioned; And that I fight not with the air, or
an adversary of mine own framing may appear from Mr. T. who examen page 23.
begges an Argument of Mr. Martial to prove reiteration of Baptism to be
intrinsecally unlawful, and that in the tone of the Marcionites and Aetians,
who in several Counsels have been whipped for it, and have received these, and
the like reasons for their pasport. 1. In the institution of Baptism there is
neither expressly, nor consequently any mention of reiteration of it, as in the
Lords Supper, Quotiescunque feceritis, as often as ye shall do it, etc. and
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, whatsoever is not grounded on Scripture is
will worship, there is no instance, or president in Scripture that any one was
baptized twice, for those, Acts 19. 3. 4. were either first baptized
metonymically, that is initiated with the doctrine of John, and then afterward
baptized with water as some say; or adulteratly baptized with false Baptism (as
Ambrose thinks) and then with true Baptism; or baptized first with John's
Baptism, and then with Christ's, which (as Austin conceives) are two distinct
Baptismes; or which is most consonant to the Text, first baptized by John with
water, then by the Apostle with the Holy Ghost, and fire, that is the
miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost; None of these make for the reiteration of
the same baptism; besides there is express Scripture against it. Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Lord, one faith, one Baptism. 2. Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration,
or new birth; and as Austin has it as we are carnally, and naturally born but
once, so we are spiritually, and supernaturally new born but once; faith though
it admit of grandations begins but once, Bapt^sm that matriculates us into
Christ's Schole, is to be performed but once; Therefore even Cyprian himself,
and his followers never baptized any whom they thought were truly baptized
before: 3. Baptism succeeds Circumcision which was but once administered, as
appears from that of Joshuah 5. 4. where the Holy Ghost gives this reason why
Joshuah circumcised the Israelites in Gilgal? Because all the circumcised were
dead, intimating if they had been circumcised already, it should not have been
done again. And seeing circumcision was tied to the eight day from the birth,
till a second eight day besides the first can be found, it cannot be justified
without sacrilege.

His third allegation that the true cause of Anabaptism is shining forth of
l^ght from the Scriptures, and other Authors; what other Authors? Is not
Scripture by Bellarmine's own confession certissima omnium and perfectissima
regula, the most certain and perfectest rule of all? Yea the sole and adequate
rule of our faith? Scripture (its true) may impart its light to other Authors,
as the Sun empties his rays (as the Astronomers speak) in inferiores crateras,
into inferior sublunary vessels; If the Scripture have thus emptied it self
for the advantage of Anabaptism, they might do well to let it appear, produce
one sol^d Argument out of Scripture against Infant Baptism, name one
Authentic, and impartial Author that demonstrates out of one Text of Scripture
that Infants* ought not de jure to be baptized, out of the undoubted Records of
one Century, that de facto they were not baptized, but this they never could do
yet, never will do. Indeed they may fancy to themselves abundance of light out
of Scripture, like sick persons in some disease, when death approaches thinks,
that store of tapers, and torches are lighted about the bed, when the candle is
out; the cause is in the distemper of the brain, and eye, and if the spiritual
eye of the soul be darkened (...) how great is the darkness.

The fourth Allegation is, That this light out of Scripture, and other Authors
was not discerned formerly as now. Some of our Anabaptists are of opinion that
Christ never locally ascended into heaven, but only vanished out of sight and
is yet bodily upon the earth, vouchsafing his apparition to the Saints now,
which he did not in former ages; This is either a diabolical fiction, or a
deluding Phantasm; like to this, is the pretended light out of Scripture, and
other Authors for Anabaptism not discerned formerly as now. Did Berengarius see
more than the primative Fathers, and Martyrs? The Albigenses of France, and the
Anonymi more then Berengarius: Peter de Bruis more than the Albigenses?
Baltazzar, Hubmir, Pacimontanus, Muncer, and John of Leyden more than Peter de
Bruis? And Mr. Tombs as a child upon these Giants shoulders sees further into
childrens baptism than they all? Ring the bells backward, and make Horace
recant his parentum pejor avis, lib. 3. ode. 6. That every thing degenerates;
Ovid and Hesiod were mistaken, now is the golden age, and not before: It seems
the promise that Christ made to the never dying corporation of his Apostles,
and their successors, that he was with them always, even to the end of the
world, was not performed before; That the Holy Ghost that was to lead into all
truth was not sent till now. We have special predictions of these latter days,
but its such as these. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 6 7. In the last days perilous times
shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, etc. Of this
sort are they that creep into houses, and lead captive silly wom^n laden with
sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever hearing, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth; Now as Jannes, and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
also the truth; Jude 18. 19. There should be mockers in the last time, who
should walk after their own ungodly lusts; These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. And our Savior himself tells us,
when he shall come, he shall scarce find faith upon earth. But that there is
shining light out of Scripture, and other Authors not formerly discerned about
Infant Baptism (otherwise than that by opposition the truth is more cleared) I
fear is but a bragg like Oromazes in Plutarch, who boasted he had an Egg that
had included in it the happiness of the world, which being broken proved a
wind-egg, and nothing came forth, but corrupted air. I have read of a
Mountebanke that bragged of a new receipt that would make dim eyes see as
perfectly as those of Lynceus, who could discover the flaggs of ships from the
Carthaginian to the Lilibaean shore, but being applied put them out. Satan
promised Eve that her eyes should be opened, and that they should be as Gods,
knowing good and evil, but it was to see* their misery, as the event declares.
John of Leyden when he awaked out of his deep sleep, pretended strange
revelations, and new lights, which ended in riding upon a blind Ass in the
market place, where he afterward for his impostures suffered: Male ominatis
parcite verbis, God grant that the end of our Anabaptists may be to their own
comfort, and the peace of the Church, and that is the worst I wish them.

In answer to the fourth head of the Epistle, why the Anabaptists were
permitted, and their books printed, seeing those of Arrius, Dr. Pocklingtons,
Mr. Archers were burned, he passes by the reasons there assigned, which are
these, 1. The providence of God, 2. The wisdom of the state. The providence of
God, who suffers errors, 1. That truth by opposition may more diligently be
searched out, 2. That the sincerity, and constancy of the faithful may be
tried. 3. That impenitent and proud in spirit may be blinded, and hardened.

The wisdom of the State, that like wise Chirurgians will not lance a turgid
ulcer, till it be ripe; A skillful Physician that will not purge some floating
humors till they be settled, These he calls the Epistlers own ignorant
surmises, when they are not his own, but in effect of the whole Church,; not
ignorant surmises, but the judgment of most learned men, wherein consequently
he accuses many former Counsels, Synods, Harmonies of confessions,
Parliaments, Canon, Civil, Statute laws, many former Treatises of learned
Divines, and the late Assembly, of ignorant surmises.

The true reason (says he) why their books, and practice is permitted, is
because they have at least, so much appearance of truth as is sufficient to
make wise men to let them alone, least they happily should fight against God;
This is the (...) or common allegation that the Quakers, Shakers, Ranters, and
all dissenters plead for liberty of conscience, wherein are couched two words
that discovers an Asses ears under a Lions skin, and a poult-foot under a long
mantle, for he speaks not out, and says absolutely that there is truth in
their books; but that there is at least so much appearance of truth; not that
those that oppose them, fight against God: but that happily, that is casually,
they may fight against God: True it is which the Philosopher says, (...), many
things appears and makes fair semblance, which are but shadows, and
kickshowes: Copp put such a gloss, and varnish upon upon his blasphemies, that
a Matron that cried shame upon him before, when she heard his Sophisticated
reasons, was convinced to be of his judgment.

Anabaptism is a Magazine of all subtlety, fortified, and ammunitioned with
all sorts of Paralogismes, and Elenches of Sophistry. In which Etnean forge,
Mr. T. is the chief Briarius, or Gias, who operates with more than an hundred
hands; yet wise, and learned men easily discovers a vein of fallacies running
through the whole mine, and by the cynosure, or pole star of the Gospel escapes
themselves, and directs others to avoid the Rhegium, or breach they make in the
Church, and cuts the channel even betwixt the Scylla or gulf of errors on the
one hand; and the Charybdis, or rock of absurdities on the other. Now if any
well meaning, though weak Christian, be inveigled with this error, we would
not have them fight against God, that is, their own conscience (which happily by
accident may be, when they oppose an untruth) but we would have them by sweet
insinuations, and Arguments to be won unto the truth. Yet this is no Plea for
Bigots of the faction, like fire to turn all things into their own nature, and
with the Pharisees to compass Sea, and Land to make Proselytes of their own
opinion: Therefore Edward the sixth, when Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Ridley Bishop of London were sent from the Council to entreat him for
toleration but in one family of a Religion that was against his conscience; he
first opposed it out of Scripture-grounds; secondly backed it with a
resolution, that he would spend his life, and all that he had, rather than to
agree, and grant to that he knew certainly to be against the truth; And lastly
(when they continued their importunity) his tender heart bursting out in bitter
weeping, and sobbing, desired them to be content; whereat the Bishops
themselves, seeing his zeal, and constancy, wept as fast as he, as convinced
with his tears, which like Mary Magdalens tears, may well be proclaimed for a
memorial, and Monument of him, and is well worth our imitation, Acts and
Monuments, Tom. 2. p. 1295. col. 2. Edit. Anni 1583.

Master Tombs. 8. Section.
THough Disputes are useful, yet such unworthy artifices, as I find in and
after them are a just reason for me to wa^e them, especially with such men as I
have met with. What the success has been of the disputes mentioned is not so
proper for me to enquire. The publishing of that at Bewdley in so unbrotherly
manner, has I imagine, diverted many from the truth, who if they had not been
willing to be deluded, had never been caught with such a cheat as is the
mock-titled book, Plain Scripture Proof for Infant* Baptism.

The rest of the Disputes have not gained (that I hear) any credit to
^adobaptism, but on the contrary, among the intelligent.

It is true I was importuned to visit some friends at Abergaveny, and did
preach there, and some of the things the letter mentions, I spoke, and do still
avouch,

The two mentioned were unknown to me, I slighted neither, though being wearied
with preaching, I did forbear to speak much, and was willing to get into a dry
house from the rain. I was willing t^ have confe^ence with Mr. V. who seemed
modest and intelligent. The other Opponent I found before to be a man of talk,
who could not blush. That which the second Epistle writes of my being wounded,
and vaunting, is merely fabulous; and I think the like of the short time of
conce^ving the Dispute, and Sermon. It displeases me not that the business^
should be truly stated, which is the end of this writing, though it displease
me that such unworthy tricks are used to deceive people, as those which appear
in the publishing this Disputation and Sermon. I intend not to lengthen the
business by insisting on the falsity of the reports of my Answer: It is not
improbable I might in five hours Dispute, with one who talked so fast, as to
give no time to consider of what he said, answer not so clearly as I would, had
I had the Arguments to view, and examine deliberately. I presume it will be
sufficient for clearing Truth, if either I show how my Answers are misreported,
or ^ow they are to b^ amended.

Reply.
TO the fifth head of the Epistle (wherein it is enquired, whether it be fit to
Dispute, and confer wi^h Anabaptists, seeing their Doctrine eats ^s a Cank^r,
for which cause the Empress Placilla would not suffer her husband Theodosius to
discourse with the Heretic Eunomius) He answers by concurring in judgment with
the resolution there given, gran^ing by an hypothesis, that Disputes are
us^fu^; but like Margery-good-cow, ^ve^th owes it pres^ntly again with th^s
Thesis, that such unworthy artifi^es as he fi^ds in, and after them, are a just
reason for him to wave them, especially with such men as he has met with.

What unworth* artifices has Mr. Tombs found i^ Disputes? L^g^ck, and Divine
Truth, Logic, or refined reason, whereby ^is ^alacies, Divine Truth, whereby
h^s errors are discovered. H^w much are they to blame, that set up true Lights
to descry false War^s? What Artifices has he found after Disputes? A
publication of them, that what was transacted in private, is transmitted to the
public view: O unworthy project! Cannot Bajaset b^ taken, but he must be
carr^ed ab^ut in a Cage to be s^en? Nothing grieved the Monks, and Friars so
much, as when the Images of Da^n^l Gathern, the rood of Grace, and Wilfrids
ned^e were pulled d^wn, that they were shown at Pauls-Crosse, and els^where,
that all m^g^t s^e the secret gimmers by which a Pri^st invisible d^d act the
pretend^d Mirac^es. And he further aggravates these unworthy Artifices with an
Emphasis put upon them, especially with such men as he has met with. What men
has he met with? Such whose neither Person, nor Arguments he can reconcile to
his party: Caligula loves to grapple with the shells of the shore, whence
Trophies of victory may be carried away without sweat, or blood; so does the
Anabaptists like Salmacida, spolia sine sanguine, and sudore. And therefore
because he cannot carry away a dry conquest, he resolves to wave Disputes
hereafter; I wish h^ had done so hitherto, both by pen, and otherwise; his
conscience one day would have found more peace, and the Church more quiet. O
that he would imitate Austin hereaf^er, who nev^r writ so fair a hand, as when
he writ backward, his ^erractations.

What success the Disputes at Bewdley, Hereford, Ross, and Abergaveny had (he
says) is not so proper for him to enquire; whether proper or no, we cannot
believe but that he is so careful a husbandman, when he has planted, and
watered, he will look after the increase; or if he enquire not, others will be
apt to tell him; (which he confesses afterward) for Fame has an hundred feet,
an hundred wings, an hundred mouths. That at Bewdley (he implyedly confesses)
has had success for Infant Baptism, but presently he sends up a swarm of
Locusts to dimm this light. 1. Affirming that it was published in an
unbrotherly manner. 2. That it diverted many from truth. 3. That they were
willing to be deluded. 4. That they were caught with a cheat. 5. That the book
styled plain Scripture proof for Infant Baptism, is a Mock* titled book. All
which calumnies, Master Baxter the Author has answered with that dexterity,
solidity, and satisfaction to the impartial reader, that whosoever shall go
about to add athing, may seem to pour water into the Sea, and light a candle
to the Sun.

The rest of the Disputes (he says) have not gained any credit to
Paedobaptism, but with these two limitations, 1. That he hears, 2. Among the
Intelligent. What he hears we know not, only this we know, that what he hears
at such a distance, is from the Anabaptists, who since by dipping they have
took possession of that Element, thinks with Lunatic Thrasilaus at Athens,
that every ship that comes to the shore is their own; Every Text of Scripture
like the Catadupes of Nilus, sounds nothing but plunging. Now who these
Intelligent are, with whom the Disputes have gained no credit, we may easily
conjecture, none of them that are for the profane abuse of Infant-Sprinkling:
Which amounts to this, that none but the Anabaptists are Intelligent; who, as
if they had the sole Monopoly of Intelligencies, ought in his judgment to move
the Spears in these inferior orbs of Church, and Commonweal. With these we
confess the Disputes have gained no more credit, than Luthers reformation has
done with the Jesuits; Saint Peter's miracles with the Disciples of Simon Magus,
or our Saviors Disputes with the unconverted Sadduces. Otherwise he shall find
that they have gained credit with the Orthodox, and Pious, Else why are the
banks of their Jordans left so desolate since, as if to be dipped, were to be
thrown into the water in a sack of Leather for a Parricide, or condemned to
Tyber from the Scalae Gemoni^?

To the Sixth Quere of the Epistle, he confesses that he was importuned to visit
some friends at Abergaveny, which for seventeen years he had deserted, and
though often requested in former times, would not vouchsafe then a visit, till
the cause brought him. There (he says) he preached, and that is true; and some
things the letter mentions he spoke, and does still avouch; But what he spoke,
and does still avouch, he tells us not, that by this Enthymematical reservation
he may have a loophole of evasion in all Emergencies. The things the Epistle
mentions he spoke were these. That Infant Baptism was a nullity, a mockery: no
Baptism but by dipping, or plunging was lawful, that all that would be saved,
must be rebaptized, or baptized after profession; That there was no such thing
as Infant Baptism in the Primitive times, but that came in with other
corruptions upon unsound grounds; whether he will avouch all this, or no, many
others will, that he delivered them, whose credit, and Testimonies (no
disparagement to him) are as Authentic as his.

And whereas the Epistle says there were many well learned that heard him,
especially two, Mr. Bonner, and Mr. Vaughan, who both for the present kept
silence, when out of the pulpit he challenged the whole Congregation to speak,
if they had any thing to say, contrary to that he had delivered. Only Master
Bonner closed with him in the way to his lodging, and told him he had delivered
some thing contrary to that he had read in the Ancients, and other things that
grieved his spirit to hear, and desired therefore to conferr with him there
about the next morning, and that he slighted the grave old Gentleman with as
much contempt as Austin the Monk did the British Commissioners at Bang^r. He
says he slighted neither, though both were unknown to him, whereas the
slighting of one is but laid to his charge: Mr. Vaughan was not known to him
(as my information serves me) till the next day: But it was no sleighting, but
forbearing to speak much, because he was wearied with preaching, as if in the
Pulpit he had not only spent his spirits, but (...), his civility, and
affability too: Mr. Bonner is not for many words, but delights in Laconisms
more than he. But he was willing to get into a dry house from the rain, and was
not Mr. Bonner so too? The ubi of this overture (as I hear) was not sub dio,
but sub tecto. And here I cannot but tell Mr. T. what one observed when he read
these his words, that he was like the Pharis^es, lay heavy burdens upon
others, but would not touch them with one of his fingers, could press
Arguments for two hours, that people must be d^pped in rivers over head when
himself was impatient for two minutes to be baptized under the cloud. And it
was further observed more generally, that that day of his preaching, and the
day of h^s departure were more tempestuous than ordinary, as if the Element of
water had been enraged, for the sacrilegious abuse of it; But secret things
belong to God; the sin we know, the punishment we know not.

He says, he was willing to have conference with Mr. V. who seemed modest, and
intelligent; in which words, is involved a fripperie of incongruities; for how
could he be willing to have conference with Mr. V. before he knew him? And it
is apparent he never knew him not till he had conference with him; And how did
he find that he was modest, and intelligent, but by the conference? But how
these qualifications discovered in the conference could be an occasion of his
willingness to admit of the conference, is not intelligible. I shall confess
that the Encomi^m he gives Mr. V. and much more is his due: But I fear (...),
his grants are but lures; Some Stratagem lies couched in this Trojan horse,
that he vainly hopes to gain Mr. V. to his party, or silence: Otherwise it is
observed, the more able his adversaries are, and the more unanswerable their
Arguments, the more he vilifies them, witness that Triumvirat of Worthies, Dr.
Hamond, Mr. Marshal, and Mr. Baxter, whom he either slights, or bitterly
calumniates, as he does me in the words following, who (though conscious of
mine own weakness) take those slanders for honors, which fall from the pen of
one, that can drop nothing but gall; for thus he belshes out his rancour,
saying, he found me before to be a man of talk, who could not blush. Two
aspersions which rather for vindication of the Cause, than my person, I shall
(God willing) clear, and retort them justly without recrimination.

First, he says he found me before to be a man of talk, meaning at Ross, where
I had some skirmaging with him upon this occasion; There being a day solemnly
agreed upon for a public disputation, I came (as did many hundreds more) to
hear it; The Respondent designed, was one Mr. Skinner an Anabaptist: The
Opponents Mr. Tirer, Mr. Smith, and other Ministers in the Neigbourhood, whose
faces I had never seen before: when the Congregation was gathered, and an
Alarm, ready to be beat for the Dispute, Mr. Tombs unexpectedly entered the
lists, and and took the Pulpit, and for an hour, and an half together out of
Matthew. 28. 19. stated the Question, answered the Paedobaptists objections, laid
the grounds of his own Arguments, and so prepossessed the affections of the
Auditory: Which Prologue being end^d, Skinner takes place, and goes on with the
Protasis, mustring the occasions of the Dispute into Rank, and F^le. Which
done, Mr. Tirer enters the Stage, relating the grievances that intervened,
whereupon he was interrupted, here began the Epitasis; No D^spute was like to
be, unless Mr. Tombs would depart, or keep silence, which he refused,
alleging he came to maintain the Truth; hereupon (after some debate) he was
challenged to take up the gantlet, which he did, making choice of Mr. Skinner to
be his Moderator, or Second; so the Opponents did of me, which that things
might proceed in an orderly way, I undertook, though unprepared. No sooner were
they launched into any depth of the Dispute, but I found that which I had heard
of Master Tombs, that he was more for the extravagants, than the digests, and
like as they define the Air, would easily entrench o^ others bounds, but would
hardly be kept within his own; whereupon I pressed him to La^onisme, minding
him of his Respondents office, which was to repeat, deny, distinguish, discover
the fallacy, give a curt exposition of a Text alleged, and not like a Lapwing
to carry far from the matter with a wilden^sse, and luxurianc^e of words.
Which h^ n^w ^ccuses me of, as Chrysogonus d^d Sextus Rossius, and Tub^ro
Liga^ius of the crimes they we^e guilty of themselves; In this mi^ating Skogen,
who when the day of payment came arrested his Cred to^; Never is malice more
indiscreet than when it charge others with imputation of that to which it is
more liable it self. This the Poet cannot endure, Quis tulerit Gracch^s de
seditione querente, Verrem de furto? Its one of our Saviors first lessons to
cast the beam out of our own eye, before we see the mote in another.

For the second calumny, that I could not blush, whether he take it naturally,
or morally, it will easily reflect upon himself: If natural^y, I appeal to any
Physiognomer, whether Master Tombs countenance, or mine are deeplier dyed in
grain (I speak not this to upbraid any Dyers son) that it cannot change its
hue. A Subtilist in Nature, being asked what he thought of Tiberius the
Emperor, said he saw in h^s complexion (...), dirt mingled with blood, that
is, baseness with c^uelty. Cardanus saw a man at Millan that washed h^s face
with scalding lead, as carelessly as a man washes himself with ordinary water.
I will not make application; only this I say, he must needs have a stayed
countenance that can confront ^he whole Cathol^ck Church without blushing. If
he mean Morally, let him show where I was guilty of one absurdity, that
deserved a blush, though I deny not, but I might oftentimes change countenance,
as troubled with his uncivil expressions, and carri^ge; whereas, if need were,
I could muster up a decade of his, and some so gross, that a great Commander
said, that if he had committed such an absurdity, as one was, when he was a
schoolboy reading Godwin's Antiquities, his Master would have whipped him. Sed
me repimam. I had rather be (...) suffer by too much stupidity, than being
reviled, in imitation of mine adversary over do it, by being (...), (as he)
little less then scurrilous.

In answer to the second Epistle (where the Relator gives the reasons of his
publication of the Dispute and Sermon) he says two things are merely fabulous,
his being wounded, and vaunting; And he thinks the like of a third, the short
time of conceiving the Dispute, and Sermon.

For the first, as I am not bound to vindicate every circumstance of fact, the
Epistle asserts, so it is not so proper for ^e to speak of wounding; only what
he confesses himself* I may with modesty relate; he implies, he answered not so
clearly, as he would, if he had had the Arguments to view, and examine
deliberately, and that his Answers are to be amended page 5. That he denied the
Minor, in which he imagined that fallacy, which he does not now upon sight
deprehend. Page 22. In denying the Major in the first Argument, he confesses he
was mistaken through inadvertencie, or some humane infirmity page 14. with many
more, which I forbear. Besides me thinks, a little friction might rub up his
memory to be sensible that Mr. V. whom he commends for suffering him to play
with the bait of his Argument to the end of the line, dismissed him not without
several pricks in the gills.

For the second, his Vaunting (besides his Sermon at Ross, his own confession
of his words at Abergaveny relating to Mr. Baxter p. 24. his saying that
neither Dr. Savage, nor the Dr. of the Chair did avoid his Argument at Oxford
p. 15.) is a thing as visibly to be seen in all his writings, as Owls at
Athens.

For the third, that he thinks the short time asserted in the Epistle for the
conceiving of the Dispute and Sermon, is also fabulous; I return, that what he
groundlesly thinks, I value not, as long as I certainly know, that the Dispute
on my part (and I believe the same of Mr. V.) was so far wanting to have an
hour and an half for the conception; that I had not so much as a conceived
thought to Dispute when I entered the place. Only I came to hear Mr. Bonner,
when that failed, fear of offense, and the peoples Apostacy drew me to it. For
the Sermon, though it was the gleanings of two, it had not the entire
retiredness of one day, as those that knew my other employments, will easily
believe.

For the words following I concur with him, that it displeases not me, that
the business should be truly stated, which is the end also of this my writing;
Though it displease me that he should first give the assault, and then raise
the hubbub. For surely his Sermon and Dispute were a snare to deceive the
people; whereas the publication of the other was intended as a preservative to
undeceive them. He intends not to lengthen the business by insisting upon the
falsity of the reports of his Answer, and he has good reason for it, for there
are none. His next expressions presages some good hope, that he that here
begins to write his Confessions, may hereafter with Austin write his
retractions; for he grants it is not improbable that he might in five hours
Dispute with one who talked so fast, as to give no time to consider of what he
said, answered not so clearly as he would, had he had the Arguments to view,
and examine deliberatly. In the womb of which Monster, three untruthes are
couched; First, that he disputed five hours with me, when the whole was short
of that, and almost two thereof spent with Mr. V. Secondly, that I talked so
fast, as to give him no time to consider of what he said, whereas I did not
only speak treatibly, but was often forced to repeat the Syllogism twice, or
thrice. Indeed I would not suffer him to build his Tabernacle upon every
groundless fancy, and brood upon his Cockatrice eggs till he had hatched them.
Thirdly that he could not answer so clearly as he would, had he had the
Arguments to view, and examine deliberatly, whereas now after six months time,
he brings them forth in print, but as mere unlicked Bears whelps, and misshapen
Moon-calves as formerly; for all he pretends he will either show how his
Answers were misreported which was not at all; or how they are to be amended,
which (as shall appear) is not yet.

The Dispute Examined.
The second Part.
1. Section. Mr. Tombs.
COnceiving I have answered Master V. sufficiently, I take my leave of him, and
^ass on to Master C. concerning whom the Reader is to be premonished, that by
reason of his fast speaking, and many words, I was often uncertain what to
apply an Answer to at the Dispute.

As for his Preface I let it pass. His first Enthymene, page 16. Some Infants
may not be baptized, therefore some Infants may be baptized is so frivolous,
that I neither did then, nor do now think it worth any thing but contempt. For
if the reasoning were good, it must ^e resolved into this Syllogism, All that
may not be baptized, may be baptized; some Infants may not be baptized, Ergo,
some Infants may be baptized: There being no other way according to
Logick-Rules to make it good. Any man of common sense might see the foolery of
that Argument. For if it be good, he might in like manner say, some Infants may
not have the Lords Supper, Therefore some infants may; Some Boys are not to be
Ordained Bishops, Therefore some are, I denied the consequence, and Mr. C. not
sensible of his folly prints a Syllogism, which shows he proved not what was
to be proved, which when I would have rectified by showing what he should have
concluded, he ran on so fast in his vain prattle, that the reader may easily
perceive I had reason to say, what would the man say?

Reply.
HOw sufficiently he has answered Mr. V. and upon what terms he takes his
leave of him, will be further (I hope) manifested one day; he is of age, and
able, let him answer for himself, I will not meddle with his replication; But
look to mine own guard, for he passes on to me with flying colors, and before
his de^ence, he raises this Sconce, that the Reader is to be premonished that
by reason of my fast speaking, and many words, he was often uncertain what to
apply an Answer to at the Dispute; Where he violates both art, and truth; 1.
Art, where according to the Areopagites rule he should handle controversies
(...), without passion, (...), without Preambles. 2. Truth, for though his
conclusion be true that he was often uncertain what to apply an Answer to at
the Dispute, yet his premises are notor^ously false, for neither were my
expressions so voluble, but an ordinary capacity might go in Equipage with
them, nor my Syllogismes so long, but they were easily repeatable; for I speak
nothing but the Sceleton, or nerves of Arguments; unless when forced to reclaim
him from Extravagancies, or vagaries; or to give an answer to his Socratical
Interrogations, or Queris. The true reasons of his uncertainty to apply an
Answer, was partly in the object, a truth so clear, that it was unanswerable;
partly in himself, who like Antaeus taken off his own ground, and beaten path,
is often far to seek. And would one think, that he that makes so light of most
Divines in the world in this point, should make so feeble, and frontless
Apology, to palliate his uncertain, and Camelian-like answers from the shock of
an extemporal Dispute, which he is not willing to hear of, and therefore passes
by the Preface, wherein I first requested that the Cause might not suffer
prejudice for mine unpreparation. 2. That liberty might be granted of a
permeditated, and treatable Dispute hereafter, That I might but study the
Question so many hours as Mr. Tombs had done days, days as he had done
months, months as he years. But without any grain of allowance for this; This
Achilles, who was said in the latter Epistle to be wounded in the heel falls
upon the first Enthymene (as he calls it) with that overflowing of gall, that
his whole paper is tinctured with the Jaundeis (...). Hom. Ilid. a. And why
Enthymene? unless because (...), it sticks in his stomach; that he kevisses
like a Dear wounded with a dart, that he needs some ditanie to draw it out; He
should have called it Enthymeme, so the Relator calls it, not I, in the
Dispute, and they are both mistaken; for Mr. Tombs might have remembered so
much out of Logic, that there is a species, or kind of Argumentation distinct
from Ethimema, which by K^ckerman Systematis, Log. page 45. is styled
consecutio sententiarum, and thus by him defined, sine medii dispositione
sententia sive propositio ad propositionem sequens, one sentence or proposition
following another, without disposition of the medium, as appears (besides many
other ways) in all conversions both simplex, per Accidens, and per contra
positionem, where the Argument is good, and yet neither three propositions, nor
an entire Syllogism can be immediately made, and for this he quotes Javel, who
says non statim est Enthymema, cum audiuntur duae positiones, quarum una
sequitur ex altera, siquidem omne Ethymema compleri potest, and ad tres
propositiones reduci, consecutio autem haec propositionum compleri non potest,
and ad tres propositiones revocari. Now this mistaken Enthymema, but indeed
consecutio sententiarum was this, Some Infants may not be baptized, therefore
some Infants may be baptized, This he says is so frivolous, that he neither
did then, nor does yet think it worth any thing but contempt; which
uncharitable censure arises from ignorance, or inadvertencie, that betrays him
to a double mistake; 1. that there was no way of Arguing consecutive, by two
propositions, but Ethymematically, so that they were immediately reducible to a
Syllogism complete in mood, and figure. 2. If an Ethymema, and reducible, that
it must be necessarily resolved into his Syllogism as he calls it. All that may
not be baptized, may be baptized, some Infants may not be baptized, Ergo some
Infants may be baptized. Truly this is so frivolous, and deserves so much
contempt, that a fresh-man would laugh at it. I find in Master Marshal's Just
Censure of Master Tombs, that he makes himself merry, by turning the Orations,
Epistles, an Allusion of Fathers into Syllogismes; That his main faculty lies
in framing specious answers to Arguments brought to prove any thing; That he
has a dexterity in forming Arguments into several shapes, and then eluding
them; Master Hussie says, Master Tombs can discover conclusions arising from
premises, that no man else can see, But that he was not able to make a
Syllogism, or reduce that to a Syllogism, which was reducible, I would not have
believed, Therefore surely it is the Printers fault, both for name and thing;
1. For calling it an Enthymene, 2. For misforming it being miscalled. I would
gladly know to what mood of the first figure, (for it has sub. pra.) his
monstrous Syllogism belongs consisting in the Premises of two negatives, in
the conclusion of an affirmative, whereby (as every Puny knows) two maxims are
violated. 1. That of pure negatives, nothing is concluded. 2. That the
conclusion should follow the unworthier part; whereas he extracts an
affirmative conclusion from negative premises.

Might it not more likely, (I will not say truly) have been completed in
Darii, thus; All besides them that are excluded Baptism, may be baptized; There
are some Infants besides them that are excluded Baptism, therefore some Infants
may be baptized. Howsoever the force of the Argument lies in the Immediateness
of the Propositions, that what belongs not to the one of them, must needs
belong to the other. It is the eighth place (as Cracanthorpe says) Logic. page
350. Whence Arguments may be drawn, a dissentaneis, that what one member
receives not, the other admits; As for instance, from the immediate division of
a living creature, into reasonable, and unreasonable, it will follow, some
living creatures are unreasonable, therefore some are reasonable. Elements are
divided into heavy and light; hence it will follow, some Elements are light,
therefore some Elements are heavy, or not light. Christ says Matthew. 24. 41.
Two women shall be grinding at the Mill, the one shall be taken, and the other
left; hence it follows from his Testimony, one shall be taken, therefore one
shall be left; From the like Testimony, chapt. 25. Some shall be set on the
left hand, therefore some shall be s^t on the right; Now what could be more
ridicuthen to resolve it into this form, All those that shall not be set on
the right hand, shall be set on the right hand, but some men shall not be set
on the right hand, Therefore some shall be set on the right hand.

Master Tombs by this (I hope) sees that there is another way according to
Logic to make it good, besides his; the foolery of which (to use his own
words) any one that has common sense may see; as also his Inference, for he
says, if it be good, one might in like manner say, Some Infants may not have
the Lords Supper, therefore some Infants may. To which I answer, if the subject
be capable of the Lords Supper, (as Austin, and some of the Ancients thought)
it will follow; If not capable (for I speak of such) his Pa^allel is
impe^tinent, and will not follow; as also his other, Some Boys are not to be
Ordained Bishops, therefore some are; here I would know what Mr. Tombs means
by Ordained? What by Bishop? If by Ordained he mean a solemn setting apart by
imposit^on or hands after Election* and Examination, If by Bishop, he mean a
superior dignity, and Office of the Ministry; I say that in sensu Composito
while Boys, they are not capable; But if by Ordained Bishop, he m^an one
permitted, and approved to exercise, and preach, it will follow from his own
principles, for he holds that all that are gifted may preach, provided that it
be not in the Pulpits of able men; But some boys are gifted, how much have we
heard of the gifted Boy at Stafford, and elsewhere? Now the scruple here will
be, whether Infants are capable of Baptism, or no; if capable, it will
inevitably follow, and that they are capable, Mr. Tombs consequently grants,
for he yields that Infants may be elected, that they may have the habit, nay,
the act of faith, which if he knew, he would baptize; now his ignorance cannot
hinder their capacity. And this was involved in the consequent, which he
denied, and was proved by a concatenation of Syllogisms fairly propounded, and
deliberately by him repeated, till his Answer insinuated, th^se were necessary
propositions, which he had granted before to be contingent; which
contradiction, when he could not reconcile, h^ endeavored with his Sarcasm to
dash me out of countenance, which he now aggravates, calling the whole, a vain
pra^tle, that as the Auditors then discovered weakness in his Logic, and
rationals, so the reader may do now in his Ethics, and Morals, his main drift
being to render my person, and cause od^ous, and contemptible to the people,
like Monops a beast in Peonia, which (as Aelianus writes) brought to an
unavoydable strait, ven^s an infectio^^ ordour against the pursuer; and this
wa^ all the reason had without reason to say etc.

Master Tombs 2. Section.
THE next Argument is concerning the Essence of Baptism, which he says
belongs to Infants; Therefore they may be baptized, and then Insinuates me to
have been driven to absurdities in denying that Baptism is a relation, and
Austins definition of a Sacrament.

To which I answer, 1. This proposition the essence of Baptism belongs to
Infants, may have two senses. 1. That the Baptism of Infants is true Baptism,
that is, is according to Transcendental verity, such as has the true nature of
Baptism, and in this sense I grant the Proposition is true, and so it is true
that an Infants eating bread, and drinking wine, is true eating and drinking
the Lords Supper, it has the Essence of it; But this I did not imagine he
meant, and therefore denied his Minor, till his next Syllegism showed he meant
it, and then I perceived I should have denied the Major; but his quickness,
and multiplying words would not permit me to recall my self. 2. The other sense
is this, The Essence of Baptism, that is, that which is of the Essence to right
administration of Baptism belongs to Infants, in which sense I denied it.

Nor does his Argument from the definition prove it, for it is all one as to
argue, Infant Baptism is Baptism, therefore it is right Baptism; As for the
absurdities he imputes to me, I deny them to be absurdities. For I take Baptism
to be either an Action, or Passion, though Christian Baptism have a relation
super added, and so in the use is a sign, and the Genus of it, which is of the
Essence, I should make an Action. As for the other absurdity, I do confess,
that the term Sacrament, being but a term invented by Latin Fathers may be
laid aside, nor is there any common nature of Sacraments expressed in
Scripture. And I confess I take Austins definition, if it be his, that a
Sacrament is a visible sign of invisible grace, to be but imperfect, since it
may be applied to the descent of the Holy Ghost as a dove, Christ washing of
his Disciples feet, a persons kneeling, and holding up his hands to pray, the
kissing of the Bible, and many other actions which are not Sacraments. I
confess I was weary of these Quirks, and imagined that be used them only t^
weary me, and blunt my attention, and to make some ostentation of himself, I
replied not to his vain talk, but called for Scripture proof.

Reply.
THe Argument drawn from the Essence of Baptism was not a new one (as he
mistakes) but a continuation, and confirmation o^ the former, for when after
four Syllogisms orderly proposed; he had no way of evasion, but petere
principium, to fly back to his first Sanctuary, I was forced again to prove the
consecution of the propositions, that they were both actually true, especially
that i^ controversy, that some Infants may be baptized, which I di^ thus: To
whom belongs the Essence of Baptism, they may be baptized, to some Infants
belongs the Essence of Baptism, ergo some Infants may be baptized. Here he
confesses he denied the Minor, where he should have denied the Major; And which
is worse, though he perceived by my next Syllogism he was mistaken, he could
not recall himself by reason of my quickness, and multiplying words would not
permit him; pitiful fig leaves; Did not he first hear the Argument from
me, and then repeat it himself, what quickness? Is not the Syllogism briefly
couched, that took away his Minor, what multiplying of words?

But now he makes amends, and repaires the loss by a distinction of a twofold
Essence of Baptism, which is a mere Cymera, or rather an Ens fictum impossible,
never heard before; for as Ens is unum but one, so Essentia una, essence is but
one: who ever read of this new Divinity, and Metaphysics, that the essence of
Baptism belonging to Infants may have two senses? First, (as he glosses it)
that the baptism of Infants is true Baptism, that is according to
transcendental verity, such as has the nature of Baptism; And in this sense he
grants the proposition is true, that the essence of Baptism belongs to Infants;
The other sense is, the essence of Baptism, that is, that which is of the
essence to the right administration of Baptism belongs to Infants, in which
sense (he says) he denies, that the essence of Baptism belongs to Infants; as
if the essence were not indivisible, that they that had one part, had all,
wanted one part, wanted all; For as Eustachius has it, Metaphys. page 21.
every created essence consists of parts Physical, or Metaphysical, eatenus
tamen dicuntur indivisibiles quod nulla sit natura, quae secundum naturam
specificam inaequaliter participetur ab individuis, Therefore essences are
called indivisible, because there is nothing of nature that according to the
specifical reason may be unequally participated of Individuals; As appears by
induction, humane nature belongs not more to one man than another, so that one
man cannot more be said to be a man than another, and he gives a reason,
because nothing that belongs to the essence of a thing can be added, or
withdrawn, but presently the nature and essence is changed, whence Aristotle
Metaphys. 8. cap. 3. Tom. 10. compares essences to numbers, to which if we add,
or substract but an union, the same specifical number is changed, hence the
result is, if the essence of Baptism belongs to Infants, then indivisibly, and
equally to them, with those of riper age, but Mr. Tombs being Judge, the
essence of Baptism according to Transcendental verity belongs to Infants,
therefore Baptism belongs indivisibly, and equally to Infants with them of
riper years; Neither will his parallel instance relieve him, that Infants
eating bread, and drinking wine, is true eating, and drinking the Lords Supper,
and have the essence of it, which is his groundless dictate, and has no truth
in it, for upon supposition that Infants are excluded the Lords Supper in the
divine institution, which is the fundament, and gives being to the relation,
they are no more capable of the essence, and true eating of the Lords Supper
while Infants, than degs, and mice, which how ridiculously the Canonists of the
Church of Rome Dispute whether they eat the Lords Supper, or no, every man of
common sense knows; As for the other part of the distinction, which he also
calls the essence of Baptism, it is so far from being the essence of it, as
his own terms (right administration) implies, that it is but an accidental
perfection superadded to the essence. If his distinct on had been of the truth
of Baptism, it might have had some ground in it, though not as applied to
Infants; for as the Church of Rome, and other Churches that holds the
fundamentals, according to Bishop Hall, and Davenant are true Churches in
transcendental verity, but in relation to their erroneous superstructions, they
are not true Churches, eatenus in moral verity. Baptism with water in the
Church, administered by a Priest in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
is true Baptism in Transcen^ental verity, though in respect of their additions
of salt, spittle, exorcism, and other superstitious circumstances morally not
true; But Baptism of Bells is neither Transcendentally, nor morally true, much
less have they the essence of Baptism, as wanting the fundament, which is the
root of the ent^tie. Whereas Mr. Tombs confesses Infants may have the essence
of Baptism, or that it belongs to them, which the Argument from the defin^tion
further proves, in form thus. To whom belongs the definition of Baptism, to
them belongs the essence, to some Infants belongs the definition of Baptism,
therefore to some Infants belongs the essence; This is no Identical probation,
or all one (as he says) as to argue Infant Baptism is Baptism, therefore it is
right Baptism, it is not Identical, for an Argument taken from the definition
is a demonstration, a priori, and notiori, from the former, and better known:
It is not all one to argue Infant Baptism is Baptism, therefore it is right
Baptism, but it concludes Infant Baptism is Baptism, therefore Infants may be
baptized, which is the Question by this inference put out of Question. And if
we make a deeper Scrutinie into the parts of the definition, we shall find that
their Baptism is right Baptism, and that Infants may rightly be baptized, for
the entire definition of Baptism comprehends in its womb these parts, 1. The
fundament, which is the divine Institution enfolding Infants in all Nations, in
several families, 2. The principal cause, the Holy Ghost, of which they are
capable, what then can forbid water? 3. The Instrumental cause, the Minister,
whose commission extends to them, go baptize all Nations. 4. The matterial
cause, water, of which Christian children are as capable, as the Jewish
children were of Circumcision. 5. The formal cause also, into the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 6. Tho correlative Christ, of whose Union,
children are receptive. 7. The final cause, grace, and glory, from which they
cannot be excluded, for to such belongs the Kingdom of God.

And this is the Argument perticularised by which I proved the definition of
Baptism belonged to Infants thus; The definition of Baptism, as of all other
relations, is made up of the fundament, correlative, and Termini, but all these
three, Fundamentum, Correlatum, and Terminus belongs to Infants, therefore the
definition of Baptism belongs to Infants. Here he denied Baptism was a
Relation, wherein (he says) I insinuate that he was driven to an absurdity,
and how justly let learned men judge; Keckerman places Baptism, amongst
concrete Relatives, called of the Greeks (...), Log. Syst. page 15. Melanch^on
says, Baptism is a Relation, and that terminus baptismi est obsignatio, and
confirmatio absolutionis peccatorum per sanguinem Christi, The term of Baptism
is the sealing and confirmation of pardon of sins by the blood of Christ-Peter
Martyr Com. places part. 4. page 112. defines Baptism, a sign of regeneration
into Christ, into his death, and resurrection etc. and that by sign, he means
Metonym^cally a Relation betwixt the sign, and thing signed, and signified is
apparent by the words following; A Sign is a word common to Baptism, and other
Sacraments is proved hereby (says he) because Paul in the Epistle to the
Romans 4. 11. taught that Abraham, after he was justified did receive
circumcision being a seal of righteousness of faith already obtained; and that
Baptism seals is sufficiently expressed, seeing it is called a sign of
regeneration, for Christ manifestly taught Nicodemus, John 3. 3. that they that
will be saved must be born again, thus far he. Zanchie, Calvin, Vrsine, Bucane,
Bishop Jewel described Baptism by Relation, or Relative terms; so among the
Ancients, Dionys. cap. 2. calls it (...), the garment of incorruption; and
Austin, a Sacrament of remission of sins.

Now Mr. Tombs in opposition to these, and many more which might be alleged,
denies it to be a relation, and least it should be nothing (as many would have
it) he say^ ^e takes Baptism to be either an action or passion, but he tells us
not whether, leaving it hanging between two Predicaments like Mahomet's Tomb
at Mecha: He might have remembered that nothing formally can be placed in two
Categories, and as in words (...), not to signify one thing distinctly, is to
signify nothing, so not to be placed in one Category, is to be placed in none.
But perhaps he thinks with Janus, it puts on a double face, and as it respects
the Minister baptizing, is an action, as it looks at the party baptized, its a
passion; And why may not as well Marriage be said to be in both, seeing in it
there is both action and passion? Its confessed that in Baptism is included
baptization which is both action and passion, the party baptizing, and the
party baptized with the water, which are corporal substances, the pronouncing
of the words of Baptism, which may relate to quantity, divine graces of
regeneration, which are infused qualities, divine institution of it, union with
Christ, and the whole Trinity, which are Transcendents; These are the
materials; but the ratio formalis, the essence, and form of Baptism consists in
Relation, which is duorum unio, the union betwixt the outward sign of water,
and inward grace signified by it: This Master Tombe^ grants in part, when he
says Christian Baptism has a relation superadded; if he had said in casu
recto, it was a relation he had stroke home, which his next words intimates,
confessing that in the use, it was a sign, which predication is but
Metonimical, the true genus of Baptism must be the union between the sign, and
the thing signed, or signifi^d, which is a relation, and not as he would make
it an action, which would carry in the bowels of it this absurdity, that then
Baptism would be inherent in the baptized, that the party baptized could not
say mine, but the Ministers Baptism; Actio est agentis.

Now the Argument whereby in the Dispute I proved Baptism to be a relation, was
this, Every Sacrament is a relation, Baptism is a Sacrament, therefore Baptism
is a Relation. Then he denied both the premises, but now minces it, saying
that he confesses that the term Sacrament, being but a term invented by Latin
Fathers, may he laid aside: What Latin Fathers? The duodecim Tabulae? For they
mention it; There was among the Ancient Heathen Romans Sacramentum militare, a
Soldiers Sacrament, whereby Plantiff, and defendant put in gages to abide the
trial, this Tully alludes too pro Milone Sacramentis alienos fundos petunt,
They sue for other men's grounds with Sacraments, or gages of money. Therefore
the Term Sacrament was not invented by the Christian Latin Fathers, but was
long before them: Perhaps he means the term Sacrament to speak properly, was
not invented but applied to Baptism, and the Lords Supper by the Latin
Christian Fathers, and therefore may be laid aside, because a heathen word; So
the terms Episcopus, Presbyter, Diaconus, should be laid aside, for the
Areopagites, and other Grecians had them, I Will instance in one, Episcopus,
Plutarch in Pericle says, (...), Phidias was his Bishop, or ovescer in all
things. Or it may be he means there is no one Scripture word in the Original
that can properly be translated Sacrament; Then the word Trinity, Unity,
Humanity, and (which they cant so much withal) Anti-Paedobaptist, must be laid
aside: Besides is there not (...) mystery in the Original, which to express in
our language, and the Latin no fitter words according to common use can be
then Sacrament; And though Mystery, and Sacrament are of a larger extent and
signification than to be convertible with Baptism, and the Lords Supper, yet
they are the Mysteries and Sacraments (...), by way of eminence. And that
Baptism was both a Sacrament, and a relation was further proved. That which is
an outward and visible sign, of an inward and invisible grace, is both a
Relation, and a Sacrament; Baptism is an outward and visible sign of an inward
and invisible grace, Therefore it is both a Relation, and a Sacrament. Then he
denied the Minor; now he speaks not quite out, but clou^s the Truth of it with
two false assertions, 1. That there is no common nature of a Sacrament
expressed in Scripture. 2. That Austins definition thereof is imperfect.

For the former, that there is no common nature of a Sacrament expressed in
Scripture is untrue, both in the sequel, and in it self; In the sequel, for
what consequence? there is no common nature of a Sacrament expressed in
Scripture, therefore Baptism is not a Sacrament more than in this? There is no
common nature of infused grace expressed in Scripture, therefore faith is not
an infused grace. Untrue in it self, for though not in one place, there may be
in many places of Scripture compared together (like garlands of flowers
gathered out of the same garden) a common nature of a Sacrament expressed, as
well as of predestination, election, adoption, regeneration, hope, with many
more, which Scripture in no one place, undertakes completely to define, but the
common nature thereof, (if he mean the Genus, and the special nature, the
differentia) may be gathered by comparing of Scriptures: And is there not the
common nature of a Sacrament expressed in one Scripture, Romans 4. 11. (...), a
seal of the righteousness of faith? This is the judgment of the Ancients, and
the most of the Divines of reformed Churches, amongst which expressly Bucanus
Loc. commu. page 557. says, est igitur Paulo finitore Sacramentum sigillum
justitiae fidei. Therefore a Sacrament, as Paul defines it, is a seal of the
righteousness of faith; And Peter Martyr, once Dr. of the chair in Oxford,
says in the fore quoted place, page 102. L. C. A Sacrament is called a Sign,
which word that it is common to Baptism, and the Lords Supper it is proved
hereby, because Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, taught that Abraham after
that he was justified, received Circumcision, being a seal of the righteousness
already obtained. To these we might add Ursine Catech. page 414. with many
more.

His second groundless assertion is, That Austins definition, or that which
go^s in his name (for he scruples it) of a Sacrament is impertinent, and his
reason is as groundless, since (says he) it may be applied to the descent of
the Holy Ghost as a dove, Christ's washing of his Disciples feet, a persons
kneeling and holding up his hands to pray, the kissing of the Bible, and many
other actions which are not Sacraments.

Here is couched a Miscelene of absurdities; was not the descent of the Holy
Ghost, as a Dove, a seal, or sign of Christ's Office of the Mediatorship, and
not of his righteousness of faith? What sign of invisible Grace was Christ's
washing of his Disciples feet, but a pattern to teach them humility, the
service it self being necessary, and no ceremony in those hot Countries?
Kneeling, and holding up of hands to pray, is a moral duty, seeing Christ has
redeemed us both body an soul, therefore we ought to worship him in body, and
soul, come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker,
pray every where lifting up pure hands without wrath. Kissing of the Bible is
but either an expression of our reverence to Gods Word, or a civil ceremony in
deposing before the Magistrate, common to us, with Turks who also kiss their
Alcoran. But grant that all these were (...), positive signs of Divine
Institution (which is the Genus of a Sacrament) as habit is of saving graces;
will it more follow* these are signs of divine Institution, therefore
Sacraments; than this, Logic is a habit, therefore a saving grace? But let him
lay aside his double fallacy, which he tw^sts together, 1. Arguing
affirmatively a Genere ad speciem; 2. His fallacia divi ionis, and take the
whole definition (for I only made use of so much as sufficed for a Medium to
prove Baptism was a Sacrament) and he shall see the feebleness of his
assertion, and instances, its this as every child knows; An outward and visible
sign, of an inward and spiritual Grace given to us, ordained by Christ
himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us
thereof: Every word of it severally may be proved out of Scripture; Now that
this cannot be applied to the descent of the Holy Ghost as a dove, Christ's
washing of his Disciples feet, a persons kneeling, and holding up his hands to
pray, the kissing of the Bible, I dare appeal to Mr. Tombs himself, or any one
that has not lost his intellectuals; And whereas he further says, it may be
applied to many other actions, which are not Sacraments, let him show that one
action can properly be capable of this definition. In the mean time let the
Reader judge whether he was driven to absurdities or no, in denying that
Baptism was a Relation, and Austins definition of a Sacrament. But howsoever
th^se he says were but Quirks that he imagines I used only to weary him, and
blunt his attention, and make some ostentation of my self, and that he was
weary of them; I shall think till he give more satisfactory Answers, that they
were concluding Arguments, and that his weariness and bluntness of attention
did arise from the difficulty of untying the knot, which was not tied by me for
ostentation of my self, but for trial of him, and discovery of truth; to which
he replied not, not because the talk was vain, but because he thought it was in
vain to talk, and therefore not his importunity, but my present necessity
called for plain Scripture Proof, that the people might understand, how both my
Argument, and person were abused.

Mr. Tombs 3. Section.
AS for that which he says, 1 denied all that were Church Members were to be
baptized, and yet affirmed it in my Sermon, in both I said ^ue, the former
being understood of invisible, the later of visible Church^embers.

In the Argument, page 24. Those whom God did promise before ^e Law, foretell
under the Law, actually receive into Covenant un^r the Gospel, those God did
appoint Church Members under the Go^ell, But etc. Ergo, had not Mr. C.
quickness hindered me, I had ^ewed the vanity of the Major, as well as denied
the Minor, for if he ^ean by Church Members, visible Church Members, and by
actually ^ceiving into Cov^nant understand such an Actual receiving as is
without any act of faith, or profession of the persons received into Cove^nt,
as I conceive he does, I deny the Major. But I also denied the ^nor.

Reply.
THat the definition in the right administration thereof (which was the thing
denied) belongs to Infants, I prove thus; If God did institute baptism for
Infants, Christ merited it for them, and ^hey stand in need of it, then to
Infants belongs the definition of ^^ptism; But God instituted, Christ merited,
and Infants stand in ^eed of it, therefore to Infants belongs the definition of
Baptism, He denied the Minor, every branch whereof I promised to prove in
order, and would have endeavored (God willing) if the time, and his patience
would have permitted. Beginning with the first, That God did institute Baptism
for Infants, which was concluded thus, He that appointed Infants Church Members
under the Gospel, did institute Baptism for them, God appointed Infants
Church Members under the Gospel, Therefore God did institute Baptism for
Infants. To this he answered, first the Major might be questioned, because to
be Church Members (whereas he should have said Church Members under the Gospel)
and to be baptized, were not termini convertibiles; This I granted, for Infants
under the Law were Church Members, and yet not baptized, but circumcised, and
before the Law, Church Members, and yet neither circumcised, nor baptized, but
under the Gospel they were so convertible, that all that were baptized were
Church Members, and all that were Church Members were to be baptized, which was
that I affirmed now in the Major, and as I avouched was a truth so clear, that
Mr. T. confesses it all along in his books, and that upon that confessed
Ground, Mr. Baxter goes in many of his Arguments. This he denied till a
Gentleman told him that he heard him affirm the same in his Sermon the day
before, this he then let pass, but now cements it thus, with this untempered
mortar; in the first words of his former Paragraph thus, As for that which he
says I denied all that were Church members were to be baptized, and yet
affirmed in my Sermon, that they were to be baptized, in both I said true, the
former being understood of invisible, the later of visible Church Members,
hence he would imply that all-invisible Church Members may not be baptized, all
visible Church Members may be baptized: This is his Cardinal distinction upon
the hinge whereon hangs the whole Fabric of his Anti Paedobaptistical Babel,
and like the string in the Lamprey, runs with a poisonous and fallacious vein
through the whole body of his discourse, whereby he eludes all Arguments, as
the Sophister did with his Archipodialiter, and reflexive. Let him give me
leave to parley with him a little; and first tell him that his distinction (if
true) is not fitly applied to this place. 2. That it is untrue. Not fitly
applied to this place, for the proposition by him denied, points only at the
visible Church Membership of Infants, adjudging it an absurd thing to draw an
Argument to prove a visible Ordinance taken from the qualification of a subject
invisible; So that if he please he may frame the Proposition thus. He that
appointed infants visible Church Members under the Gospel, did institute
Baptism for them, and then he might have spared his visible, and invisible
distinction. 2. It is not true, for neither are all visible members of the
Church to be baptized, then all baptized before (they being visible members)
were to be baptized again, and so toties, quoties, that all should turn
Hemerobaptists, be baptized every day; and if Mr. T. say this is a fallacy, it
is but paying him in his own coin, for these are his counterfeit pieces page
16. [Capable of Baptism, and disciples are not terms subordinate, but distinct,
though without opposition, and though to be Disciples made them capable, yet
there is a difference betwixt the terms, I presume Mr. C. thinks baptized
persons already disciples, yet not capable of baptism] thus far he. Now to be
members of the Church, and Disciples, are Synynoma (...), the same thing
differing only in terms.

Thus for visible Church Members, then for invisible. Its worth the enquiry,
whether he rightly denied that all of them were to be baptized; for he
insinuates that all invisible Church Members are not in capacity of Baptism;
for the discussion whereof, we are to remember that in right stating the
Question according to Art, the members of the distinction must be ad idem, to
the same subject which is the Church militant, not Triumphant; Hence the Quaere
is not whether the Saints in Heaven may be baptized, for they are above
Ordinances, nor whether the Elect before conception be baptizable, for they are
only in Gods decree and potentia objectiva, and are short of Ordinances; Nor
whether Infants unborn in the mothers womb, though sanctified with John
Baptist, may be baptized; for though they be in potentia proxima, yet they have
not attained the (...), or full groath of Ordinances, it being more impossible
to baptize them, than to Circumcise females; Nor whether the Elect amongst
Jews, Turks, and Pagans before they be called, be to be baptized; for they are
not yet members of the Church Militant: But the true state of the Question is,
whether all that are in visible being, and members of the Church Militant may
be baptized, or no? For to be in visible being, and members of the Church
invisible, implies no more contradiction, than for the good, and bad fishes to
be both visible in the net, and yet not discernable whether good, or bad, till
they came to shore. Neither are those that attain the end of Ordinances, and
Salvation called invisible members, because they are not also (ordinarily)
visible, but because it is a thing invisible, and indiscernable whether they be
true Saints, or hypocrites, So that invisible, and visible members differs as
Genus, and Species, all invisible members are visible, but not all visible
members invisible, the invisible being extracted out of the visible, as Joshua
and Caleb were out of the Spies the second time to enter Canaan, or as Gideons
soldiers that lapped w^re^, out of his numerous Army to enter battle. Now i^
all invisible members be also visible, it will inevitably follow that they may
be baptized, whether visible by profession, as them of ripe years, or visible
by prerogative of birth, and promise of parents, or sureties, as Infants; which
shall be further cleared hereafter, only this by the way, to discover the
misapplication, and untruth of this Utopian distinction.

Mr. Tombs insisting upon the denial of the Minor, which was that God did
institute infants Church Members under the Gospel, I undertook to prove it
with a threefold co^d, before the Law, under the Law, under the Gospel, which
was framed into an Argument thus; Those whom God did promise before the Law,
foretell under the Law, actually receive into Covenant under the Gospel, those
God did appoint Church Members under the Gospel; But God did promise before the
Law, foretell under the Law, actually receive Infants into covenant under the
Gospel, Therefore God did appoint Infants Church Members under the Gospel. In
answer to which he says, had not Mr. C. quickness hindered him, he had showed
the vanity of the Major, as well as denied the Minor; He might have set the
saddle upon the right --, and said his own dullness, for as Themistocles told
Seriphius, if he had not lost the Castle, he could not have won it; So I may
tell him, if his slowness had not hindered, my pretended quickness (who gave him
leave to Iterate, and reiterate the Syllogism) could not have prevented his
mature, and deliberate answer. But why had he showed the vanity of the Major?
He gives a reason (such as it is) if I mean by [Church-members] visible
Church Members, and by [actually receiving into Covenant] understand such an
actual receiving, as is without any act of Faith, or profession of the persons
received into Covenant (as he conceives I do) he denies the Major. He conceives
I mean by Church Members; visible Church Members, Its true I do so; Why did
not he conceive I meant so in the former Syllogism, and spared his distinction
of visible, and invisible Church Members; which it seems by his own confession
is but a false conception, or Mooncalfe, for if he conceived I meant visible
Churchmembers, why talks he vainly of invisible? If he had a conceit I meant
invisible, why says he, that he conceives I meant visible? but that any poor
shift will fit to elude an Argument. But the main ground upon which he denies
the proposition, is because there can be no actual receiving into Covenant
without an act of faith, or profession of the persons received; How
impertinent, and senseless this is, will appear by the bare repetition of it,
which is this. Those whom God did promise before the Law, foretell under the
Law, actually receive into Covenant under the Gospel, those God did appoint
Church Members under the Gospel; The truth of this proposition has no
dependence upon faith, or profession, which is but Mr. Tombs his dream, but
upon a threefold impregnable rock, first Gods promise which is founded upon his
veracity, secondly his prediction which is founded upon his omnisciency, and
infallibility, thirdly, from the intrinsecal connection of the terms, which
makes it to be aeternae veritatis; for actually to receive into covenant under
the Gospel, and to appoint Church Members under the Gospel, are as essentially
coincident as to be a man, and a reasonable creature; To deny the two former
branches is no less than blasphemy; to question the third, would grant a
Metaphysical, and Logical principle, upon which is built the superstructures of
all Arts, and Sciences. What can be more absurd than to affirm, that what God
has promised, foretold, performed, is not executed? When Orthodox Christians
argued that God created the World of nothing, because when there was nothing
extant besides himself, he decreed to create it, said before there was any
creature, fiat Coelum, let there be Heaven, and Earth, and in six days framed
all things, he made the World of nothing; but when there was nothing extant
besides God, he decreed to create the World, and before there was any creature;
said fiat Coelum, and in six days framed all things: Therefore God made all
the World of nothing. Porphyrie, and Libanius those Atheists, answered, that if
by Gods decree, fiat, and fact was meant that God made all things sine
praejacente materia, without a first matter, they denied the Major; as if God
could not of nothing create all things. In imitation of these Mr. Tombs d^nies
those whom God did promise before the Law, foretell under the Law, actually
receive into Covenant under the Gospel, that he did appoint them Church Members
under the Gospel, if by actual receiving into Covenant, I understand such an
actual receiving as is without any act of Faith, or profession of the persons
received into Covenant; as ^f God could not appoint them Church Members, even
though he had promised, foretold, and actually received them into Covenant,
without an act of faith, and profession.

This might have had some color, if applied to the Minor, which he says he
also denied, implying that in the Dispute he denied the Major, which will throw
him upon the horns of this Dilemma, if he denied it, then my quickness
prevented him not; if he denied it not, then he tells an utruth, and
contradicts himself, but this is so usual that I am wearied to take notice of
them.

Master Tombs 4. Section.
IN the next proof he changes the term of actually receiving, into being in
Covenant. Now there is a manifest difference between them, since a person may be
in Covenant, that is, have a Covenant made to him, who is not yet born, as
Isaac, Genesis 17. 21. But he is not actually received into Covenant till he is
born, and by some Acts of his own engages himself to be Gods: Receiving
imports an offering, which is to be done by profession. As for his proof from
Genesis 17. 7. I had many exceptions against it; First, that if it be understood
of the natural seed of Abraham, the everlastingness of it was but for a time,
and that time before the Gospel, as in the next verse the possession of Canaan
is promised to be everlasting, and yet the Jews dispossessed now of it. Which
Mr. C. grant^, and therefore must needs grant that the promise verse 7. though
it be termed everlasting, yet it is to be understood only of a limited time,
as in other passages, Exodus 21. 6. and 12. 24. etc. If meant of the natural
seed of Abraham. Nor is he relieved by saying they shall have Canaan again, for
however the possession was not everlasting, that is, at all times, particularly
not in Gospel Times.

Reply.
HE having denied the Minor, that God did promise before the Law, foretell
under the Law, and actually receive Infants into Covenant under the Gospel; I
proved the branches in order. First, that God did promise before the Law, that
Infants should be in Covenant under the Gospel, thus. That which God did
promise to Abraham was before the Law, but God did promise to Abraham that
Infants should be in Covenant, or actually received into Covenant under the
Gospel, therefore God did promise before the law that Infants should be in
Covenant, or actually received into covenant under the Gospel. Here he says I
change the term of actually receiving into being in Covenant; whereas if his
memory had not failed, he might have recollected that in the Dispute I used
both, if his charity had not been a grain, or too too light, he might have
imputed it to the Relator, who for brevity sake omitted the one term, which
was used but (...) to interpret the other, they being Equivalent in sense. But
he says there is a manifest difference between them, wha^ difference? He that
is actually received into covenant is in Covenant, and he that is in Covenant,
is actually received into Covenant, it being impossible to be in Covenant
(properly so called) without being actually received into it. To be in the
state of grace, and glory, and to be actually received into the state of grace
and glory, are Aequipollent terms; If Mr. Tombes's soul be in his body, it is
actually received into his body, and if the sword be in the Scaberd, it is
actually received into the scaberd; But he disproves this Instance, since a
person may be in Covenant that ^s, have a Covenant made to him, who is not yet
born as Isaak, Genesis 17. 21. Three untruths couched in one kennil.

1. That a person may be in Covenant who is not yet born.

2. That to have a Covenant made to him, is to be in Covenant.

3. That Isaak was in Covenant, who was not yet born, Genesis 17. 21.

First, That a person may be in Covenant, who is not yet born or conceived, as
his instance of Isaak implies, may be confuted insito Argumento, by an Argument
inbred in the terms, for he implies, and that right, that a person must be the
subject of being in Covenant, but none who is unborn, and unconceived as Isaak,
Genesis 17. 21. is a person; for a person must be a substance, which excludes all
Accidents from Covenant capacity; a substantia prima, must exist, and be
clothed with individual circumstances, which excludes universals, must be
Intelligent, which excludes all irrational creatures, Incommunicable, which
excludes the Divine nature; No part of another, which excludes the soul or body
of man, after separation to be persons; Not supported of another, which
excludes the humane nature of Christ, because it is supported of the Divine.
Now that which is unborn, not conceived, or organized in the womb, is therefore
incapable of being a person, which by his own confession is the subject of
being in Covenant.

Secondly, It is a false suggestion, that to have a Covenant made to one, is to
be in Covenant, if by having the Covenant made to one (for the phrase is
somewhat strange) he means (as he can mean nothing else) a promise from God to
be, and be in Covenant, for a promise may be made to, or of one long before he
have any being, not executed, or performed till long after his being; Then to
be elected, and to be in Covenant would be both one; then Mary Magdalen, while
possessed with seven Devils, and Saul, while a persecuter were in covenant,
nay, from eternity, to be in covenant would precede outward, and inward
calling, conversion, profession, and prerogative of birth, than which nothing
can be more ridiculous.

Thirdly it is of the same leaven of untruth, that Isaak was in covenant, when
he was not yet born, which his own quotation, Genesis 17. 21. proves against him:
The words are these, But my covenant will I establish with Isaak, which Sara
shall bear i^to thee, at this set time in the next year, where observe. 1. God
promises that Sara shall bear Isaak unto Abraham, therefore he was not yet
born. 2. That she should bear him at that set time of the next year, therefore
not conceived yet. 3. That he will establish a covenant with Isaak in the
future, not that he does establish a covenant in the present. 4 He will
establish his covenant with Isaak, not that Isaak is in covenant; to be in
covenant, and to establish a covenant with one are distinct terms, what child
cannot discover this inconsequence, God promises that he will establish his
covenant with Isaak, before he was born, therefore Isaak was in covenant before
he was born: Master T. might as truly conclude thus, God promised Genesis 49. 10.
That the Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shilo come, Therefore the
Scepter was in Judah before David, or any governor of that tribe was born. I
confess that God loved the elect from eternity with the love of intention, but
not till c^nverted with the love of execution, at which time they begin to be
internally in covenant with God, and members invisible, and externally in
covenant, and members visible, as soon as they are born, if infants of
believing Parents, as soon they profess, Jews, or Pagans.

But he goes on with the other branch of his new distinction, affirming that a
Person is not actually received into covenant till he be born, which is true of
the external, and outward receiving, but not of the internal, and spiritual
receiving, for who can deny with reason that John Baptist, and Jeremy that were
sanctified in the womb, and elect children that dies in the womb are not
spiritually, and invisibly in covenant with God, seeing they are qualifyed with
graces suitable to their present condition, that God is well pleased with them.
But whereas he adds, that one is not actually received into covenant till by
some acts of his own, he engages himself to be Gods; This erroneous
superstructure is founded upon the Basis of this mistake, that every covenant
must be expressly, and actually mutual betwixt both parties that are
covenanters, and is an Arguments sophistically (though sillily) drawn a
negatione unius speciei ad totum genus, and in forth sounds thus: Some
covenants must be expressly, and actually mutual between the covenante^s,
therefore all, even that between God, and Infants, must be actually, and
expressly mutual, or which is more, Infants by some Acts of their own, must
engage themselves to be Gods: Whereas covenanters are twofold, 1. Actually
mutual, when both parties correspondently indents, and stipulates; 2 Or not
mutual, and reciprocal, when one party imposes something upon the other, as
Conquerors upon captives; as 1 Samuel 11. 2. And Naah the Ammonite answered them,
on this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all
your right ^yes, and lay it for a reproach on all Israel; This was upon
supposition of his conquest, to enforce them whether they would or no; and is
an Act of Justice, sometimes an act of mercy, as Ezekiel. 36. 26. Where God
engages without any mutual stipulation, That a a new heart he would give them,
and a new spirit he would put within them, and he would take away the stony
heart out of their flesh, and that he would give them a heart of flesh, and
that he would put his spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his
Statutes, and keep his Commandments. In this case one party makes the
Covenant without mentioning the other, but as patient, therefore Genesis 15. 8.
God is said to make a Covenant, with Abraham, and 17. 9. God calls the
covenant his covenant, God made the promise, and conditions, not Abraham: The
former kind of covenant which is mutual, wherein both parties in a sense
indent, and stipulate, is twofo^d, first when personally for themselves, both
act, or interpretativ^ly consent, so Genesis 21. 27. When Abraham, and Abimelech
did covenant, the Text says, they both made a ^vonant, Abraham his conditions,
and Abimelech his. And Genesis 17. 10. God said unto Abraham, thou shall keep my
Covenant, therefore thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations, this is
my Covenant which ye shall keep between me, and you, every manchild among you
shall be circum^ised. Secondly, representatively by others who are their
Proxies and engages for them, they being but mere passives, and are received
into covenant without any voluntary act of their own; Thus Infants in all
generations from Abraham became covenanters by circumcision, when they were but
eight days old, which Christ himself confirmed by his own example pro parvulis
parv^l^s factus, became a little one for little ones, was Mediator, and head of
the Church in both natures, circumcised when a little one, that little ones by
Circumcision might be admitted into covenant. By this you see it smells rank of
heresy, if not of blasphemy, to affirm that a person cannot actually be
received into covenant, till by some acts of his own he engages himself to be
Gods: for then all Infants from Adam till Abraham; Isaak and all circumcised
Infants from Abraham till Christ, from Christ till the end of the world, nay,
Christ himself, while an Infant (who as he was the first begotten of the dead,
was the first in covenant) would be excluded the Covenant: We find in the
Gospel, that sick persons, that were carried by others, were cured upon account
of their Faith; and Infants brought to Christ by others, were actually
themselves blessed by him: Therefore vain is that he asserts, that actual
receiving into covenant imports an offering which is to be done by profession;
as if more were to be required for admission of visible members into covenant,
than was for admission, or actual receiving of Christ as God-man, and Mediator
to be visible head of the Church; for though we read that the Star, and Angels
proclaimed him, the wise men offered Gold, and Myrrh, and Frankincense to him,
yet we read not that he made any offering himself by profession, till he came
of riper years, increasing in knowledge, and stature, and favor with God, and
man.

The proof of the Minor, that God did promise to Abraham that Infants should be
in covenant under the Gospel, taken from Genes. 17. 7. I will establish my
covenant between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations for
an everlasting covenant to be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee, he
says he had many exceptions against it, but I remember none, but those here
mentioned by him, nor all them, which how incongruously they are applied, will
appear by reciting the Argument in form which was this. He that makes an
everlasting covenant to Abraham, and his seed after him, in their generations,
promised that Infants should be in covenant under the Gospel; God made an
everlasting covenant with Abraham, and his seed after him in their generations,
Therefore God promised that infants should be in covenant under the Gospel,
His first exception he says was, That if it be understood of the natural seed
of Abraham, the everlastingness of it was but for a time: But for a time? How
does that follow? If it had been with a particle of exclusion, only to the
natural seed, there might have been some color of dispute, and yet without
all controversy, the everlastingness of it is extended even to the natural
seed of Abraham; for there has been, is, and will be a succession of Jewish
believer^ to the end of the world, which proves that in his sense its false,
that the everlastingness of it was but for a time, and that time before the
Gospel: But the truth is, it is not only meant, of the natural seed, but of
the spiritual seed of Abraham, both whereof successively, and in part, if not
altogether concomitantly (for there were always P^oselytes) it is everlasting,
or to the end of the world; Neither is he relieved by the next verse wherein he
says the possession of Caena^n is promised to be everlasting, and yet the Jews
are dispossessed now of it, unless that the same word in adjoining verses must
necessarily signify the same thing; Then the Argument would be good,
Everlasting in the latter verse signifies not continuance to the end of the
world without interruption; therefore not in the former. Upon the same ground
an Argument might be drawn against the infiniteness, and eternity of the deity,
from these words, God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, Gods, and Lords in the latter
signifies creatures, Therefore in the former, but how inconsequently in both a
child may judge.

But when all this is done, what if in his sense the possession of Canaan is
not promised to be everlasting? the words are these, I will give unto thee, and
unto thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession, wherein you see the gift is the whole
land of Canaan; The parties to whom Abraham, and his seed after him; The
continuance for an everlasting possession: Now Abraham was so far from the
possession of the whole land of Canaan, that he only sojourned in it, and that
but for a while as a stranger; Jacob his grandchild with his posterity, after
their departure into Egypt possessed neither whole, nor part, till Josuah's
time, which was almost three hundred years; after Josuah's time till the
destruction of the Temple by Titus, the Jews could never compass the possession
of the whole, or expel the Je^usites, and Canaanites. What then must be mea^t
by Gods promise to Abraham of an everlasting possession of Canaan? one of these
three; either that they had; jus ad rem, though not in re, title to it, though
not actual possession of it, or that it was a type of the everlasting
spiritual Canaan, in which senses from Abraham they possessed it; or that the
plenarie, and full possession of the whole begins at the conversion of the
Jews, and shall last from thence to the end of the world without interruption;
None of these will support Mr. T. his declining cause; nor will my grant do him
any good, that the Jews are dispossessed of Canaan; neither will it follow from
thence, that I must needs grant, that the promise verse 7. though it be termed
everlasting, yet it is only to be understood of a limited time, for I deny
both the Antecedent, and the consequent, The Antecedent, it is not meant of a
limited time, The consequent, that if it were so meant, it is no sequel that
the former must be so meant also. Those pretended parallels taken from Exodus 2.
16. and 12. 24. are heterogeneal, and indeed (...) another Question, which
speaks not of everlasting, but ever, and is to be limited to the subject
ma^ter, and service. The servant shall serve the Master for ever, that is as
long as the one is capable to serve, and the other to be served. And ye shall
observe this thing for ever, that is, ever when ye celebrate the Passover. And
whereas he says I am not relieved by saying that they shall have Canaan again,
I must tell him that, that Fo^t needs no relieving that was never beleagerd, or
beseeged. The Question is not of actual possession of Canaan, but of such a
possession, as God promised, and undoubtedly performed to Abraham, and his seed
after him; when Abraham himself possessed scarce any part, his poster^ty from
Jacob till Josuah none at all; from Josuah till the destruction of Jerusalem
according to the letter not all of Canaan; Therefore his inference is
inconsequently infer^ed, that the possession was not everlasting, that is at
all times, particularly not in Gospel Times, seeing they were never, no not in
the time of Babylonish captivity dispossessed of Canaan in that sense, in which
it is said to be everlasting.

Mr. Tombs. 5. Section.
AS for his proof of the continuance of the Gospel Covenant unto the end of the
world, to Abraham and his seed, the very text he alleges, Gal. 3. 8. does
manifestly express the thing promised to be justification, and that of the
heathen, and that through faith, that had not the man a face which could not
blush, he would have been ashamed to have urged it to prove that Abraham's
natural seed were promised to be in covenant under the Gospel. And his next
allegation is as vain, that because, Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. The whole congregation
of Israel ^re said to stand before the Lord with their little ones, to enter
into covenant, therefore the covenant, Genesis 17. 7. is to continue to
infant-natural seed of Abraham to the end of the world; whereas the speech is
only of a Transient fact, not of a command, much less of ^ promise of
something perpetually future, and what is said of the little ones, is as well
said of wives, hewers of wood, and drawers of water.

And therefore if thence be concluded a continuance of covenant to Infants, a
continuance of covenant to wives, and servants will be concluded.

Reply.
MAster Tombs thinking to gain the shore upon this broken plank, that the
covenant God made with Abraham was not simply everlasting, because the Jews
possession of Canaan was not everlasting, was further assaulted with an
Argument drawn from a Gospel Covenant thus; That which is a Gospel Covenant is
to continue to the end of the world, The covenant that God made with Abraham,
and his seed to all generations is a Gospel* covenant, Gal. 3. 8. and the
Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached
the Gospel before to Abraham, saying, in thee shall all nations be blessed,
Therefore it is to continue to the end of the world. In which text three things
are observable. 1. That the Scripture foretold that God would justify the
heathen through faith, that is the partition wall should be pulled down, and
the heathen nations should profess faith as visible members, whereof some
should be actually justified as members invisible. 2. That the same Gospel that
was afterward preached to the heathens, was first preached to Abraham. 3. That
in Abraham, that is in him, as the root whence sprung the branches, or in the
covenant made with him, or in Christ virtually in him by way of excellency,
all nations shall be blessed. Now instead of direct answer to this, he first
injuriously misreports my allegation against the law of equity. 2. He shoots at
his hostem stramineum imaginary Bugbear of straw against the rules of Logic
and verity. 3. Having missed his mark with the Dragon in the Revelation, he
sends floods of reproach after me against the grounds of religion, and piety.

First he injuriously misreports my allegation, that I urged this Argument
drawn from Gal. 3. 8. to prove that Abraham's natural seed were promised to be
in covenant under the Gospel, as will appear to any one that observes the
concatenation of the Mediums, which loosed into a Sorites presents themselves
thus: Infants may be baptized, because the Essence of Baptism belongs to them,
The Essence belongs to them, because the definition belongs to them, The
definition of Baptism belongs to Infants, because Christ did institute it for
them, he did institute Baptism for them, because he appointed them visible
Churchmembers under the Gospel; he appointed them visible Churchmembers under
the Gospel, because he promised to Abraham before the Law, that they should be
received into covenant under the Gospel; he promised to Abraham before the Law,
that they should be received into covenant under the Gospel, because he made an
everlasting covenant with Abraham, and his seed, that is professors, and
believers, whether carnally descended from him, or no; he made an everlasting
covenant with Abraham, and his seed which was not to expire with the Jewish
Paedogogie, because it was a Gospel Covenant, and that it was a Gospelcovenant
it was proved, Gal. 3. 8. God preached the Gospel to Abraham. Now where did I
urge that Abraham's natural s^ed were promised to be in covenant under the
Gospel? Master T. his conscience tells him, no where; Let him take heed of
these untruths that he thinks are officious, and pious frauds, least they prove
malicious, and unexpiable without confession and satisfaction.

Secondly he shoots at his own Idol against the rules of Logic, and verity,
for having swallowed, and digested this untruth, that I urged Abraham's
natural seed were in covenant under the Gospel, he attempts to disprove it
from the Text alleged, Gal. 3. 8. because the thing promised (as he expresses
it with an Emphasis) was justification, and that of the heathen, and that
through faith. As if all this might not be, and yet some of the natural seed
of Abraham be in covenant under the Gospel, who professed, were justified, and
had faith as well as the heathen. True it is I averred in the dispute, and
avouch now, that Abraham was the root; the natural seed of Abraham, (though
not as natural,) were the natural branches of this Olive, and in visible
covenant till Christ's incarnation; and yet not these alone, for Proselytes also
of every nation were admitted; After Christ, the Gentiles, or Nations, as wild
Olives were ingrafted into the place of the natural Olive, which in great part
was broken off; and yet many of the Jews embraced Christ, continued in ^he
stock, and were both the natural, and spiritual seed of Abraham; for if
Peter, Acts 2. at one Sermon converted three thousand, how many thousands may
we think were converted with all the Sermons of all the Apostles, and
Evangelists? But I never affirmed that the covenant was to be made, and
continued, to the end only with the natural seed of Abraham, but the quite
contrary, seeing also the Gentile professors, and believers were the seed of
Abraham, which is plainly expressed, Gal. 3. 7. Know ye therefore that they
that are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham, and ver. 9. They that
are of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham; and if the continuation of
Abraham's seed had been only by this spiritual succession, it had been enough
to prove, that the covenant God made with him was everlasting.

Thirdly by this accuser of his brethren, Revel. 12 10. being thus cast down,
ver. 15. Casts out of his mouth a flood ^f water ofter me, saying, had not the
man a face which could not blush, he would have been ashamed to urge it, to
prove that Abraham's natural seed were promised to be in covenant under the
Gospel; whereas no man whose conscience is not seared, and face starched will
say, that I affirmed Abraham's natural seed were promised to be in covenant
under the Gospel, or that I urged that place to prove it? Is it no sin first
to slander, and then to fasten an Aspersion of so deep a dye upon a groundless
slander? (...) Pindar. Ode. 1. The venen^ous waspe by shooting out her st^ng,
may very well loose her bowels. And because Master T. speaks so often of a face
that cannot blush, let him reflect upon his own, which (as if born under
Saturn, who is said ^o have murdered his children) livo^em loquitur, speaks
paleness, and envy, which I had thought had been ch^cked with grace, till
besides his uncivil language in the dispute without provocation, he vents so
much rancour deliberately in writing.

Qualiter eruptis corrupta cadavera Tumbis
Inficiunt, saetore graves imitata cloacas;
Lurida cum Stygiis glomer antque aconita venenis.
As gaping Tombs though painted fair,
With poisoned breath infects the Air,
And with a scent out-vyes the Jakes,
Or dampes that rise from Stygian lakes*
But he goes on in the same Equipage twisting a cord of untruth, and reproach
together, saying that my next allegation is as vain, that because, Deuteronomy. 29.
11. The whole Congregation of Israel are said to stand before the Lord with
their little ones, to enter into covenant. Therefore the covenant, Genesis 17. 7.
is to continue to Infant-naturall seed of Abraham to the end of the world. Here
is Triplex Geryon, a Monster composed of a threefold untruth. 1. It is a
fiction that I ever affi^med, that the covenant Genesis 17. 7. was to continue to
Infant-naturall seed of Abraham to the end of the world. 2. Much more that I
had any occasion, or went to prove it. 3. Most of all, that I proved it from
that Text Deuteronomy. 29. 10. 11. Because the whole Congregation of Israel are said
to stand before the Lord with their little ones.

The reader must be advertised, that the true occasion of my producing that
Text was this; when I had proved the covenant God made with Abraham was to
continue to the end of the world, because it was a Gospell-covenant. Gal. 3. 8.
Master T. confusedly without repeating answered thus, That it was an
everlasting covenant, and to continue to the end of the world, but not to
Infants; I first told him that it was a denying of the conclusion, then took
away h^s answer thus. If God commands Infants to stand in covenant before him,
then it is to continue to Infants, but God commands Infants to stand in
covenant before him, Therefore it is to continue to Infants, Deuteronomy* 29. 10. 11.
Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God, your Captains of your
tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of Israel, your little
ones, etc. To this he now upon second thoughts answers, impliedly confessing,
that Infants were then in covenant, but from thence could not be concluded a
continuance of covenant to Infants; His exceptions against it are four. First,
that the speech is only of a transient fact. Secondly, not of a command.
Thi^dly, much less of a promise of something perpetually future. Fourthly, what
is said of the little ones, is as well said of wives, hewers of wood, and
drawers of water, which shall be examined in o^der.

His first exception, that the speech is only of a transient fact, is confuted
by many Arguments rivitted in the text: I Will insist in one or two, ver. 10. 11.
little ones are said to stand before the Lord, to enter into covenant with him,
what covenant was this? ver. 25. That which he made with them, when he brought
them out of the land of Egypt; This covenant was perpetual to all, and binding
all, even children, and to put this out of all controversy, he adds in the
29. that those things that are revealed (meaning concerning this covenant)
belongs unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of
this Law; That which is for ever is no Transient fact.

His second excepion is, That it is not of a command. No? does not the Chapter
begin thus? These are the words of the Covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses
to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab. 29. Those things
revealed unto them, and their children, that they may do all the words of this
Law. Now a law is a command, or a precept of doing, or avoiding some thing v.
23. God threatens that for breach of this Covenant, the whole land shall be
brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it shall not be sown, nor any grass
grow therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorah, Admah, and Zeboim which
the Lord overthrew in his anger: Now every punishment presupposes the breach
of a law, and every law a command, (...). And if any say this reaches not
children, let him look back at the command, and curse, Circumcise the foreskin
of every male-child, for he that is not circumcised, shall be cut off, for he
has broke my Covenant.

His third exception, that it is not a promise of something perpetually future
is overthrown, in that it is said, 29. that it is revealed to them, and their
children for ever; and 13. that the end of the Covenant is, that God may
establish them a people unto himself, and that he may be a God unto them; but
God is no less a God to Infants under the Gospel, than under the Law. And to
affirm that Infants stood once in Covenant before the Lord, and shall not do so
still, is but a begging of the Question; for they cannot show a line in
Scripture where the privilege is revoked, or repealed; the contrary may be
proved by unanswerable arguments.

His fourth exception is, that what is said of the little ones, is as well said
of wives, hewers of wood, drawers of water, and therefore if thence be
concluded a continuance of Covenant to Infants, a continuance of covenant to
wives, and servants will be concluded; what Inconvenience? As hewers of wood,
drawers of water, wives, servants, if professors, or proselytes were in
Covenant under the law, even so believing wives, and servants under the Gospel
are in Covenant: Hence we may retort, If wives, and servants are in covenant
under the Gospel, as well as under the Law; then by his own concession it may
be concluded, that Infants are in covenant under the Gospel, but wives, and
servants are in covenant as well under the Gospel, as under the Law, Therefore
Infants are in Covenant under the Gospel; and to this fair issue the matter is
come.

Mr. Tombs 6. Section*
HIs allegation of Heb. 8. 6. is as vain, for he brings it to prove that if
Infants were in covenant under the Law, they are in covenant under the Gospel,
whereas the meliority of the covenant is not placed in the extent to the sort
of persons, for then it should be extended to more sorts than the covenant of
the Law was, but to the meliority of the promises, which were of better things,
or better terms, than the promises of the Law, but not to any other than elect,
and true believers, and so not to Infants as the natural seed of believers.

Reply.
THough Mr. Tombs could not make his retreat good, nor man his fort consisting
of a fourfold exception; yet like as Thucidides said of Pericles, when he was
asked by Archidamus King of the Spartans, whether he, or his adversary wrastled
better? A man (says he) cannot tell, for when I cast him down, he by saying he
has no fall, persuades the beholders, and so overcomes: So he being beat out
of his holds, peremptorily held his conclusion, maugre the premises, that the
covenant was not perpetual, and as well to Infants under the Gospel, as under
the Law: Against which was concluded thus. If Christ has obtained a more
excellent Ministry, and is a Mediator of a better covenant, which is
established upon better promises, than if Infants were in covenant under the
Law, they are in covenant under the Gospel; But Heb. 7. 22. 8. 6. Christ has
obtained a more excellent Ministry, was a Mediator of a better Covenant, which
was established upon better promises; Therefore if Infants were in Covenant
under the Law, they are in covenant under the Gospel. This he says is a vain
allegation, implyedly denying the consequence of the Major, and gives his
reasons; 1. negatively, that the meliority of the covenant is not placed in the
extent to the sort of persons, for then it should be extended to more sorts
than the covenant of the Law was; 2. affirmatively, But to the meliority of the
promises, which were of better things, or better terms than the promises of the
Law: Thence he infers, that not to any other but the elect, and true believers,
and so not to Infants as the natural seed of believers. These are either wild
assertions, or inconsequent deductions which now comes to the touchstone:

First he affirms that the meliority of the covenant is not placed sin the
extent to the sort of persons, what then? will it follow if ^ covenant was made
no more than before, therefore not to all that were before? A Prince may grant
a better Charter to a Corporation then formerly, and yet to none but them that
were free Denisons before, their children. A noble man's patent may be enlarged
with greater privileges, of a Baron be made a Duke, and yet in the same
latitude to posterity: Gospel-p^erogatives may be greater than of the Law, and
yet equally to professors, and their children. We argue not affirmatively, it
is a better covenant, because it is made to more than before; but negatively,
it were not a better covenant, at least eatenus if it were not made to all it
was before. But as his inference, so his proposition is false, for the
Meliority (to use his barbarism) of the covenant is also placed in the extent
to the sort of persons; for whereas before it was confined only to the Jews,
now all Nations, Jews, Gentiles, Grecians, Barbarians, bond, free flows in Isa.
2. 2. as we have a praeludium of it Acts 2. 9. Parchians, and Medes, Elamites,
and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and
Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and the parts of Lybia, about Cyrene,
and strangers of Rome, Cretes, and Arabians, the wonderful works of God. By
this you see his reason is turned point blank against himself, and the
contradictory of his propositions are true; The Meliority of the covenant is
placed in the extent to the sort of persons, because it is extended to more
sorts, than the covenant of the Law was: And this in answer to his negative
proofs. The affirmative follow, which are these. 1. That the Meliority of the
covenant is placed in the Meliority of the promises. 2. That Gospel-promises
are of better things, or better terms than the promises of the Law. 3. That the
promises of the Gospel are not to any other, than elect, and true believers,
and therefore not to Infants as the natural seed of believers; for the first,
that the Meliority of the covenant is placed in the Meliority of the promises
is both impertinent, and untrue. Impertinent, for if it were confessed that the
Meliority of the covenant is placed in the Meliority of the promises, it will
not follow that Infants are not in covenant as well under the Gospel, as under
the Law; nor will it avoid my Argument, unless it were with a term of
exclusion, that the betterness of the Covenant is only placed in the Meliority
of of the promises, which he asserts not, for it may be also placed in other
things, as in a larger extent to persons in particular, besides the
forementioned, even to Infants before eight days old: Neither will the
pre-eminence of circumstances (wherein the dignity of the Covenant under the
Gospel, and under the Law is distinguished) countervaile the holding out of
one soul out of Covenant, and so ordinary capacity of salvation, much more, so
many millions of Infants that die before they be actual professors.

It is also untrue that the meliority of the Covenant is placed in the
meliority of the promises; as if better things in substance were promised under
the Gospel, than under the Law; or as if the promises under the Gospel, and
under the Law were not in effect the same, differing only in Oeconomies, and
several manners of administration; the contrary of which is Anti-nomianism.

His second Thesis is, that Gospell-promises are of better things than the
promises of the Law, which would imply that there were salvation in some other
name, than in the name of Jesus, and that Jesus Christ were not the same to
day, yesterday, and for ever. True it is Christ was not at all times revealed
alike clearly, obscurely to Adam in the seed of the woman that should bruise
the Serpents head; to Abraham more fully, that in his seed all the Nations of
the Earth should be blessed; To Moses in Typesshadowes, sacrifices; really in
the flesh of the virgin; spiritually by the Holy Ghost after the assention: But
before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, Christ was the
meritorious cause, grace was the means, glory was the end of our salvation, the
Identity of which, makes the Identity of the thing promised.

His third Paradox is, that the promises of the Gospel are not to any others
than the elect, and true believers; here we must distinguish, The promises of
the Gospel are twofold, either internal, and spiritual, or external, and of
Ordinances: Interna^ again, are either hypothetical, and conditional, or
categoricaland absolute: Hence arises these three propositions. 1. That the
external promises of the Gospel, which are of ordinances, are made to all
visible members. 2. That the internal, and spiritual promises of the Gospel are
made, or propounded conditionally to all visible members; hence arose those
distinctions of Damascen and others, Signi, and been placiti; sufficienter, and
efficienter, catagorice and hypothetice; voluntate antecedenti, and consequente.

3. That the internal, and spiritual promises of the Gospel are made
absolutely, and terminated or performed only to the Elect, and invisible
members ^ Here it is apparent that his allegation is only true in the third
sense, in the two former manifestly false; in which sense only it concerns our
present controversy of visible Church membership: And how his assertion makes
for him, nay, not directly against him, I cannot see; for the meliority of the
covenant consists principally in outward Ordinances, manner of administration,
and dispensation; extent and amplitude of the proposal; not of grace and glory,
of which there was always the same reason; Enoch, Abraham, Eliah and Moses,
were as well justified by faith, and had a respect to the recompense of reward,
Heb. 11. as well as Peter and the rest of the Apostles.

His last assertion is, That because the promises of the Gospel are not to any
other than the Elect, and true believers, therefore they are not to Infants, as
the natural seed of believers: The Antecedent is proved to be false, for though
the spiritual part of Gospel-promises is absolutely performed, and terminated
to the Elect, yet they are conditionally proposed to all professors; and the
external part which consists in administration of Ordinances is equally
belonging unto all visible members. His consequent is also unsound, for the
internal and spiritual part may be made intentionally to Infants, as the
spiritual seed of believers, and yet the external part, and that of Ordinances
to Infants as the natural seed of believers, as well under the Gospel, as under
the Law: That under the Law it is apparent by the History of the Old Testament,
confirmed by that of P^^^, Galat. 2. 15. We who are Jews by nature and not
sinners of the Gentiles; And Romans 4. 12. Where Abraham is said to be the Father
of circumcision to them that are not of circumcision only, but also walk in
the steps of his faith; which implies that he was the Father of them, who are
of circumcision only, and walk not in the steps of his faith: The same reason
is of the Gospel, unless they were two distinct covenants, and essentially
different, and that made with Abraham, and his seed carnal, as the carnal
Anabaptists affirm; which absurdity supposes it little better comfort, for
Abraham and his seed to have such a portion only sealed to him, than Turks,
and Tarters enjoy, who were never in covenant with God. True, in the covenant
there was a promise of Canaan, and temporal blessings, but yet the covenant was
in the main spiritual, Romans 4. ^1. else we should make the Jews little better
than the beasts that perish; as some gross Anabaptists do; So Calvine well
observes Judaeos adeo carnales nobis depingunt, ut pecudum similiores sunt quam
hominum: Calvin Instit. lib. 1. c. 16. s. 10. The covenant of free grace that
God made with Abraham in Christ, is an everlasting covenant, and stands more
firm than the pillars of the earth, or the poles of the heaven; hence God
himself calls it an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17. 7. and that it is not meant
of any limited time is put out of doubt, Isai. 54. 8. 10. With everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord thy Redeemer, and the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee. So that the Gospel Covenant for substance is
still in force to the natural seed of Believers (though not as natural, but
natural of Believers) as well as under the Law. And though the Jews had
priority in the Covenant, yet not sole propriety, for the Gentiles becoming
visible professers, they and their Infants did partake in it; whosoever fears
the Lord, his children were Olive plants as well as theirs, Psalm. 128. 1. 3.

Master Tombs 7. Section.
ANd for that which he says, This unchurcheth the one half of Christendom,
and leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation, if he mean by Christendom all
that are commonly called Christians, I grant it, if the Infants be the one half
of them, and their unchurching be in respect of visible Church Membership, but
count it no absurdity. Nor do know what ordinary means of Salvation he
conceives they are left without, except Baptism, which I take not to be an
ordinary means of salvation without faith, and therefore think it no
inconvenience to say that Infants are without ordinary means of salvation,
which are the preaching the Word, etc. Yet are saved by the election of God,
redemption of Christ, and work of his spirit.

Reply.
MAster Tombs denying the consequent of the Major, that though the Covenant of
the Gospel was a better Covenant than that under the Law, yet Infants were not
in covenant as well under the Gospel, as under the Law, which in the Dispute
was thus taken away; That which unchurches the one half of Christendom, and
leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation, cannot be a better Covenant; to
deny Infants to be in covenant, unchurches the one half of Christendom, and
leaves them no ordinary means of Salvation, therefore it cannot be a better
Covenant. Then he gave no direct answer, but now says, if I mean by
Christendom all that are commonly called Christians, he grants it, this is his
concession, but with two limitations, 1. If the Infants be the one half of
them, 2. If their unchurching be in respect of visible Church Membership, but
then he counts it no absurdity, there is his Epanorthosis, or correction. Again
he says that he knows not what ordinary means of salvation, I conceive they
are left without, except Baptism, which he takes not to be an ordinary means of
salvation, and therefore thinks it no inconvenience to say that Infants are
without ordinary means of Salvation, etc. yet are saved by the election of God,
redemption of Christ, and works of his spirit, All this being summed together
is in his sense to deny the major, and interpretatively averrs, That which
unchurches the one half of Christendom, and leaves them no ordinary means of
salvation, may be a better Covenant; I Will trace him in his own foot steps.

First to gratify him, I mean by Christendom all that are commonly called
Christians; that is them, and their children that hold the fundamentals, till
they deny them by their life, or doctrine, and then too, so far, that after
repentance they are not to be baptized again, or readmitted by iteration of the
seal, contrary to Cyprian, the Novatians, and Donatists, with the Council of
Carthage.

2. I conceive that Infants, that is (besides those that dye in their mothers
wombes) they that expire before, and after Baptism before years of discretion,
with the number of those that lives before the dippers will admit them to their
water-ordinance, are the one half, if not the greater of visible members, as by
examining of Registers has been observed.

Thirdly I grant him that their unchurching is in respect of visible Church
membership, though not only so, but of invisible Church Membership, also
interpretatively, and consequently* for they that are not in covenant, and
members of the Churchvisible, have no promise, no present hope of Salvation
Ephesians. 2. 12. This he seems to overthrow by these positions following* 1. That
he knows not what ordinary means of Salvation Infants out of Covenant are left
without except baptism; 2. That he takes not Baptism to be an ordinary means of
Salvation without faith. 3. He thinks it no inconvenience to say that Infants
are without ordinary means of Salvation. 4. That Infants are saved by the
election of God, redemption of Christ, and work of his spirit, without ordinary
means; These are his slight works, that he intends to entrench himself in, but
(God willing) we shall easily level them.

First he says, that he knows not what ordinary means of Salvation Infants
out of Covenant are left without, except Baptism; And is not that enough? An
Infant under the Law, left without any ordinary means of salvation, save only
circumcision was in a sad condition, seeing God said Genesis 17. 14. The
uncircumcised Manchild, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that
soul shall be cut off from his people, for he has broken my Covenant; and
shall we not think the condition as bad of an Infant under the Gospel, left
without any ordinary means of salvation, save only Baptism, seeing Christ
says, John 3. 5. Except a man b^ born of water, and of the Spirit be cannot
see the Kingdom of God. But there are ordinary means of salvation, beside
Baptism, tha^ Infants out of Covenant, are left without: for clearing of which,
by ordinary, I mean that which God has revealed in Scripture, and has left us
a word of promise to depend upon: By means of salvation I understand all that
which cond^ces to the end, and is contradistinguished to the end; Thus means of
salvation, either strictly signifies those things that morally are in our
power, as for the Catechumeni, and them of years, whether they will be
Baptized, hear the Word, receive the Eucharist; Or those things that are not
in our power, wherein we are Passives, yet performed by others, as Proxies for
us, thus under the Law, Infants were circumcised, washed, sanctified by
oblations, presented in the Temple; under the Gospel baptized, engaged by
their parents, or sureties. Or those thing, that are neither in our power, nor
others, performed neither by our selves, nor others, yet by Gods free Charter
in our selves, and others; Thus covenant-holiness, prerogative of birth, Gods
promise to Abraham, that he would be his God, and the God of his seed; That of
Peter, Acts 2. 39. confirmed to Jews and Gentiles, the promise is to you and
your children are ordinary means of Salvation; Infants out of covenant are left
without all these, and would be in the same condition with Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.
12. Without Christ, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the
covonant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the World; Thus
negatively what they are deprived of by being out of covenant. Let us see
positively the benefits of being in covenant by comparing them with Jews
children with whom they hold proportion, Romans 3. 12. What advantage has the
Jew, or what profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way; chiefly because
unto them were committed the Oracles of God. And Romans 9 4. Who are Israelites,
to whom pertains the Adoption, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law,
and the service of God, and the promises; there is the same reason of Infants
under the Gospel.

Secondly he says, that he takes not Baptism to be any ordinary means of
salvation without faith; what he takes is not much material, so long as he
mistakes: If it be an ordinary means of salvation any way, it is enough to
prove that Infants are left without that means; And in this his amphibological
asseveration are cooped three fallacies, 1. Fallacia divisionis, for the
Question is not whether Baptism be an ordinary means of salvation without
faith, but whether it be a means or no; 2. A dicto simpliciter ad dictum
secundum quid, for the Question is not whether Baptism be a principle means,
but whether it be a means, 3. Non causae ut causae. For it is not enquired
whether baptism presupposes faith as a cause or qualification, but whether
Baptism be the ordinary way God has appointed for salvation: And when the
proposal is whether baptism be an ordinary means of Salvation? To say it is not
without faith, is as unsavory, as when the demand is, whether the lungs are an
ordinary Instrument of breathing, to say they are not without the heart; when
the Question is simply whether a Colonel has any command in an Army? It would
be ridiculous to answer it by saying he has none without orders from the
General; And yet there is not that necessary connection betwixt faith, and
Baptism, that is betwixt the lungs, and the heart; for the lungs cannot breath
without the heart, nor the Colonel issue out any word of command without
subordination to his general: But Baptism may be true Baptism even in adultis,
as Hymenaeus, without true faith, and many other hypocrites who when they
became true Penetentiaries, none but those Heretics, the Novations, and
Donatists, durst Baptize again, But for the Baptism of Infants, actual faith
is not necessary for the been esse, or perfection of it, much less for the
esse or being of it: And that they have the infused habit of faith, or the
roots, and seeds of it, he confesses saying, they are saved by the work of
Christ's spirit, which can be no other, but the seeds of faith, hope, charity,
and the new creature.

Thirdly, he thinks it no inconvenience to say that Infants are without
ordinary means of salvation: he means preaching of the word, for so he
expresses himself: of that we must distinguish, Preaching is either,
manifesting to the understanding that which is preached, so Infants are without
the means; or presenting objectively the benefit of that which is preached, as
the new creature, gifts of the spirit, salvation, so Infants are not without
the means: A will is sealed, and published by the Father ^n the presence of all
his children, Wherein there is contained bequeathments, and Legacies to them
severally, now they of age only understand it, but the Infants, and sucklings
that understand it not, have equal benefit by it, their honest overseers, and
Guardians will look to their Interests, and shall we think God to be less
careful of Infants, to whom he has proclaimed belongs the Kingdom of God?

Lastly he says Infants are saved by the election of God, redemption of
Christ, and work of his spirit without ordinary means; This implies a
contradiction, of which his forge is full; for if God has revealed in the
Covenant of the Gospel, and made a promise thereof, that Infants are saved by
the election of God, redemption of Christ, and work of his spirit, then it is
not without ordinary means, for this is the way that God has declared himself
ordinarily to operate in, whose will is a fix^ Law; and if God has not
revealed it in the Cov^nant of the Gospel, and made a promise thereof, how
does he know that Infants are saved by the election of God, redemption of
Christ, and work of his spirit? Or how dare he avouch it? God has promised no
such thing to Infants of Jews, Turks, Infidels, therefore they are out of
Covenant, and not visible member^: if God has promised such things to Infants
of believers, they are in Covenant, and visible members. But perhaps he means
Infants are saved without ordinary means, that is baptism: That if it were
true, might vindicate a tanto, that they are saved without that ordinary means,
but not a toto, that they are saved without an ordinary means. But his former
grant necessarily infers that they are not saved without Baptism, for what can
forbid water (says the Apostle) that these may not be baptized, seeing they
have recieved the Holy Ghost as well as we: Now they that have elections
redemption of Christ, and work of his spirit, have received the Holy Ghost;
which is a thing so clear that Mr. T. himself is forced to confess, that if he
knew Infants were elected, he would Baptize them; and here he acknowledges of
the species, or sort of believers Infants, that they are not only elected of
God, but redeemed of Christ, and have the work of his spirit; And why then they
may not be baptized, even from his own grounds, is past my understanding to
apprehend. Now to return to the Argument, and sum up all, That which deprives
the one half of Christendom of substantials, as the benefit of the word,
inward, and outward baptism, visible Church membership, Prerogative of birth,
covenant-holyness, Gods promise of grace, and glory, cannot be a better
covenant than that which differed only in circumstantials, and deprived of
none of these, but to deny Infants to be in covenant, deprives the one half of
Christendom of substantials, as the benefit of the word, inward and outward
Baptism, visible Church membership, Prerogative of Birth, covenant-holyness,
Gods promise of grace, and glory; Therefore it cannot be a better covenant
than that which differed only in circumstantials, and deprived of none of
these.

Mr. Tombs. 8. Section.
WHat I said, that the covenant under the Gospel was made only with the
spiritual seed of Abraham was right, and determined so Romans 4. 11, 12, 16.
Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 3. 29. John 8. 39. etc. Nor is it true because the partiton
wall is broken down, therefore there is the same covenant national to the
natural seed of believers as was to Abraham, but that therefore as the Apostle
speaks Ephesians 3. 6. The Gentiles (to wit believing Gentiles, Romans 1 16.) should
be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ
by the Gospel. Nor is it true, That the Gospel covenant is made with the whole
visible Church, as the Gospel Covenant is expressed, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. And if I denied the Major page ^9. in the first Argument, I confess I
was mistaken through inadvertency, whether by reason of Master C. fast
speaking, or some humane infirmity, or some other occurrence now not remembered,
I cannot tell. But I deny the Minor, understood of the Gospel Covenant Heb. 8.
10 and the whole visible Church being taken without any Synecdoche for every
visible Churchmember.

Reply.
IN the dispute Mr. T. gave no direct answer to the foregoing Syllogism, but
eluded all, saying that the Covenant under the Gospel was made only with the
spiritual seed of Abraham, which he peremptorily again asserts here, avouching
it was right, and determined so Romans 4. 11, 12, 16. Romans 9. 7, 8 Gal. 3 29 John
8 39. But that it was neither right, nor determined so in the sense alleged,
or if it had been right, and determined so, that it had made nothing against my
present allegation, comes now to be tried. First the saying was not right, that
the Covenant under the Gospel was made only with the spiritual seed of
Abraham, that is, Gal. 2. 15. not with chose that are not Jews by nature, or
lineally descended from Abraham, but only with sinners of the Gentiles,
converted, and called, for though it is true the Covenant under the Gospel was
principally, or in a greater part made with the believing Gentiles, yet that
partly also it was made with the Jews, it appears in that it was first proposed
unto them without success, that the Apostles, and Evangelists were Jews; that
Peter was the Apostle of Circumcision, that three thousand Jews were converted
at one Sermon of his Acts, 2. 38. that the Epistle to the Hebrews is directed
only to the Jews, the Epistle of James sent only to the twelve tribes
scattered abroad, the former Epistle of Peter to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, that Jew, and
Gentile are all one in Christ Jesus: The sum of all which amounts to this,
That which was proposed and entertained with success by the Jews, which were
the natural seed of Abraham, was not only made with the spiritual seed of
Abraham; But the Covenant under the Gospel was proposed, and entertained with
success by the Jews which were the natural seed of Abraham, Therefore it was
not only made with the spiritual seed of Abraham.

2. it was not determined by those forequoted places, that the covenant under
the Gospel was only made with the spiritual seed of Abraham, as appears out
of the circumstances of those Texts, Romans 4. 11. It is said, Abraham received a
sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet
being uncircumcised, that he might be the father of them that believe; now
there were many of the natural seed of Abraham, that believed under the
Gospel, which is further confirmed by the next ver. 12. He was the father of
circumcision to them who are not of circumcision only, which is Equivalent in
sense with that we affirm, he was a Father to the natural Jews, when they
believed, and entertained Christ. And the 16. ver. makes the relations of
paternity and son ship equal to Jew, and G^ntile believers, Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all
the seed, not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of
the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all; what c^n be more apparent by
this, than that Abraham is a father both to Jew, and Gentile, professer, and
believer under the Gospel: His quotations Romans 9. 7, 8. make nothing for him,
but against him, for we hold not because they are the seed of Abraham,
therefore they are children of the Gospel Covenant; But that those that are as
Abraham was, professors, and believers, they, and their children are in
covenant; for then the posterity of Ishmael, when the apostated and the
unbelieving Jew^, to whom the Gospel was a stumbling block, would have
remained in covenant. In Isaak it is said Abraham's seed shall be called for
two reasons. 1. Because Christ descended of him. 2. Because the posterity of
Isaak was not guilty of backsliding, and r^ciduation, as the posterity of
Ishmael, and Ketu^ah were; otherwise it is apparent, that not only the outward
Ordinances, and seals of the covenant, but even the spiritual part signanter
at the least was proposed to all these, nay, who knows but that many of them
attained the end of the covenant? Luther is of opinion that even Ishmael was
saved, and brings reasons out of Scripture to prove it, which I conceive are as
concluding as any Master T. can bring to the contrary: And whereas it is said
ver* 8. They that a^e the children of the flesh, these are not the children of
God, but children of the promise are counted for the seed: we must distinguish
of children of the flesh, children of God, and children of promise. 1. Children
of the flesh are so styled, either because they were never in visible covenant,
as Pharaoh, and the Egyptians; or that were in covenant, and apostated, as the
posterity of Ishmael, and the Jews that were broak off at Christ's coming; Or
that being in covenant, and outward profession performed not sincerely the
conditions of the covenant. 2. Children of God are either so by outward
calling, and Judgment of charity, or secret election and Judgment of verity;
Many are called, that is to be sons by profession, but few are chosen, to be
really sons in possession. 3. The children of promise are either those to whom
outward things, and visible characters, as Circumcision to the Jews, Baptism to
Christians are proposed absolutely, the spiritual part thereof conditionally;
or those that attain the end of the promise, or thing promised.

These grounds thus laid, These propositions results. 1. Those that were never
in visible covenant with God, are not (ordinarily) children of promise, or
children of God in a Gosp^ll sense. 2 Those that were in visible covenant, as
Ishmael, and the Jews till they apostated, are children of God by outward
calling, and judgment of charity, and for any thing we know, by election, and
Judgment of verity. 3. Those that are in v^sible covenant, till they
apostate, are children of promise, so that outward Or^inances belongs to them
absolutely, the inward, and spiritual part is proposed unto them
conditionally. 4. Those that are visible Covenanters, and outward Professers,
not performing the conditions of the covenant, are neither the children of God,
nor children of promise in respect of Election, and obtaining the end promised.
5. Those that are in visible covenant, and performs the conditions of the
covenant, have Interest in the outward Ordinances, spiritual grace, and glory
the end; In all these respects the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3. 29. If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham' s seed, and heirs according to promise. If
Christ's by profession, then Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise in
Judgment of charity; If Christ's sincerely, then Abraham's seed, and heirs
really, and in verity John 8 39. where Jesus said to the Jews, If ye were
Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham; he does not deny that
they are the children of Abraham both by nature, and outward covenant, for that
he confesses 37* I know that ye are Abraham' s seed, but upbraids them for
degenerating from Abraham's faith, who desired to see his day: nay who knows
but some of these children that were disobedient for the present (like
persecuting Saul) were elect, and heirs of promise.

Now whether Mr. T. by spiritual seed of Abraham (for he speaks ambiguously)
understand believing Gentiles, as opposed to the Jews; or the elect of both
Jews, and Gentiles, as opposed to the carnal professors of both, it is untrue
that it is determined by the forequoted places, that the covenant under the
Gospel, in the sense controverted was made only with the spiritual seed of
Abraham.

Thirdly if it had been right, and determined so, that the covenant under the
Gospel, was made only with the spiritual seed of Abraham, it had made nothing
against my present allegation, which was this, That which unchurches the one
half of Christendom, and leaves them no ordinary means of salvation, can not
be a better covenant than that under the Law; for what consequence is in this?
The covenant under the Gospel is only made with the spiritual seed of
Abraham, therefore though it unchurch Infants, which are the one half of
Christendom, it may be a better covenant than that of the Law; whereas the
excellency of the covenant, whether made with the natural, carnal, or
spiritual seed consists in the excellency of the object, and thing
covenanted, and the extent to the parties who; now if the one half be cut off
from covenant, and so from ordinary capacity of salvation, the covenant is
rendered by half the worse.

But that the covenant was not only made with the spiritual seed of Abraham I
further disproved thus; If the covenant was made in the same extent to the
Gentiles as to the Jews, then under the Gospel it was not only made to the
spiritual seed, but it was made in the same manner, and extent to the Gentiles
as it was to the Jews, Therefore under the Gospel it was not only made to the
spiritual seed. Then he denied the Minor, which was proved by this Enthymema:
The partition wall is pulled down, and Jew, and Gentile are all one in Christ
Jesus, Therefore the covenant is made in the same manner, and extent to the Jew
and Gentile. Then he denied the consequent, as he does now with an addition,
saying it is not true, because the partition wall is broken down, therefore
there is the same covenant National to the natural seed of believers, as was
to Abraham: Nor is it true, I am sure, that I said, because the partition wall
is broken down, therefore there is the same covenant national to the natural
seed of believers as was to Abraham, either expressly, or by consequence not
expressly, for my words, that the covenant was made in the same manner, and
extent to the Jew, and Gentile, not by consequence; in the same manner, because
by mutual stipulation, in the same extent* because Parents with children; And
that is was national to the Jew, was Accidental, for it was made with Abraham
when he was but a family, dwelt in the midst of other nations, and was a
part of the Hebrews: It was not made to continue to all the posterity of
Abraham, for the posterity of Ishmael, Keturah, Esau shortly after fell off;
not only with his posterity, for the Proselytes, and Jebusites did
participate, they sojourned four hundred years in Egypt. But, what
inconvenience, if we allow him to make his best advantage of it, and say the
Gospel Covenant even extends to nations, seeing, Isaiah says Isai. 2. 2.
Nations shall flow in, and Revel. 12. 5. the man* child which the woman brought
forth was to rule the nations, which has been effected many ways; either when
one family of Christians, like Abraham's, has grown to be a nation; or when
the supreme Magistrate engages for his subjects, that they shall be the
subjects of Christ, and by imperial decrees proclaims an uniformity in
Religion; or when by Gods blessing upon Ministers endeavors, whole Nations are
convinced to profess Christianity, as in this o^ ours, where Church, and
Commonwealth as both one; And to say we have many hypocrites, and carnal
Professors, concludes no more that our Church is not national, than against
the Jews, that theirs was not national; or against the seven Churches of Asia,
that they were not Churches, for there were many hypocrites and carnal
professors in these.

Neither is this my Tenet unravelled by hi^ next asseveration, that the
Partition wall is said to be broken down, that therefore as the Apostle speaks
Ephesians. 3. 6. The Gentiles, to wit believing Gentiles, Romans 1. 16. should be
fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by
the Gospel: for as the Jews, even the whole nation of professors were received
into covenant, that indefinitly they might be fellow heirs with Christ, of the
same mystical body, whereof he is the head, and partakers of spiritual
comfort, though a remnant of them were but saved, and attained the end. So the
Gentiles are received also into covenant, even whole Nations, when they profess
(the partition wall being pulled down) for the end that they may be
fellow-heirs with the Jews, of the same body, and partakers of the promise in
Christ by the Gospel; Though all that are called, are not chosen; for there is
a difference betwixt inward, and outward calling, visible, and invisible
members, yet not easily discernable in this life. Therefore it is true that the
Gospel Covenant is made with the whole visible Church, for all receive the
seals of the covenant, participates of the ordinances, gives up their names to
Christ, engages to fight under his banner.

Now as a Soldier that is listed, cannot be denied to be a member of an army,
though he be treacherous, or unserviceable, till he be discovered and
cashi^red, nor can a Professor be denied to be Christ's Soldier while he is
Militant here. The Apostles distingu^sh all the Churches to whom they write
from heathens by the Characteristicall note of Saints, yet it is to be feared,
the greater part of these fields were tares; neither is this any whit impeached
by that which he subjoyns, that the Gospel Covenant is not made with the whole
visible Church as it is expressed, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. This is a
fallacy a dicto secundum quid, ad simplicuer negative, for if it be made with
the whole visible Church in the sense in Question, it is sufficient for our
purpose, though it be not in every sense, or that there expressed. One and the
same covenant is expressed several ways, differing only in graduall
perfections according to the capacity, and receptibility of the Covenanter;
Sometimes signanter, and in via, as is proposed to them in the way; sometimes
efficaciter and in patria as it is te^minated, and made effectual at the end
of the way; Now the covenant as it is expressed, Heb. 8. 7. (whether it be
meant literally of the Jews when recalled. 8. I will make, the word is (...) I
will perfect, or finish a new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house
of Judah; or siguratively of the converted Gentiles) offers no violence to my
fo^mer assertion, for this covenant ver. 10 is made with the house of Israel,
and Judah, which either is, or represents the whole visible Church; and ver.
11. all shall know me (says God) from the least to the greatest; therefore not
only the spiritual seed of Abraham, which were invisible, and none knew who
were the greatest, or the least, but points at signally, and (...) those that
were faithful to the end, and received a crown of life.

Now in the dispute the consequent by him denied was further proved thus; That
which is made with the whole visible Church is not only made with the elect,
and true believers; The covenant is made with the whole visible Church,
Therefore not only with the elect, and true believers. In answer to this he
says, If he denied the Major (as he did page 29. in the first Argument) he
confesses he was mistaken through inadvertencie, his conditional [if] implying
his memory may fail, His confessed [mistake] that his Judgment may fail;
[Inadvertencie] that there is a ground, or principle within him, whereby he is
inclined to fail: In this glass the An^baptists muy see what a broken sta^
they trust unto, in opposition to the universal Church. But as the Spanish
Garrisons could not be taken but by treachery; so Master Tombs forsooth could
not be mistaken, if it were not either through my fast sp^aking, or some humane
infirmity, or some other occur^ence now not remembered; but which of these he
cannot tell, only this he can tell, he was mistaken. Here we have that great
advan^age which Tully sperks of, confitentem reum; were we but sure to ^ye a
knot upon him, for he is somewhat sl^ppery. Quid cum manifesto tenetur?
Anguilla'st, elabitur, Plautus in Pseud. for now after six months traveling in
conception, he denies the Minor he granted before; but with two limitations, 1.
If it be understood of the Gospel Covenant, Heb, 8. 10. 2. If the whole visible
Church be taken without any Synecdoche for every Church member; Thus we have
his collection in words at large, and not in figures.

The former I have cleared before that it is understood of the Gospel
Covenant, which all those that are baptized, and discipled into Christ, are
entered into; As Apprentises, as soon as the Indentures are sealded, are in
covenant with their Masters, though peradventure some of them serve not out
their time, and through miscarriage attain not their freedom, Roman Soldiers
were all Sacramento militari obstricti, bound by an oath to their Commanders,
though some after fled from their colors: All visible professors are in
Covenant inchoative, and enjoy the means; though not consummative, that they
may enjoy the end. And that Heb. 8. 10. does not enfeeble, but enfo^ce this;
for God puts his Law into the minds, and wri^es them in the hearts of all
professors; for the seed is sown, and pa^tly comes up in the whole field, some
receive it with joy, tastes the good word of God, the heavenly gift, are
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and yet falls away, Heb. 6 6. God is to them a
God, and they to him a people, for he is a Savior of all men, (...),
especially of them that believe.

His second limitation is, That the Covenant is not made with the whole visible
Church, if the whole Church be taken without any Synecdoche, for every visible
Churchmember: For clea^ing of this, we must call to mind, that common
distinction of all Divines, that as there is an external, and internal
administration of the Covenant; So there is a twofold making with (and being in
covenant of) the visible Church, first secundum propositum electionis,
according to the purpose of election in Gods eternal decree, so only the elect
are in Covenant, some call this intentionally to be in covenant, because God
principally, though not only intends the Covenant for them; Others call it
spiritually, and savingly from the effect, and even^, in this sense the
covenant is not made with the whole visible Church without a Syn^cdoche, or
taking part for the whole; and this answers, Heb. 8. 10. take it in what sense
you please.

Secondly, there is a making, and so a being in Covenant in facie visibilis
ecclesiae according to visible profession, participation of Ordinances,
communion with Saints, all outward Characters of Saintship undiscernable, Romans
9. 4. Deuteronomy. 29 10, 12. John 1. 11. Psalm 50. 5 John 15. 2. Every branch in me
that bears not fruit, he takes away: whence it is appatent, that there are
branches in Christ, in Covenant with Christ, that brings forth no fruit, yet
are visible members while they carry in the vine; And in this sense the
Gospel Covenant is made with the whole visible Church, being taken without any
Synecdoche for every Churchmember; Otherwise there could be no visible
Gospell-Covenant, Gospel Ordinances, Gospel-Ministery, which must needs take
the denomination from the visibilitie of the object, and according to this new
Tenet would be Utopian, and no where.

Mr. Tombs 9. Section.
BUt I perceive by Mr. C. words, page 30. If the Church in regard of outward
administration of Ordinances (which is the Question) were only the elect, etc.
That the terms Church, and Covenant were so ambiguously used by him, that I
knew not how to conceive of his meaning, and his fast speaking would not permit
me deliberately to consider his words, and therefore no marvel I desired
liberty to explain my self, and to enquire into Mr. C. meaning, it being
impossible for me otherwise to answer appositely, and to make the disputation
profitable for finding out truth.

As for that which Mr. C. says, That it was the Question whether the Church in
regard of outward administration of Ordinances were only the elect, it does
untruly suggest, as if I so conceived, who though I hold the Church invisible
are the elect only, and that the Gospel Covenant of grace, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.
is made to them only, yet have still granted, that the Church visible consists
of others than elect persons, and that outward Ordinances may lawfully be
administered to them upon their profession of faith in Christ.

But Mr. C. by confounding those terms, To be in Covenant, to be subjects of
Baptism, etc. misleads unwary hearers, and readers.

Reply.
HEre Mr. Tombs (like a bad division) saltum facit, skips over main passages
in the dispute, that it is needful to find the end of the th^^ad, to guide us
in the Meanders of this Labyrinth: Then the major proposition by him denied was
thus confi^med: That which is made to the k^^gdome of God upon earth is not
only made to the elect, that which is made to the whole Church visible is made
to the kingdom of God upon earth, therefore it was not only made to the elect.

Here he denied the former proposition again, which was proved thus: In the
Kingdom o^ God, that is, in the Church Militant, the^e are not only elect,
but reprobates, Saints, but hypocrites, for all that are outwardly called, are
of the kingdom of God in this sense, and many are called, and few chosen; the
Kingdom of God is compa^ed to a field, where there are tares as well as wheat;
a fold, where there are goats as well as sheep; To a Noble man's house, where
there are vessels of dishonor, as well as hon^ur: And if the Church in regard
of outward administration of Ordinances (which is the Question) were only the
Elect, then it would follow that there were no visible Church upon earth, the
Jews had no more visible Church than the Heathens, the distinction of the
Church visible, and ^nvisible were frivolous, for no mo man nor Angel know^
who are elect, nor any but God. All this he passes by and gives no answer to
it, as if it were a Gordian knot, and insoluble; only like Aristotle's (...),
Ethic l. 4. c. 1. he catches at circumstances, as men, when almost drowned, do
at sticks, or weeds; for he says he perceives by my words, page 30. If the
Church in regard of outward administration of Ordinances were only the elect,
etc. that the te^ms Church and Covenant were so ambiguously used by me that he
knew no^ how to conceive of my meaning; Thus this ^ugler casts a mist before
the eyes of the Reader, that by the virtue of Hocus Pocus he may seemingly
swallow those daggers, that he will never be able to d^gest. But in good
earnest were the terms Church and Covenant used ambiguously by me? When by
Church I expressed my self to mean the whole visible Church, as in the major
denied, page 29. and by Covenant to mean an external covenant made with all
vsible Professors in opposition to his Covenant made only with the spiritual
seed of Abraham, page 14 Whosoever reads the Premises, or the relation of the
Dispute will find that I spoke so clearly, and distinctly home in these terms,
that he conceiving my meaning did directly overthrow his, gave no answer then,
nor does yet, save this collateral shift, which like the black mud cast over
the fish Sepia, or Cuttle, shows where he was taken; But with Reignold he has
more evasions yet, for my fast speaking, he says, would not permit him
deliberately to consider my words; what a sore is this, that he lays his
finger upon, and complains o^ almost in every page? The truth is, I spoke no
faster than he repeated, but faster than he answered, That as the Cardinal of
Lorrain said at Beza's dispute, he wished the people had either been deaf, or I
dumb, But this my fastness would not suffer him deliberately to consider my
words; If almost three hours time would not suffer him, deliberately to
consider of that which might have been delivered in one hour, yet methinks six
months since might; But this (...), as in the Epigram, brings forth now as
blind whelps as then: So that it was a marvel that he desired liberty then to
explain himself, and to enquire into my meaning, which was as transparent, as
if it had been writ with the Sunbeames; but amounts to a prodigy that he
should averr so now, when he neither did so, nor had the least occasion for it;
Only when he perceived the people apprehended that he was brought to an
apparent absurdity, he waded into a large discourse to wind himself out, it
being impossible for him otherwise seemingly to answer, or to make the
disputation on his part, but sophistically probable, but by obscuring the truth.

But his assertion in the next section is more frontless, for thus he charges
me; As for that which Mr. C. says, it was the Question whether the Church in
regard of outward administration of Ordinances were only the elect: It does
untruly suggest as if I so conceived, whereas the truth is, he untruly suggests
that which I said not, for my proposition was not Categorical (as he
mis-reports it) that it was the Question, whether the Church in regard of
outward administration of Ordinances were only the elect; but hypothetical, if
the Church in regard of outward administration of Ordinances (which is the
Question) were only the elect: These were my words expressly, neither can he
drawout by any consequence that I employed so much, for if he rack them upon the
Tenters, he cannot stretch them to say that the question was whether the
Church, in regard of outward administration of Ordinances was only the elect,
but the Question was about the administration of an outward Ordinance, to wit
Baptism: And if I had said, that had been the Question (as he alleges it) I
had suggested nothing otherwise than he conceived, if we may judge of his
conceits by his expressions, as appears by denying the Major, page 29. of the
relation, viz. That which is made to the whole visible Church, is net only
made with the elect: For if the whole visible Church, and the elect be all one,
and termini convertibiles, as his denial necessarily inferrs, it will
inevitably follow, whether it be the Question or no, that he conceives, that
the Church in regard of outward administration of Ordinances is only the
elect; And though he retract it in his answer, confessing that he was mistaken
either through inadvertencie, or some humane frailty, or by some other
occurrence by him not remembered; how could I divine this in the dispute, or the
Relator after me? Seeing it was several months before he sung this Palinodie,
to which me thinks he might do well, ingeniously to add a further retractation,
by confessing he wronged me, when he said that I untruly suggested, as if he
conceived that the Church in regard of outward administration of Ordinances was
only the elect.

But he further confirmed his recantation by saying he holds the Church
invisible are the elect only, to let u^ see that he concurrs not in all
opinions with the grosser Anabaptists, Papists, Lutherans, and Remonstrants;
who maintain that there are some members of the Church invisible, and in the
state of salvation for a while, who fall from the state of grace totally, and
finally, being never elected; and in this he does well, if he do not Polypize,
and change colors; for who knows but that hereafter he will say, he was
mistaken, as he is in the words following, that the Gospel Covenant of Grace,
Hebr. 8. 10, 11, 12. is made only to the elect, as has been formerly proved*
unless by the Covenant he mean the end, event, and success thereof; for those
that are not crowned, Indentes, and stipulates, receiving outward ordinances,
the badges of the covenant, have the tender of the inward part, and
participates of common graces peculiar yet to them that are in Gospel Covenant,
that by virtue thereof the formal hypocrite with the foolish virgins may not
only deceive others, but themselves.

And whereas he says he still granted, that the Church visible consists of
others than elect persons, he should have put in this caution, saving when he
was mistaken through inadvertency, or some humane frailty, which like an
Epilepsie, or Morbus facer, so often surprises him, that his Tenets are like
the Island Delos always floating, and never settled; Therefore I shall put him
in mind of his next grant, that outward Ordinances may lawfully be administered
to others than elect persons, upon their profession of faith in Christ, when I
shall have occasion hereafter to prove that outward ord^nances may lawfully be
administered to none but them in Covenant; And that there is the same reason of
professors chi^dren under the Gospel, that was under the Law; and that many
sick persons were cured of their bodily maladies by v^^ue of the faith of them
that brought them; surely the parents faith and pro^ession may have so much
influence upon their children, that they may receive the outwa^d Ordinance of
Baptism in referrenc^ to the cu^e of their spiritual maladyes But like the
Se^pent Amphisbene, that has a st^ng at both ends; as he began, so he ends
with poison, saying that by confounding these term* [to be in C^venant, to be
subjects of Baptism] I mislead unwary hea^ers, and readers, whe^eas I clearly
affi^m withal the reformed Church^s, that all ^n visible covenant are subjects
of Baptism, and all subjects of Baptism are in visible covenant, -- hic murus
aheneus esto.

Mr. Tombs 10. Section.
THe next Text Mr. C. brought was Isaiah 49. 22. whence he would prove that
Infants should be Church Members under the Gospel.

To which my answer was at first (though it was otherwise taken) that it is a
prophecy that the Gentiles should bring back the Jews, not only Infants, but
others from captivity, which the words before, 19, 20, 21. and after, v 24, 25.
Do plainly evince; And this is given, as the meaning by the new annotations
made by Mr. Gataker, does on verse 23. say it was fulfilled in those Persian
Potentates, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Ahasuerus. Nor is there in the contents
of the chapter (which Mr. C. without grounds, makes the judgment of the Church
of England) any thing to the contrary, but the words which are, [18 The ample
restoration of the Church; 24. The powerful deliverance out of captivity] do
rather confirm this. If any people laughed at this, they showed their
ignorance, and Mr. C. showed his heedlesness when he said, That it was an
addition to the Text, that the Gentiles should bring the Jews, when the very
distinction of [thy children from [the Gentiles] shows it meant of the Jews,
otherwise it should have been [their children] in the third person, not [then]
in the second; nor can it be meant of Gods children as his, for then it should
be [mine] in the first person, for God speaks those words. Though I deny not
but the words may be accommodated to the times of the Gospel, but not to Mr.
C. purpose of bringing Infants to Baptism, which has no color from the Text.
Which appears ^^ considering Mr. C. Answer to my Questions put forth needfully
to clear the Text.

Reply.
HAving dispatched the first branch of the first Argument, that God did promise
before the Law, that Infants should be actually received into Covenant under
the Gospel, Mr. T. forgetting the office of a respondent, went about
authoritatively to determine the Question, till with much importunity he was
persuaded to attend the proof of the second branch, to wit, that God foretold
under the Law, that Infants should be actually received into Covenant, or be
Church Members under the Gospel, which was done by this medium. He that
foretold that he would lift up his hand to the Gentiles, and set up a standard
to the people, and that they should bring their sons in their arms, and their
daughters should be carried upon their shoulders, foretold that Infants should
be Church Members under the Gospel; But thus says the Lord God, Isai, 49 22.
Behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the
people, they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders; Therefore God foretold that Infants should be
Church Members under the Gospel. Then he denied the major, saying the meaning
was that the Jews should bring the Gentiles children, to which was replied, God
says I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and they that is the Gentiles
shall bring thy sons, and Mr. T. says the Jews shall bring thy sons,
whereupon the words were read, so that he recollecting himself, said the
meaning was, the Gentiles should bring the Jews children from captivity, and
that it d^d not point at the time of the Gospel; Now he says his answer was at
first (though it was otherwise taken) that it is a prophecy, that the Gentiles
should bring back the Jews not only Infants but others from captivity: What
his meaning was we know not, but that his expressions were otherwise, the most
that were there, even they of his own party knows; But let that pass as matter
of fact, and impertinent to the present controversy, which is not whether he
or the whole congregation be to be believed; That he said so afterward we
acknowledge, but how he will make it good we know not, or if he make that
interpretation good, how it will make for him, unless (exclusively) he can
prove, that it is only meant of the Gentiles bringing the Jews from
captivity, which he undertakes not, but the contrary, saying afterward that he
denies not, but the words may be accommodated to the times of the Gospel. But
how proves he that it is a prophecy, that the Gentilds should bring back the
Jews, not only Infants, but others from captivity? Two ways, First by
Testimony of Scripture. Secondly of Mr. Gataker, which like Linsiewoolsie he
weaves together. First Scripture, for he says the words before v. 19. 20, 21.
and after 24, 25. do plainly evince; let us see v. 19. how plainly these are
the words, for thy wast, and desolate places, and the land of thy destruction
shall even now be too narrow by reason of thy inhabitants, and they that
swallowed thee up shall be far away; Let him mould this into a Syllogism, and
see how it will conclude. May it not in an allegory, be understood of the
conversion of the Gentiles expressed in borrowed speeches from the Jews? This
is usual in Scripture; and the next, verse 20* rather confirms than confutes;
The children which thou shall have, that is, of the called Gentiles, after thou
have lost the other, that is of the natural seed of Abraham, shall say again in
thine ears, the place is to strait for me, that is, the land of Canaan is to
narrow to contain the whole Church, give place to me that I may dwell, that is,
in the Islands and Provinces of the Gentiles, according to verse 6. 21. Then
shall thou say in thy heart, who has begotten me those, to wit of the Gentiles
by adoption? And have lost my children by natural generation, and an desolate,
and a captive, and removing to, and fro, that is, after the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, when they were scattered in all Nations (as Josephus
stories it) for we never find i^ literally verifyed, that the land of Canaan
was too straight during the time of captivity (as the words point) to contain
the Jews: And this interpretation in part Mr. Tombs approves, saying page 14.
the Church is spoken to, and the children were both the Gentiles children, and
yet (thy children) that is the Churches.

Now let us see whither the verses following relieve him any thing, 24. Shall
the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered? This
Interrogation is equivalent to a Negation, The prey shall not (that is easily)
be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive is not usually deliverd; one
Democritus would not be enough to laugh at, nor three Anticyra's suffice to
purge that head, that would attempt from hence to draw an Argument to prove the
f^regoing conclusion: But perhaps he means it jointly with the following verse,
I am willing to join issue; the words are these; Even the captives of the
mighty shall be taken away; from whom? From Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius,
Ahasuerus? That would imply a contradiction, for he confesses that these were
nursing fathers that did bring back the Jews from captivity; the prey of the
terrible shall be delivered children are not preyes to their nurses, neither
are nurses terrible to their children, unless it be the Indian women, who
swiming over great rivers with children in their arms, in danger the drowning
of them, as sometimes do the dippers: But the truth is The great red Dragon
Rev. 12. 13. having seven heads and ten horns, that is as Mr. Mead Comments
Apocatyp. page 164. interprets it, The Roman Pagan Empire seated upon seven
hills, and armed* with ten persecuting Kings, or dynasts was terrible to the
woman traveling, that is to the Church bringing forth Christians, yet the
woman prevailed against this dragon, and brought forth a man child, which was
taken up unto God, and his throne, that is power, and authority in the Church.
And this is more likely the meaning of it, for the places seem to be
symbolicall, and Concentrick; Then indeed Kings became nursing fathers,
Constantine in the Empire, Lucius in Britain, Donald in Scotland.

Secondly he proves it from Mr. Gatakers authority, who gives this as the
meaning by the new Annotations made by him; new I believe, and so new, that I
think scarce any before him went in that way; for I doubt not, if Mr. T. could
but have light of one Commentator Ancient, or Modern (of so many scores) that
he had made for him, he would no more have concealed his name then he does Mr.
Gatakers, a man yet living. His Argument in form sounds thus; The meaning of
Mr. Gataker is true, it is the meaning of Mr. Gataker in his annotations upon
Isai. 49 22. That the Gentiles should bring the Jews not only Infants, but
others from captivity: Therefore that the Gentiles should bring the Jews not
only* Infants, but others from captivity, is true. I thus retort* it. The
meaning of Mr. Gataker is true, But it is the meaning of Mr. Gataker that many
Texts in Scripture concludes for Infant Baptism, Therefore that many Texts in
Scripture concludes for Infant Baptism, is true. By this I suppose Mr. T. will
spare the labor of denying the Major, But how shall I know that that meaning
is given by Gataker, who never saw his Annotations? except I credit my
Adversaries bare word, which how Authentic his saying, that Casaubon upon
Matthew. 3. made for dipping has taught me: yet I rather believe him, that it is
Mr. Gatakers meaning, then the conclusion he infers from it, and that it is his
meaning he seems to prove; because he does on verse 23. say, it was fulfilled
in those Persian Potentates Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Ahasuerus; did all these
four bring back the Jews, not only Infants but others from captivity? I will
not question their history for making Artaxerxes, and Ahasuerus two several
men, which Philo, and Esdras makes but one, Nor their Chronology in making the
Captivity to last about seventy years: for the Captivity began in
Nabukkadnezars time, who lived some years after, his successor was
Evilmerodach, his son, after him was Balthazar, from whom Cyrus took Babylon,
and conferred the Empire upon the Persians, this Cyrus according to the Greeks
reigned 29 years, his successors in order reckoned by them were Cambyses that
reigned five years seven months, Darius the son of Hist^spis 36. years, Xerxes
20. Artaxerxes Longimanus, 40. which besides the three Babylonish Kings amounts
to 131 years, odd months. According to Philo, and Esdras, Cyrus ^ules 22
years; Artaxerxes 20. Darius, Artaxerxes, Longimanus 27. Darius Nothus 19.
which amounts to 98 years; now could they be 98 years, in bringing from
captivity that were but 70. years in captivity? but I stand not much upon that?
But that the meaning was not that the Gentiles should bring the Jews Children
from Captivity, I urged from the Contents of the Chapter, Which though no
demonstrative Argument, yet far more concluding than his, that was but drawn
from a single Testimony, The contents are these, Christ sent to the Jews,
complains of them to the 5. verse, he is sent to the Gentiles with gracious
promises. 13. Gods love is perpetual to his Church. 18. The powerful
deliverance out of Captivity to the end. Which was framed into an Argument,
thus. That which is the judgment of the Church of England ought to be
entertained before the groundless assertion of one private man, That it points
at the times of the Gospel, is the judgment of the Church of England,
Therefore it ought to be entertained before the groundless assertion of one
private man* Then he denied the Minor, which answer he cor^oborats now, saying
that there is not in the Contens of the Chapter (which Mr. C. without ground
makes the judgment of the Church of England) any thing to the contrary, but
the words, which are [18. the ample restoration of the Church; 24. the
powerful deliverance cut of Captivity] do rather confirm this. Wherein he
affirms three things, which seems to me leavened with much uncertainty, if not
apparent untruth.

First that I make without any ground the Contents of the Chapter the judgment
of the Church of England, It is ground enough, that every Bible in the English
tongue has them, every Minister almost in the Church of England (and many
private families) publicly read them; And grant there had been no Canon to
tie, no Rubric to direct, it has been usual since the Reformation, 1. To
read the Contents, then the Chapter, and though it c^uld not be proved
positively such a Parliament, Synod, Royal assent established them, yet it is
apparent, That every Parliament, Synod, all authority approved of them, in that
they permitted the continuance of them. And in the latter times when almost all
things have been Questioned by some; there has not been (for any thing I know)
so much as a Petition against them; by which it is clear, that it is not only
the judgment of the supreme Magistracy, as Parliaments, and Synods, which are
the Church of England Representatively, but of all, or the most of the people,
which is the Church of England essentially, and integretly; And our strongest
Laws in things, that are either good in themselves, or Adiaphorous, are veteres
Angli^ consuetudines. If Mr. T. could say as much for his Antipaedobaptism, he
would conclude contra omnes gentes (that as the Donatists said of Africe) the
true Church had for many years been confined to England; I hope then it is not
without ground that I said: that the Contents of the Chapter are the Judgment
of the Church of England; which Dr. Willet, Dr. Boyse, and many others said
before me.

Secondly he affirms that there is in the Contents of the Chapter not any thing
to the contrary, but that is was a prophecy that the Gentiles should bring
the Jews from captivity: from captivity? when? At their recalling at, or near
the end of the world to embrace the Gospel? That may agree with analogy of
faith, but neither with the meaning of the place, nor his purpose; The Contents
begin thus: Christ being sent to the Jews complains of them, sent to his own
after the Incarnation, and they knew him not, complains of them, because his
Gospel was a stumbling block to them: Now to revolve this back to the reducing
from captivity would be a strange Anachronism, for the captivity was many
hundred years before the Incarnation; from the captivity the Persian Monar^hie
lasted 191 years. The Grecian Monarchy 146. The Kingdom of the Maccabees 127.
after that Christ was born in the 30. year of the reign of Herod the great,
verse 5. he is sent to the Gentiles with a gracious promise according to Acts
2. 40. The promise is to you, and your Children, if you embrace it, and to them
that are afar off, even the Gentiles, when God shall call them: which Cyprian
de duplici Martyrio confirms, ecce a Domini redemptoris temporibus anni
effluxerunt plus minus 240. jamque hujus vitis palmites latius se sparserunt,
quam Romanum Imperium, It is little more or less (says he) then two hundred
and forty years since the days of Christ, the Redeemer, and yet in that time
the Church has spread out her branches larger than the Roman Empire; and quos
nulla vis ferri domare potuit, emollit sanguis agni candidi, and they whom no
power of the sword was able to daunt, are made peaceable, and tame by the blood
of the unspotted Lamb. Now to recapitulate this; That which makes for the
rejection of the Jews after the Incarnation and calling of the Gentiles, has
something to the contrary, that it was not a prophecy that the Gentiles should
bring the Jews Children from Babylonish Captivity; There is something in the
Contents that makes for the rejection of the Jews after the Incarnation and
calling of the Gentiles; Therefore the Contents of the Chapter have something
to the contrary, that it was not a prophecy that the Gentiles should bring
the Jews Children from Captivity.

His third allegation is, that the words [18. the ample restoration of the
Church, 24. the powerful deliverance out of captivity] do rather confirm that
there is something in the Contents of the Chapter, that the Gentiles should
bring the Jews Children from Captivity; We shall see that by framing it* into
an Argument. The ample restoration of the Church, the powerful deliverance
out of Captivity is promised, therefore there is something in the Contents
that the Gentiles should bring the Jews from Captivity. I deny the consequent,
for that ample restoration of the Church is meant of the Gentiles graffed into
the stock of the Jews broken off; That powerful deliverance out of Captivity,
is that which was effected by preaching of the word in the evidence, and
demonstration of the spirit, and power, when the Gentiles were delivered from
the Captivity of sin, Satan, and heathen Idols; and this is very clear compared
with the former, and his consequent so irrational, that the people in the
dispute laughed at it, in which he says now they showed their ignorance. As I
did not then, neither do I now approve of their laughing, yet I think he cannot
prove they showed their ignorance, unless in this practical Axiom, that
errors are rather to be pittyed in brethern then laughed at. But if he means
they showed their ignorance in not understanding his consequence, I must
profess my self to be amongst those ignorant, and so I believe will the most
that hears it, in which he will as soon persuade any rational man, as
Anaxagoras that the snow is black.

But he has also a snatch at me, saying that I showed my heedlesness when I
said it was an Addition to the Text, that the Gentiles should bring the Jews:
well, let that be examined; An addition may be two ways, either in words, so
it is apparent, for the Text says, not that the Gentiles shall bring the Jews:
Or in sense, and so it is not said the Gentiles shall bring thy Children by
natural generation (which I conceive is the Question) but their own; But he
says the very distinction of [thy Children] from [the Gentiles] shows it meant
of the Jews, otherwise it should have been [their Children] in the third
person, not [thine] in the second; here is vindice cuneo nodus dignissimus, a
knot that one may unty with his gloves on; They, the Gentiless shall bring thy
sons, that is Sons of the Church, and yet the Gentiles Children. But who ever
interpreted it thus? A great writer. 1. Tombs B. D. in his Plea for
Antidaedobaptists page 14. for these are his words; The Church is spoken to,
observe not [the Jews,] and the Children were both the Gentiles Children, and
yet [thy Children] that is the Churches; Now who showed his heedlesness? But in
the same blindfold posture he goes on, saying it can not be meant of Gods
Children as his, for then it should be [mine] in the first person, for God
speaks those words: Here is an Excellent Grammar-lecture of the distinction of
persons, for which the Author merits to be Terrae filius, the next year; But
let us look back? It cannot be meant of Gods Children (^ayes he) as his, for
then it should be [mine] in the first person, for God speaks those words; well,
God says to Moses thy Children which thou have brought out of Egypt, it can
not be meant of Gods Children, for God speaks the words; This is a fallacy a
dicto seeundum quid ad simpliciter; All this may be easily reconciled; They are
the Churches Children by spiritual succession, the Gentiles by natural
generation, Gods by adoption.

But we might have spared our labor all this while; for he denies not but the
words may be accommodated to the times of the Gospel, This is something that he
is contented with the Adulterous woman that the Child shall be divided, and we
shall have part; but the true Mother will either have all, or none. How
accommodated to the times of the Gospel? If ^lterally, then not to any
historical thing under the Law, If Mystically, then it was a Prophecy of a
prophecy. But without further inquiry this grant is enough for my purpose,
though not of bringing Infants to Baptism, which is (...) another Question, yet
to prove the Proposition in Question, that God foretold that Infants should be
Church Members under the Gospel, whence Infant Baptism will follow; and this
has so much color from the Text, That Master T. for all his experience, can
put no other color upon it, for if by his own confession it be a prophecy,
that the Gentiles should bring back the Jews not only Infants, but others from
captivity in the letter, and type; It will follow, the Gentiles shall bring
back not only children, but others from spiritual captivity, in the Mystery,
and Antitype, which his words unawares of him seems to carry, when he styles
them the Gentiles Children, that is the Churches; And this will further appear
by considering my answers to his Questions, put out Socratically to entangle
me, and cunningly to darken the Text.

Mr. Tombs 11. Section.
FOr 1. If by standard be meant baptism, which the Scripture never calls Gods
standard, and the bringing should be to Baptism, then the sense should be, that
supreme Magistrates as Kings, and Queens should bring Infants in their Arms,
and carry them on shoulders to Baptism, which no story ever mentions to have
been done, and is too frivolous to be made the matter of that Prophecy.

2. The terms nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers show it to be a Metaphor,
which Mr. C. granting, though it follow not that nothing could be gathered from
it, yet it follows, that Mr. C. application which is according to the proper
sense of the words, is not right: What I said, that it was fulfilled in Hesters
time, I said rightly, and Mr. Gataker before me in those annotations of his,
which are taken for the most incomparably learned, and H^ster as a Queen among
the Gentiles might well be styled a nursing Mother to the Jews, I will not
trouble my self to examine Mr. C. dictates, but refer the Reader to the notes
of Master Gataker.

As for that I said, that though it should be understood of the times of the
Gospel, yet it might be meant of grown men persuaded by the preaching of the
Gospel, as Jun us in his Annot. was true. Nor does the bringing in the bosom,
being a Metaphor, proves they were Infants. And if so, the Church is spoken to,
and the Children were both the Gentiles Children, and yet ^hy children, that is
the Churches. And so there is no interfering in my words.

Reply.
AS it is a Stratagem in War, when an Army is brought into a strait, and finds
it self over-matched, with Quintus Fabi^^ to parley, till they have found an
advantage, and then suddenly to fall upon the enemy; So it is the Trick of a
Sophister, when he is at a loss in dispute, to ask Questions to ens^are the
a^versarie, and then with Crocodile ^leights supprise him; Mr. T. is very
dexterous in this art, which he exercised in the dispute, asking what I
understood by Standard, what by Kings, what by nursing Fathers? I told him,
that it was not his place to dispute Socratically by asking of Questions, but
to answer ad oppositum.

But to give him satisfaction (which I needed not) by Standard I understood
visible holding out of Gospel Ordinances, as Baptism, etc. By Kings supreme
Magistrates, By nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers Patrons, and Protectors of
the Gospel. Now to put a gloss upon his counterf^t wares he says these
Questions were put out needfully to clear the Text, that it had no color for
bringing Infants to Baptism; whereas he should have said to be visible Church
members under the Gospel. For 1. says he, if by Standard be meant Baptism,
which the Scripture never dalls Standard, and the bringing should be to
Baptism, then the sense should be, that supreme Magistrates as Kings and Queens
should bring Infan^s in their Arms, and carry them on shoulders to Baptism,
which no story ever mentions to have been done, and is too frivolous to be made
the matter of that prophecy, In which word there is neither verity, nor
consequence, if sense.

First he says if by Standard be meant Baptism, who makes a Thesis o^ his
Hypothesis? or affirms that by Standard is meant Baptism? My answer was that by
Standard was meant some visible Gospel-Ordinance, as Baptism, etc. to wit
preaching praying with many more: Now who knows not that there is a difference
betwixt Gospel Ordinances in general, and Baptism in particular? as much as
betwixt a man and a living creature, whereas a Gnat is a living creature, genus
d^^^ert ab omnibus suis speciebus simul sumptis, multo magis ab una specie.

But secondly he says the Scripture never calls Baptism Gods standard, yes,
even in this place, for I had thought the Genus might have been praedicated of
the Species, though the Species can not be of the Genius; And if in no other
place of Scripture, (for perhaps he has looked over his Concordance) this one
is sufficient, Baptism in Scripture is called (...), a lover of regeneration
but once, and (...) put for a vail or covering but once.

Thirdly he says, if the bringing should be to Baptism, then the sense (which I
think is nonsense) should be that supreme Magistrates, as Kings and Queens
should bring Infants in their Arms, and carry them on shoulders to Baptism; How
does that follow? ver. 22. I will set up my Standard to the people, and they
shall bring thy sons in their Arms; 23. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers;
what was there no people but Kings, that they must necessarily be the people,
that shall bring them in arms? either Canaan was very strait, or the Kings were
very many that it could not hold them, ver. 20. Nurses, that is the Mothers
commonly lies in, while the Children are carried to be baptized, and other
nurses are often provided after baptism.

Fourthly he says no story ever mentions it to have been done that Kings and
Queens should bring Infants in their Arms, and carry them on Shoulders to
Baptism, Truly neither the Text, nor any that I know out of the Text affirms it
except his dream; And if he will give me leave to Criticize upon his
Oneirocriticks, I must tell him that I think he is mistaken in saying that no
story ever mentions it to have been done; To begin with our own times, he
cannot but have heard that King James in a conference at Hampton Court
affi^med, that rather than his Child should dye unbaptised, he would take it up
his Arms, and carry it to the brook himself; And if he will but ascend a story,
or two higher, he shall find out of venerable Bede, and others that Ethelwolf
King of Mercia being Baptized himself by the persuasion of King Wulfhere
brought others Parents, and Children to be baptized of Wilfride. Edwine King of
the Northumbers while he was attending the baptizing of Children upon Easter
day was wounded by an Assasinat named Eomer, sent by Guicheline King of West
Saxons; The same night his Queen was delivered of a daughter, which upon
Whitsunday next he caused to be baptized by Paulinus the Bishop, and named her
Eanfleda. These stories both mentions that such a thing was done, and that
Infants were baptized; which though it proves not exactly in the Letter that
Kings have brought Children upon their Shoulders, and in their arms, yet it
proves more than I affirmed, that they should be Pations, and Protectours of
the Church; And that is not too frivolous to be made the matter of that
propheci^, a part whereof Theodosius the Emperor accounted a greater honor,
than to be ruler of the whole world.

I granted that the terms nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers in the verse
following were Metaphors, but that nothing could be gathered from it, was Mr.
T. collection not mine, which now he retracts; whereas he further adds, that
my application which is according to the proper sense of the words is not
right, he either contradicts himself, or delivers a strange inconsequence,
contradicts himself, who confesses I granted it to be a Metaphor, and not
according to the proper sense of the word: A strange inconsequence, for if
nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers verse 23. be Metaphorical, must therefore
Gentiles, and people, and Arms, and Shoulders, in the 22. be Metaphors? What
he means by my application I know not, but to gratify him further, and satisfy
the Reader, thus I conceive, that it is a Prophecy poynting at the time of the
Gospel, where Christ is the General, all visible Church Members are his
Soldiers fighting under his banner, visible Church-Ordinances are his
Standard; The people (not Kings) should bring sons in their Arms, and Daughters
upon their Shoulders to baptism one of these Ordinances, Kings should be
nursing Fathers, that is maintainers, and protectours of Baptism, and all other
Ordinances of the Gospel; which has been verifyed ever since Constantine, and
Lucius his time. Now if it be objected that Infants are incapable of spiritual
warfare; I answer it is their mistake, who without ground think they are more
incapable of spiritual warfare, than temporal, for it is a thing well known
that in the low Countries the eldest son of a Commission Captain being born
there whilst his Father is in the service of the State, is by the courtesy of
the Camp enrolled in the Souldlers list on his birth day, and by the allowance
of the State recei^es pay from the time of his Nativity: In the Christian
warfare, though Christ alone be our Captain, every common Soldier Male, or
Female enlisted under him derives this Privilege to all his Children, that
from their very births they are thus far entered into the Muster-roll of the
Church, as to receive pay, I mean the right, and title to the Sacrament of
Baptism, as being by their very extraction not unclean, but Sacramentally holy.
Fuller Infant Advocate Page 99.

But all this he checks, saying, it was fulfilled in Hesters time. Hester was
wife to Ahasuerus, and had power but in one Kings time, before he said it was
was fulfilled in Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Ahasuerus times: pergit pugnantia
secum frontibus adversis componere Horat. Satyr. 1. But how he proves that it
was fulfilled in Hesters time by two testimonies, 1. His own, (...), I said
rightly. 2. Of Master Gataker, who said so before him, and that in his
Annotations which are taken for the most incomparably learned, viz. by Master
T. because in this place perhaps they seem to make for him, what thinks he of
innumerable places that Master Gataker in this cause Interprets against him?
They are not so incomparably learned, why? because they make against him, so
all is resolved at length into his own Testimony, by which he makes Master
Gatakers notes so Authentic, that he refers the Reader to them, and will not
trouble himself to examine my dictates (as he calls them,) I suppose because
they overthrow his application of it to Hester, for thus it was answered;
Hester was a Jew, and a friend to the Jews, what is this to the Gentiles
bringing children upon shoulders? And though that should be waved, and Hester
granted to be a nursing Mother in the Type, yet in the Antitype it ayms
principally at the times of the Gospel, else gross absurdities would follow;
for what Kings, or Queens in Hesters time did bow down to the Jews with their
face toward the earth? and lick up the dust of their feet. 23. Isles are
summoned in the first verse, which must be meant of the time of the Gospel;
Christ is promised to be given for a light for the Gentiles, that he may be
their salvation to the end of the earth. 6. Kings shall see, and arise, Princes
also shall worship. 7. And the Holy Ghost quotes verbatim, and applies to the
times of the Gospel the 8. verse; and that expressly ^ Corint. 6. 2. There is an
employed cutting off of the Jews. 20. And ingrafting in of the Gentiles, the
children of the w^ld Olive into the stock of the natural Olive. 21. A bringing
of Children to visible Ordinances 22.

In the dispute by d^nt of Argument, and push of Syllogisticall Pike, being
forced to surrender up his former hold, Mr. T. endeavored to make good this
retreat, that if it should be understood of the times of the Gospel, yet by
sons in arms, and daughters upon shoulders was meant grown men, for any thing
he knew, men, and women of an hundred years of age might be carried in arms,
and upon Shoulders; Now he says, though it should be understood of the times
of the Gospel, yet it might be understood of grown men persuaded by the
Preaching of the Gospel, as Jnius in his Annotations: The force of the Argument
is this, Junius says so, therefore it is so; I deny both the Antecedent, and
the Consequent; The Antecedent, for Junius says not so, his words are theses
cum vexillo Evangelii, quod est Dei potentia ad salutem, haec omnia allegorice
dicuntur de amplitudine regni Christi spiritualis, with the Standard of the
Gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, all these things are spoken
Allegorically of the amplitude of Christ's Kingdom, but he does not say that the
bringing of children in arms should be understood of grown Children capable of
instruction, when it may be literally understood: And if Junius had said so,
his Judgment is not infallible, which is the Consequent: Mr. T. might have
found more than Junius to interpret it of the Gospel, which though some extend
it further than Children, yet none exclude Children, Cornelius a Lapide in his
Commentary upon the place, says, erigam manu, and pocentia mea signum, etc. I
will advance by my hand, and power a sign, that is a Standard of the Cross of
Christ, and to that, and the tents of my Church I will call all Gentiles; God
speaks as a General of holy war, with him agrees Hierom, Cyril, and Haymo;
They shall bring thy sons in arms (says Cyril) and thy daughters upon
shoulders, that is the Apostles, and the propagators of the faith shall not
impose the grievous yoke of Moses Law upon the faithful, but shall nurse them
as Infants with the sweet milk of the Gospel, and shall carry them in arms,
and upon shoulders, that is (says he,) shall bring them with all motherly care
to the Church, idem facient parents fidelium the Parents of the faithful
shall do the same; verse 23. erunt reges Nutrici tui Hebr. (...) omenim, Kings
shall be thy nursing Fathers, that is thy Stewards, and Guardians, as if he
should say (O Church) Kings shall nurse thee, and enrich thee with their goods,
as a Father, and Mother do nourish their Infants; Aliqui haec accipiunt de
Cyro, and Dario (says a Lapide) some, understand these of Cyrus, and Darius,
but it is apparent by the word, that they are to be restrained to the Gospel;
Hence we may gather that according to the Judgment of these men Hierom, Cyril,
Haymo, and Cornelius a Lapide. 1. That it concerns Gospel Times. 2. That it may
be extended to grown men. 3. That it excludes not, but includes Infants, for
all these were for their visible Church Membership, and Baptism; By this it
appears that bringing in the bosom, if it should be a metaphor, proves they
were Infants, though not only Infants, for mine intention was only to prove
that Infants were visible Church Members, and baptizable, but not only they
excluding all others? And this to be the true meaning (methinks) he seems to be
conscious, when he says, if so the Church is spoken to, and the children were
both the Gentiles children, and yet [thy children] that is the Churches, and so
there is no interfering in my words. This is like all the rest, for if it be
the Gentiles converted Christians, not Persian potentates Cyrus, Artaxerxes,
Darius, Ahasuerus, that shall bring by virtue of a Gospell-covenant, not by
civil favors, from Paganism, not Babylonish captivity to Gospel Ordinances,
not to repair Jerusalem; Thy sons, that is the Churches by a spiritual
succession, not the Jews by natural generation, then it must needs clash with
his former, that it was a prophecy that the Gentiles should bring back the
Jews not only Infants, but others from captivity.

Mr. Tombs 12. Section.
THe next Text was Isaiah 65. 20. in reading which Mr. C. left out those words,
nor an old man that has not filled his days, nor would read them nor the
words following ver. 21. 22. I perceived he meant nothing but fallacy, and yet
he adds impudence to it, in accusing me as urging it to deceive the peoples
when his own course in concealing what should have cleared the Text had a
manifest show of deceit, and mine of plain dealing.

As for his interpretation, There shall be no more an Infant of days, that is
Infants shall not be incapable of the seal, it has no proof, but his dictate,
and it is Without all show of probabillity, there being not a word of any such
thing as outward ordinances, but of peace, increase, possession, and long life,
as the verses before, and after show.

The like is to be said of his interpretation of the other part of the verse,
The child shall die an hundred years old, that is as an hundred years old, or as
well a Churchmember as if he were a hundred years old, when the Term [as] is
added to the Text. To which he replied that I do put in [as] 1. Cor. 10. 2. and
Romans 11. ^19 But this latter is false. I grant I do so interpret it [Baptized
1. Cor. 10. 2.] Because otherwise the proposition were not true, and the sense
is plain according to his sense, were Baptized, that is their passage through
the sea, and under the cloud, was to them, as if they had been Baptized, and so
did Grotius expound it, which is the same with that which others mean when they
say, they were Analogically Baptized. But in Isaiah 65. 20. There is no need of
such an interpretation, and that I may use the words of Mr. Gataker's Annot. on
Isaiah 65. 20: The Syntax is familiar, and as clear as the daylight, or
sunshine: The child or youth, that now is, shall die the son of an hundred
years; that is shall be an hundred years old when he dies. Nor is it contrary
to the Contents, which though they be entitled to the Church of England, yet
there is no Canon, or act of any Synod, which did ever make them so, and who
ever framed them? yet I think it no disparagement to say that Mr. Gataker
understood the Text as well, or better than he: And this Text was rightly made
by me answerable to Zacha. 8. 4. Nor is their either absurdity, or untruth, or
Blasphemy in my interpretation: which might be showed by transcribing Mr.
Gatakers forementioned notes on Isaiah 65. 17. 19. 25. were it not I am forced
to be brief.

Reply.
THe next Text (its true) I produced that Infants under the Law were promised
to be in visible covenant, or Church Members under the Gospel, was Isaiah 65.
20. there shall be no more thence an infant of days, etc. but the child shall
die an hundred years old. Before I could have time to frame mine Argument, he
pressed me to read the words interposed, and following; I told him, I had read
as much as I intended to raise mine Arguments from, not passing by the other
words, because they contained any thing that makes against me, but that an
Argument (as he well knew) must be Terminus simplex, uniform, and homogeneal,
and if any thing was advantageous for him, he had liberty to urge it in his
answer, otherwise (as every disputant knows) his design was but to prepossess
The people with prejudice, and in stead of solid satisfaction to say something
to deceive them; This he retorts now by recrimination, saying, he perceived I
meant nothing but fallacy; what fallacy could he perceive before he heard
mine Argument? I had thought that every fallacy had been either in single
words, or in the composure of the whole Sillogism, as Aristotle says cap. 4.
lib. 1. Sophist. Elench. (...). Now how could he discover this before he heard
the Syllogism? That's not all, he doubles his files, and charges me further to
add impudence to it, in accusing him as urging it to deceive the people.

(...). Hom. Ili. a. What not one word of the spirit of meekeness out of his
mouth? He may enter our charges, and pres^ Anabaptism against our Municipal,
and Ecclesiastical laws, provoke us indirectly to a dispute, and obstruct the
orderly progress of it against the rules of Logic, and not be told of it,
without the brand of impudency; His holiness of Rome in Pontificalibus, e
cathedra could not have fulminated his Censures with more imperiousness, Bone
Deus in quae tempora nos reservasti! Let him tell me in good earnest, where
ever he found it the office or practice of any Opponent to urge any more than
his Medium, to enforce his conclusion, with the contrary, whereof to possess
the people (who are ignorant of the Schoole-way) before the Argument had a
manifest show of deceit, and not of plain dealing; which afterward when there
is a just cause, may be applied by the Respondent for clearing the Text.

The Arguments I raised from thence were two; The first was this, There shall
be no more an Infant of days, that is Infants shall not be incapable of the
seal while their age is measured by days, as the Jews infants, that might not
be circumcised, till a week had passed over them, Therefore Infants new born
are capable of the seal.

The second was this, The child shall die an hundred years old, that is as an
hundred years old, or as well a Churchmember as if he were an hundred years
old, Therefore children may be Baptized under the Gospel. To the former, to
wit, There shall be no more an Infant of days, that is, Infants shall not be
incapable of the seal; he answers now implyedly, by denying the consequence,
saying it has no proof but my dictate; To which it were sufficient reply to
say it has no disproofe but his dictate, which is without all show of
probabillity, there being not a word of any such thing as outward peace,
increase, possession, and long life to the Jews, unless in the Type, and that
scarce probable, but of the Glorious estate of the times of the Gospel held
out in outward ordinances, as shall appear.

The like may truly be said of mine interpretation of the other part, whence I
drew the second Argument, The child shall die an hundred years old, that is as
an hundred years old, or as well a Churchmember as if he were an hundred years
old; he denied the consequent which I made good first ab impossibi^^, because
to take it literally would imply a contradiction. For it is impossible being a
child to die an hundred years old, Child is the subject of the Question, which
is to be taken properly without enallogie; shall die an hundred years old, the
Predicate that cannot otherwise be affirmed of it, but analogically resembling
in some capacity, and qualification them that dies an hundred years old. 2. By
taking away his exception, that the term [as] is added to the Text, which is
necessary in all analogies, and is better than his, and the Anabaptists
interpretation of this, and other places; This place, where to avoid once [as]
he is forced to imply four times [was] he that was a child, was a stripling,
was a young man, was a grown man shall die an hundred years old. Other places,
for it is his exposition of 1. Cor. 10. 2. they were Baptezed under the Cloud,
that is (says he) as if they were baptized under the Cloud, when nothing
hindered, but they were really Baptized under the Cloud. And Romans 11. 19. The
branches were broken off, that is, say they, as if they were broken off, when
it was both possible, and apparent, they were broken off: he grants, he so
interprets. [ Baptized 1. Cor. 10. 2. and assigns his reason, because the
proposition otherwise were untrue, when indeed the proposition thereby is
rendered untrue, for if they were actually Baptized, or washed under the cloud,
it raining upon them, and in the red Sea, the water touching their feet at the
least, after the dividing of the waves in such a sudden passage, and blowing
upon them with the sprinkling thereof, then they were not as Baptized, or
washed, for nothing that is like, is the same. And the sense is plain according
to this sense, [ were Baptized] that is in the passage through the Sea, and
under the Cloud, were actually washed, so the word (...) signyfies, the history
of the 13. and 14. chapt. of Exodus all interpreters ancient, and Modern
expound it, save Grotius, who to engratiate with the Semi-Pelagians, and
Socinians humors them by racking this Text, and is an excellent Argument
wherein he may confide: Grotius says so, therefore it is so: Indeed more
likely not to be so; and is differing as far as white from black from that
which others mean, when they say they were analogically Baptized, for they
understand positively a real, though Typical Baptism, resembling Sacramental
Baptism the Antitype, not negatively no baptism, or washing but as washing. For
Typical Baptism, and Sacramental are Analoga, not Baptism, and no Baptism,
which will appear by the definition of Analoga. They have one common name,
which principally is attributed to one member, afterward by similitude, or
proportion to others: Thus Baptism is principally Sacramental, less
principally Typical washings, whether ordinary the Leviticall, or
extraordinary this under the Cloud, and in the red Sea; And Analoga are
twofold, either of inequality, so entitie, or being is by way of perfection
ascribed to God, afterward by participation to the creature, Or of
attribution, when it is given to one member properly, as health to a body, to
another Metonymically, when it is given to the Urine as the sign, to diet as
the cause of health; To the later of these our Typical Baptism may be reduced,
the other to neither, but is Grotius his figment, having not the common name.

And in Isaiah 65. 20. There is need of such an interpretation, for as ver. 17.
The new heavens, and new earth, and 18. 19. Creation, and Jerusalem were
analogicall, and not proper, so the 20. ver. is wholly Tropicall, and
Mystical. There shall be no more thence an Infant of days; How can this be
understood literally? did not Infants after, as well, as under the Captivity
make up their weeks of days, months of weeks? etc. It must needs relate to
something under the Jewish Paedogogie, and nothing so probably as that of
theirs, that nothing was clean till a Sabbath had gone over it, and therefore
according to divine institution, Circumcision was not till the eighth day; Mr.
T. might have done well, to have imparted us either his own, or Master Gatakers
descant upon these words, but because they could devise nothing that like the
ears under the Lions skin would not discover the whole Imposture ne (...)
quidem. But though he passed by that as a riddle, like Davus not Oedipus, yet
in the words following says Master Gataker the Syntax is familiar; I had
thought Syntax had been Grammatical construction according to rule, not
literal interpretation, or univocall, not analogicall praedication; And this
Syntax he says, is as clear as the daylight, or Sunshine, perhaps to an Owl,
or Bat: And what is this Syntax that is so clear? The Child, or youth that now
is, shall dye the son of an hundred years, that is shall be an hundred years
old when he dies: The Child, or youth, there is one addition, for the Text
mentions not youth, which is a distinct age from Childhood; That now is, there
is another, the Child was not yet, it was a praediction, and so both an
Addition, and an untruth; shall dye the son of an hundred years, there is a
third, [ son of] by addition put in, old by substraction taken away, excellent
Arithmetic; besides here is a new creation of a new generation [ son of
years,] who ever heard such a Syntax? did the son beget the years, or the years
the son? or whether is elder? That is, shall be an hundred years old when be
dies, here is an exposition of an exposition, and a fourth addition [ be and
when] being superadded. According to which interpretation the words must carry
this sense, There shall no more Infants dye when they are young, nor an old man
till he has filled his days, for he that now is a child shall not dye till he
be an hundred years old; I wonder in what age this was performed, that no man
dyed till he had completed his Century, no mortal diseases, nor use of
Physicians, but every man might certainly know the day of his death? All
experience, and history is contrary to this, (unless that of China that relates
many generations before Adam) as well as the contents, which are justly
entitled to the Church of England, seeing besides the rise, and spring of them,
every Parliament, and Synod with universal acceptance did interpretatively
make them so; before so many millions to prefer Mr. Gataker one single man, and
say he understands the text as well, or better than they, is not only a
disparagement, but praesumption: I esteem of Mr. Gataker as a reverend man, and
a prime light of the Church, yet dare not elevate him so high in the Pole with
Mr. Tombs as to make him infallible; nor depresse him so low, as Mr. Lilly
calculates him, page 5. 6. of his Merlini Anglici Ephemeris 1654 (...); Truth
must not be pinned upon Mr. Gataker's, no nor upon Mr. Tombs sleeve, though he
speaks magnificently in the language of Nabucadnezzar; this text was rightly
made by me, answerable to Zach. 8. 4. made by him, and not by the Holy Ghost,
nor declared so by any Interpreter before him? He mentions neither; This is
great Babel. Let us hear the words; Thus says the Lord of Hosts; there shall
yet old men, and old women, dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man
with his staffin his hand for very age, and the streets of the City shall be
full of boys, and girls playing in the streets thereof: What is this to an
Infant of days, or a child dying an hundred years old? When it is apparent
from the contents, text, and Interpreters that this of Zachary is meant of the
Jews return from captivity; and more apparent that, that of Isay, is meant of
the state of Christ's Kingdom under the Gospel. To interpret it otherwise
(notwithstanding any thing that has been said hitherto, or Mr. Gatake's notes
which for brevity sake he will not transcribe, bu^ keeps for a reserve) ^
believe even yet, includes little less than absurdity, untruth, Blasphemy.

1. To apply the 25. v. to the return from captivity is absurd, that the wolf,
and the lamb should feed together, and the lion should eat straw with the
bullock, and dust should be the serpents neat; The Parallel place to which the
marginal notes, and Expositer^ refer it, can be understood of none but
Gospel Times, for Isai 11. having expressed Christ's lineage, natures, office,
he declares the peaceable estate of his kingdom, 6. 7. The Wolf also shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall ly down with the Kid, and the Calf,
and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead
them, and the Cow, and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall ly down
together, and the Lion shall eat straw with the Ox. 2. To apply the 19. v. to
the return from captivity, is an untruth, that the voice of weeping should be
no more heard in Jerusalem, for it was twice destroyed afterward, once by
Antiochus, then by Vespatian and Titus, never rebuilded, nor restored yet; So
that either it must be understood mystically of the conversion, and fullness of
the Gentiles, or literally of the final calling of the Jews. 3. To apply the
17 v. to the return from captivity is blasphemous; Behold I create new heavens,
and new earth, and the former shall no more be remembered, and come into mind,
for it crosses St. Peter's interpretation, 2 Pet. 3. 13. We according to his
promise, look for new heavens, and new earth; for can any rational man think,
that the new Temple built at Jerusalem in Cyrus his time, was the new heaven,
and the new earth, that the former should be no more remembered? When the
ancient men are said to weep, because the glory of the latter Temple was short
of the glory of the first, Ezra, 3. 11.

Mr. Tombs, 13. Section.
WHat I said about Dr. Prideaux his use was true, and that he would require the
respondent before he answered to read the Text, and consider it, which is
necessary in divinity disputes, however Respondents be restrained in other
Disputes.

And for my Explosion at Oxford it is a mere figment, and that neither Dr.
Savage, nor the Doctor of the Chair, did avoid my Argument by their Answer is
manifest enough from Dr. Savage his own recital of his answer in his printed
book, and this had been showed in print ere this, but that the Printer failed
to print mine Answer in the fit time.

The frivolous conceit of my fear of Mr. C. gunshot is foolish; I do not count
Mr. C. Arguments to be of so much force as a Squib.

Reply.
THe first words about Dr. Prideaux his use, he brings in like a fragment,
seemingly having no dependence of the foregoing or following discourse,
concerning which the Reader must be informed, that from answering Mr. T. fell
to moderating and magisterially determining of the Question, that before he
would resign the chair, I was forced to tell him, that he violated the rules
of dispute, and did lasciviously wanton it out into a wilderness of words, that
the truth might be obscured or lost, and like a lapwing, carry the hearers far
from the matter; Then his Apology was, that Dr. Prideaux, when a place of
Scripture was cited, was wont to give a large Exposition; To which was then
replied, that he was Dr. of the Chair, and Judge of the cont^oversie, and
might do that a Respondent may not do, whose office is only to repeat, deny,
distinguish, and when a Text is quoted to give a brief Exposition, that the
Opponent may have some thing to fasten upon; Now he asserts, that what he said
of Dr. Prideaux his use was true, that he would require the Respondent before
he answered, to read the Text, and consider it; which I do not deny but that de
facto, it was done, de jure it ought to have been done, not only (though
principally) in d^vinity Disputes, but even in Philosophy, and Mathematics,
when the Argument depends upon the authority, or meaning of A^istotle, Plato,
Euclide, or the like. But that any mention was made thereof in the Dispute, I
do not remember, for there he spoke of Dr. Prideaux his practice in his own
person, not what he willed in the person of the Respondent: Besides it is one
thing to require the Respondent before his answer to read the Text, and
consider it, another thing to suffer the Respondent (after he has spun out his
Answer to a long thread) to enforce his own sense upon the Chapter, and
determine the Question: And though it may be true, it was his use, that he
required the Respondent before he answered to read the Text, yet I am sure it
is as true, that he would not require the Opponent before the framing of his
Syllogism to read more than he drew his Argument from, for neglect of which he
unjustly accuses me of fallacy.

What he means by Explosion, or a mere figment I know not, this I know, that
when he would not be satisfied with Dr. Savage his Answer, nor the Professors
determination; but fell to repetition, exploserunt saltem juniores, not once,
but again at his n^^ answering the Drs. challenge. Though perhaps Mr. Tombs
was so harness^d with confidence, that he was not sensible of it,

Vos o Patricius sanguis quos vivere fas est,
Occipiti ^aeco posticae occurrite sannae. Pers. Satyr* 1.
And such Explosions are grounded upon equity, because those that will not
acquiess in the Vicechancellors, or Professer^ determinations, by the
University statutes, are to be admonished. But he unmindfull of this, like
Chrysogonus, whom Tully for the like cause, calls nobilem, and eg^egium
gladiatorem, speaks in the language of a Fencer, saying that neither Dr.
Savage, nor the Dr. of the Chair did avoid his Argument, by their Answer is
manifest enough from Dr. Savage his own reci^al of his Answer in his printed
book. Sed quo judice? Who shall be U^p^re in this debate? Mr. Tombs himself,
for he says that this had been showed in print ere this, but that the Printer
failed to print his Answer in the fit time; How much was that Printer to blame,
that would not expedite that Canon that must regulate the whole Church in
opposition to harmonies of confessions, Assemblies of Divines, determinations
of Universities; Frange l^ves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos, Si dare etc.
Mart.

But he f^lls off from vying with his sword and buckle^, whereby he avoided the
Drs. Arguments, to vaunt his coat of Male, as if he had got Vulcan's Panopl^e,
and were shot free; for he says the frivolous conceit of his fear of my
gunshot, is foolish; In some sense, I confess, its true; for he that will not
fear the whole Church, terrible as an Army with Banners, will not tremble at
the shot of one private soldier; But that in another sense he feared, was
apparent, both from his abrupt breaking off the Dispute, and refusing further
engagement. And for all he counts not my Arguments to be of so much force as a
squib, his eyes may be opened one day, to see his whole Magazine blown up
thereby, as it is to manifest, his patience is already, by which he might have
possessed his soul, one dram whereof is to be preferred before the Vatican
Library full of such volumes as his.

Master Tombs 14. Section.
AS for his Argument from Mat. 28 19. I answered that all Nations or whole
Nations did not include every part, all Nations being taken Synecdochically for
the Disciples of all Nations.

As for his Division, I gave the genuine reason why Infants are excepted from
the precept of baptizing, because they are no Disciples. Nor was there any
defect in Logic when I did not reduce it to one of his members. For capable of
Baptism and Disciples are not terms subordinate, but distinct, though without
opposition. And though to be Disciples made them capable, yet there is a
difference between the terms. I presume Mr. C. thinks baptized persons already
Disciples, yet not capable of Baptism.

Reply.
HAving dispatched the two former branches of mine Argument That God did
promise before the Law, foretell under the Law; I came unto the third, That God
did actually receive Infants to be Church Members under the Gospel, and that
they might be baptized thus* Those whom Christ commanded his Disciples to
baptize, they may be baptized, Christ commanded his D^sciples to baptize
Infants, Therefore they may be baptized. The Minor being denied was proved
thus, He that commanded his Disciples to baptize all Nations, commanded them to
baptize Infants, Christ commanded his Disciples, Math. 28. 14. To baptize all
Nations, therefore Christ commanded them to baptize Infants; he denied the
Major, which was proved by this Enthymema, the whole encludes every part,
Infants are a part of nations, therefore he that commanded to baptize all
nations, commanded to baptize Infants; he denied the consequent, which was
proved thus, from that Axiom in Logic, Philosophy, and Divinity, that a
general whole being granted, no part of it could be denied, as Psalm. 117. 1.
Praise the Lord all ye Nations, is interpreted by another Psalm, old men, and
babes, young men, and m^idens praise ye the Lord. His answer was, that the
Axiom was true, where there was no exception, but here was an exception;
Against which I opposed Ambrose his saying upon the place, qui dixit omnes,
nullos exclusit, neque parvulo^, he that said baptize all Nations, excepted
none, no not Infants; To which he gave no distinct answer then, nor now, saving
he says in gross, that all Nations, or whole Nations did not include every
part, all Nations being taken Synecdochically for the Disciples of all Nations.

Here may be three Queries, first how he can make good that all Nations, or
whole Nations did not include every part; Secondly, that Nations are taken
Synecdochically, for the Disciples of all Nations, excluding all else. Thirdly,
that Infants are no Disciples; otherwise his answer is not satisfactory, and
apposite ad rem. First how he can make good that all Nations does not include
every part? I do not say actually, but potentially, as we say of numbers, they
are infinite, because still more may be added; So Christ gave his Disciples
commission to admit (as they could have opportunity) all sexes, all conditions,
all ages into covenant, excluding none from capacity, for whom Christ dyed, now
Christ dyed as well for Infants as others, took ^nfancie upon him visibly as
other ages, that being visible head of the Church, even when an Infant, might
by his passive obedience sanctify Infants to be visible members, according to
that of Bernard, qui pa^ vulus natus est, parvulos a gratia non exclusit, he
that was born a little one excluded not little ones from grace. And if it be
objected, that God can save Infants by virtue of Christ's death, without visible
membership, or seal of the Covenant; The Answer is apparent, that this is an
Argument from Gods power to his will, which is inconsequent, we are to have
recourse to Gods revealed Will, which unless he has declared Infants of
believers to be in Covenant, we have no more ground to presume of their
Salvation, than of Turks, and Pagans. And though Mr. Tombs has a dexterity
(...) to elude an Argument be it never so solid, by ^aying his own grounds, and
multiplying various interpretations; but that (...) he can ever make his Tenet
good, that whole Nations does not include Infants, we think it impossible, if
he should live Methusalem's days.

Secondly, it must be enquired how he can clear that nations are taken
Synecdochically for the Disciples of all Nations, excluding all else; which
before it be effected, he must remove these three scruples. 1. That the verb
(...) teach, includes actually in it the noun (...) Disciples, 2. Because it is
placed before (...) baptizing, therefore it is before it in order of nature and
time; 3. That (...), if it should signify actual Disciples, or Disciples of
actual believers, is not put Synecdochically also for Infants of believers.

First it may be justly doubted whether the word (...) teach includes actually
in it the noune (...) Disciples? Actually I say, not potentially, for I deny
not that virtually it includes all the acts of discipling from the first
matriculation, or admission of a Scholar, till the completing, and perfecting
of him, and that as it relates to (...), all Nations, it infolds all these, is
acknowledged; for it was the Apostles duty to endeavor to bring their Scholars
to all perfection; but that every act was requisite before baptizing of any, or
any acts to be precursors of believers Infants baptism, save bare acceptance
of them, without further proof I cannot be persuaded: And to argue from the
lat^tude of the signification of (...) is inconsequently to draw an A^gument a
potentia ad actum, a genere ad spec^em affirmative, and concludes thus, (...) a
scholar may signify one that is endued with all learning, therefore every
scholar is endued with all learning.

Object. But (...) teach, or make Disciples signifies alwa^es to teach cum
eff^ctu, till we make them proficients, and actual Disciples.

Answ. It is boldly affirmed by Mr. Tombs, page* 124. of his examen, but not
proved, for his instances Math. 13. 52. Math. 27. 57. concludes that sometimes
it is taken so, not always, and is the former fallacy.

His third Instance for all Beza's translation seems to make against him, (...)
had taught many, how knows he that all were effectually wrought upon, that
were t^ught? Or if discipulos multos adjunxissent, they had joined many
Disciples, how knows he that Infants were none of these Disciples, when whole
families so frequently were taken in? Infants are as well under the Gospel,
Christ's Disciples, as they were under the Law, which if they had not been, God
would not have said of them, Genes. 17. 14. that they had broken his covenant,
presupposing a capacity to keep it: Those that are admitted into a school,
before they know a letter, are as well Scholars, as the greatest Rabbis,
Aristoph. (...), Budeus renders it, (...), he was a Scholar of Socrates, before
he had learned any thing of him, in as much as he desired to be his Scholar:
Therefore the very bringing into the Church, and therein subjecting to its
nurture, and instruction is a discipling, as appears by Luke 14. 21. where this
commission is spoken of in other terms, and for (...) here, there is (...),
bring them hither; Acts 19. 3. Those that knew not the Holy Ghost are called
Disciples.

Secondly, it may be doubted, whether because [teach, or make Disciples] is
placed before [baptize] therefore in order of nature and time it must go before
it? The order of things are not always exactly expressed in Scripture, as they
were done; for there are many (...), or transpositions, placing that
afterward, that in order of nature is Antecedent, as Ma^k. 1. 15. repentance
is put before faith. Romans 10. 9. confession with the mouth, is put before
believing with the heart: So that it is not true that Christ bids them make
them Disc^ples first, and then baptize them, for the words are not, going,
Disciple and baptize, but going, Disciple baptizing, etc. And is usual in such
manner of speaking for the Participle to declare the manner of, or some mediate
act unto the thing spoken of in the precedent verb, as if he had said make
Disciples by baptizing; The Greeks want the Ge^unds, which oftentimes are
supplied by the Participle, go build a house laying the foundation; the
imperative verbe^s placed before the Participle laying the foundation, yet the
house begins but to be builded by laying the foundation: Disciple is placed
before Baptize, yet they begin to be discipled by baptizing: This is confirmed
by learned Gerard (...) est proprie Discipulos facere praedicatione verbi apud
adultos, and administratione baptismi apud inf^ntes, it signifies properly to
make Disciples by preaching of the word to them that are of ripe years, by
administering of baptism to Infants, with whom agrees Spanhemius, Dub. 27. To
give some instances, Tit. 1. 11. They subvert whole houses, teaching things
that they ought not, that is they subvert by teaching, or by teaching they
begin to subvert. Heb. 12 1. 2. Let us run with patience the race set before
us, looking unto Jesus; Must men run with patience before they look to Christ?
Or rather is not this looking the way, and means to that patient running? Mat.
3. 6. The people were baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins, if
they were baptized before confession of sins, why do they press repentance
before baptism? If repentance, or confession of sins must go before baptism,
why do thy press the order of words? When it is apparent that the order of
words is not argumentative; Scriptura nescit prius, and posterius.

Thirdly, it may be doubted, whether (...) (if it should signify to make
actual Disciples, or Disciples of actual believers) is not put Synecdochically
also for the Infants of believers; of this judgment is learned whitaker, (...)
Pertinet primum ad homines adultos, tum ex vifoederis etiam ad illorum liberos,
make Disciples (says he) pertains first to them of ripe years, then by the
force of the Covenant to their children also. Spanhemius, Duh. 27. (...) est
discipulum facere, non tantum docere quod suo modo etiam infantibus aptari
poterat, quando etiam parents prose, and familia Christo nomen dant, tota
eorum domus (...); it is to make a Disciple, not only to teach, which in its
manner also may be fitted to Infants, for when the parents do give their name
to Christ for themselves and their family, their whole house is (or shall be)
discipled.

The last of the three Queries remains, which is, whether Infants of Believers
be Disciples? Which is partly proved by the Premises, and has no assault, or
battery laid against it, but this that they are not teachable; To which I
answer by concession, granting that all baptized ones must be taught, but not
all at the same time, such as are capable of teaching, let them be taught
before Baptism, they that are incapable at present, as Infants, let them be
baptized first, and taught after, as the Infants of the Jews were after
Circumcision. Thus believing with the heart, and confessing with the mouth are
necessary to Salvation, Romans 10. 10. but it must be in subjecto capaci, in
persons capable of actual faith, and confession, not infants; he that will not
labor, must not eat, it must be restrained to those that are able, not
children, or decrepid or sick persons. The fallacy in this Argument pressed
against us by our adversaries is discovered by Danaeus contra Bellarm. est
fallacia a dicto secundum quid ad simpliciter etc. What Christ commands (says
he) to be done only in the baptism of those of age, they generally would have
done in baptizing of all, even Infants: Spanhemius judiciously determines the
Question, having granted that their Infants as well as actual believers are
Disciples, says, in adultis requirenda institutio antecedens, in infantibus
subsequens, in them of age is requisite instruction before, in Infants after
baptism. If then all nations include every part, nations are not taken
Synecdochically for the Disciples of all nations, Infants of believers are
Disciples, it still remains a truth, that Infants are not excepted from
baptism; Which was thus further proved, if Infants be excepted from baptism, it
is either because they are not named in the text, or because we find no
instance that any were baptized, or because they are not capable, but for none
of these three, therefore Infants are not excepted. In the conference Mr.
Tombs denied the Major, saying that a fourth reason might be given, because
they were not Disciples, whereupon I told him that in this answer he showed
himself no good Logician, for it is an Axiom, that in no division, one member
can be affirmed of another, because they are opposite; Now to be Disciples, and
capable of Baptism were not opposite, but subordinate; and to be Disciples, if
it made them not capable it was no exception at all; if it made them capable,
it was the same with the third; To which Dilemma he gave them no direct answer,
nor does yet, save that he says, for my division he gave the genuine reason
why Infants are excepted from the precept of baptizing, because they are no
Disciples, and that there was no defect in his Log^ck, when he did not reduce
it to one of my members.

That he gave not the genuine reason why Infants were excepted from the precept
of baptizing appears by the falsity of his antecedent, and consequent too, if
understood of Disciples actual believers; and that there was a palpable defect
in his Logic, in not reducing it to one of my members, is manifest from the
laws of a true division, 1. They must be opposite according to Aristotle. 1.
de part. Animal. cap. 3. (...), 2. The parts were adequate, and even with the
whole, for every thing that may be presumed to hinder from Baptism, is either
because they are not named in the precept, or because there is no instance in
Scripture thereof, or because they are not capable thereof, Incapacity includes
all imaginary impediments besides the other two; he inartificially adds a
fourth, which is included in the former, for to be Disciples renders capable of
baptism in his sense, if not capable, it can be avouched in no sense; To this
he says capable of Baptism and Disciples are not terms subordinate, but
distinct without opposition; Prodigious: not terms subordinate, and yet
predicated one of another? But distinct without opposition, so we yield; the
genus is predicated of his species is formally distinguished from it, without
opposition, But how can this be a distinct member from the rest, that is not
opposed? Membra dividentia debent esse opposita: And that capable of baptizing
is predicated of Disciples he grants, saying, though to be Disciples made them
capable; but thinks to relieve himself by saying there is a difference between
the terms; if by difference he mean distinctio formalis I grant it, but that
overthrowes his position, that they are subordinate; if by difference he means
they are disparata then one cannot be predicated of the other, which he allows.

But he concludes from a supposed concession of mine, saying he presumes I
think baptized persons already Disciples, yet not capable of baptism; It is but
his presumption, for though I think baptized persons already Disciples, yet
capable of Baptism not in his sense that they may be rebaptized or toties
quoties dipped, for that is per accidens, because Baptism is a Sacrament that
is not reiterable, but because they are qualified for baptism in specie
indeterminately, and the contrary to his assertion is true; As a man that is
regenerate, is therefore capable of regeneration, as being elected, and
otherwise qualified for it, which remains after regeneration; So Disciples
baptized are therefore still capable of baptism, because they have the
qualification, or fundament of the sacred relation still adhaering, or
inhaering ^ and he could not but know that it was both fallacia aequivocatio^^,
and accidentis, and could make nothing for his purpose, seeing Infants, of whom
we discourse, are not baptized persons already, and therefore for his non causa
ut causa can not be rendered incapable.

Mr. T^mbes, 15. Section.
WHat he says of me, that I found fault with him at Rosse, for translating of
(...) make Disciples of all Nations, I am as sure is his fiction, as that I
spoke any thing there to him; Nor will I think, any man will believe I should
do so, except he sound me now crazed in my brain, that has either read my
Examen, part. 3. s. 12. or 13. or shall read that part of my review now in
Press, in which I often assert that translation, and largely answer objections
to the contrary in the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth etc. of that book.
In which book I shall at large answer all that Mr. Baxter has said to prove
Infants Disciples from Acts 15. 10. As for what Mr. C. says here, it is
frivolous. For though v. 1. 5. there is mention of circumcision, yet not of
circumcision as acted on Infants, but as taught brethren, and when the
Apostles, v. 6. did consider of the matter, they did not consider of
circumcision as acted, but as taught, and not only of circumcision, but also
imposing the whole Law of Moses as necessary, which was the putting the yoke,
v. 10. and it is ridicul^m to conceive that those teachers mentioned v. 1. did
attempt to do any thing to Infants, and therefore it is a mere wrangling to
contend that the Disciples on whom they would have put the yoke, v 10. were
Infants, contrary to the constant use of the Term throughout all the New
Testament some hundreds of time.

Reply.
WHen I demanded of him, where it was required, that those that are to be
baptized must be Disciples? He said out of the Text, for that which is
translated, teach all Nations, is (...), make Disciples; I first denied the
Consequent, then for his Antecedent I told him, that he found fault with me at
Rosse for that Translation, asking me was I w^ser than the Translators? and now
when it seems to make for him, he urges it,

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? To this he says now that he is as
sure it is my fiction as that he spoke any thing there to me; Perhaps he has
forgot the whole, as Mesalla Corvinus did his own name, otherwise I am as sure
of it, as that I spoke any thing to him, of many of the particulars whereof I
could give account; and there are besides my self not a few, that will
testify, same of his own party, who returning to Abergaveny had nothing to
boast of, but, 1 That he asked me if I was wiser than the Tra^slators for
giving the signification of (...) not teach, but make Disciples. 2. That he
corrected me, when I rendered (...) make Disciples by baptizing, showing a
place in the same Chapter where the Participle is not expressed by the Gerund;
whereas I held it not universally, but (...), indefinitly; And for my part, if
I had not heard him, I could beleve he might do so, and not find him crazed in
his brain, for all I had read his Examen, part. 3 l. 12, or 13. or the other
part of his review (then in the Presle) as well as his revocation of
Antipaedobaptism, part. 1. page 2. l. 14. H^s writing so many books in defense
of Anabaptists, whom in his Treatise of Scandals page 323. He calls Heretics,
and a l^tter of grievous Wolves: His denying before a great Congregation that
ever he accused Master Baxter of Apostacy, of which he was convicted by
several witnesses.

His opposition of Episcopacie, and the Book of Common Prayer, when formerly he
had been a zealous Surrogate under the one, and a maintainer of the other; The
forced rendering to Mr. Wigmore the pieces he gave him for a former Book,
because he asserted the contradictory in a latter; Many more Instances might be
given of his self-oppositions, though I believe he did it not then upon that
account, but magisterially to control me, and to advantage his cause, and
credit, by making me contemptible to the people, with whom he hunts after
popular applause. Therefore in the words following to anticipate all prejudice,
he says by way of Prolepsis or Presumption, that in his forementioned Book, he
has answered at large, all that Mr. Baxter has said to prove Infants
Disciples from Acts 15. 10. Ole quid ad me? what is that to me? It may be a
large pretended answer, and little satisfactory, as those that have read it,
judges; But his answer to me he contracts, like the man that confuted
Bellarmine in one word, saying that what I say here of, Acts 15. 10. is
fr^v^lous; which Epithete whether his sayings or mine deserves more, I submit
to the censure of the Readers; for my Argument to prove that Infants were
Disciples was this, They upon whom the Pharisees would have laid the yoke were
Disciples ver. 10. why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples? but many of them were Infants, Therefore Infants are Disciples: The
Minor was proved thus, the yoke was Circumcision, ver. 5. The Pharisees saying,
that it was needful to Circumcise them, but they upon whom the yoke was to be
imposed by Circumcision were only Infants among the Jews, and Infants together
with Parents amongst the Gentiles, Therefore many of them were Infants. The
Major was proved that the yoke was Circision by comparing the 5. and 10. with
the foregoing verses. 1. verse, Certain men came down from Jerusalem, and
taught the brethren, except ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved; where observe that Circumcision is the subject of the
Question, In the second verse they determined that Paul, and Barnabas, and
certain others of them should go to Jerusalem unto the Apostles, and Elders
about this Question, to wit, Circumcision. In the 5. ver. Certain of the sect
of the Pharisees said that it was needful to Circumcise them; In the 6. The
Apostles came together to consider of the matter, that is Circumcision; And
when there had been much disputing Peter arose up in the 7. and determined the
Question in the tenth verse, Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of
the Disciples? Mr. T. his answer to all this is, that it is frivolous; of which
contumelious censure, I am sure his pretended reason is guilty, for says he,
though ver. 1. 5. there is mention of Circumcision, yet not of Circumcision as
acted on Infants, but taught brethren: Here are two questions, The first is
negative, that there is not mention of Circumcision as acted on Infants; The
second affirmative, That it is Circumcision as acted only on brethren: I Will
invert the order, and begin with the latter. That which is pressed as a
Transient act, and not permanent to posterity, is not mentioned here: But
Circumcision acted only on taught brethren is pressed only as a Translent
act, not permanent to posterity, Therefore Circumcision acted only on taught
brethren is not mentioned here. The Major is apparent, because they that came
from Judea did not press a duty that should determine presently, but to
continue always to posterity, of which nature in their Judgment was
circumcision, and obligation to Moses his law: Therefore the determination of
the Council against them v. 28. was not a Transient, but a permanent decree
binding negatively from circumcision all Infants for the time to come. The
Minor is as clear, That circumcision acted on taught brethren, not Infants,
had been a Transient act, would have expired with that generation, and not
concerned their Infants to posterity, and according to his ground the Council
had determined nothing against Infant-circumcision which nevertheless would
have been still in force, provided they ^bstained from circumcising of taught
brethren, which is a most gross, and heretical absurdity.

His second evasion is that there is no mention of Circumcision as acted on
Infants, The falsity of which appears by this Argument; If it were Infants also
whom the false teachers would have had to be Circumcised as necessary, and as
engaging to Moses Law, then mention is made of Circumcision, as acted, (or to
be acted) on Infants, But it was Infants also whom the false teachers would
have had to be Circumcised as necessary, and as engaging unto Moses Law,
Therefore mention is made of Circumcision as acted (or to be acted) on Infants.
The Antecedent (to wit) it was Infants also they would have Circumcised, is
cleared ver. 1. Except ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot
be saved, if they would have had them Circumcised after the manner of Moses,
then they would have Infants also Circumcised, But they would have them
Circumcised after the manner of Moses, Therefore they would have Infants also
Circumcised; for nothing is more manifest, than that after the manner of Moses,
all the Proselytes Children should be Circumcised as well as the Jews, and ever
after all their posterity at eight days old. But it will be expected I should
make good the Consequence, which in the words following he interpretatively
denies, saying when the Apostles ver. 6. did consider of the matter, they did
not consider of the circumcision as acted, but taught, and not only of
Circumcision, but also imposing the law of Moses as necessary, which was the
putting the yeake ver. 10. To which saying of Mr. T. I will oppose Mr. T. his
own words Exam. page 101. Now I pray you (says he) what is this yoke Acts. 15.
10. but circumcision? as if he should say with an Emphasis, it is nothing else;
and here he says it is not circumcision as acted, but the doctrine, and the law
of Moses, The Satyr will be afraid of conversing with him, that can blow hot,
and cold, contradictories out of the same mouth.

But that it was Circumcision as acted I shall (God willing) clear out of the
Text, where it is in plain terms thrice set down, ver. 1. They taught the
Brethren except ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be
saved; he does not say, except ye be taught Circumcision, and so have the
Theory sceptically without the practice, but passively except ye be
Circumcised, and have the seal cut in your flesh, and that after the manner of
Moses, who did usually Circumcise Males at eight days old, and for neglecting
but one, the Lord would have slain him. And ver. 5. They taught it was needful
to Circumcise them, not needful to teach them the Law of Circumcision, but to
act it upon them, and in them, And ver. 24. Ye must be Circumcised, not taught
Circumcision; And though from this yoke, (taking it aggregative) we neither
exclude teaching, nor the Law of Moses, yet to say that they did not consider
Circumcision as acted is a gross absurdity, and a giving the Holy Ghost the
lie, as appears in the three former Texts, teaching was the means by which the
false brethren pressed actual Circumcision as a seal obligatory to the
necessary observation of the Law of Moses. These three are linked together
which he fallaciously divides; Therefore it is a most ridiculous saying of his
to say it is ridiculous to conceive that those teachers mentioned ver. 1. did
attempt to do any thing to Infants, when the attempt is said thrice to be
actual Circumcision, and it is most certain that these men coming from Judea
did act it only upon their own Children at home, pressed it according to the
Law of Moses (for it is called his Law, because he both penned it, as the whole

Pentateuch, and practiced it) upon the Gentiles converted Parents with
Children, and upon the Children of posterity only; And therefore it is a mere
wrangling without any color of ingenuous sophistry, to contend that none of
these Disciples upon whom they would have put the yoke ver. 10. were Infants;
con^rarie to the precept, nature, and use of Circumcision, which was applied
either to Infants only, or Infants together with parents, as may be confirmed
by many Clouds of witnesses, both out of the old, and new Testament. And
whereas he concludes that to contend, that the Disciples on whom they would
have put the yoke were Infants is contrary to the use of the term throughout
all the new Testament; I would gladly know what he means by contrary? If he say
diverse, as he can mean nothing else; That by his own confession is short of
opposite, and opposite short of contrary; To which Catachresis he joins this
Hyperbole [some hundreds of times which if true comes short of [holy] which he
acknowledges to be taken six hundred times in Scripture in a distinct sense
from chastity, and but two places pretended for it; why may not these two (if
there were no more) serve our turn to prove Infants Disciples? which is already
manifested.

Mr. Tombs 16. Section.
AS for Mr. C. Argument from Acts 2. 38. 39. it is false that the Apostles
inference is as Mr. C. insinuated, unless his Argument have four Terms, that
they may be baptized to whom is the promise; for the Apostle expresses a duty
in the Imperative Mood, not a right in the Indicative, or Potentiall, it is [be
baptized] not [may be baptized] as in Mr. C. his conclusion.

I excepted that those parents were not then believers, which Mr. C. confessed
in saying, They were believers in fieri, though not perhaps in facto, which is
all one as to say they were not yet believers, but in the way to it. A^ for his
saying, They were believers by outward assent, and disposition, though perhaps
not by inward assent, and habit. I reply 1. If they were by disposition, how
were they not by inward assent? 2. How does he know they were believers by
outward assent, and not by inward? does he know they were Hypocrites. 3. What
act did they show which expressed outward assent to the acknowledgement of
Christ as their Lord? what Mr. C. says he knows of me, and tells of a
Ministers rule, is a fault he charge me with as not pertaining to the dispute.

Reply.
TO prove further that Infants of Believers were Disciples, and might be
baptized, in the conference I urged; They to whom is the promise, may be
baptized, it is the Apostles own inference, Acts. 2. 28. be baptized, for the
promise is to you; But to Infants of believers is the promise, the promise is
to you and your children, therefore Infants may be baptized. Then he denied the
Minor, now he seems to deny the conclusion by an indirect evasion glossing
thus; as for Mr. C. Argument from Acts 2. 38, 39. it is false that the Apostles
inference is as he infinuated, unless his Argument has four terms, that they
may be baptized to whom is the promise; By four Terms I imagine he fallaciously
means a fallacy, for if his answer had been distinct to cle^r the truth, he
would have discovered the particular Paralogism (if there had been any) and not
insisted upon generals, like an Advocate that accused the Defendant of a plea
of debt, but neither knew how much, nor had evidence to prove any; In this
discovering himself a true Sophister, (...), 1. Sophst. Elench. 1. 6. Captious
to lay hold of any thing, that he may seem to say something: This his pretended
reason following discovers; for (says he) the Apostle expresses a duty in the
Inperative mood, not a right in the Indicative, or Potential, It is be
baptized, not may be baptized as in his conclusion: To which I reply, Granting
that every proposition, even the conclusion in a Syllogism, must be Oration
indicativa, a speech in the Indicative Mood, so that Imperatives, and
Potentials are formally excluded from the predicate of any Enunciation; But
that by the rule of Equipollence Indicative propositions cannot be inferred
from Imperatives, would be a Tenet of that consequence that it would destroy
all deductions from Scriptures, and municipal laws, whose commands are in the
Imperative mood, Mr. Tombs infers himself from Math. 28. 19. make Disciples in
the Imperative Mood, that he may disciple in the Potential; Therefore I
conceive this Argument is good; Those whom Christ commands his Apostles to
disciple, may be discipled: Christ commands his Apostles to disciple all
Nations; Therefore they may be discipled. Otherwise those that are above
Ordinances might be furnished with an answer, it is make ye Disciples, not ye
may make Disciples, and so destroy the ordinance of the Ministry; It is said in
the institution of the Lords Supper (...) do this, and (...), let a man
examine, let him eat, all in the Imperative, not in the Indicative, or
Potentiall, this would be a sufficient buckler for the Socinians against the
Eucharist. The Antinomians might shake off the yoke of the moral Law, for every
Commandment is Imperative; the Ranters conjugality, for it is crescite, and
Multiplicamini, increase and multiply; and to avoid fornication. 1 Cor. 7. 2.
(...), let every one have his own wife. The Anabaptists might cast off
magistracy, because it is (...), let every soul be subject, and all this in the
Imperative, not in the Indicative, or Potential mood. But he says the Apostle
expresses a duty in the one mood, not a right in the other; this is a strange
distinction; I should think the contrary, because a duty, therefore a right.
Therefore we have a right to the undertaking of any action, or achievement,
because God commands it as a duty; Gods command makes a thing lawful, nay,
necessary to be done, and that in the present tense, as directed in that mood
that wants the future, and for that cause by Quintilian, Priscian, and other
Grammarians it is called modus permissivus, the permissive mood; accordingly be
baptized is Equipollent to may be baptized.

We cannot without blasphemy imagine divine precepts otherwise than lawful,
the transgression of them a sin, the observatiof them a virtuous duty,
contrariorum est contraria consequentia commands (which all Imperative
injunctions implies) and duties are Relatives, mutuo se ponunt, and tollunt,
and it can be no duty, if no right; If no right to Baptism, to accept it is a
sin, if a duty (as he confesses) not to accept it, is a sin, that howsoever
they were necessitated to sin, contrary to that Tenet of School men necessario
non cogimur peccare, this is a two-edged sword that cuts both ways.

Having no better success in denying the conclusion, he quarrels with the
premises, yet so, as he neither impeaches the major, which is, they to whom is
the promise may be baptized; Nor the Minor, To Infants of believing parents is
the promise; But as the Elephant in the Amphitheater passing by the Rhinoceros,
and Leopard fastened upon a Curr: So he waves them both, and frames a third
proposition which he thinks he can master, which is, that those parents were
not yet believers, which though impertinent furnishes me with a further
Argument a Min^r^ ad Majus. If those that are not yet believers may be
baptized, parents with children* then parents with children may be baptized,
but they that are not yet believers parents with children may be baptized, Ergo
parents believing with children may be baptized. The consequence is evident,
and the minor proved out of the Text. And that they were not yet believers he
says I confessed, in saying, They were believers in fieri, though not perhaps
in facto; Nay I confessed they were believers, in that I said they were
believers in fieri, and denied not, but that they might be also in facto.

But because it could not so evidently be gathered out of the text, nor
otherwise, save by circumstances, I said perhaps they were not believers in
facto, especially a major part, as all such speeches are to be understood;
Therefore that which he further adds is vain, and inconsequent, when he avers
it is all one as to say they were not yet believers, but in the way to it;
whereas I avouch they were already believers yet in a way to further gradual
perfections; whether the Clymax be from outward profession (which is the
adequate formal object of our Baptism in adultis) to inward sincerity; or from
a weak to strong faith: To which purpose I explained my self, when he enquired
what I meant by that school distinction, saying they were believers by outward
assent, and disposition, though perhaps not by inward assent, and habit: To
this he replies with a threefold Quere: 1. If they were by disposition, how
were they not by inward assent? I answer as the body by organization is
disposed before to receive the form, so possibly they had previous
dispositions forerunners of actual faith, This all of them at the least had,
and probably many of them had more; therefore I say perhaps not by outward
assent, and habit, not denying but that perhaps also by inward assent, and
habit; for indefinite propositions in a contingent matter, and particulars in
diverse Subjects, though seeming opposite, may be both true: Some of these to
whom the Apostles spoke, might be believers only by outward assent, and
disposition, others by inward assent, and habit.

The second Quere is, how I know they were believers by outward assent, and not
by inward? I answer by many circumstances in the Text, which evidently clears
that thus far at the least, they were predisposed for actual faith; but that
they had not actual faith with inward assent, I dare not take upon me, with him
to know, who peremptorily says they were not yet believers, and that my words,
if he had faithfully recited them, had discovered, for I said perhaps they were
not believers by outward assent, The word [ perhaps] left out would have
answered the Question; and his Subquere in the cloase is as irrational, where
he demands, do I know they were hypocrites? Which cannot be presumed of me, who
knows nothing to the contrary, but that some of them, at the least, had true
faith, and if they had not, it does not follow they were hypocrites, much less
that I should know them so; for they might have previous dispositions to
justification, and the new creature without justifying faith, and yet no
hypocrites He might have learned so much from Aristotle, lib. Categ. cap 10.
Tunc dicimus singula, quae habitum recipere possunt, privata esse, cum non
inest, quando natura inesse debet. Then we say all things that are capable of a
hab^^, to be deprived, when that is not, which by nature ought to be. No
convert is capable of sincerity of faith, before the infusion of that
supernatural grace, to the reception whereof, there are many preparations,
during which motion till the form might he introduced, no man properly can be
said to be an hypocrite.

The third Quere is, what act did they show, which expressed outward assent to
the acknowlegment of Christ as their Lord? Which Question I answer with another
Question; what act did the rest of the household of Lydia show, which expressed
outward assent to the acknowledgment of Christ as their Lord before they were
baptized? I know Mr. T.. will not say none, for that crosses both his
principles and ours, who both acknowledge in them of years, there must be some
outward assent, but he knows Scripture is silent of any Acts, 16. 15. and why
might it not as well be silent also? But if he here must have acts expressing
outward assent to the acknowledgment of Christ as their Lord, what can be more
signal than these? After they heard Peter's Sermon concerning Christ's birth,
death, resurrection, exaltation, sending of the Holy Ghost, and that he whom
they crucified, was both Lord and Christ, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we
do? 37. They gladly received the word, 41. Some we find baptized of whom
nothing in this nature is said, many of whom less is said, few of whom more;
And this in answer to this Questionist, who further says, what I knew of him;
and tell of Ministers rule, is a fault I charge him with, as not pertaining to
the Dispute; which words like an ambiguous Proteus may carry a double sense; If
he means that it pertains not to, because not uttered in the Dispute, he has
tasted of Lethe, and his memory is not as good as Julius Caesar's, that could
forget nothing but injuries; If he mean it was impertinently applied, let the
reader observe the occasion, and judge, which was this, when I had affirmed
that these Jews Acts 2. 38. were believers by outward assent, and disposition
sufficient to make them members visible, but perhaps not believers by inward
assent, and habit to justify them, I further asserted, that I knew Mr. T.
would not say that none are to be baptized, but they that have a saving faith,
which none but God is able to discern; Ministers must act according to rule,
which in adultis is outward profession, or willingness to receive the
ordinance, and that they were thus qualified (which is sufficient) ^t was
apparent.

Mr. Tombs. 17 Section.
WHat he says, that Acts 2. 38. Repentance is not made a condition of being
baptized, is in my apprehension, manifestly false. For the requiring repentance
as first to be done, and then Baptism to be annexed does make ^t a condition of
Baptism, as when it is said, believe, and thou shall be saved, believe is made
a condition of salvation. His talk about incomplete repentance, because they
were pricked in their hearts, as a sufficient qualification for baptism, does
make the Apostles speech as idle, which requires that which they had already,
if Mr. C. say true. But who will believe Mr. C. that the Apostle required no
more to Baptism, but an incomplete repentance, or pricking the heart, v. 38.
Which it is said, they had before? Or that he took that as a sufficient
qualification for baptism, and yet required more as previous to it? Or who will
believe him that the 3000. Jews were baptized upon an incomplete repentance,
when the Text expressly says, then they that gladly received the word were
baptized? Or that there was no new act of Peter, but a recapitulation of the
heads of his Sermon that he preached to them before they were pricked in
conscience, or were exhorted to be baptized, when the Text says, with many
other words he testified, and exhorted: Or that there was any (...), putting
that as done after, which was done before, when the Text does so expersly note
the order of time, (...), which our Translatours render [then] and if it be
rendered [therefore] it proves that which was done, v. 41. to be consequent on
that which was done before, v. 40.

Reply.
HE denying that these Jews, Acts 2. 38. were sufficiently qualified for
Baptism by outward profession, or a willingness to receive the ordinance, was
assaulted with this Argument. They whom the Apostle commanded to be baptiz^d,
were sufficiently qualified, but the Apostle commanded them to be baptized,
Therefore they were sufficiently qualified. He denied that the Apostle commanded
them to be baptized, which was proved, verse, 38. (...), imperatively be
baptized every one of you; his answer was, upon condition of repentance,
repent, and be baptized: That I told him, was a condition of his own making,
and an adding to the Word of God, for the Scripture no where expressly, or
implyedly says that repentance is a condition of baptism, if it be meant of
complete repentance; for though it was their duty, both to repent, and to be
baptized, to repent in relation to crucifying of Christ, to be Baptized in
relation to Judaism, which they were to put off, and Christianity, which they
were to put on; but that they must have complete repentance before baptism, is
not so much as hinted at; all this he passes by, which might have given light
to that which follows, only ^atches at this, what I say that Acts 2. 38.
repentance is not ma^e a condition of being baptized is in his apprehension
manifestly false; where he unfaithfully reci^es my words, leaving out that,
whith is the hinge of the controversy, for I said not, but granted, that
repentance was a condition in adultis of being baptized, but denied that
complete repentance was; for then none were to be baptized, till they were
complete Christians, then the Pharisees, and others John Baptized were such,
Then the Apostle preached to, bapt^zed, and brought to that perfection three
thousand Jews in one day, then the Jailer and his family were perfected in a
part of a night: Lydia, and her household with one sermon; whereas Mr. T. has
been preaching, writing, disputing these twelve years for Antipaedobaptism, and
yet by report has scarce dipped a hundred, and how many of these had complete
repentance, I leave it to him that searches the heart, it being pretended that
the spirit is poured ^ut more abundantly now, than it was in former times, and
his reason is as feeble, as the quotation false, for the requiring, says he,
repentance, as first to be done, and then Baptism to be annexed, does make it a
condition of Baptism;

To which I answer; first incomplete repentance which consists in acknowledging
ones former error, and inclining to accept of Christ, is a condition
requisite, and therefore he idly beats the air; Secondly I deny that he
requires complete repentance first to be done; Thirdly that he requires Baptism
to be annexed to complete a repentance 1. He requires not complete repentance
first to be done, for first repentance is pressed there as the end, Baptism as
the means, repentance is a continued act all our life long, Baptism like
regeneration, but once; repentance is the first in intention, and therefore
oftentimes first expressed as analytically in all practical methods, according
to Arist. 2. Phys. cap. 9 t. 69* Finis est unde principium ducitur, non agendi,
sed cogitandi. Finis est principium actionum. 1. Metaph. 2. Hence arises this
philosophical Canon, omnis Intellectus operativus incipit a fine, every
practical act of the understanding begins at the end.

Therefore, 2* he requires not Baptism to be annexed to complete repentance,
but presupposes it before it, therefore the Catechumeni, or converted Pagans in
the infancy of the Church, and the baptized in latter times in full
constituted Churches did promise by themselves, or sureties, to forsake the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and to keep all the Commandments; So that
Baptism does not necessarily p^esuppose, but is a tie for the future obliging
to complete repentance, therefore John Baptist says Matthew. 3. 11. 1 Baptize
(...), to repentance, and they were baptized, v. 6. (...), confessing their
sins; first baptising is expressed, then repentance, and confessing of sins; So
that from the order of the words (if there be any force in such an Argument) we
might as well conclude, requiring baptism first to be done and then repentance,
and confession of sins to be annexed does make baptism a condition of
repentance.

And his Instance is as weak and impertinent, believe, and thou shall be saved,
believe is made a condition of salvation, what then? Repent, and be baptized
(for it is not repent, and thou shall be baptized) therefore complete
repentance is made a condition of Baptism, a strange consequence, and has
couchant two fallacies in it, first, a secundum quid ad simpliciter, for if
some thing that is first placed in order be a condition of another, as faith of
salvation, it does not follow from a particular to an universal, that always
that which is placed first is made a condition of the latter. 2. It is fallacia
accidentis, but a contingent thing, that the former in order is a condition of
the latter; Me thinks Mr. T. that will allow no Argument from Analogies in
positives without a precept, should not enforce an Argument from placing o^
words without a precept. But to his Instance, believe, and thou shall be saved,
believe is made a condition of salvation, what belief, actual? For so its meant
Mark 16. 16. What then will become of all Infants, unless God work a miracle
upon them (to use his own parallel) as he did upon Baalam's Ass, Exam. page
134? But as actual belief is p^t before salvation, so before Baptism, that from
his ground it will follow, none but actual believers are to be baptized, which
without extraordinary revelation is impossible for the Baptist to know, and
would be an unanswerable Argument for the Socinians. But as believing is placed
before Baptism, is not Baptism placed before Salvation? He that is baptized
shall be saved; by his Logic it will follow that Baptism is a necessary
condition of Salvation, why does he then insult so much upon Austin, and some
of the ancients for holding the necessity of baptism to salvation; and against
the Doctors of the Church of Rome for maintaining a Limbum Infantum, when he
furnishes them with a medium to enforce their conclusions? If this his
assertion has any truth i^ it, as indeed it has none.

Having unfaithfully (as you see) recited my proposition, by concealing the
word complete after it had wrought a while upon his stomach, he was forced to
vomit it up, and with it some gall, faying my talk about incomplete repentance,
because they were pricked in their hearts, as a sufficient qualification for
baptism, does make the Apostles speech idle, which requires that which they had
already, if I say true. Soft, and fair, let him take patience along with him,
and look before he leap; I say again, incomplete repentance, not only because
they were pricked in their hearts, but also for other reasons, as a sufficient
qualification does make the Apostles speech congruous, and not idle, which
requires not that which they had already, and yet I say true, for the Apostle
requires not previous dispositions, to sincere faith, and complete repentance,
which dispositions they had at least already, but the gradual perfections of
complete repentance, which is not to determine in one transient act, or a part
of a day (as the case stood with them before Baptism) but to continue to their
lives end; That they were sorry for their former Judgment, and practice in
Judaism is apparent from their being pricked in their hearts, there is their
(...), having accepted of Christ in a general way, they address themselves to
the Apostles for further directions, men and brethren what shall we do? there
is their (...); Therefore he directs them to a putting on, and a further being
builded up in Christ, repent and be Baptized: And seeing Quod est primum in uno
quoque genere est mensura reliquorum, why this may not be interpreted by that
of John Matthew. 3. be Baptized unto repentance, no solid reason can be given.
But he proceeds saying, who will believe Mr. C. that the Apostle required no
more to Baptism but an incomplete repentance or a pricking in their hearts
verse. 38. which is said they had before? or that he took that as a sufficient
qualification for Baptism, and yet required more as previous to it? To which
Interrogation I think it is sufficient to answer by another Quaere: who will
believe Mr. T. that the Apostle required any more to Baptism but an incomplete
repentance expressed by pricking in their hearts, and other tokens, which it is
confessed they had before? or that he took not that as a sufficient
qualification for Baptism, and required no more as previous to it? But this
Questionest further says, who will believe him, that the 3000. Jews were
Baptized upon an incomplete repentance, when the Text expressly says that they
that gladly received the word were Baptized; To which I retort this cross
Interrogatory, who will believe him that the 3000. Jews might not be Baptized
upon an incomplete repentance? for all the Text expressly says that they gladly
received the word, seeing Christ says Luke 8. 13. They received the word with
joy, and have no root, and in time of temptation fall away, I think receiving,
the word gladly, and receiving it with joy, are synonoma, (...); but the truth
is I said no such thing, that these Jews had but an incomplete repentance, the
thing I said was this, they had an incomplete repentance at least, and that was
sufficient for Baptism. But I am grapling with Hydra, one head cut off, more
arises, for he has a third Question, who will believe him that there was no
new act of Peter, but a recapitulation of the heads of his sermon, that he
preached to them before they were pricked in heart, or were exhorted to be
Baptized, when the Text says with many other words he testified, and
exhorted,? I return, who will believe him that there was any new act of Peter,
but a recapitulation of the heads of his sermon, that he preached to them
before they were pricked in conscience, or were exhorted to be baptized, when
the Text says not with many other words (besides his sermon) he testified, and
exhorted, but (as more probably) with many other words, besides the
abbreviation collected by Luke, for I suppose to preach once, and baptize
afterward 3000. in one day, especially by dipping, Mr. T. will find it a hard
task, if he had Stentors sides, Atlas strength, and Bryareus his hands: But
this Examiner has not vented all his Questions yet, there is one behind, who
will believe there was any (...), putting that as done after, which was done
before, when the Text does so expressly note the order of time, (...) which our
Translators render [then] and if it be rendered [therefore] it proves that
which was done verse. 41. to be consequent on that which was done before, verse.
40.? To which I reply it is credible there was a (...), putting that after
which was done before, for all he says the Text does so expressly note the
order of time which he critically gathers from the Adverb of time (as he
insinuates) which our Translators renders [then] or if it be rendered
illatively [therefore] as more fitly, it proves not that which was done v. 41.
to be consequent on that which was done before v. 40 But v. 41. Then when Peter
said be Baptized, they that gladly received the word were Baptized, Therefore
because Peter said be Baptized, they were Baptized; And such (...) are usual
in Scripture Genes. 1. God having expressed the creation of man, and Gods
blessing of him and all creatures to him, recites afterward the manner of the
creation, by adding a more distinct relation of that which was delivered more
generally in the second chapter. But howsoever I told him in the dispute this
made nothing against my design, for whether it be taken Thetically, without any
condition, or hypothetically upon condition of repentance in manner as formerly
is declared, the children were to be Baptized together with the parents, the
promise is to you, and your children, and that was all I contended for, whence
issued this Argument, To whom the promise of grace belongs, to them, Baptism
belongs also, but the promise of grace belongs to believers, and their
children, Therefore Baptism belongs to both.

Mr. Tombs 18. Section.
TO the Argument, To whom the promise of grace belonged, to them baptism
belongs also, but the promise of grace belongs to believers and their Children,
Ergo. To this I answered out of the Text, when they are called, or are
believers, not before, it neither belongs to Fathers nor Children without
calling. To this Mr. C. replied, 1. That the verb is in the Indicative Present
tense, which implies, it is to them for the present, as well to your Children
as to you. 2. The opposition is between them, and their Children as near, to
distinguish them as to whom the promise was at present, from them to whom it
was afar off, that is in the future, But all this is frivolous. For 1. The Verb
is in the Indicative Mood when it is said, The promise is to those that are
afar off. as well as when it is said, The promise is to you, and your Children.
2. Their being afar off is not in respect of time, but of place, or dwelling,
and the meaning is, they that are in the dispersion, as it is called, James 1.
1. Or if it were meant in the sense that it is used, Ephesians. 2. 15. ( not Romans
2. 15. as Mr. C. miscites) yet they are said to be afar off in respect of Gods
favor, or their affection to him, not in respect of time.

Lastly it is frequent even in speeches like this, to put the Indicative Mood
present tense, by an Enallage of Tense for the future, as Math. 5. 10. 12.

Reply.
TO the Argument, To whom the promise of grace belonged, to them baptism
belongs also, but the promise of grace belongs to believers, and their
Children. Ergo, he says he answered, (implyedly denying the Major) out of the
Text, when they are called, or are believers, not before; which answer is
absurd, seeing there is no mention in the Text of calling as appliable to these
Jews, nor of believers at all; or if so, they cannot be debarred for want of
that qualification they had already. First there is no mention in the Text of
calling as applyable to these Jews, for the words in their genuine sense sound
thus, The promise is [made] to you [Jews] near, and present, and your Children
you now have,] and to them that are afar off, [distant in place, or affection,
Jews, or Gentiles] whosoever they be that the Lord shall call [To, or unto him,
and unto their Children;] for afar off, and present, or near, are here opposed
as says Ludovicm de Dieu. Secondly there is no mention in the Text of
believers at all; for the words are not believe, and be baptized, but repent,
and be baptized, for the promise is to you, and your Children; The former is a
corrupting, and this latter is an adding to the Text; Thirdly if there had been
mention of believing, and calling applyable to these Jews, it had been no debar
for want of that qualification they had already; for they were already
believers in the same sense they were Penitentiaries, by outward assent, and
previous dispositions at least, as is formerly declared, and consequently
called at least with an outward call: Before Christ's Incarnation the Jews had a
call that assented to all things that were revealed; after his incarnation, and
resurrection, they continued their call that entertained further Revelations,
as it is apparent these three thousand d^d, as far as one Sermon possibly could
render them capable: for the intent of the place is, that the promise runs to
the believing Jews, and their Children, as it did to believing Abraham, and his
Children in the outward promu^gation, administration, and signing; Hence I may
safely conclude, if there be no mention in the Text of believers at all, of
calling as appliable to these Jews, or if there had, it could be no debar,
seeing they were already called, then his answer was not right to the Major
proposition [when they are called, or are believers not before,] But there is
no mention in the Text of believers at all, of calling as appliable to these
Jews, or if there had, it could be no debar, seeing they were already called,
Ergo.

Therefore my reply was congruous, when I said there were two Arguments in the
Text to overthrow his descant; The first drawn from the Indicative predication
in the Present tense, The promise is to you, and your Children, is, for the
present as well to your Children as to you. The second from the opposition
betwixt you, and your Children* and them that are afar off. They and their
Children which are (...) near (as the Greek Scholiast, and the Syrian
Interpreter says) are opposed to them that are (...) afar off. The Jews were
near, and in Covenant, for to them is the promise in the present tense, but the
Gentiles were afar off. Ephesians. 2. 15. Ye who sometimes were afar off, are made
^igh by the blood of Christ, Therefore it is expressed in the Future tense, as
many as God shall call; So that the Jews being called, their Cildten were in
Covenant with them, when the Gentiles shall be called, their Children shall be
in Covenant with them.

All this he thinks to blast with one word, which is his Cuckcow-spit
[frivolous] and may be very well hung out as a sign before his answer. For 1.
The verb (says he) is in the Indicative Mood, when it is said the promise is to
those that are afar off, as well as when it is said the promise is to you, and
your Children: Its true, when it is said so; But when, or where it is said, the
promise is to those that are afar off? The verb [(...)] is but expressed once,
and that immediately in construction before [(...) you] not again before [(...),
to all those that are afar off,] Therefore as learned Camerarius says upon the
place, sunt (...) haec, This is a curt Laconick expression, where something is
left out, to be supplied by the Reader; The promise is to you, and your
Children, and supply [(...), shall be] to all that are afar off, etc. Mr. T. I
hope has not ^orgot his Grammar, which tells him that Zeugma est unius verbi,
vel adjectivi viciniori respondentis ad diversa supposita reductio, ad unum
quidem express, ad alterum vero per supplementum. This will further appear by
considering that in this verse we have an exact distribution of the world into
Jew, and Gentile, according to the usual distribution in other Scriptures, The
Gentiles being usually called those afar off, and the promises equally
distributed, only he adds (as many as the Lord shall call) to those that are
afar, as most proper in that place; But it can in no sense be referred to the
former part of the verse, either to Parents, or Children, for he changes the
Tense of the Verb in both parts, In the first part, to the Jews he speaks de
praesenti, of the present application of the promise, Repent ye, and be
Baptized, for the promise is to you, and your Children, even now the promise is
offered to you, for they were under the call of God: But when he speaks of the
Gentiles, because they were yet afar off, and not at all called, he speaks de
futuro, as many as God shall call; There shall be an application of the
promises to them, when they shall be under the call, not before.

His second reason is as frivolous, fere valens obulum, of no weight, for (says
he) their being afar off is not in respect of time, but of place, or dwelling,
what then? is not the promise to the one for the present, who are already
called, to the other for the future? I deny both his Antecedent, and
consequent, Antecedent, for their being afar off is in respect of time, whither
we understand their distance in state, and condition, as the Gentiles, who are
said to be a far off, therefore (...) a far off says Cornelius a Lapide is
Periphrasis Gentium, a description of the Gentiles; I do not unwillingly assent
(says de Dieu) to the great learned men, who refer the words [(...) those afar
off] to the Gentiles remote from the Covenant of grace; Or if it be meant of
the Jews, who were afar off in time, and were as yet unborn, and should succeed
in after generations, which Mr. T. himself elsewhere intimates out of Beza, and
therefore seems to me to be guilty of contradiction; Or thirdly afar off in
place, (not excluding, but including the other two) and so may comprehend them
of the dispersion James 1. 1. I deny also his consequent, for whether it was
the Gentiles (as most probable) that were afar off in affection, or the
succeeding ages of Jews in time, or the dispersed Jews in place, none of these
were yet called, and therefore the gracious promise was to be applied to them
for the future, according to that note of Camerarius, far off, must not only
be understood of place, but of mind, and judgment; This Mr. T. seems to assent
to, loosing his former hold, when he says, if it be meant in the sense, that
it is used, Ephesians. 2. 15. (not Romans 2. 15. as he unjustly impeaches me) yet
they are said to be afar off in respect of Gods favors or their affection to
him, not in respect of time; which is a most palpable untruth; for even because
they are afar off in respect of Gods favor, or their affection to him,
therefore they are afar off in respect of time; Gods calling is wrought by
means, which are not Instantaneous, but successive; with this agrees de Dieu,
when he says Beza his reason, that afar off should signify future Generations
of Jews, not Gentiles afar off in place, or affection, because Peter here
speaking knew not the calling of the Gentiles till Acts 10. cannot hold good,
because an extraordinary inspired Apostle, and acquainted with the Prophets,
that are full of the calling of the Gentiles, could not be ignorant of the
thing; only he perceived not the time to be so near till Acts 10. and because
near, therefore future.

But he has a third Evasion as void of reason, as the two former pretended
reasons; it is frequent (says he) even in speeches like this to put the
Indicative Mood, Present tense, by an Enallage of tense for the Future;
Therefore the promise is to you, and your Children, in the present tense, must
be interpreted by the Future, the promise shall be to you, and your Children;
What Paedobaptist so weak that cannot tell him, this is to argue from a
particular to an Universal, and concludes as this, it is frequent to put the
Indicative Mood Present tense by an Enallage for the Future, Therefore to us a
son is born, in the Present tense must be interpreted by the future, to us a
son shall be born; This arguing would make for the Jews, who deny that Christ
is come in the flesh, and would sooner bring in Judaism by one Medium, then a
hundred Arguments from Analogies. But to prove his Antecedent, that in speeches
like this, the Present tense by an Enallage of tense is frequently put for the
future, he brings but one instance, Math. 5. 10. 12. Blessed are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is, that is, shall be the
kingdom of Heaven; Who ever interpreted it thus? Is not the kingdom of grace,
which they are possessed of already, the kingdom of Heaven, which is the same
specificall kingdom, and differs only modally, and in degrees of perfection,
from the kingdom of glory.

Mr. Tombs. 19. Section.
I Added, that by [Childreen] is no necessity to understand Infants, yet Mr. C.
contrary to the common use, as Ephesians. 6. 4. Colos. 3. 20. would have [Children]
restrained to infants. 1. Because of the notation of the word, (...) is from
(...) to bring forth, which I think he says salsly is given sometimes to
children in the womb, but if it be, then it overthrows his notation, for then
(...) is not from (...) to bring forth, for a child in the womb is not yet
brought forth. But how does it appear that (...) signifies properly a young
Child? or that Child is analogum to old and young? I had hitherto thought,
Child, and Parent had been Relatives, and that child signifies as well an
elder, as a younger. To that of the verb of the present tense answer is before.

How does Mr. C. prove that their Children they had were young Children? It is
vainly supposed, that the promise is to them, and their Childreen, as the Jews
Children were in Covenant with their Parents. The Text makes it belong neither
to Parents, nor Children, but those that God calls. Does Mr. C. think that the
unbelieving Jews had the promise? and yet they were in Covenant in his sense
before, even the whole Nation; Or does he think that Christ's blood was not
avenged on them? If it were, how was the remedy as large as the disease?

Reply.
IT is true that after all this bustle about the Major, he granted the Minor,
that the promise of grace belonged to believers with their Children, together
with the conclusion that both of them might be baptized; But had this evasion,
by those Children were not meant Infants, but grown men, now he adds that by
[Children] is no necessity to understand Infants, I yield, unless the context
limit it, and the subject matter require restraint, for (...) (says Leigh) is
a general term used to set forth all sorts of Children, of what age, Sex, or
degree whatsoever, so that according to the notation of the word, the promise
is to Children indefinitly, and in respect of the matter is equivalent to an
Universal, at least including Infants. The promise is to Children, Infants are
Children as well as Elders, Therefore the promise is to Infants. With this
agrees Vossius, fit mentio liberorum (...) sine descretione aetatis, unde
liquet non minus parvulos a Petro comprehendi, quam cum Deus diceret Abrahamo,
Genesis 17. 7. ^ro Deus tuus, and seminis tui, mention is made simply of Children
without any distinction of age, when it is clear that little ones are no less
comprehended of Peter, than when God said to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed. Nay it is apparent, that it is especially meant
of little ones, because they are distinguished from the present converts, who
probably many of them were young men, and women; now when we distinguish
between men and children, we suppose the one Adult, the other not grown up, and
it can not rationally be conjectured otherwise, because the Apostle does join
them with their Parents in the same promise, and not leave them to stand by
themselves, as grown persons must.

He does not say, The promise is to you, and your Children, your Kinsmen, your
Parents, for likely those present had all these Relations; But to your
children, to express that theirs were covenanted in them; else it would have
been cold comfort, to have said, that formerly you, and your little ones were
in Covenant, but now if you be Christians, they are excluded, till they make
profession of themselves; To remove this scruple, The Apostle alluding to Genesis
17. 7. says the promise is to you, and your Children also, as accordingly is
determined by learned Calvin upon the place, Quod patribus filios adjunxit,
pendet e^ ver bis promissionis, ere Deus tuus, and seminis tui, ubi Deus fili^s
patribus accenset in adoptionis gratia; hic ergo locus abunde refellit
Anabaptistas, qui infantes ex fidelibus genitos a baptismo arcent, quasi non
sint ^cclesiae membra; Effugium in Allegorico sensu captant, ac filios
interpretantur, qui spiritualiter geniti sunt, sed nihil proficiunt tam crass a
imprudentia: Palam est, hoc dictum fuisse a Petro, quia Deus gentem unam
peculariter adoptaverit, quod autem jus adoptionis etiam infantibus commune
esset, testis fuit circumcisio. But Mr. T. says that contrary to the common
use, I would have children restrained to Infants, wherein are two untruths; for
1. As may appear by the premises, I grant [(...)] indefinitly may signify
offspring at large, more properly young Children, or Infants, in this place
may be extended to posterity in general, but more peculiarly, at least
inclusively points at little ones contradistinguished to Parents, and them of
age. 2. It is not contrary to the common use of the word; but the word rather
is more commonly used for Infants, for when a woman is said to be in pain, and
bring forth, this word is used John 16. 21. Luke 1. 31. Math. 1. 26. Luke 1.
51. his Instances of Ephesians. 6. 4. Col. 3. 2. pretends but to prove that the
word is sometimes used for grown Children, which I grant, I think the former
Ephesians. 6. 4 makes rather against him, for Parents may provoke their Children to
wrath, when they are but two, or three years old, and may begin (...) from
their Infancy, and in their Infancy to instill some Christian principles,
long before in their sense, they are capable of Baptism. When he said Children
mentioned, Acts 2. 39. were not Infants but grown men, I replied there were
many circumstances in the Text overthrew that, 1. The word is (...) which comes
from (...) to bring forth, given sometimes to Children in the womb, for the
most part to them that are newly born, or young This Examiner corrects this
by-thought, saying, he thinks I say falsely that it is given sometimes to
Children in the womb; sweet language, especially if he think amiss; he might
have considered that (...) the root signifies not always to bring forth, but
sometimes to beget, Homer. Odys. 3. (...), whom Ulysses begot, Bacchus in the
womb is called (...), Jupiters Child, or offspring. Its applied to women in
travel, before the Childbirth, John 16. 21. (...), a woman when she is in
travel has sorrow, because her hour is come, some Copies have it, (...) her
day is come, howsoever she is not yet delivered, which the words following
insinuates, as soon as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more the
anguish (...) is to beget Children, as Budaeus, and the Epigram renders it,
(...), is as well begetting, and carrying children in the womb, as bringing
them forth, 1 Timothy 2. 15. (...) she shall be saved in Childbearing, (...) is
murdering of Children, though it by potions in the womb, (...) is to beget
Children, so Xenephon uses it, (...) accompanying with women we beget Children;
Herodotus in Terpsicore calls a woman (...) that is fruitful to conceive
Children, (...) (whence immediately comes (...)) signifies to beget, and (...)
to conceive Children, as Aristotle dist^nguishes, (...). and (...) is not
interpreted by Budeus, Scapula, George Perkins, and others foetus, proles,
soboles, fruit, offspring issue, which is properly so called in the womb, as
fruit of the womb, etc.

By this I hope it appears that I said not falsely, when I said it was
sometimes given to Children in the womb, which I conceive he was jealous, by
letting go his former hold, with this (...); but if it be, then it overthrows
his notation, for then (...) is not from (...) to bring forth, for a child in
the womb is not yet brought forth. By that which is already said, is manifest,
that it overthrows not my notation, for (...) comes remotely from (...) that
signifies not only to bring forth, but to beget, conceive, and travel withal
in the womb, as has been proved out of Scripture and Classick Authors, and a
child in the womb is brought forth though not a secundina from the Tun^cle it
is wrapped in the matrice, yet a femore Patris, from the Fathers loins, (...).
But what if in this signification, it had not suited exactly with the notation,
had therefore the notation been false? Mr. T. might remember that of Aquinas,
non a quo, sed ad quod imponuntur vocabula, and of the Philosopher (...), words
signify not by nature, but (...) by imposition, wherein (...) for the most part
Derivatives (whence I drew m^ne Argument) su^ts with the Primitives; yet
sometimes they signify (...) by hap-hazard, sometimes (...) by the contrary.
Mr. T. contradicting himself here, ^^gh^ly dete^m^ns this controversy page
108. Antipaedobaptist. 1 Part. where he says, vis and no^ma, the rule and
measure of words, and their sense in use, as Horat. de art Poetica, nor is the
use alw^^es according to special reason, but ex placito, as it pleased ^he
users or beginners. Otherwise no reason can be given why from (...) Cadas, the
same root should come a Noun signifying a Saint, and a whore (...) Barach
should signify to bless, and to curse, (...), a crime, thing polluted, and a
pious fact, (...) a medicine, and a poison; sacer holy, and detestable, with
many more. All this is true, yet (...) Cados more properly signifies a Saint
than a whore, because the forementioned root signifies to sanctify, or make
holy, and (...) more properly signifies a holy than execrable thing, because
(...), and (...) whence it has its notation, signifies a pure thing without
mixture of earth, and for the same reason it does appear that (...) signifyes
properly a young child, because it comes from (...) to beget, conceive,
travel, or bring forth, which I think fully answers his Question, as also that
(upon the same ground) child is analogum to old, and young? nomen eisi sit
commune, ratio tamen ejus est prius, and perfectius in uno membro analogato,
quam in alio, young children are nearer their birth, and more properly called
children than they that are stricken in years, and remoter from it: I imagine
Mr. T. when he hears the word child without addition, will not thereby
understand an old man; And whereas he says he had hitherto thought that child,
and parent had been Relatives, and that child signifies as well an elder, as a
younger, he may think so still, and put all in his eye he gains thereby, and
see no worse; for Relata ad pater and filius, not pater, and partus; the child,
who is (...), or partus may possibly be without a Father, as our Savior in
respect of his humane nature, or the Father may be dead before the child be
brought forth; yet the child nevertheless is (...); where is the Correlative
that ought mutuo ponere, and be (...) convertible; but he cunningly says that
he had thought that child, and Parent, meaning the Mother, had been Relatives;
It seems then these three thousand the Apostle converted, and baptized were
women, but he calls them (...) men of Judah ver. 14. (...) men of Israel 22.
(...); men and brethren 29. To that he says to the verb of the present tense
answer is before, I say also the reply is before, I am sumus ergo pares, so I
think we are quits.

To his Question how do I prove their children they had were young children? I
return, how does he prove 3000. men of Judea, and Israel gathered together out
of several Provinces had not at the least some young children? The household of
Lydia, Stephanas, and the Jailer, may possibly be thought, not probably
conjectured to be without Infants; But that three thousand should be without
Infants, no man will say but he that is resolved upon contradictions, be the
evidence never so clear. Mr. T. has been in the army, where single men, and
unmarried men are designed for the service on purpose, yet I am confident he
could not find out in a body three thousand, no nor three hundred, scarce sixty
together, that were without young Children, and then shall we think this of the
Jews a fruitful nation, that had the further advantage of Polygamie, or many
wives? It would be hard to prove demonstratively that any of the three thousand
had Parents, Brethren, Sisters, Masters, Servants, yet a gross absurdity
deserving Sardonick laughter to deny it.

To my third circumstance in the Text, the Finis (...), the end to whom the
promise is, to you, and your children; The Jews children under the Law, were in
Covenant with their Parents, the Charter is confirmed under the Gospel to them,
and their Children; he answers, saying, it vainly supposed that the promise is
to them, and their Children, as the Jews Children were in Covenant with their
Parents; I reply the word [as] may relate either to circumstantials, or
substantials, if his meaning be, that the promise is not to them, and their
Children, as the Jews Children were in Covenant in respect of circumstantials,
I yield it, but this is nothing to the purpose; But if he mean that the promise
in regard of substantials is not to them, and their Children, as the Jews
Children were in Covenant, it is so far from being va^n, that in that vein has
run the issue of the whole Church from the Apostles till the German
Anabaptists, who I know not by what unhappy (...), or (...) corroding, burst
out o^ the Channel, have begot so dangerous an imposthume, or Pleuresie, that
I pray God it may be cured by Lenitives, without Phlebotomie. To which dictate
of Mr. T. I think it sufficient for the present to oppose the Orthodox
judgments of two, with neither of which he is to be compared. First Whitaker
contra Duraeum page 685. Circumcisi olim Infantes sunt propter foedus, nunc
propter candem causam baptizandi sunt, id enim ex analogia utriusque Sacramenti
necessario consequitur, Infants formerly were Circumcised by reason of the
Covenant, for the same cause they are now to be baptized, for that follows
necessarily from the Analogy of both Sacraments. The other is Doctor Sibbs
Phil. 3. 3. page 32. who faith, The Sacraments before and after Christ, were in
substance all one, as the Church was one, and the same, they may be said to be
baptized as we, and we Circumcised as they, the difference was only in the
outward Ceremony, and show, which the Church then being young had need of.

His saying is true, (therefore let us set Thress^m notam a white mark upon it
for the rarity, as the Jews a Statue (...) to the good Publican Sueton, in
Flav. Vesp. c. 1.) that the Text makes it belong neither to Parents, nor
Children, but those that God calls? yet his Interrogative point spoils all,
which surely I may rather impute to him, then he the misquotation Romans 2. 15.)
to me; But he might have assumed, God had called these three thousand Jews,
Parents, and Children, Ergo the promise was to them both; for though I believe
not that the unbelieving Jews had the promise, yet I believe these believing
Jews (that were pricked in heart, said men, and brethren what shall we do?
received the word gladly) had the promise: The Jews before Christ's Incarnation
had the promise, because they believed credenda, things to be believed* at, and
after the Incarnation, they had the promise continued, that entertained Christ,
they were defeated of the promise that rejected him. It is false, that I think,
that the unbelieving Jews sensu composito, while unbelieving, had the promise,
and that they were in Covenant in that sense before, even the whole Nation;
They that were in Covenant, and visible believers till Christ was revealed, not
entertaining that further Revelation (being a fundamental) through invincible
obstinacy became Apostates, and branches broken off. And to his last Question;
I think Christ's blood was avenged upon the unbelieving Jews, Parents with
Children; I think all his blood was expiatory, and satisfactory for the
believing Jews Parents with Children, generibus singulorum, to all sexes,
conditions, ages; and therefore the remedy as large as the disease; So his
Questions (for all have a whole gross of them) are answered.

Master Tombs 20. Section.
NExt Mr. C. argues thus, They that are holy with a Covenant-holiness, are
capable of the outward visible part of blessing: but Infants of believers are
holy with a Covenant-holiness, Therefore they are capable of the outward, and
visible part. Of which Syllogism I might have denied the Major, there being a
Covenant-holiness according to election, which does not always instate the
person in that which he calls the outward visible part of the blessing, by
which he means title to Baptis. But I denied the Minor, understanding it of the
outward Covenant* holiness, as they call it, which I truly said, is gibberish,
and however Vossius, Bullinger ( for Grotius I think means otherwise) conceive
of it, or the Assembly, yet it is a me^r mystake, and that holiness of
Children, which is mentioned 1 Cor. 7. 14. is truly said by me to be only
Matrimonial holiness, or legitimation. And his Argument out of Mr. Baxter I
justly retorted, that in six hundred times, in which holy is used in Scripture,
in none of them it is found for outward Covenant holiness intiluling to
Baptism: which is a right way of answering, though it be called indirect by the
Logicians. And as for that he replies, that Romans 11. 16. I confessed at Ross
Covenant holiness is meant, I grant it, but not outward Covenant holiness
intiluling to Baptism, but that real saving holiness, which is according to
the election of grace, according to which Jews elected shall hereafter be
graffed in again*

Reply.
THat the promise belonged to Infant Children, was thus further ^videnced, The
blessing is as large as the curse, but the curse was extended even to Children
before they could actually believe ( his blood be upon us, and upon our
children) Therefore the blessing. To this he accommodates now no answer, but
instead thereof, bolts out this Question [doth he think that Christ's blood was
not avenged on them? if it were, how was the remedy as large as the disease?
how satisfactorily let any intelligent man Judge; Christ's blood was avenged
upon the murdering Jews, and their Infant children, therefore does he think, it
was not extendable to the believing Jews, and their Infant-children? Reason
dictates the contrary. His evasion in the conference, was more colorable,
thus. If by blessing was meant the Inward, and spiritual part of the covenant
it might be true, but that was not to the present purpose, seeing it is not
known to us; but if the outward, and visible part, he denied that Infants were
capable of the blessing as well as liable to the curse, which distinction was
thus taken away; They that are holy with a Covenant holiness are capable of the
outward visible part of the blessing, But Infants of believers are holy with a
Covenant holiness, Therefore they are capable of the outward, and visible part.
Of this Syllogism he says, he might have denied the Major, Its strange a man
should be more absurd upon deliberation, than on a sudden, as is evident he is
by his reason, for (says he) there is a Covenant holiness according to
election, which does not always instate the person in that which I call the
outward part of the blessing, by which I mean title to Baptism; what he means
by this Centaur of Covenant-holiness by election is hard to conjecture, whether
of elect Infants before they be born, or of elect Infidels before they be
called, or of believers, or unbelievers, sanctified Infants, before profession.
If he mean it of elect Infants before they be born, it is ridiculous, seeing
the subject of the Question is Infants of believers, they that are actually in
being, not a subject in posse without an Accident, an Accident in posse without
a subject, at the best but ens fictum possibile. If he mean elect Infidels
before they be called, how are they holy, that have nothing in them but the old
Adam? It seems holy Saul while he was a persecutor, holy Dionysius, while a
Heathen Philosopher, holy 3000. Jews, while they were crucifying Christ. If he
mean of unbelievers, or believers sanctified Infants, first let me enquire of
him, what groudn he has from Scripture, or any divine Revelation that Infants
of unbelievers are sanctified, that there is salvation out of the visible
Church, that any such a^^ promised to be so qualified, till professors: Every
act of Faith has for its object Gods promise, or Revelation, and whatsoever is
not of Faith, even in this sense is sin. Secondly for the sanctified holiness
of believers Infants according to election, if he mean that they are elected
to, for the future, and have not yet, that cannot denominate them holy, if he
mean that holiness of election they enjoy for the present, Master T. confesses,
that holiness makes them capable of the outward visible part of the blessing,
and intitles them to baptism, and that if he knew they were so qualified, he
would baptize them; The Question is not whom he according to his light may
baptize, but who are baptizable; But he knew that my proposition pointed at
none of these, and therefore idely beat the air, as his next words discovers,
for he says, he denied the Minor, understanding it, and so did I, of outward
Covenant holiness, upon which he bestows two taunts. 1. [As they call it.] 2.
That he truly said [that it was gibberish] yet confesses that Vossius,
Bullinger, and the late assembly did so conceive of it; To these he might have
joined all the Harmonies of confessions of Reformed Churches, Tertullian de
anima Cap. 39. Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait,
tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina, caeterum inquit
immundi nascerentur, quasi designatos tamen sanctitatis and per hoc etiam
salutis, intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut bujus spei pignora matrimoniis,
quae retinenda censuerat, patrocinarentur; The Apostle says he, avers, they
may be procreated holy of either sex being sanctified as well of the
Prerogative of the seed, as the Discipline of education, otherwise he says
they would be born unclean, willing the children of the faithful to be
understood as designed to holiness, and consequently salvation, that he might
maintain the pledges of this hope to marriages, which he judged to be retained:
Junius upon these words [ quasi designatos] glosses thus; alludit ad priscum
Romans morem, qui ante annum ferm^ (...), Praetores alios designabant quam
inirent Magistratum, etc. he al(...)es ^^yes he to the ancient Roman custom,
who designed alm(...) ear before they entered their Office, Consuls, Praetors,
and other Magistrates. So that the sense is, the children of the faithful, to
be as it were designed to holiness, and consequently salvation, even as
Magistrates were wont to be designed: here in the Church they are designed by a
common call, there in heaven, they enter glory by a singular call, and benefit.
Athanasius in his 114. Question, being asked whether Infants dying go to be
punished, or to the Kingdom, says (...), your children are holy, and (...),
Infants of believers that are baptized enter into Heaven; Hugo Grotius. Mr. T.
his great friend (for all he vainly thinks he means otherwise) here forsakes
him, saying, non loquitur Apostolus de sanctitate naturali, etc. The Apostle
says he, speaks not of natural holiness, and inhering to the nature of
children, but of holiness adhering to them outwardly, that is of the holiness
of the Covenant, for the children of believers are comprehended in the Covenant
of grace, and so far forth are judged holy of God. Well said Hugo; What now
says Master T. to his beloved Pamphilus, being defeated of his Philomena? but
in the language of Charinus, nullane in re cuiquam hominum esse fidem? Terent.
Andr. The Assemby of Divines consisting of a hundred and fifty Reverend and
learned Ministers, indeed the Representative of the Church of England crosses
him in this. First in the Directory page 21. Infants are Christians, and
federally holy before Baptism, and therefore are they Baptized, and this
confirmed by Ordinance of Parliament, Larger Catechism page 138 Infants
descending from Parents, either both, or but one of them professing Faith in
Christ, and obedience to him, are in that respect within the Covenant, and to
be baptized. Lesser Catechism, page 176. Infants of such as are Members of the
visible Church are to be baptized, in both places quoting 1 Cor. 7. 14. else
were your children unclean, but now they are holy.

All these he says with Vossius, Bullinger, the Parliament, with hund^eds more
of the greatest lights the world has had, are meer^ mistaken, and that
holiness of Children, which is menti(...) 1 Cor. 7. 14. is truly said by him,
to be only matrimonial s(...)iness, or legitimation; O infallible Oracle,
Credit me folium vobis recitare Sibylles: we have found another Socrates but
with this difference. 1. The former was judged the wisest man by the Oracle of
Apollo, this by his own Oracle and opinion, (...) I truly said; The former was
(...), dissembling he knew nothing, This other is plain-dealing, professing in
Mysteries, the whole Church was ignorant of before, he knows all things.

I will not loose time, nor blur paper, about his Trivial criticism, [(...)]
whether it be the unbelieving husband is, or has been sanctified in, or to, or
for the wife, or (...) believing wife, as Beza's Copies has it; Nor will I
take advantage of his grant that it is easy for us to bring ten for one who
interpret this Text as we do, if we understand it of those, who are called
Calvinists, though he thinks scarce so many of the Papists, and Lutherans. His
impertinent quotation of Augustine Tom. 7. de peccat. merito, and remission. c.
26. who rejects not the Covenant-holiness, but original holiness. I will pass
by his Acyrology, or Catachresis, that in impropriety, or abuse of speech, the
sense might be as he conceived it most likely to be thus understood; The
unbelieving husband, though an unbeliever is sanctified, that is all one to his
wife in respect of the lawful enjoyment of him as her husband, as ^f he were
indeed sanctified to God; because (forsooth) Piscator interprets some thing in
the fore going verse so.

Neither will I take notice of the feebleness of his Argument taken from (...).
which signifies chastity, or to be chaste, therefore (...) may signify so; and
because it may signify, therefore it does signify so, because they all come
from the same root, which I believe is untrue; for whether (...) holy come from
(...) to worship, (as Jansenius would have it) or from (...), as Aretius in his
Problems, or from the Hebrew word signifying a feast, as Pasor, from (...), and
(...), as Beda and the best Grammarians) it has no affinity with the
forementioned words; These with a miscellanious ^ubbidg of much more I
supersede, whereby like the Limner that could not draw the picture to the life,
he casts a veil over the face of truth, and with that General that durst not
face his enemy, raises a thick mist, that he may march away in the dark.

But to his answer, That 1 Cor. 7. 14. is meant only of matrimonial holiness,
or legitimation, it was thus replied; That which in Scripture is taken almost
six hundred times in a distinct sense, and not once for matrimonial holiness,
or legitimation, cannot be so meant here, but it is taken in Scripture almost
six hundred times in a distinct sense, and not once for matrimonial holiness,
or legitimation, therefore it cannot be so meant here.

In stead of answering, he goes about, 1. To disgrace this Argument, and his
Opponent saying, it is out of Mr. Baxter; What then? May not I as well
entertain truth from him, as Mr. Tombs error from Grotius, the German
Anabaptists, and them of Alba-Julia? Whose Monument he does not only
prodigiously erect, as Artimesia did of her husband Mausolus, but with her
drinks drown their very ashes, Valor. Max. 171. That in England, Ireland,
Scotland, his Trophies are erected,

Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis.

Secondly he says, That in six hundred times, in which holy is used in
Scripture, in none of them it is found for outward Covenant holiness,
entituling to Baptism; [Entitling to Baptism,] Is there any such thing in my
Syllogism? Look you never so strictly to that Gamester he will slir a die,

Etsi non aliquo nocuisset, mortuus esset.

Let us see how he makes that good anon; In the mean time observe how he
manages his Bactrian like fight, tergiversando, shooting over his shoulders,
which he calls retorting, and a right way of answering, though it be called
indirect by the Logicians; What Logicians call it a right way of answering?
Seton in his Officio Respondentis says, non est fas ut responsor ulla
disputanti objiciat, aut questiones proponat, suum agat negotium, id est
objecta repetat, repellat, solvat. It is not lawful for the R^pondent to
object any thing to the Opponent, or propound Questions, let him tend his own
business, that is, let him repeat the Objections, repel, unty them; with him
agrees Crakenthorp, Burgersdicius, and others; Neither do I find any thing that
makes for him in his sense; its true Keckerman System. Log. page 444. speaks of
an indirect Syllogism, which concludes by that which is indirect, or absurd,
which by Aristotle, lib. priorum, cap. 2. is called (...), A Syllogism bringing
to that which is impossible; And 2. priorum cap 15. is called (...), a
Syllogism of contraries; but this is in the Opponent, not unmannerly snatching
from him by the Respondent, howsoever not to be used to invert the order of the
Dispute, when there is another way of answering: But to return to his retorting
Syllogism; That which in Scripture is taken almost six hundred times in a
distinct sense, and not once for Covenant-holiness, cannot be meant here, but
it is taken almost six hundred times in a distinct sense, and not once for
covenant-holyness, Therefore it cannot be meant here: I might deny his Major,
which may be false, and mine in a contingent matter true; (...) is often taken in
a distinct signification from a veil, and not once for a veil, therefore not
in that place, 1 Cor. 11. will not include. But his Minor is apparently false,
as appeared by instance, Romans 11. 16. If the first fruit be holy, the lump is
also holy, and if the root be holy, so is also the branches; To this he answers
saying, he confessed at Ross, Covenant-holiness was meant by it (which are the
words of the Argument) but not outward holin^ss intitling to Baptism (which are
his own addition) but that real saving holiness, which is according to the
election of grace, according to which Jews elected, shall be graff d^n again;
This novel interpretation crosses Beza, who says children are holy, and
comprehended in the Covenant from the womb; Bowls, who says they are holy by
outward holiness, by which they are adjudged to be in Covenant: Ravenel, who
says, sancti, id est, in foedore Dei comprehensi, and segregati a prophanis,
ut non habeantur pro prophanis, sed pro Christianis; holy, that is comprehended
in the Covenant of God, and separated from profane, that they not be accounted
profane but Christians; Diodate, who says, the wild branches are the Gentiles
inserted into the body of the Church, and admitted into the Covenant made with
Abraham; Wendel, who says, vocantur sancti, quia foederati, they are called
holy, because in Covenant, and that no man may doubt of what holiness he means,
he says, est sanctitas externa, and foederalis, an outward, and Covenant
holiness, lib. 1. c. 10. These 8. with many more, able to swell a volume, whose
authorities are more authentic than his.

Mine intended brevity will not suffer me to give reasons of this genuine
interpretation, only thus much by the way, that holiness is here meant, from
which the Jews were fallen, and the natural branches were broken off, but it
was outward covenant holiness from whence these Jews were fallen, and the
natural branches were broken off, Therefore outward Covenant holiness is here
meant; The Major is clear in it self, and may be further evidenced from the
connection betwixt the 16. and 17. verses. The Minor is thus confirmed, The
Jews were fallen from that holiness, and the natural branches broken off,
which they were capable to loose; but it was outward Covenant holiness, from
whence the Jews were fallen, and they were capable to loose, therefore it was
outward Covenant holiness, from whence the Jews were fallen, and the natural
branches broken off. The Minor again is thus proved, either they were liable to
loose outward Covenant holiness, or inward holiness according to election, but
not inward holiness according to election, therefore outward Covenant-holiness.
Not inward holiness according to election, then the immortal seed would dye,
the gifts, and graces of God were not without repentance, those whom God
justifies, them he would not glorify, Romans 8. 30 Which is to comply with the
Papists, Pelagians, and Remonstrants. Secondly that holiness is here meant
according to which the branches of the wild olive were graffed in, but it was
covenant-holiness according to which the branches of the wild olive were
graffed in, therefore outward Covenant-holines is here meant. That it was
outward Covenant-holiness according to which the branches of the wild olive
were graffed in, appears in that it was visible (which that according to
election is not) the branches were visibly broken off, they were visibly
graffed in, (...), that is as Beza, and the Syriak translates it, pro ipsis for
them, that is in ramorum defractorum locum, into the room, or stead of the
branches broken off.

Thirdly, that holiness is here meant, for which the Apostles gives the
Gentiles a caveat, least they be broken off* Romans 11. 20. Be not high minded
but fear, but it was outward Covenant-holiness for which the Apostle gives them
a caveat least they should be broken off, not inward holiness according to
election, for from that he had assured them they could not be broken off, Romans
8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; verse the last
(...) I am persuaded etc. Therefore outward covenant holiness is here meant.

Fourthly that holiness is here meant, according to which the body of the Jews
shall be graffed in again, but it is covenant-holiness according to which the
body of the Jews shall be graffed in again, therefore covenant-holiness is
here meant. The Minor is thus made good, the body of the Jews shall be graffed
in according to that they are natural branches, v. 24. but it is
covenant-holiness according to which they are natural branches, otherwise all
the elect Proselytes, and Gentiles, though not of the stock of Abraham, Job in
Syria, Abedmelesh in Aethiopia were natural branches, therefore it is covenant
holiness according to which the body of the Jews shall be graffed in again.

Fifthly holiness is meant here in that sense, in which it is used 1 Pet. 2. 9.
ye are a holy nation, but there it is used for Covenantholiness, therefore it
is meant here in that sense, for the Apostle writ to them as holy according to
profession, not holy according to election, in which sense he was ignorant of
their condition, and tells some of them, 1 Pet. 4. 17. What will be the end of
them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the ungodly, and sinners appear? Lastly that holiness is here
meant, that is in every Epistle, stil^ng them to whom the Apostle writes (...)
Saints, or holy, but that was a covenant-holiness according to profession, not
inward holiness according to election, which is a mystery as secret as the last
judgment, which neither Apostle, nor Angel, nor any save God himself knows;
Therefore it is covenant-holiness.

Mr. Tombs. 21 Section.
I said, Ezra 9. 2. holy seed is all one with a legitimate seed according to
the Law of Moses; Against this it is objected, that then the meaning should be,
The holy seed, that is the lawfully begotten Jews have mingled themselves with
the seed of those Lands, that is the Bastards of those lands. But I deny this
consequence. The sense is this, the holy seed, that is, those who were
descended by lawful generation of allowed women, these have taken to
themselves of the daughters of the nations, whom God forbade them to marry,
which is plain out of the verse 1, 2. So that the people of the Land with whom
they mingled themselves, are not considered as illegitimate in their birth, but
as not allowed to the Israelites, and yet the holy seed is that seed, which by
a right generation according to Moses Law was legitimate.

As for what he says, that Jepthe was a Saint, and yet a Bastard, it is true,
he was holy in one respect, as born from above, yet unholy by natural birth.

And whereas he says, Moses had children by an Ethiopian woman, and yet not
unholy, I grant it: For the Ethiopian woman was not forbidden: Nor were Rahab,
though a Canaanitess, nor Ruth a Moabitess when they joined themselves to the
God of Israel, prohibited, or their children illegitimate: yet this is not the
same with covenant-holiness, intituling to Church Ordinances, but legitimation
intituling to be reckoned in the genealogy, and inheritance of Israel.

Reply.
MAster Tombs his retorting Argument vanishing like a Comet in smoke, and
stink, (...), Eurip. I returned from whence by his irregular motion, we had
digressed, and proved that holiness is never taken in Scripture for Matrimonial
clearness in opposition to illigitimation, not in that place, Ezra 9. 2. The
holy seed have mingled themselves with the seed of those lands, which is either
his only, or principal hold, (as far as ^s gatherable out of his books)
therefore in no place; Then he denied the Antecedent, which unsound answer he
now paints over thus, saying he said, Ezra 9. 2. Holy seed is all one with a
legitimate seed according to the Law of Moses; for this heterodox dictate he
brings neither reason, nor Testimony, no not so much as Phifer, Muncer, or
Knipperdoling, but only his own Sultan-like breath, I say so, therefore it is
so, it must be so; To which it is sufficient for the present to oppose two,
which were of greater esteem in the reformed Churches, than ever he was, or I
think, will be, 1. Peter Martyr Loc. Com. mun. class. 4. c. 8. Si tantum
civilem puritatem prolis inde susceptae adduxeris, quid nobis magis tribues,
quam infideles habeant, illorum enim filii, si ex matrimonio procreentur,
legitimi sunt, and ut justi haeredes admittuntur, quare videtur quidem aliud
judicasse quod liberis infidelium non sit datum, sed quod ad ecclesiam Dei
pertineat, and ad electionem, and promissionem; If thou shall only bring in a
civil purity from one, or both parents being believers, what will thou afford
us more than Infidels have? For their children, if they be born in marriage are
legitimate, and are admitted as lawful heirs, therefore the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.
14. (and so here Ezra) seems to have holden out some other thing, that may not
be given to the children of Infidels, but that appertains to the Church of God,
and to election, and promise. 2. Paraeus in locum, etiam mere infidelium liberi
noscuntur legitimi, nihil igitur conjugibus istis tribueret prae mere
infidelibus, The children even of mere Infidels are born legitimate, therefore
it would attribute no more to those yokes than to mere Infidels.

Against his interpretation it was further objected, if it be meant of
matrimonial cleanness, than this must be the meaning of the words, the holy
seed, that is the lawfully begotten Jews have mingled themselves with the seed
of those lands, that is, the bastards of those lands, but that cannot be the
meaning, for happily there were some bastards among the Jews, and in that sense
not holy, and no bastards among the heathens, but all, or the most legitimate,
and therefore in that sense not unholy, therefore it ^s not meant of
matrimonial holiness. He denies the consequence, which is proved thus, If God
forbid the holy seed to mingle with none but them that are unholy (which he
interprets bastards) then it will follow, the holy seed, that is, the lawfully
begotten Jews have mingled themselves with the seed of those lands, that is,
the bastards of those lands, but God forbids the holy seed to mingle with none
but them that are unholy, therefore it will follow the holy seed, that is the
lawfully begotten Jews have mingled themselves with the seed of those lands,
that is the bastards of those lands: The consequence is evident, If God forbid
them to mingle with none but those that are bastards in his sense, the meaning
is, the legitimate of the Jews have mingled with the bastards of the lands.
The Minor, that God forbids the holy seed to mingle with none but them that are
unholy is apparent from the opposition employed in the Text, the holy seed have
mingled themselves with the people, which argues the Jews had that holiness the
people had not, otherwise the speech would be incongruous, and the people might
reply; we, if it be but meant of legitimation, are as holy as you; and that the
Jews had a particular outward holiness, which other Nati^ons were not capable
of, appears by their washing of their garments, as thinking themselves
profaned, when they touched them but in the marketplace; which distinction of
holy, and unholy in this sense remained till Peter's vision Acts 10. Where v.
11. 12 a certain vessel descended unto him, as it had been a great sheet,
wherein were all manner fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and
creeping things, and fouls of the air, whereof some were clean, some unclean;
The clean represented the Jews before Christ, the unclean the Gentiles, v. 13.
There came a voice to him, rise Peter, kill, and eat. v. 14. Peter said, not so
Lord, for I have never eaten of any thing that is common or unclean; Common or
unclean are in opposition to holy, and is the word used. 1 Cor. 7. 14. else
were your children (...) unclean; 15. That God has cleansed call not thou
common, that is count not thou the Gentiles unholy, whom God intends henceforth
to graff into the stock of the natural olive, and to esteem them holy; holy now
all potentially, as having a capacity (the partitian wall being pulled down)
actually when they give their names to Christ: So that the sense is not (as he
says) the holy seed, that is, those who were descended by lawful generation
of allowed women, these have taken to themselves of the daughters of the
Nations whom God forbad them to marry; but thus, the holy seed, that is, the
Israelites that are in Covenant with God have taken to themselves of the
daughters of the nations whom God forbad them to marry, being not in covenant
with him, which is plain out of the verses 1, 2. So that I confess the people
of the land, with whom they mingled themselves, are not considered as
illegitimate in their birth, though that will inevitably follow from the
antithesis, (if his interpretation be admitted) but as not allowed to the
Israelites, who were to marry none, but they that were holy, and in Covenant;
Therefore the Nations are not simply excluded as such, but as unproselyted. And
the holy seed is not that seed which by a right generation according to Moses
Law was legitimate; Then those Apostate Jews, husbands and wives we read of in
Buxtorfius and Maymonides being by a right generation, according to Mose Law
legitimate, were a holy seed, for all they uncircumcised themselves, than which
nothing can be more absurd, and all the Jews persisting in covenant, whether
legitimate or illegitimate were a holy seed.

Hence results this Argument. That holy seed is not here meant in which the
contrary thereof even bastards are comprehended, but bastards are comprehended
under holy seed, therefore legitimation is not here meant: The Minor is
apparent, because it is spoken to the whole Congregation, whereof some were
Bastards, and bastard Israelites mingling with the Nations, had joined an
unholy seed with a holy, and fell under this reproof.

What Mr. Tombs talks of Jepthe makes him guilty of that he accuses others, of
running like Ahimaaz without his errand, and fighting like the Antabatae with
his eyes shut, for he never eyes the Question, which was not of Jephthe's
saintship according to election, but covenant-holiness, for all he was
illegitimate in his birth, which gave him capacity to circumcision, and other
peculiar ordinances of Gods people, whereby (as the means) he attained to be a
Saint, and justified by faith, Hebr. 11. To this Argument, Moses had children
by the Ethiopian woman, but they were not illegitimate, Therefore those that
were begot by mixture with the Nations, were not illegitimate, he grants the
premises, and implyedly the conclusion, which is contradictory to his, for all
he says that the Ethiopian woman was not forbidden; Not forbidden, he means
when he married her by that positive Law, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. but long before her
death, why by virtue of that might not she, and her children be put away, as
well as those in Ezra's, and Nehemiah's time? But were there not other laws
before that to keep their tribes entire without profane mixture? Nay visible
remainders in the Law of nature, for breach of which God with indignation
expresses Genesis 6. 2. And the Sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, and they took them wives of all they chose. It was according to
this light that Genesis 27. 46. Rebeckah said to Isaak, I am weary of my life,
because of the daughters of Heth, if Isaak take a wife of the daughters of
Heth, what good shall my life do me? And Genesis 28. 8. Esau saw the daughters of
Canaan pleased not his father Isaak: This I think is sufficient to prove the
Ethiopian woman was forbidden; Howsoever after that law was given, Salmon had
children by Rahab, who was a Canaanitess, and Boaz by Ruth, who was a Mobitess,
and yet they were not illegitimate, or unholy in h^s canting language; To which
he answers, Rahab though a Canaanitess, Ruth a Moabitess, when they joined
themselves to the God of Israel, were not prohibited, nor their children
illegitimate; which is true, and enforces this conclusion contradictory to
his, therefore this is the same with Covenant-holiness entituling to Church
Ordinances, not legitimation (unless by consequence) intituling to be reckoned
in the Genealogy, and inheritance of Israel: for by being Proselytes they had
equal interest to circumcision, and all other Ordinances with the native Jews;
And though it was an Appendix thereof to be capable of inheritance among the
Jews, this can no more be called legitimation, than the manumission of a
servant that was not free before, or the naturalizing of an Alien, who was no
Dennizen before, can be so styled.

Mr. Tombs 22. Section.
THe last Argument Mr. C. used was this; They that Christ took up in his arms,
blessed, and said the Kingdom of God belongs unto them, pronounced a curse
upon those that despised, and would not receive them, are holy with a
Covenant-holiness; But Christ took up little children into his arms, blessed
them, said, the Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon
those that despised, and would not receive them: Therefore little children are
holy with a Covenant holiness, In this Argument I denied the Minor, after some
debate about the way of forming of it, in which I magined that fallacy, I do
not now upon sight deprehend, and particularly I denied that Christ pronounced
a curse upon those that despised, and would not receive them. Then he alleged
Matthew. 18. 2. Whence he argued, They to whom belongs the Kingdom of Heaven are
holy, and in Covenant. But to little children belongs the Kingdom of Heaven;
Therefore little children are holy, and in Covenant. In which Argument any
Reader may perceive he proved not that I denied, That Christ pronounced a curse
upon those that despised, and would not receive little children, or Infants,
and yet that Text he alleged did not say of little cildren, that to them
belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, but those that were not to be offended v. 6.
despised v. 10. were to be received in Christ's name, v. 5. were not little
children in age, but little ones in spirit, which appeared in that they are
said to be Believers v. 6. and to be converted and become as little children.
To which as the Relator himself sets it down, Mr. C. said, the meaning is not,
that the little children are converted, which is a grant of what I alleged,
that the little ones not to be offended, despised, but received, were not
little children in age, but affection of humility. Mr. C. added, But it has
relation to the disciples in the first verse, who must be converted from their
actual sins, and become as little children, which have no actual sin. At
which words it is true I said, and that justly, o how unhappy are the people
that are seduced with these toys, are you not ashamed? To which he replied,
and it seems is not ashamed that it is printed, [I see nothing worthy of shame]
whereas if this speech of his were true, then this is a truth, except men be
converted from their actual sins, and become as little children, which have no
actual sin, they shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: for this is the
meaning of Christ's words, Matthew. 18. 3. according to Mr. C. interpretation,
which whosoever believes must of necessity despair of Heaven, since as James
says chap. 3. 2. in many things we offend all, and John 1. Epist. chap. 1.
ver. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not
in us.

Reply.
IT was further evidenced, (which he calls the last Argument) that Infants were
holy with a Covenant-holiness thus, they that Christ took up in his arms,
blessed, said the Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon
those that despised, and would not receive them are holy with a
Covenantholiness: But Christ took up little children into his arms, blessed
them, said the Kingdom of God belongs unto them, pronounces a curse upon
those that despises and would not receive them; Therefore little children are
holy with a covenant holiness. In this Argument (he says) he denied the Minor,
and after some debate about the way of forming of it, he imagined that fallacy,
he does not now upon sight deprehend; It is well he acknowledges he has not
the spirit of infallibility, he that sees his mistake in this one proposition,
may have his eyes further opened, to discover his error in the whole
controversy: His mistakes were two, 1. In saying it was a fallacy of heaping
many particulars together, 2 a copulative proposition, that if one member of it
was false, the whole was false, but for these, his retractation makes amends,
if he had not linked two untruthes unto it, First that he particularly denied
that Christ pronounced a curse upon those that despised little children, and
that, that was to be proved, Secondly, that I alleged Matthew. 18. 2. for
clearing of which, the Reader is to be advertized, that I having told him, it
was not an explicit copulative proposition, neither was any member of it
false, seeing every branch of it was Scripture, I further pressed him to
instance in any of the particulars, that he thought made the least for me, and
I would begin with that; whereupon he (not I) mentioned, Mat. 18. 2. whence I
drew this Argument; They to whom belongs the Kingdom of Heaven are holy, and
in Covenant, but to little children belongs the kingdom of Heaven, therefore
little Children are holy, and in covenant. By this any reader may percieve I
proved that which was to be proved; And for that other part of the proposition,
that Christ pronounced a curse upon those that despised, and would not receive
little children, or Infants, I promised to prove that also in it order, and
would have endeavored by Gods assistance, if the time, and his patience would
have permitted, which will fall in anon; for the present he implies a denial
of my Minor, saying the Text I alleged, did not say of little children, that
to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, but those that were not to be offended
verse. 6. despised v. 10. were to be received in Christ's name v. 5. were not
little children in age, but little ones in spirit, which appeared in that they
are said to be believers, v. 6. and to be converted, and become as little
children. To which I reply, first, in general, that by (...) in the 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, verses is without all controversy meant a little child in age, only of
that in the sixth verse. [he that shall offend one of these littte ones] some
makes a scruple (because the gender is altered) whether it be meant of infants;
yet many are of opinion that Christ speaks even that of little ones in age, and
thinks Christ reckons them believers in him, because they have no other hope,
or confidence, exercise, no self-care, self-trust, or distrust full thoughts of
God, but are cast upon him, and take submissively what he orders to them,
according to that Psalm. 71. 5, 6. Thou have been my hope, O Lord, thou have
been my trust from my youth, upon thee have I been cast from my mothers womb.
So Psalm 22. 9. Thou did make me hope, when I was upon my mothers breasts, I
was cast upon thee from the womb, and as they are numbered Psalm. 115. 13. Revel.
19. 5. with the fearers of God, Ye that fear the Lord both small, and great,
and the scandalizing such is the harming of them, which those that denies them
Church Membership, and Baptism are conceived to be guilty of according to that
of Calvin. Harm. in locum, Sacrilega est audacia abigere procul ab ovili
Christi, quos ipse in sinu suo fovet, and quasi extraneos a clausa janua
rejicere, quos prohiberi non vult. It is Sacrilegious boldness to drive those
far from the fold of Christ, which he cherishes in his bosom, and to reject
them as strangers by shutting the gate against them, which he will not have to
be kept out; And this appears to be more than probable, because the next
foregoing speech does certainly include little children, when he says he that
shall receive one such little one in my name receives me. Beza its true is
singular, conceiving that by (...) is meant one that humbles himself as a
little child, and that he speaks not properly there of children; But the
Evangelist Luke who is of better authority says expressly chap. 9. 48. That
Christ said that of that little babe too that he took in his arms, and set in
the midst of them, he that receives this little child in my name receives me:
And so in Mark. 9. 36, 37. expressly, he that shall receive one of such little
children, (without mention of any other foregoing, but the child it self taken
into his arms) receives me. Therefore his allegation is false, that the Text
I alleged, did not say of little children, that to them belongs the Kingdom of
Heaven; for as Christ expressly says Mark 10. 14. suffer little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God; so he
says here by necessary consequence v. 3. except ye be converted and become as
little children ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. v. 4. whosoever
shall humble himself, as this little child, the same is the greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaven; for if they by conformity with this little child were
rendered capable of the Kingdom of Heaven, the little child, who was their
pattern, and president, was much more, there being not a bare analogical
Identity, as in doves and lambs, but a specificall sameness betwixt the
qualifications of little children, and those required in believers, which our
Savior puts out of doubt, when he says of such is the Kingdom of God; and if
it should be granted, that those that were not to be offended v. 6. despised v.
10. were not little children in age, but little ones in spirit, because they
are said to be believers v. 6. and to be converted and become as little
children, yet it is out of doubt, that the little child mentioned in the 2, 3,
4, 5, verses whose imitation Christ commends, was a little infant, and if to
those that imitated him, belonged the Kingdom of Heaven, to the child much
more, if a curse was pronounced against the despisers of the imitators, much
more against them that despised the pattern, and Prototype. Therefore I think
it is beyond any man's apprehension to conceive what advantage he can gather
from the Relators setting it down, that the meaning is not, that the little
children are converted, though it should be a grant in part of what he
alleged, that the little ones not to be offended, despised (according to Beza)
were not little children in age, but affection of humility, seeing that he
says about a little child v. 5. is a mistake, for it is meant of little
children in age (...) one of these little ones, such as he set in the midst of
them v. 2.

That which (he says) I added that it has relation to disciples in the first
verse, who must be converted from their actual sins, and become as little
children, which have no actual sins, is Orthodox, and agreeable to the Analogy
of faith: for in true repentance there is an aversio^ from the creature, and a
conversion to the Creator. Therefore it was a Lucian like scoff proceeding from
the spirit of malignity in him to say unjustly upon this occasion, how unhappy
are the people that are seduced with these toys, are you not ashamed? Whereas
he seduces the people with toys, whom we endeavor to undeceive with solid
truth, and the light of the Gospel, of which we are not ashamed; Therefore I
replied then, that he had learned of the man in Lucian to cry out (...) O
cursed, and to vilify that Argument he cannot answer, besides which I saw
nothing shame-worthy, nor do I yet, saving that to his verbal contumel^es, he
adds a surplusage in print; That if others of his judgment were like him, they
would not fall much short of that fell from the mouth of one as learned, and
godly, but far more meek-spir^ted than himself, Master Robert Bolton; Frantic
bedlam Anabaptists (says he) who are fitter to be out of the number of men,
and driven out of the bounds of humane nature, than to be disputed with, Assise
Sermon, page 13. which censure he may seem in part to merit by his uncharitable
vocife^ation, and exclamation against that speech of mine which is true; and it
is a truth, except men be converted from their actual sins, non ut non sint (as
Austin) sed ut non imputentur, not that they be not, but that they be not
imputed; and become as little children in innocence, and humility, which have
no actual sins negatively, because they are tabula rasae subjects not yet
capable, whereas true penitents are without actual sins privatively, not in
regard of the stain, and being, but of the guilt and curse, their sins being
made Christ's, and his righteousness theirs; ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven, that is, be capable of glory, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor coveteous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners shall enter into the kingdom of God, the same in effect is
repeated, Rev. 21. 8. And this is the meaning of Christ's words, Math. 18. 3.
not only according to mine interpretation, but of ancient and modern Divines,
famous in their generations, which would have been astonished to hear any one
so irrational, as to say whosoever believes it, must of necessity despair of
heaven; as if they could not be sinners by commission of sins; as, or
resembling little children, which have no actual sins, by pardon, or remission
of sins; for if Saint James says chap. 3. 2. In many things we offend all; yet
Saint John says, 1 John 2, 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father, Christ Jesus the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins:
And as John says, 1 Epist. chap. 1. 8. If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us, this is in regard of inherence and st^in;
so the same Apostle says, 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever abides in him sins not,
and verse. 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, that is with an intention before the
commission, delight in the commission, an acqu^escing in it after the
commission of sin. And this he knew to be my meaning, but that with the
Donatists he must ca^ell even with the clearness of the sun-beame, resembling
the rest of the litter of grievous wolves, as Mr. Tombs himself styles them,
of which Master Bolton speaks, Assise S^rmon 2. page 82. The furious
Anabaptists of our time, are as like the Donatists, as if they had spit them
out of their mouths.

Mr. Tom^e^, 23 Section.
THat which Master Cragge added, that the Disciples were believers which are
meant, Math 18. 6. and not the children, and yet says his Argument remains
unanswered, has more of impudence in it; for his Argument being that Christ
pronounced a curse on them that despised, and received not little ones in age,
and yet confessing that this was meant not of little ones in age, but
disciples, believers in him, it is the height of impudency to say his Argument
is unanswered, when his own confession answered it. Justly here after five
hours time, having promised but one, did I break off, and having had experience
of Mr. C. his mere cavelling at Rosse, and Ab^rgaveny, dwelling many miles from
that Town, and finding nothing in him, and those other Paedobaptists I have
answered, but a spirit of wrangling, I yielded not to any other dispute, nor
shall for time to come, being now sufficiently taught by experience what
dealing I am like to have to yield to such Disputes.

As for that which Mr. C. says he was hurried to that extemporal discourse
through importunity, I do not believe it, being advertised before, that if I
came to Abergaveny he would oppose me. That the speech of him that said I
answered nothing, was the speech of an impudent brazen-faced fellow, I think
any will judge who reads this my writing. For Mr. Baxter, whatever his worth
be, yet how justly I might say (though the words set down were not used as the
relat^r expresses them) that I have answered all he says against me, will
appear in the review of the Dispute between him and me, and others, of which
part of it is printed, part in the Press, and the rest (if the Lord permit)
shall not be slackened. Mr. C. Arguments from John 3. 5. Romans 11. and other
places, if they be not in his Sermon (to the examining of which, I now hasten)
yet are they in other books answered by me; I shall take some view of his
Sermon, on which I had made some animadversions before, according to the
imperfect Copy I had then, and sent them to Abergaveny, but have them not now
by me in London, yet however in this straight of time I think is necessary to
write thus much.

Reply.
HIs first exception against my Argument was, that (...) in the 2, 3, 4, 5.
verses was not an Infant in age, to which I opposed Hippocrates his
interpretation, who makes it to signify a child under seven years of age, and
Beza, who says (...) de primo vitae septennio dicitur, (...) de secundo, and
therefore not capable of actual faith, when the Apostles themselves were yet
ignorant about fundamentals, besides in the second and third verses, Jesus set
a little child in the midst of them, and said, except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: Will
any one understand this of grown Children, as if they had more actual faith
than the Disciples, and were to be their patterns? Math 19 13, 14. It is said
our Savior having in the former part of the Chapter answered the Pharisees
about divorce, there were certain little children, or Infants (in Luke 18 16.
(...) quasi (...) or (...), sucking Infants, and it is considerable for what
end they were brought; its in Luke 18. That he might touch them, but in Matthew.
that he might lay his hands on them, and pray; now the laying on of hands,
especially when joined with prayer is an Ordinance of institution in the Church
of God, named after the doctrine of Baptism, Heb. 6. 1, 2. and therefore if
there be any strength in his way of arguing, that from placing of words of
institution one after another, as baptizing after discipling, or believing
would prove that discipling, and believing is to be first found in persons,
before they must be baptized; Then the same Argument would prove that these
Infants were formerly baptized, because they ^ame for imposition of hands, a
right usually following men's baptism too, in the practice of the Apostles; as
in Acts 8. 17. and 19. 5, 6. Nor can Mr. Tombs give us any certain proof, o^
demonstration, or ought besides his own presumtion, they were not. This he
passes by now without salute, as a fort impregnable, and levels his shot
against a place wherein he vainly conceives is a breach already, Thras^-like
sounding a triumph before the victory, for these are his words
Bombardi-gladio-fun-hasti-flammi-loquentes, that which Mr. C. added, that the
Disciples are believers which are meant, Matthew. 18. 6. and not the children,
and yet says his Argument remains unanswered, has more of impudence in it; To
which I reply, 1. That many understand even the sixth verse of little Children
in age, and then it will not so much as colourably make for him in any sense.
2. Be it so as the Relator has it, that the Disciples were believers which are
meant in the sixth verse, and not children, which the Grammatical construction
seems to intimate, because it is in the Masculine Gender (...), one of these
little ones, answering (...) disciple, not (...) in the neu^er gender agreeing
with (...) little child, yet my Argument remains unanswered; which was this, to
little children belongs the Kingdom of heaven, therefore they are holy, and in
covenant. Now it would be a strange inconsequence to say, The little one^ v. 6
are Disciples not Infants in age; therefore they are truly so, v. 2. 3. to whom
belongs the kingdom of heaven, are not holy, and in Covenant; If such a
fallacious non causa, ut causa, could stand, he might infer quidlibet ex
quolibet. v. 2. Christ set a little child in the midst of them, and said, v.
3. except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven; they that were converted as little children to them
belonged the kingdom of heaven, therefore surely to little children their
patterns (as before) especially seeing Christ in other Evangelists applies
those words to little children themselves, forbid them not to come unto me, for
of such is the kingdom of God.

But now I perceive his erroneous mistake, for he says my Argument being that
Christ pronounced a curse on them that received little ones in age, and yet
confessing that this was not meant of little ones in age, but disciples,
believers in him; it is the height of impudency to say mine Argument was not
answered, when mine own confession answered it: By this I see one error begets
many, for 1. my Argument was not that Christ pronounced a curse on them that
despised, and received not little ones in age (as has been manifested) that
was indeed the last member of the proposition, he excepted against, which I
promised to prove in its order.

But 2. grant it had been so, my Argument for any thing appears yet, remained
unanswered, for it would have followed ^ minori ad majus from the less to the
greater, If Christ pronounced a curse upon those that despised he imitators of
little children, much more upon the despisers of little Children themselves;
Therefore Mark 10. 14. (...) he was moved with indignation against the
Disciples, for the little Childrens sake, because they would have hindered them
to come to him for a benediction.

By this it appears upon whom this height of impudency reflects; The
Areopagites at Athens had two stones erected in the Market place, the one of
impudency, the other of contumely; Mr. Tombs has a propriety in both these,
which he frequently ascends, like that Timon (...), that he may bestow his
a^read-bare liveries upon those that descent from him in judgment, of which he
is liberal in the words following, for (saye^ he) justly here after five hours
time, ( Skogan spewes crows) ^e should have said almost five hours, or four
and an half; having promised but one, and therefore a work of Supererrogation,
else to what purpose mentions he it? Did he break off: well, it seems this
adders head is crushed; but capite eliso caudaminatur, he waggs still his tail,
and in the end thrusts out his sting, to wound their reputation, who had any
dealing with him. In this Argument; beginning with me says he had experience
of my mere cavelling at Rosse, and Abergaveny; At Rosse (its true) it fell out
incidently, that my place was to moderate, but if we had been as many as there
were Ephori at Sparta, it had been impossible to bound him within the virge of
a lawful Dispute; As for the Dispute at Abergaveny, the relation thereof, with
his answer, and my reply, let others judge whether is the mere caveller: But he
dwelt many miles from that Town; so did the Pharisees from sea, and lands, they
compassed to make Proselytes; perhaps he means that distance was
disaduantagious unto him, like A^^aeus whose strength was confined to his
mother earth, or the Samnites, who were advised by the Oracle not to fight
unless like snailes with their houses upon their backs. But as Marcion said of
the Orthodox, and Catholic Fathers, he finds nothing ^^ me, and those other
Paedobaptists he has answered (meaning Dr. Hamond, Master Marshall, Master
Baxter, Dr. Homes, Dr. Featly, Master Blake, Master Cobbet, Master Cotton, with
many more of the flour of our Nation) but a spirit of wrangling; when they have
discovered by many infallible Symptoms, this to be his very disease, which he
contumeliously imputes to others, like the mad man in Bedlam, that called all
that passed by, franticks; Austin speaks of such an adversary of his, Sermon
164. ego volo te esse sanum, quare furis in me sicut insanu^? Thus he goes on
with his (...) declamatory, defamatory oration, excusing himself for not
answering my challenge for a deliberate Dispute, than, for any Dispute for the
time to come; accusing us, that he was now sufficiently taught by experience
what dealing he was like to have; whereas the truth is, he never yielded to any
Dispute for the time past, but where he had the advantage; resolved he would
not for the future, because he experimentally found with Paulus Samosatenus
that he and his party lost by such engagements. He has found it to be his only
thriving way to se^ out Emissaries privily, like the pestilence in darkness to
inf^ the ignorant, and fill all corners of three Nations with his bo^ (as
Arrius did the Empire with his) which are so subtly, a^ laborately contrived,
that he has gained a repute by the c^^sent of all, to be accounted with Caius
Curio, ing^nios^ssime quam.

The reason why I desired a further, and that a treatable, a^ deliberate
engagement with him, was, because I was hurried t^ that extemporal discourse
through importunity, which is not* whit the less true, because he believes it
not; Some of the people were so far wrought upon with his impostures, and
delusions, that they were disposed for dipping, others told us, we were not
faithful Pastors, if we would not resist the entrance of such wolves: But in
very deed, the provocation to that sudden debate was through a stratagem of his
partakers; who triumphed and insulted upon our hearers, vaunting (as Marcion
and his followers did) that their Champians durst not show their faces whilst
Mr. Tombs was in town, whereupon I was assaulted with one messenger after
another, who rather enforced, then persuaded me to be present at Mr. Bonner's
debatement, and his: My first salute was, when I entered the Town (from a friend
of his sent as he said to know) whether I would dispute with Mr. Tombs: I
returned, I was not then provided, but if he gave the challenge, and withal a
competent time, I would (God willing) enter the lists. And for his being
advertised before, that if he came to bergaveny I would oppose him; I know not
whether it be tru^ no; however I am sure it had no ground from me, who neither
knew, nor thought of his coming thither, nor had any time to countermine such
contingencies, as groaning under two burdens able to break a back of steel:
Nor is it likely I would have begun with him, who have not given the least
affront to other Anabaptists, and Dippers, who for these several years preach
publicly there at least once a month, and have a private chamber where they
meet for breaking of bread once a week, though I have received abuses
causelessly from the sharp rasor of some of their tongues, beyond barbarity.

As for the speech of him, who said Mr. Tombs had answered nothing; I also
say, the relation of the Dispute, with his Answer and my Reply, will discover
the true Crisis; yet me thinks railing speeches are a bad Omen, and presages
ill; A man of his (...)retended gravity, and wisdom, might have spared those
Epi(...)s of impudent, and brasen-faced, knowing that of Austin a(...)st
Petilian to be true; nec malam conscientiam sanat praeconium (...)antis, nec
bonam vulnerat conviciantis opprobrium, neither does (...)commendation of the
praiser heal an evil conscience, nor (...) reproach of a reviler wound a good.

^r. Baxter his worth is too great to be impeached (which was (...)cause of my
vindication) behind his back, especially by one, (...)o had been found tripping
in that kind before. And I believe (...) may justly say; and not before, that
he has answered all Mr. ^^xter has against him; when Porphyry and Julian
shall justly say, they have ansvered Cyril; Arrius Athanasius; The Jesuits
Luther, and others of the reformed Churches: And admit the review of the
dispute between him and others (of which part is printed, part in the press,
and the rest expected, like the monster in the mountain that was to bring
forth) should swell to the bulk of Origens books (who is said to have writ more
than most men have read) That one pearl of Mr. Baxter's Plain Scripture proof
would outweigh his whole Sandy Colosse, as much as little Persius does great
Marsus, of whom Mermullius,

Saepius in libro memoratur Persius uno,
Quam levis in toto Marsus Amazoinde.
If he had not thus abruptly cut this Gordian knot, which he should have
untyed, my purposed method was to proceed to (...)h. 19. 13, 14, 15. Mark 10.
13. to 17. Mark 9. 36, 37. ^ 9. 4, 5. Luke 18. 15, 16. John 3. 5. Romans 11.
thereby further to prove Infant-Church-membership; whose answers to other men's
Arguments drawn from thence, if satisfactory, which I suspect, is no prejudice
to mine, before he hear them; The two other branches I should have followed,
first that Christ merited Baptism for Infants, secondly that Infants stand in
need of Baptism. These he waves, and hastens to take a view of m^ Sermon, whose
animadversions sent to Abergaveny I have not seen, It is his visible Examen I
must take notice of, which being sufficiently sentenced, and condemned by
others, must expect to be anatomized by me, for I intend only a brief Scheme
or Skeleton of it for the present.

The Sermon Examined.
The third Part.
1. Section. Mr. Tombs.
FIrst he says [and is baptized] page 72. to be a conditional qualification,
and yet in the dispute, he denied that repentance is a condition of baptism
Acts 2. 38. His observation out of Dr. Buckeridge page 73. is frivolous, for
the Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 28. says as well of Apostles, as ordinary Pastors,
and Teachers, (...) he set them, or if he will, fixed them; But it seems Mr. C.
has a special toth at Itinerants, though his Relator claw Mr. Cr. and Mr. W.
But what he says that it is too strict an interpretation to expound Mark 16
15. of men of age, and understanding, excluding children, shows he little
considers what he says; for if it be so, then Christ commands the Apostles
to preach the Gospel to Infants, and Since Mr. C. is bound to do so, he shows
that he sins against his own light, if he do not so. But how foolish it would
be for him to attempt it, his own words show, when he says, Infants are not
capable to be taught of men. And when he says, that Infants only i^ actu
primo are capable of the first seeds of understanding of profession of faith, I
would know in what sense they are sensible of the benefit they have by Christ.
And whereas he grants, That baptism is necessary by necessity of precept, if
conveniently it may be had, it is all ^ asserted in my Sermon, when I said all
that would be saved, must be baptized after profession. I^ Austin were a hard
Father to Infants, for holding they must be baptized, or not see the Kingdom of
God, then Mr. C. cannot gather from John 3. 5. Infants baptism; from Mark 16.
16. is rightly gathered that believing is to be before baptism, and yet from
Mark 1. 4. it is not rightly gathered, that we must be baptized before we can
hear the word preached, or repent; for the Text does not express, that John
baptized before he preached, but recites those two as connexed, yet the latter
is put first, not because first done, but because he was to set down more amply
what he prea^hed.

Reply.
THis (...) self willed Hydra infects the waters of Baptism, and by his
self-pleasing principles turns all to poison, trutinaque examen in ista
castigat, nec se quaesiverit extra. Pers. An antidote I aim at for the present,
re^erving a further re-examination of this Examiner for the future. I said [and
is baptized] page 72. to be a conditional qualification of salvation, which he
confesses page 25. he asserted of professors Baptism in his Sermon; In the
Dispute I denied not incomplete, but complete repentance to be a condition of
Baptism, Acts 2. 38. in them of age, none in Infants. Mine observation out of
Dr. Buckeridge is weighty, not as he frivously misforges it from 1 Cor. 12. 28.
where Paul speaks as well of extraordinary Apostles, and Prophets, as ordinary
Pastors, und Teachers in relation to the whole Church; But from Acts 20. 28.
where the Apostle says, take heed to all the ^^ock over which the Holy Ghost
(...) has set, or fixed you ^verseers; and Titus 1. 5. I left thee in Crete,
that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, (...), and
ordain, or rather setle Elders in every City, Mr. T. di^ingenuously has a
genuine tooth at me, not I at Itinerants who, yield them as much as either
Scripture, Reason, or the Laws require: neither I, nor my Relator (who is also
his Claws Master Cr. and Mr. W. whose worthies are so well known, that they
need not our Panegyricks. I seriously considered what I said, when I neither
would extend [(...), Mark 16 16.] to every rational creature, as Devils, nor
re^train it to men of age, and understanding, excluding children; Neither does
it ^ol^^ that Christ commanded the Apostles to Preach the Gospel to Infants,
that they should for the present be endoctrinated, but benefitted, as the
Infant is by the publication of his Fathers will, which he understands not; and
he, and I, being bound so to do, sin against our own light, if we do not
publish that Churchmembership, and Baptism, with the attendants, and sequels
are due to Infants; And it is so far from being foolish, that it proceeds from
the wisdom of him, who is wisdom it self, to attempt it; which my words show,
when I say, Infants are not capable to be taught of men but God, who has
commanded them to be sealed by men; when I distinguish of the creatures, who by
a natural instinct, and (...) earnest expectation, of men of years, who by
actual understanding, and profession of Faith; of Infants, who besides a
natural instinct, by the first seed of understanding, and grace are sensible
of their estate; I express in what sense they are sensible of benefit they have
by Christ, to wit passively, seminally, virtually, and objectively. When I
granted that Baptism is necessary by necessity of precept (if conveniently it
may be had) is not all he asserted in his Sermon, when he said all that would
be saved, must be Baptized after profession; for there is a large difference
between the lawfulness and nullity of Infant Baptism, the sufficiency of the
one, and the sacrilegious repetition of the other, the conditional necessity
of baptizing, and re-baptizing, which according to his Tenet, involves millions
that are departed, thousands of Magistrates, Ministers, and people yet living
in damnation, Austin might be a hard Father to Infants, if he held absolutely
that they must be baptized, or not see the Kingdom of God, and yet ^ may gather
from John 3. 5. conditionally, Infants Baptism; All are not damned that are not
baptized, if there be no contempt, yet the contempt of Infant Baptism is
damnable, from Mark 16. 16 is no more rightly gathered, that believing is
necessarily to be before Baptism, than Baptism necessarily before salvation,
which would infer limbum Infantum; for as belief is before Baptism there, so
Baptism before saved. It is rightly gathered from Mark 1. 4. (if any thing be
gatherable from order of words) that we must be baptized before we can hear the
word Preached, or repent for all his frivolous reason that the Text does not
express that John baptized before he Preached; Its true, no more does, Math. 28.
19. that they must make Disciples, or Preach before they baptize; but ^e says,
Mark recites these two as connexed, yet the latter is put first, not because
first done, but because he was to set down more amply what he preached: [the
Baptism of repentance for remission of sins;] As well it may be said, or better
Matthew Chap. 28. 19. recites these two [Preach and baptize] as connexed, yet
the latter is put first, not because the first to be done, but because he was
to set down more amply the manner of Baptism, [ baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Mr. Tombs. 2. Section.
THough we cannot know that the person to be Baptized has a saving Faith, yet
a saving Faith is the rule of Baptism to the person baptized, he should not
undertake that Ordinance without a saving Faith, and in respect of the
baptizer, so far as he can discern, ^e should require a saving Faith of those
he baptizeth. Dipping overhead, or baptizing over-head after profession of
Faith, is no invention of man, but the command of Christ, practice of the
Apostles, and their successors for many ages, and Infant Baptism was opposed
many ages before John of Leyden, who though he were otherwise not to be
justified, yet I do not remember that any has written he ever con^essed that
he had that doctrine from Satan.

But Mr. C. says, baptizing is in Greek any washing, whether by dipping, or
sprinkling, And he cites Ravanel, who has made a Dictionary according to the
present use of terms. But he shows not out of any of the pillars, as he calls
them, of the Greek tongue, that baptizing in Greek ever signifies to sprinkle.

Reply.
AS we cannot know the person to be Baptized has a saving Faith, so neither
can we gather from this Text that a saving Faith is the rule of Baptism, either
to the Baptizer to whom this is spoken, or to the Baptized, to whom it is not
spoken; neither is there ground from any other Scripture, that the party to be
baptized should not undertake that Ordinance without a saving Faith; nor the
baptizer should stay so far (as is discernable) till he discovers a saving
Faith in the person to be baptized; All that is necessarily required in them of
age, is a willingness to receive Christ, and his Ordinance, which was performed
by the Jailer, Lydia, and their families on a sudden, with those three thousand
Acts 2. 39. who could not possibly in one day hear the word, be baptized, and
express their willingness to entertain Christ, otherwise then (...) by lifting
up their hands, or some other sign, as in great elections, which is far short
of expression of their saving Faith.

The necessity whether by precept, or means of dipping overhead, or baptizing
over head before or after profession of Faith is an invention of man, not the
command of Christ, nor practice of the Apostles, and their successors for many
ages, nor in any age, unless accidentally, dipping it self being Adiapherous,
or indifferent. Infant Baptism was not opposed before John of Leydens time, as
is formerly proved, who was not only not to be justified, as he minces it, but
guilty of all blasphemies, and unheard of wickedness, which together with the
Author Satan he confessed at his execution, of which there are authentic
Authors, German, and English, that he might have known, and remembered, if he
would have impartially read, and judged. I said truly, Baptizing in Greek is
any washing whether dipping whole, or part, pouring or sprinkling (though I may
say with Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Blake I never saw child sprinkled yet) And for
this I cite not only Ravenel, who made a Dictionary according to the true, and
Scripture-use of terms, but Paraeus, the old Catechism, the Directory, to which
I add the greater, and lesser Catechism of the assembly. I showed out of
Hesychius, Budaeus, Stephanus, Scapula, Arius Montanus, Pasor, that it
signifies first tingere to dye, or tincture; Secondly mergere to drown, or
plunge, Thirdly madefacere to wet, or moysten, and lastly abluere to wash or
cleanse. To sprinkle is included under the third branch, to which it is
Synonimous, or at least formally the same.

Mr. Tombs. 3. Section.
HE confesses that Casaubon in his notes on Math. 3. 6. distinguishes between
baptizing, and rantizing, or sprinkling, but says the whole state of the
Question is determined against me, because he adds, that their judgment is
deservedly long since exploded, and trampled down, that would have baptizing to
be by dipping; seeing the force, and efficacy of this Mystery consists not in
that. But 1. by Mr. C. leave, the Question is plainly determined for me by
Casaubon, when he distinguished between baptizing, and sprinkling, for ^at is
the Question, not wherein the efficacy, and force of the Mystery ^^sists. 2.
Though Casaubon were a learned man, yet this speech of his is not right: for we
are to observe what Christ appoints, though the efficacy and force of the
mystery, or Sacrament consist not in it, as we are to break bread, not take a
wafter ^ake down whole, drink wine in the Lords supper, because of the
Institution, though the force, and efficacy of the mystery consists not in it.
Mr. C. speeches out of Aquinas and Dominicus a Soto, are of no weight with them
who know who those Doctors were, to wit Papists, and very unskilful in the
Greek language.

Reply.
HE begins with a notorious untruth; for I confess not that Casaubon in his
notes on Math. 3. 6. distinguishes between baptizing, and rantizing, or
spinkling: I said there were some that distinguished between (...) to rantize,
or sprinkle, (...) to plunge to the bottom, (...) to swim upon the top, and
(...) which (as some criticize upon it) is to swim between the top and the
bottom; But I was so far from saying that Casaubon, distinguishes between
baptizing, and rantizing, that I said the three last were only mentioned by
Casaubon, not rantizing or sprinkling, once named.

Therefore by Mr. T. leave, the whole state of the Question is determined
against him by Casaubon, where he says their judgment is deservedly long since
exploded, and trampled down, that would have baptizing to be dipping, seeing
the force, and efficacy consists not in that, that is the manner of washing,
and his first reason to the contrary, is idle; seeing Casaubon, distinguishes
not between baptizing and rantizing, for if that be the Question, the Question
on his side falls to the ground: Secondly as Casaubon was a learned man, so his
speech right, who observed what Christ appointed, by whom Baptism was not
determined to any specifical kind of washing, as those wil-worshippers press,
who think the force, and efficacy of the Sacrament consists in the quantity of
water; we break bread, take not a wafer cake down, drink wine in the Lords
supper (its confessed) because of the institution, we dare not determine, and
confine baptism to dipping, because there is no such thing in the institution.

If my speeches out of Aquinas, and Dominicus a Soto be not of weight with him,
because Popish Doctors, though unprejudiced in this controversy; his speeches
out of Bernard and Cl^niacensis two Popish Abbots biased with prejudice
against the Albigenses shall justly be of less weight with us, to prove
opposition of Infant Baptism before Baltazar Hubmies time; Besides they had
skill enough in the language with other helps to discover baptism to be any
kind of washing* but I might bring ^ cloud of witnesses besides.

Mr. Tombs 4. Section.
IT is as vain which Mr. C. says, the Israelites were baptized, when their
feet did but touch the water, for the Text, says Exodus 14. 29. They walked
upon dry land in the midst of the Sea, and the waters were a wall unto them on
their right hand, and on their left, and therefore their feet did not so much
as touch the water, much less were they sprinkled with it. And if the
Israelites were baptized in the cloud, and yet no water upon them, then the
Text, 1 Cor. 10. 2. does not prove baptizing to be by sprinkling, but proves
plainly, that a^ ^ugo Gro^ius said they were baptized, that is, they were as if
they had been baptized, or as others, they were analogically baptized, that is
in proportion, or likeness, not formally, that is according to what is meant by
the Term. It is without proof, yea false which Mr. C. says, where is mention
in the Gospel of washing of themselves, of cups, of vessels, of tables, that
cannot be meant of plunging in water so often, but rinsing. For water was not
so scarce but that they might do it by dipping as well as sprinkling. He might
have seen Ainsworth on Levit. 11. 32. who out of the Hebrew Canons tells us,
all that are unclean, whether men, or vessels, are not cleansed but by dipping
(or baptizing) in water: and wheresoever the Law speaks of washing a man's
flesh, or washing of clothes for uncleanness, it is not but by dipping the
whole body therein.

Reply.
IT is of weight, and preponderats his novel fiction, which I say, the
Israelites were baptized, when their feet did but touch the water, or watery
sand, for all the Text says, Exodus 14. 29. That they walked upon dry land in
the midst of the sea; That is spoken hyperbolically, or comparatively to what
it was before the miracle; and though the waters were a wall unto them, on
their right hand, and on their left, it will not follow, that their feet did
not touch the water, and that they were not sprinkled with it, till he can wipe
out of the Canon of Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. 2. and they were all baptized unto
Moses in the cloud and in the sea; If then the Israelites were baptized in the
cloud, with the water sprinkling, or falling upon them, then the Text, 1 Cor.
10. 2. does prove baptizing to be by sprinkling, or pouring on; Hugo Grotius
interprets (...) by madefacere, lavare, abl^^re to moysten, wash, purge, not
necessarily to dip; If his authority be of weight, the controversy is at an
end; if not, why quotes he his descant, that they were baptized, that is, as if
they were baptized; which he quite overthrowes, to be taken in his sense, when
he says, it is the same with that of others, to be analogically baptized, who
meant that they were truly washed, or baptized, as were those typical of the
Law, materially the same, differing formally, because representing some
analogy, or similitude with the sacramental baptism of the Gospel. Its true
and demonstrable which I say, where is mention made in the Gospel, of baptizing
or washing themselves when they came from market, of cups, of vessels, of
tables, this cannot be meant of plunging in water so often, but rinsing; not
only because water was so scarce, but for other reasons rivetted in the Text,
Luke 11. 38. The Pharisees wondered at Jesus (...), that he was not baptized,
or washed before dinner, not doused or plunged his whole body. Heb. 9. 10. the
ceremonial sprinklings are called baptisms. Luke 16. 24. The glutton beggs that
Lazarus might be sent (...) that he might baptize, or dip the top of his finger
(not the whole body) in water. 1 Samuel 14 27. Jonathan (as the Septuagints read
it) (...) dipped the end, not the whole of his rod in the honey comb. So
Sophocles uses it, (...), thou have tinctured (not dipped) thy whole weapon in
the Grecian army. Mr. Tombs interprets that literally, Mat. 3. 11. as verified
on the day of Pentecost, (...), will baptize with the Holy Ghost, and fire, the
fire did not encompasse the whole bodies, but sat in the shape of cloven
tongues upon part of their garments. This acceptance the Athenian Oracle puts
out of question, (...) baptize, or wash him, but do not plunge him. I have not
seen Ainsworth on Levit. 11. 32 therefore am jealous he may use him as he does
Casaubon; however neither his, nor the Hebrew canons, are Canon of Scripture;
Ainsworth (as he quo^es him) speaks only of men and vessels rendered unclean by
the dead carkases of unclean beasts, who (happily) in that case were not cleansed
but by dipping in the whole; This is fallacia a secundum quid ad simpliciter,
makes nothing for the Typical, much less all baptism to beby dipping.

Mr. Tombs, 5. Section.
ME thinks Mr. C. should allow Anabaptists to make consequences, though they
allowed not his. And that John Baptist' s, and Philip' s going down into the
water, proves something me thinks* Mr. C. should mot deny, since it cannot
reasonably be imagined they should go down, no^ to the water, as Mr. C. would
have it, but into the water, whereas for baptizing a person, a man might easily
have fetched, or taken water out of any spring to baptize with, if it had been
so to be done by sprinkling, and not by dipping: But if he please to see a book
entitled Of Baptism, written by an eminent man in the state, he might See many
of the prime writers, even leading Protestants, gathering dipping thence, as
used then in baptizing. The like they do from John 3. 23. of which whatever
Geographer, or Traveller says, Enon ( where John baptized) was a little brook
that one may stride over, scarce knee deep, and therefore not capable of
dipping (which does not follow) deserves not to be believed in this. Out of
Romans 6 4. we do not press a necessity of dipping, because of the resemblance,
but from the resembled and alluded, to show the use then, ingeniously confessed
by Mr. Vaughan, and therefore should be the use still. Nor does it follow, we
must lie three days, and nights in water, the resemblance of Christ's burial is
to be continued though not the duration. What ever other resemblance there may
be of our burial with Christ, yet we are to follow the institution, and
practice set down in Scripture, from which he that swerves (as sprinklers do)
do sin against Christ's command, what ever any Divines, or assemblies of men say
to the contrary.

Reply.
I cannot allow of this consequence of the Anabaptists, John baptized in
Jordan, Philip went down to the water with the Eunuch, Acts 8. 36. therefore
they were dipped, seeing it might as well be by pouring, or sprinkling of water
upon them, for any thing appears; And may be reasonably imagined, they
descended to the water (as is more congruous to the original) not into the
water, for all it is possible water might have been fetched out of the spring
to baptize them, if he can prove the Eunuch had a vessel in his Chariot; or
John Baptist a fitter Font than Jordan to baptize all Judea, and Jerusalem in.
But admit it be, they went down into the water, as Psalm. 107. They go down into
the sea, it will no more prove the one was under the water than the other; The
baptized might stand in to the knees, have his head dipped in, or water poured
upon him; Their going down into the water was either dipping it self, or a
distinct act from it; if a d^stinct act from it, how proves it dipping? If it
was dipping it self, then Philip, and John Baptist, were dipped as well, as the
Eunuch, and all Judea, and Jerusalem. Whosoever that eminent man in the State
is, that has written a book entitled of Baptism, he cannot produce many of
the prime writers, even leading Protestants gathering the necessity of dipping
thence, as to be used only in baptizing; nay nor scarce the frequent practice
then; Eusebius de locis Hebraicis, and Jerome his Interpreter, from the
smalnesse of the spring intimates the contrary, Est hodie Bethsoron (inquit)
vicus euntibus nobis ab Aelia Chebron in vicessimo lapide, juxta quem fons ad
rad ces montis ebulliens ab ^adem gignitur, sorbetur humo, and Apostolorum acta
referunt Eunuchum Candac^s reginae in hoc esse baptizatum a Philippo; Fuller
Misc. page 205.

It cannot so much as de facto from John 3. 23. be proved, that those that were
baptized in Enon were dipped, because Geographers and Travelers of cred^t
tells us that Enon is a little brook that one may stride over, scarce knee
deep, and therefore not capable of dipping, which they interpret swimming
between the top and the bottom, and touch neither. They cannot out of Romans 6.
4. press a necessity of dipping, either from the resemblance, or the
resemblance alluded to without a divine institution, or determined practice of
the Apostles, which was not confessed by Mr. Vaughan, but the frequencie of it
in succeeding Centuries, which being a thing Ad^apherous, the Church had their
liberty of indifferency, not to alter Christ's institution (as he
dis-ingenuously charges him) but the manner undetermined. The scope of the
Apostle is to show, that one end of our Baptism is to seal our communion with
Christ in his death; and concludes as well, that the resemblance of Christ's
burial is to be continued as much in the duration, as the thing; as well lying
three days, and three nights, as under the water at all. Therefore all
resemblances betwixt our baptism, and Christ's burial, not bottomed upon divine
institution and Apostolical practice revealed in Scripture are but humane
inventions, which they that Idolize, as Anabaptists determining baptizing to
dipping, sins against Christ's command, as godly learned men, and assemblies out
of holy writ have discovered.

Mr. Tombs 6. Section.
IT is well Mr. C. confesses, That if he were to baptize converted Turks, or
Pagans of ripe age be might baptize them by dipping: It she was that it is
only for Infants sake that the institution of Christ is altered, and so one
corruption has brought in another. What he adds provided their garments were
not first baptized, or washed, intimates be would have them naked, which Mr.
Baxter would conclude to be against the sixth and seventh Command, and he may do
well to school Mr. C. for it: his reason is as foolish, though the garments be
baptized in water, yet are not baptized with that use, that the person is, but
by accident, not baptized as Bells to drive away devils. Nor is by baptizing
the garment any worship done to it, as the Church of Rome does to the Image:
for then the baptizing of the body, should be *worshippin^ it; the garments,
and body are not worshipped at all by baptizing, and therefore foolishly it is
compared to Romish superstition, and Idolatry. He that affirms that baptizing
without dipping is not lawful, that it is will worship, that the sprinkling
used is a nullity, that notwithstanding such pretended Baptism, yet Baptism
remains a duty, speaks but truth.

Reply.
I confess with Mr. Perkins, that if we were to baptize converted Turks, or
Pagans of ripe age, in hot Countries (which he leaves out) we might baptize
them by dipping; which shows that it is not only for infants sake, but the
coldness of our Clymats, we baptize by dipping in part of the body, pouring on
water, or sprinkling, which are as well according to Christ's institution, as
^lunging, God will have mercy, and not sacrifice: The Anabaptists show that it
is for dipping sake, which sucklings cannot endure, that Christ's institution of
Infant baptism is altered, and so one corruption has brought in another.

I add, provided their garments were not first baptized, or washed; which
intimates not necessarily I would have them naked, for they may have loose
garments after the manner of the Jews, which prevents not the washing of the
body; or if I would have them of ripe age in hot Countries naked, I may
conclude with Mr. Baxter to dip naked, or clothed in cold Climats to be
against the sixth Commandment, because it endangers their lives: To dip with us
naked to be against the seventh Commandments, because it endangers chastity;
not so in Africe, and hot Countries where (without impeachment of modesty) they
go naked, or slender clothed; Mr. T. may justly be schooled by us both, for
his unfaithful dealing in the premises. The reason is solid, which is not
mine, but Vossius his; who says Baptismus non est immersio vestium, sed humani
corporis, Baptism is not a washing of garments, but man's body: Baptizing of
garments may be as well superstitious, as of Bells, for all they are not
baptized with that use the person is, but by accident, for the Romists have the
very same distinctions of worshipping of Images, Suarez. in 3. Tom. ^isp. 54.
sect. 4. dicendum ergo primo est fieri recte posse, ut prototypon in imagine,
and imago cum prototypo uno actu adoretur, atque hoc pacto posse imaginem
Christi adorari latria, posse tamen co-adorari, sicut humanitas Christi
coadoratur verbo, purpura regis adoratur hon^re regio. The garment is washed
with the same water the body is, as well as the Image is adored with the same
worship the Prototype is; The purple of the king is as well adored by accident,
as the garment washed; And though garments be not baptized as Bells, to drive
away devils, yet they are conceived to be baptized without divine in^^itution,
and so from the Devil; Baptizing of the body is not worshipping of it, but ^
performing of Christ's Ordinance in relation to it, which to perform also to the
garmants is will worship and therefore f^tly compared to Romish ^uperstition,
and i^olatry. He that aff^rms that baptizing without dipping is not lawful,
that it is will worship, that infant* baptism as used is a nullity, that
notwithstanding such baptism, yet rebaptizing remains a duty, speaks
sacrileiously, schismatically, heretically.

Mr. Tombs, 7. Section.
THe Decree of the Senate of Zurick was an unrighteous Decree, which what ever
state follows, it will draw the guilt of mur^bering innocent persons on it, and
Mr. C. by citing it with seeming approbation, does make it probable that he is
a bloody minded man, who would rejoice to see innocent men, wh^ out of
tenderness of conscience follow the plain rule of Christ, so put to death:
which its not unlikely to be the aim of his, or his accomplices printing this
book against those he calls Anabaptists, that he might stir up either
Magistrates, or furious common people against them. Mr. C. says, he has
resolved the former doubt, that baptizing is not dipping, and yet page 81. the
Authors he cites, and by citing approves, do all make dipping, or dying one of
the first of its significatiens. Now he undertakes to prove, that Infants may,
nay ought to be baptized. An^ he begins as an Advocate for Infants with this
childish preface, that those poor souls cannot speak for themselves, as if in
speaking for their baptism, he spoke for them, when he does thereby rather
speak for that which is to their hurt, and calls them poor souls, whom before
he called Saints.

There is more in his pitiful Preface, he supposes, if the Apostles had been
asked why they did not put down Infant Baptism in plainer terms, they would
have answered, that they thought none would have denied it. And I suppose they
would have answered, that they thought none would have affirmed it, being quite
against Christ's appointment, and their practice, who had then no such custom,
nor the Churches of God. The rest as it is taken from Mr. Baxter, so it is
answered in the Answer to him, now in the Press, Sect. 3. lets view Mr. C.
Arguments.

Reply.
I Will neither accuse nor excuse the decree of the Senate of Zuri^k against
those turbulent Anabaptists that disturbed their quiet, neither will I prejudge
that state that follows them, whether draw upon themselves the guilt of
murdering innocent persons, or wash their hands in innocence from guilt: My
citing of it, was with no further approbation of it, as my words purport, but
that they knew well, those that were baptized before were not to be baptized
again. And it is neither a Logical, nor Thelogicall conclusion in Mr. T. as
proceeding neither from reason, nor charity to say from thence its probable
that I am a bloody minded man, who would rejoice to see innocent men put to
death; when it is well known, that even in Abergaveny, when the most eminent
dipper in these parts was sentenced to death by a council of war, and the
Engine for execution prepared, I labored with others, what I could to reverse
it, when that could not be, to defer it to procure some liberty from close
imprisonment, and consequently his escape. Methinks if Mr. Tombs out of
tenderness of conscience should follow that which he thinks (though
mistakingly) the plain rule of Christ, he should be more meek, than causlesly
judge it not unlikely to be my aim, or my accomplices, in printing the brief
relation of a dispute, and sermon (which suits both with the Laws, and Religion
of our Land) to stir up Magistrates, or furious common people against them,
when he has printed many Volumes disputing with both, whereby both Church, and
State are disquieted, and as the wolf in the fable did the lamb, accuses us of
that (which never entered into our thoughts) which he has effected in part, and
is to be feared, with his accomplices is further projecting against us. The
Authors I cite, and by citing approve, that do make dying the first, dipping
the second of the significations of (...), do not cross my resolution of the
former doubt, that baptizing is not dipping, but prove it for if there be four
manners of Baptizing, whereof dipping is but one, then baptizing is not only
dipping; Species non praedicatur de genere, nec cum eo reciprocatur. I
undertake to prove that Infants may, nay ought to be baptized, whose Advocate
Christ was, commanding them to be brought to him, that could not come
themselves, spoke in the behalf of them that could not speak for themselves, In
subordination to whose will, I speak for them in speaking for their Baptism, it
tending to their good, as thereby being made visible members of the Church more
completely, out of which ordinarily there is no salvation: Poor they are, in
regard they are self-helpless; Saints or holy, in regard of birthprivilege, or
election of grace, whch none but Satan, and his accomplices denies them.

The preface, (which the pittiless Herodian Infanticides oppugn) recommends
two considerations, first, that those truths that were not in controversy in
the primitive times, the Apostles were not so punctual in pressing of them,
seeing there was no need: Solon being asked why he made no Law against
murderers of Parents, answered, because he conceived none would commit that
unnatural act; If the Apostles had been asked why they did not put down
Infant Baptism in plainer terms, they would have answered that none would have
denied it, as being so firmly founded in Christ's appointment, and their
practice, that the gates of Hell, and the Locusts swarming thence in succeeding
ages should not prevail against it. The second consideration, which is not so
much taken from Mr. Baxter, as Mr. T. his whole fabric from the German
Anabaptists, Gr^tius and the Jesuits, is, that those things that are pressed
often in the Old Testament, are mentioned more sparingly in the New, as the
Sabbath, and Magistracy; which he says, is answered in his answer to Mr.
Baxter, but so weakly, that whosoever reads, and understands, cannot, but be
further confirmed against him; but I follow him to the view of mine Arguments.

Mr. Tombs 8. Section.
HIs first is, Those that are in covenant with God, ought to have the seal of
the covenant, which is Baptism; But Infants of believing Parents are in
covenant with God; Ergo. He says, the former proposition is firm by the
confession of all Divines, even our adversaries, and cites five, but not where
they say it, nor is any one his adversary in this point. It is true, Ferus was
a Popish friar, though more ingenuous than the most of them. But does Mr. C.
think that we must take that for true, which Protestants and Papists do avow
without any proof from Scripture? If so, then let us lay aside the Scripture,
and read their books. But he might know, and it is likely did know, that I
(though I will not take on ^e the name of a divine) yet have denied, yea, and
proved his former proposition to be false; Exam. part 3. Sect. 1. letter to Mr.
Bailey Sect. 3. Antipaedobap. or full Review 1. part. Sect. 5. Which shall be
fully vindicated (God assi^ting) in the Third part. yea were his Argument good,
it would prove Infants were wronged, because they had not the communion. for I
can as well from his own Medium, prove that they are to have it, as he Baptism.

Reply.
THe first Argument is, Those (meaning under the Gospel) that are in Covenant
with God, (meaning outward, and visible,) ought to have the seal of the
Covenant which is Baptism; But Infants of believing parents are in Covenant
with God, therefore they ought to have the seal of the Covenant which is
Baptism. The former proposition I truly said is firm by the confession of all
Divines, even our adversaries, meaning Mr. T. himself, whose, Plea for
Antipaed. page 12. confesses he affirmed in his sermon that visible
Church Members were to be baptized, visible Church Members, and visible
Covenanters are Synonima; And that those that were actually received into
Covenant might be Baptized; to be visibly in covenant, and actually received
into covenant, are both one.

I cited five more, four eminent Protestants Danaeus Davenant, Wendel, and
Perkings; One a Papist, Ferus, who he says, is more ingenuous than them that
are forementioned, see his affection; and (if you please) Ferus his ingenuity,
who upon Matthew. 19. says, just, ac vere ex spiritu Christi ecclesiae etiam
pueros baptizat, non igitur Christianum, sed plane Herodianum, vel si mavis,
Egyptiacum est parvulos populi Dei necare, Justly and truly from the spirit of
God, the Church even baptizeth children; therefore it is not a Christan act,
but plainly like Herod, or rather like the Egyptians to murder the little ones
of Gods people by denying them Baptism. I think we must take that for true,
which is instituted by Christ, practiced by the Apostles, and all succeeding
ages, adhere to Scriptures, not the writings of a few novel Anabaptists, whose
dictats poisons the Church. I knew that Mr. T. who will not take upon him the
name of a Divine, yet thinks himself wiser than all the Divines in the World,
has denied and attempted to prove Exam. part 3. Sect. 1. letter to Mr. Bailey
Sect. 3. Antipaed. 1. part Sect. 5. That those that were in covenant with God,
had no seal before Abraham's time, from Abraham till Christ, women were in
covenant, and not circumcised, since Christ the elect are in covenant
invisibly, before they be members visible, and not Baptizable: All this makes
nothing against my Thesis, That those that are now visibly in covenant with
God, ought to have the seal of the covenant, which is Baptism: what wonders his
Third part may do, like a Tertius Cato, is not yet discovered.

My arguing is good, and proves Infants are wronged, that have not Baptism the
initiating seal, but not so, if they have not the Communion, because they
cannot examine themselves? Neither can he from my Medium, or any other prove
it, unless he contradict Scripture, and himself, who often says, he would
Baptize an Infant if he knew him to be regenerat, yet I think, he durst not
give him the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Mr. Tombs 9. Section.
THe Minor he takes on him to prove from Genesis 17. 7. But there is not a word
of Infants of believing Parents. But to prove it, he cites Cornelius a Lapide,
a Jesuit, for him, and yet had he not falsely translated his words, the words
would have appeared to be against him, for whereas he renders them in, The
Sprituall seed to the faithful (which mars his sense) it is, in the spiritual
seed the faithful So likewise Gal. 3. 8. Though there be not the te^m Abraham's
seed, yet it is directly against him, for it asserts justification to the
believing Gentiles only from Abraham's promise, not a promise to them, and
their seed. I deny not, but that Isack was in covenant with God, that is a
child of the promise, not only when he was but eight days old, but also
before the seventh, yea before he was borne, but when he says he had the seal
(meaning circumcision) by virtue of the lamb to be slain, it is strange
Divinity to me, who never heard, or read, that any person was circumcised by
virtue of Christ's death, but by reason of Gods command. And that which he
says, much more the children of believing Parents, by virtue of the lamb that
is already slain, which seems to intimate, that circumcision is due to them
much more, and that by virtue of Christ's death, is a foppery like to the
Authors ingeny. He says Deuteronomy. 29. 11. when all the people stood in covenant
before the Lord, their little ones are mentioned amongst the rest. And are not
their Wives and Servants Hewers of Wood an Drawers of Water? Are all these in
Covenant with God? how does he prove they were believers Infants? The words v.
4. seem to make to the contrary. It is no shift, but a manifest truth, that
those Acts 2. 38, 39 to whom Peter said; The promise is to you, and your
children, were not the believers in Christ, when the words were spoken to them*
for first The Apostle exhorts to Repentance, therefore they had not yet
repented, and so were not Believers. Mr. C. himself, page 78. in this Sermon
says, Repentance is a fruit and effect of Faith, therefore according to him,
not before it.

And in the dispute page 52 he made them Believers in fieri, with a^ incomplete
repentance, though perhaps not believers in facto 2. v. 40. He exhorted them
with more words, and then v. 41. some of them gladly recieved the word, and
were believors. Yet Peter said to them before they were Believers, the promise
is to you and your Children, nor is there a word in the Text that makes it
clear, that as soon as they were Believers, their Children were in Covenant
with them, and to be baptized.

Reply.
THE Minor I prove from Genesis 17. 7. where the Infants of believing Parents
are employed, it being a covenant not only established with Abraham, but with
his seed after him in their generations for an everlasting covenant, by virtue
of which Isack, and all succeeding Male-Infants were circumcised. I cited
Cornelius a Lapide (which he does often) though a Jesuit, not to prove the
point, but the harmony of learned men against the new fangle Anabaptist; the
translation of whose words, though mistaken in a syllable by the Relator, or
Printer, makes for me, for both the words, and Context proves prerogative of
birth to believers Infants to the end of the World. In Gal. 3. 8. There is
employed Abraham's seed, in that it was a Gospell-covenant, and that in him all
Nations shall be blessed, and is directly for me, for it asserts the covenant,
and in that justification to the believing Gentiles, not only from Abraham's
promise, but also a promise to them, and their seed. I confess Isaak was in
covenant with God internally, that is as he interprets, a child of promise, not
only when he was but eight days old, but before the seventh; but we speak of
a visible covenant, which he at least completely entered not till by
circumcision the eight day; which outward seal, I say meaning circumcision, as
well as the inward circumcision of the heart, he had by the virtue, or in the
virtue of the lamb to be slain; And is no strange Divinity to them, who
acknowledge Christ the Angel, and Mediator of the covenant, both to hear and
read, that every person was circumcised by virtue of Christ's death, as the
Meritorius, as well as by reason of Gods command the efficient cause; To look
at any circumstance of the covenant of grace out of Christ, or not receiving
virtue from Christ, is too look in a glass wherein we may see our own
damnation. I rightly inferred, if Isack had the s^al (circumcision) by virtue
of the lamb to be slain, much more the children of believing Parents now may
have the seal (baptism) by virtue of the lamb already slain; But too intimate
from thence that the old seal of circumcision is much more due now to Infants
of believing Christians, is a note beyond Ela, and a misshapen crotchet like
the Composers Fantasy. I said Deuteronomy. 29. 11. when all the people stood in
covenant before the Lord, their little ones are mentioned amongst the rest, as
are indeed their wives, and servants, hewers of wood, and drawers of water, who
were either Jews or circumcised Proselytes, which all were in covenant with
God, had the seal, therefore their Infants were believers, that is Professors
Infants, as the words in the first verse, and consequently in the 4. verse
prove; For God expostulates there not with Aliens out of covenant, but with his
own, who had been careless, many of them, of the conditions of the covenant. It
is a shift, and a mani^est untruth, that those Acts 2. 38, 39, To whom Peter
said the promise is to you, and your children, were not accepters, or
entertainers of Christ, when the words were spoken to them: for 1. The Apostle
exhorts them to complete repentance, which was initiated, or begun in them,
they were pricked in heart, therefore also faith, that is profession of faith,
Men and Brethren what shall we do? I said in the sermon, complete repentance
is an effect, and fruit of saving faith, as in order of nature after it; Yet
there is an incomplete repentance, and profession of faith antecedent to both;
In the dispute accordingly, I made them believers in fieri, with an incomplete
repentance, though perhaps not in facto; what then? verse 40. he exhorted them
with more words than are in Lukes abbreviation, but not than were in the
sermon, upon hearing of which sermon, some of them gladly received the word,
and were believers by acceptance to entertain Christ; but by justification to
be implanted into him, is more than he knows. Peter said not unto them before
they were believers, that is accepters, the promise is to you, and your
children, every circumstance in the Text makes it clear, that as soon as they
were believers, their children were in covenant with them, and to be baptized,
be baptized every one of you, for the covenant (...), is for the present to
you, and your children; and to them that are afar off, to wit the Gentiles
aliens in affection, when God shall call them, Parents with children for the
future.

Mr. Tombs. 10. Sect.
HIs second Argument is, such as were circumcised under the Law, may be
baptized under the Gospel; But infants of believers were circumcised under the
Law; Therefore they may be baptized under the Gospel. He cites Whitaker saying,
all the Anabaptists shall not be able to resist this Argument. I answer
notwithstanding so learned a man's conceit, it has not the force of a feather,
so as to need resistance. To it I answer. 1. Indirectly by retortion. Such as
were circumcised under the Law, may be baptized under the Gospel; But infants
of unbelievers, as the males bought with Abraham' s money of the stranger, not
of his seed, Genesis 17. 12, 13, 23. 27. persons out of covenant, as Ishmael, Genesis
17. 19. 21. 25. were circumcised under the Law: Ergo, if the one be
irresistible, so is the other. 2. Directly, by denying the Major, if it be
universal; if not the Syllogism is naught concluding from particulars. His
proof^ are vain; That from Austin is of no force, unless it be supposed. 1.
That by circumcising under the Law, and baptizing under the Gospel, the grace
of God is conferred, which is a Popish conceit. Circumcision did bind to the
keeping of the Law, but never that I find is the grace of God said to be either
physically, or morally conferred by the circumcision of each person rightly
circumcised. 2. It supposes, if infants be not baptized, the grace of God is
straiter in the new Testament, than in the old. But that is false; for the
grace of God is as much without Sacraments, as with it. Above two thousand
years before Abraham was circumcised, there was neither circumcision, nor
baptism of infants, nor any other Sacrament instead thereof; shall we say that
Gods grace was straiter before Abraham' s time than since? As bad as the
Schoolmen were, who gave too much to Sacraments, yet they held, That the grace
of God is not tied to Sacraments.

Reply.
MY second Argument was, such as were circumcised under the Law, may be
baptized under the Gospel; But Infants of believers were circumcised under the
Law; therefore they may be baptized under the Gospel; for this I cited learned
Whitaker, saying, huic Argumento non omnes Anabaptistae resistent. All the
Anabaptists shall not be able to resist this Argument; This Antagonist flights
him, calling it his conceit, that has not the force of a feather, so as to
need resistance as mine before not of a squib; high towering words,

Proijcit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba;

Reverend Bishop Hall says of him, who ever saw him without reverence, or
heard him without admiration? Learned, and pious Doctor Arrowsmith gave him
this Enconium the last Commencement at Cambridge, Egregie Whitakerus ut in
omnibus; yet this fore-house in the Anabaptists term (as Mr. Carpenter calls
him) as if he had the Monopoly of plumes, allows not his Arguments (that
astonished Cardinals) the force of a feather. To it, he says, he answers. 1.
Indirectly by retortion, but indeed proves directly for me. Such as were
circumcised under the Law, may be baptized under the Gospel; But Infants of
unbelievers, as the Males bought with Abraham's money, of the stranger not of
his seed, Genesis 17. 12, 13. 23. 27. persons out of covenant, as Ishmael Genesis 17.
19. 21. 25. were circumcised under the Law; Ergo, if the one be irresistible,
so is the other. I yield all, the premises being truly understood; for children
of unbelievers, if under Christians tuition, are capable of baptism; we plead
education, as well as birthright; Those that are out, that is that have not
the covenant established to posterity, with Ishmael may be baptized: Ishmael
was not out of the outward, and visible covenant, which is the Question, nor as
Luher thinks out of the invisible, though his posterity apostated, and Christ
came not out of his loins; which if he deny, one branch of his Copulative Minor
is false, and according to his own rule, renders the whole untrue, and his
conclusion not deducible. 2. He says, he answers directly, by denying the
Major, if universal, whereas his own former instance* have demonstrated it
universally true. My proofs are convincing; That from Austin is of force,
Mutatis signis manet eadem gratia sine aetatis discrimine, the outward visible
signs being changed, the same grace remains without difference of age, and is
vainly supposed by him, that therefore, 1. by circumcising under the Law, and
baptizing under the Gospel, the grace of God is conferred, otherwise than
sacramentally, and signally according to divine institution, which is no Popish
conceit, Circumcision did no more bind to the keeping of the Moral Law, than
does Baptism, both beings seals of the righteousness of faith; nor do we, nor
did Austin upon more mature thoughts, find that the grace of God was either
Physically, or Morally conferred by the circumcision of each person rightly
circumcised, nor do the Papists by baptis^ for some may ponere obicem: we say
further its conferred on none either Physically, or Morally, and yet conferred
sacramentally, according to the nature of the union of the sign, and thing
signed, or signified. 2. It justly supposes, if Infants be not baptized, the
grace of God is straiter in the new Testament than in the old, which is true;
for the grace of God according to the Oeconomie, or dispensation under the
Gospel, is not ordinarily conferred without sacraments; Gods administration of
the Church before Abraham's time without Scripture, and sacraments, is no
president to us, who must follow the present rule, and concludes as well for
Antiscripturians, as Antipaedobaptists: God disp^nsed grace before Abraham
without sacraments, because it was his pleasure, not so since, at least, to the
contemners of sacraments, for the same reason. Schoolmen gave not so much to
the right use of the sacraments (it seems; as Mr. T. does to the sacrilegious
abuse, who confesses he asserted in his Sermon, all that would be saved must be
baptized after profession, that is, baptized again, though they were baptized
when Infants.

Mr. Tombs. 11. Section.
THat Question from Hebr. 8. 6. how were it a better covenant, if all poor
Infants that were in covenant under the Law, were out of covenant under the
Gospel, runs upon these common mistakes, That to be circumcised or baptized is
all one as to be in covenant, all that were in covenant were to be circumcised,
or baptized; all that were not, were out of covenant; That the reason of
circumcising, or baptizing a person is his being in covenant, which are all
false, as I have proved Exam. part 3. Sect. 1. letter to Mr. Bailey Sect. 3.
part 1. Sect. 5. and shall, part 3 in many Sections, if God permit. And to the
Question, I answer from the next words Hebr. 8. 6. The new covenant is a better
covenant, because it is stablished on better promises, though it were imagined
never a poor Infant (as he childishly speaks) which yet I do not conceive,
were in covenant. His next from Tit. 2. 11. supposes, if Infants be not to be
baptized, The grace of God appears not to them, which is of no force, unless
that Popish conceit obtain that by it and not without it, Gods grace appears to
all; But this is false, and not in the Text. Irenaeus words are not that Christ
was a little one, that little ones might be baptized from his example, for then
he would have them baptized in infancy, where as he was not baptized till about
thirty years of age. We need not deny Christ's redemption of Infants, because we
deny their baptism, there is no such connection between them. His saying of
little ones, That they were the first Martyrs that suffered for Christ, is
false; for how were they Martyrs, who testyfied nothing concerning Christ? That
of the collect in the Common prayer book on Innocents day, that they witnessed
only by dying is vain; for dying without some other expression does not
witness: nor did they suffer for Christ, whom they knew not, but because of
Herod's beastly rage. This speech of Mr. C. smells rank of the Common
prayer book superstition, in keeping Innocents day, which it seems Mr. C. yet
retains, but is nothing to the proof of his Major, nor any thing hitherto
alleged.

Reply.
CHrist is said Heb. 8. 6. to be a Mediator of a better Covenant, which could
not be, if Infants, that were in covenan, under the Law, were out of covenant
under the Gospeland is grounded upon this impregnable rock, which the
Anabaptists will never overthrow, that to be circumcised, or baptized is all
one as to be in visible covenant; That the reason of baptizing, or circumcising
a person, is their birthright, Tuition, self profession, whereby they are
visibly admitted into covenant That what he has said examen part. 3. Sect. 1.
Antipaed. part. 1. Sect. 5. touches not the true state of the controversy, but
is a confused Maze intricated with his fallacia decumana, or Master-fallacie of
Gods making, whereas he should say, completing his covenant only with the
elect, or spiritual seed, and this as the poisoned string in the Lamprey, runs
through the whole: we have seen: his attempts hitherto, as fallacious, as the
hanging of Mahomets tomb in the air, his followers may expect as much
satisfaction from the many sections of his third part yet invisible, as
Mahomets from his second coming: Hebr. 8. 6. The new covenant is a better
covenant, not only positively, because it is established upon better promises
in circumstantials, but because it is extended to move all Nations; negatively
would not be better, if any sex, age, degree were excluded

Titus 2. 11. The grace of God has appeared unto all, therefore to Infants by
Church membership, and the visible seal thereof, out of the one whereof, and
without the other, if it may be had, God has given no promise of salvation;
yet this is no popish conceit in tying God to the means, as if without them he
could not, but to obedience without which he will not. Irenaeus words are that
Christ b^came a little one for little ones sake, that he might redeem little
ones, outwardly as well baptizing them with water, as inwardly with the Holy
Ghost, after his precept not example, who was not baptized till thirty years of
ag^, because baptism was not instituted till then, but circumcised, when eight
days old As d^mnat^on; and contempt, so Christ's redemption, and acceptance of
baptism, are connexed. My saying of little ones, that they were the first
Martyrs that suff^red for Christ, is true; for they may be M^rtyrs, or
w^tnesses, who do suffer, or signify any thing relating to Christ, without an
express verbal testimony; This appears by the Hebrew acceptance of the word,
Genes. 31. 48. Laban said this heap is (...) Eedah, a witness between me, and
thee, The children, might as well be witnesse^ as a heap of stones; Deuteronomy. 4.
God calls Heaven, and Earth to witness, The Greeks, whence the word Martyr is
borrowed applies it to dead things, Pindar. ode. (...) the last days are
wisest witnesses, and Plato (...) I produce nature for a witness. That
expression that they witnessed only by dying (I confess) is vain, which is Mr.
Tombs his own, not of the collect in the Common prayer book on Innocents day,
which calls them witnesses, not by speaking, but dying; dying without other
vocal expression, by impression may witness. They suffered being baptized with
the baptism of blood for Christ, whom actually they knew not, though Herod was
the Instrument, as Pilate was of Christ's suffering for us. This suits with the
language of Fathers, and leading Protestants, and infers not the keeping of
Innocents day much less the rankness of Common Prayer books superstition, which
about twenty years ago I opposed in a Bishops House, while Mr. T. to ingratiat
with Bishops, was maintaining of it (as credibly reported) with tongue and pen:
All this conduces to the proof of the Major.

Mr. Tombs, 12 Section.
THat which he says last, has most show of proof, That Baptism came in place
of circumcision, the Apostle clears it, Col. 2. 11, 12, ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands, how is that? huryed with him in Baptism: but
it is not true, that he says, ye are circumcised with circumcision made
without hands, in that ye are buried with him in Baptism: These are predicated
of the same persons, and so were conjoined, but yet not so, as to express how
that the former was done by the latter, no more than by that which follows,
that therein they were raised by the faith of the operation of God, who raised,
Christ from the dead; yea, it had been false so expounded: for how could it be
true that they were circumcised without hands, in that they, were buried in
Baptism with hands? Nor if this were granted, were it true, that it is cleared
by the Apostle, that Baptism comes in the room of circumcision: for there is
not a word to that end, yea, the scope is to prove that we have all in Christ
without circumcision, as v. 10 etc. does show, and that Christ came in the
place of circumcision, and the rest of the Jewish ceremonies, as v. 17. is
expressed. And therefore the Apostle asserts the contrary, that no rite but
Christ, came in the room of circumcision. If any ask, why is v. 12. added, I
have answered formerly, and the answer is not gainsaid by Mr. Marshall, that it
is to show how persons come to be in Christ, and so to be complete in him,
which he usually ascribes to faith and baptism, Gal. 3. 26, 27, Romans 6. 3, 4,
5. and they are put together, Col. 2. 12, So that if baptism be conceived
thence to succeed circumcision, faith also is said to succeed it: which is more
agreeable to the expressions, G^l. 3. 23, 25. I add the circumcision mentioned
Col. 2. 11. is either circumcision made without hands, or Christ's personal
circumcision, Therefore if the placing of baptism after v. 12. prove its
succession to circumcision, it proves only its succcession to that made
without hands, which was not the ceremony commanded, Genesis 17. or to Christ's
circumcision, not to the common circumcision of others: yet were a succession
granted, this proves not, it must be in baptism, as in circumcision without a
like command, as I prove, Antipaed. part. 2. Sect. 2, 3. No more than because
the Ministers of the Gospel succeed the Priests of the Law, does it follow, the
Ministers children must be Ministers, anointed, etc. as it was in the Law. So
that Mr. C. irresistible Argument is as easily blown away as a feather. And I
hardly imagine any Anabaptist, so called, to be so weak, but that he is able to
answer it, by telling Mr. C. that his first proposition is false, unless there
were the like command to baptize Infants, as there was to circumcise them.

Reply.
HE confesses, there is that behind, which has most show of proof.? where I
say that baptism came in the place of circumcision, the Apostle clears it,
Colos. 2. 11, 12, ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, how
is that? buried with him in baptism. It is true that I say (...) in the Aorist
of the verb, ye are, or have been circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands etc. (...) in the Aorist of the Participle, being buried, or by
having been buried with him in baptism: These are predicated of the same
persons, and so conjoined, as to express how the former was done by the latter;
not so in that which follows, They (one subject) were raised (passively) by
the faith of the operation of God, who raised (actively) Christ from the dead
(another subject) and being so expounded, its true, for they were circumcised
without hands by baptism secundum quid, relating to the manner of legal
circumcision, without hands s^mpliciter relating to the inward baptism signed
by the outvvard, which being granted, it is consequently cleared by the
Apostle, that baptism comes in the room of circumcision, which is the scope
of the place v. 10. That we are (...) completed, or filled in Christ, by
baptism without circumcision, and that Christ, who is yesterday, to day, and
for ever the same, substituted baptism into the place of circumcision, which
with other Jevvish ceremonies v. 17. vanished at his passion. And therefore
the Apostle asserts, that Christ in the flesh with baptism, and the rites
under the Gospel, came in the place of Christ promised with circumcision, and
other rites under the Law. Mr. Marshall had reason to grant that persons came
to be in Christ, and completed in him by baptism signally, or significatively,
as by faith really, as Gal. 3 26, 27, Romans 3, 4, 5, so that baptism is evinced
thence to succeed circumcision, so faith in Christ already come, succeeds faith
in Christ that was to come, which is agreeable to the expressions Gal. 3, 23,
25. Circumcision mentioned, Coloss. 2. 11. is baptism succeeding legal
Circumcision to which it alludes, receiving virtue from Christ's personal
Circumcision, which was a part of his Passive obedience; Therefore the placing
Baptism after ver. 12. proves the Identity, or sameness of the thing signified;
The diversity of the Seals, to wit, baptism, which succeeded in the place of
Circumcision the Ceremonies commanded, Genesis 17. This granted, it proves it must
be in Baptism, as it was in Circumcision, having the like command both
expressed, and often interpretatively employed, against which he proves nothing,
Antipaed. part. 2. Sect. 2, 3. but beggs the Question. Ministers children under
the Gospel succeeds not, as the Priests children did under the Law, because God
in no place says to those that are in competition to be Pastors, and Teachers,
be ordained every one of you, for the promise is to you, and your children, as
he does to Converts, be baptized every one of you, for the promise is to you,
and your children; Neither is it said according to Gospell-promise, to any and
their seed; ye are consecrated with unction made without hands, being ordained
by imposition of hands, as it is said here, ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands, buried with him in Baptism. So that the
Argument, that Mr. T. presumptiously says, he has blown away like a feather,
may prove (as the Fly did to Pope Adrian) a feather to choke his confidence:
And though I confess, the most of the Anabaptists truly so called, have so much
brass, as to answer this proposition (as the Anti-scripturians does the whole
Scripture) by denying it; yet I cannot imagine they can with any probable
evasion elude it, when their great Goliath falls before it, and perishes with
his own sword.

Mr. Tombs. 13 Section.
IF the third Argument arise thence, it has its answer thence, that it is a
frivolous talk in Mr. C. to speak as if denying Infant baptism, were putting
out of the Covenant, disfranchizing, and circumcizing, supposed being in
Covenant, was a seal of the Covenant of grace. His proof, That the Gospel puts
not infants out of covenant, is true of the elect infants, and the covenant of
grace expressed in the Gospel. And yet his proofs are silly. New born babes
desire milk, little children are humble, and are proposed herein as paterns to
us, therefore they are in covenant, whereas this is as true of Infidel*
Children as of Christians, and therefore proves the one in covenant as well as
the other, and both these acts of little Children are only natural, not
virtuous, and so give not evidence of their being in covenant; nor does the
Gospel give them large commendations beyond them of riper years, making them
the rule of our perfection: for there is neither commendation of them, 1 Pet.
2. 2. nor Math. 18. 3. nor making them the rule of our perfection, any more
than Sheep, and Doves, Math. 10. 16. But only those virtuous qualities, which
are resembled by their natural qualities, are propounded to us as our rule.
His testimony out of Bellarmine intimates that Bellarmine said, there is no
impediment to infants baptism, because the case is clear, as if Bellarmine
would not have said it, had not the case been clear. Whereas it is more likely
to be false than true, because Bellarmine a Jesuit says it; yea, it is
manifestly false; for the Institution being only to baptize Disciples,
prohibits baptizing of infants, which are not such, but for want of being
Disciples incapable of baptism.

Reply.
THe third Argument rising thence, has its unanswerable stability thence;
which was this; Those that were in covenant, had the seal of the covenant, and
were never disfranchized, and put out of covenant, have title to the Covenant,
and seal of it still; But infants were once in Covenant, had the seal of the
Covenant, and were never disfranchized, and put out of Covenant, Therefore
infants have title to the Covenant, and seal of it still. To this he gives no
direct answer, but catches at his own shadow, with Ixion begetting Centaurs,
which to deny is to confute, they are Clouds, and will vanish; for denying of
Infant Baptism, is putting out of visible Covenant, disfranchizing, out of
which we have no promise of invisible. Circumcising supposed visible Covenant,
was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace; If the Gospel puts Infants out of visible
Covenant, for any thing we know, or is revealed in the word, it puts them
wholely out of the Covenant of Grace* My amplication to the people, which he
scoffingly calls proofs; are significant, and suitable. The Gospel is so far
from expressing of infants, that they are put out, that it gives them large
commendations beyond them of riper years, making them the rule of our
perfection; as new born babes receive the sincere milk of the word, unless ye
be as little children, y^ shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. His own
Argument, as he moulds it, concludes against him; little children are humble,
and proposed herein as paterns to us, Therefore they are in Covenant; for if
those that follow them are so qualified, The Copy, and pattern much more,
especially that humbleness being a fruit of the spirit, which he can never
prove to be as true of Infidels children, as Christians, nor the one
consequently to be in Covenant as well, as the other; That these acts, or
qualities of little children are only natural, not seminally virtuous, is his
bold conjecture, which if so, might give evidence of their being in Covenant,
God selecting his own federally, though not morally holy, for presidents: There
are commendations of little children, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and Math. 18. 3. compared
with other places, making them more the rule of our perfection than Sheep and
Doves, Math. 10. 16 for when did our Savior take Sheep, and Doves up in his
arms, lay his hands upon them, and bless them, saying the Kingdom of God did
belong unto them? and unless ye be as Sheep, or Doves, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of God? Doctor Everard is blamed for saying Swine, and Sheep praise
the Lord in laying down their life, according to Gods will, for man, as well as
Stephen, and the Martyrs, when they called upon God; meaning in their kind, not
in the same degree; Then shall Mr. T. be justified for saying Scripture neither
commends, nor makes little children the rule of our perfection, more than
Sheep, or Doves, excepting no degree, or graduall perfection? Some may better
steal a Horse, than others many look over the hedge. The Philosopher says,
(...), that an Accident has no Accident; But that natural qualities in
rational creatures should resemble virtuous qualities inhearing in no
creatures to be a rule to spiritual creatures, is a Prodigy beyond the Mint of
Popish Transubstantiation. My testimony out of Bellarmine intimates that
Bellarmine, and the Jesuits that concenters with the Anabaptists in opposing
Covenant-holiness, and Analogy from circumcision, deserts them here, as ashamed
of the conclusion of Anti-paedobaptism they draw thence: If it be more likely
to be false, because Bellarmine a Jesuit says it, then that there is no such
thing as Covenant-holiness, and that Arguments drawn from analogy of
circumcision are not concluding, is also false, which will necessarily enforce
our Thesis; It being also true that Christ instituted baptizing of children
with Parents, who with their Parents being in visible Covenant, are capable of
baptism.

Mr. Tombs. 14. Section
But Mr. C. in his fourth Argument will prove Infant Baptism commanded, Math
28. 19. because Nations are commanded to be baptized; To this I answered before
in the dispute, and my answer is, and was, Nations are not commanded to be
baptized without any other circumscription, but Disciples of the Nations Master
C. confesses page 48. (...) Is, ye shall make Disciples, and then baptizing is
of Disciples. His speech, infants are not incapable of baptism, because they
have not faith, and repentance, because Christ was baptized without repentance,
is frivolous, for there is not the same end of Christ's baptism, and ours, and
therefore though repentance were not required of him, yet it is of us, and the
want of it, makes infants incapable of baptism. It is false that God requires
no more of persons in Covenant, and born of believing Parents, to their
baptism, but a mere objective power, or receptibility, as he calls it, as was
in the world at its creation, or in the regeneration, when he new makes us. And
it is merely false, that upon any such account, as he speaks of, many whole
families were baptized, or that any Infants were included. The very Texts,
which speak of baptizing of the households, either there or elsewhere speak of
their fearing God, Acts. 2. 2. That all the household be saved by Peter's words,
Acts 11. 14. had repentance, and the like gift with the Apostles, ver. 17. 18.
had the word spoken to them, Acts 16. 32. believed ver. 34. Acts 18. 8.
addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16. 15. which show no
infants were meant under the household, for they did none of these things.

Reply.
MY fourth Argument proved Infan-t Baptism commanded Math. 28. 19. because
Nations are commanded to be baptized: according to Ambrose, qui dixit omnes,
nullos exclusit, neque parvulos, he that said baptize all, excluded none, no
not little ones. I confessed (...) is, ye shall make Disciples, but not that
baptizing is only of actual Disciples; for 1. It can not be proved, that the
verb (...) teach, includes actually in it the noun (...) Disciples. 2. It
follows not, because it is placed before (...) baptizing, therefore it is
simply before it in order of nature, and time. 3. Though (...) should signify,
make actual Disciples, and in order of nature and time proceed, it may be put
Synecdochically for the greater part, actual believers, not excluding their
infants. My speech, Infants are not incapable of baptism, because they have not
faith, and repentance, because Christ was baptized without repentance is
unanswerable; for it presupposes his proposition drawn from [make Disciples]
not to be universal, and so irregularly to conclude from particulars; for if
there be not the same end of Christ's baptism, and ours, there may be different
ends of infants Baptism, and those of age: Christ was circumcised for one end,
Isaak, and Ogdemerans for another, Abraham, and aged Proselytes for another:
Christ was baptized absolutely without repentance, Infants to repentance for
the future, but of them of age it was required, that they should be
penitentiaries at least in fieri, for the present. It is true, that God
requires no more of Infants in Covenant, and born of believing Parents, to
their baptism, but a mere objective power, or receptibility, as the world in
its Creation was of nothing, so infants regeneration, or new creature is of
nothing. It is also a divine truth, that upon the account I spoke of, many
whole families accepting Christ were baptized, and their infants with them,
which the Texts I alleged in the Sermon, proves, Acts 10. 47. Those were
baptized that received the Holy Ghost, of which infants are capable, as Mr. T.
often confesses; Jeremy, and John Baptist were sanctified in their Mothers
womb, Acts 16. 15. mention is made only of Lydia attending to the things that
were spoken by Paul, yet upon that account her whole household was baptized with
her 1 Cor. 1. 16. Paul baptized the household of Stephanas, making no mention of
faith, and repentance, Acts 16. 30, 31. The jaylers family is baptized in
reference to his faith, believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and
thy house, whereupon he was baptized, (...), all that were his. The Texts, that
speak of fearing of God, repentance, belief, hearing the word, addicting
themselves to the Ministry of Saints, is to be applied to the subject matter
capable of those duties, and proves affirmatively, such so qualified, were
baptized, but nothing negatively, they that were not so qualified, were not
baptized; The contrary whereof the Holy Ghost put out of Question, naming whole
families, wherein infants are included, that were baptized without exception.

Mr. Tombs. 15. Section.
MAster C. goes on, Argument 5. They that are capable of the Kingdom, and the
blessing, which is the greater, are capable of baptism, which is the lesser,
But infants are capable of the Kingdom, and the blessing which is the greater;
Therefore they ^re capable of baptism, which is the lesser.

To which I answer, The Major is false: if it were true, it would follow,
Infants are capable of the Kingdom, and the blessing, which is the greater,
Therefore they are capable of the Lords Supper, Ordination to the Ministry,
Church Discipline, which are the less. Though into the Kingdom of Heaven
Infants are admitted by God, who knows who are his without any visible
expression, yet into the visible Church persons are not admitted without
visible Testimony of their faith, of which sort were all added to the Church,
Acts 2. 47. not one of those Texts. Mark 10. 13. to 17. Mark. 9. 14. 36. 37.
Math. 18. 2. 3. 4. Math. 19. 13. 14, 15. Luke 9. 14. 15. Luke 18. 15, 16.
severally, nor all jointly prove, infants visible Church Members. The Kingdom
of God, Mark 10. 14. is not the visible Church, for into it such as are not
humble, as liitle children may enter, which our Savior denies ver. 15. but the
same with the Kingdom ver. 23, 24, 25. into which it is so hard, and impossible
for a rich man, or one that trusts in riches, to enter, which is called ver.
17, 30. eternal life. It is false, that Christ says, The Angels of little
ones in age see the face of his Father, which is in Heaven; But of little ones
in spirit, who are converted, and believe in Christ, Math. 18. 3, 6, 10. for
whose sake they are sent, Heb. 1. 14. They are but Paedobaptists dreams, that
the three Evangelists recorded Christ's blessing little ones to check
Antipaedobaptists, or to declare that which Mr. C. calls a precious truth,
though it be a very lie, and may be gathered to be so even from the story.

Reply.
MY first Argument was, They that are capable of the Kingdom and blessing which
is the greater, are capable of baptism which is the lesser; But infants of
believers are capable of the Kingdom, and blessing which is the greater;
Therefore they are capable of baptism, which is the lesser. The Major is true
being understood Relatively (as he knew it ought to be) of the inward
spiritual grace signified by outward washing, They that are capable of inward
baptism which is the greater, are capable of outward baptism the less. This he
confesses often, and that if he knew, he would baptize them, what can hinder
water that these may be baptized, seeing they have received the Holy Ghost? But
it does not follow, that because they are capable of the Kingdom, and blessing
which is the greater, Therefore they are capable of the Lords Supper,
Ordination to the Ministry, Church Discipline, which are the lesser; for these
are heterogeneal, and not by any divine institution appointed to signify, or
Seal the other. We receive the Lords Supper, not as capable of the Kingdom, and
to be matriculated, but as proficients in the Kingdom in a further graduall
perfection. Ordination of Ministers, Church Discipline relates not strictly to
the Kingdom, and blessing, as Kingdom, but accidentally in outward separable
respects, and circumstances. I confess according to Gods secret will it is
possible, that infants of unbelievers may be admitted by God into the Kingdom
of Heaven without any visible expression, but we are to depend upon Gods
revealed will, who has given no promise but to Covenanters, believers, and
their seed, who are admitted into the Church without any visible Testimony of
their actual faith. Those Texts, Mark 10. 13. to 17. Mark 9. 14. 36. 37. Math.
18. 2. 3. 4. Math. 19. 13, 14. 15. Luke 18. 15. 16. Severally, and jointly
prove Infants visible Church Members. The Kingdom of God, Ma^k. 10. 14. is also
inclusively the visible Church, as well as invisible, Such as are not humble,
seemingly as little Children (for the Apostles were often deceived) shall not
enter into the visible Church; such as are not really humble shall not enter
into the invisible, which is the same with the Kingdom, v. 23, 24, 25. into
which, it is so hard, and impossible for a rich man, or one that trusts in his
riches, to enter, which is called ver. 17. 30. eternal life. It is true that
Christ said, not only of little ones in Spirit, who are converted, and believe
in him, but of little ones in age, their Samplers, and paterns, that their
angels see the face of his Father which is in Heaven, Math. 18. 3, 6, 10. It is
an unanswerable observation of the learned of former, and latter ages, that the
three Evangelists recorded Christ's blessing of little ones, to check (as it
falls out) the novell Anabaptists, and to declare that which I call a precious
truth, which maugre all opposition, may be gathered to be so from the story.

Mr. Tombs. 16. Section.
FOr sure if infants had been to be baptized, Christ would then have appointed
them to be baptized, and blamed his Apostles for not doing it. And therefore
Mr. C. questions are answered by Questions. 1. Does Christ take Children in his
arms, and would he have all put out of his visible Church? Answ. Does Christ no
more but take them up in his arms, lay his hands on them, and bless them? and
shall we presume to do more without any warrant of his, even to admit them into
his visible Church by Baptism? 2. Would he have us receive them in his name,
and yet not receive them into his visible Church? Answ. Where does Christ ever
bid us receive little children in age? Where did he ever send them, That they
might be received in his name? must we make Christ's words to import that, which
we would in another censure as a spice of madness, when he has told us plainly
they are his Apostles, and other Preachers he has sent, whom we are to receive
in his name, Mark 9. 41. Luke 9. 48. though they are as mean, and contemptible
as a little child? How should children be received, but by providing nurses?
would Christ have us provide nurses for little children? our Lord Christ
expresses a cup of cold water to drink, as some part of the reception in his
name, Mark 9. 41. Is this a thing fit to entertain an Infant with? This is
enough to answer Mr. C. frivolous questions. And in answer to the words of
Master Baxter, who is the godly, and Reverend Divine he means, I say for my
part, seeing the will of Christ is that I must walk by, and his word that I
must be judged by, and he has given so full a discovery of his will in this
point, I will boldly adventure to follow his rule to baptize Disciples
professing faith, and had rather answer him upon his own encouragement for not
admitting by baptism those he never appointed to be baptized, than to adventure
upon the doing like Uzzah upon mine own head, that which does pr^sane the
Ordinance of baptism, and corrupt the Church of Christ.

Reply.
MOst surely, if Infants had not been baptizable, Christ would not have laid
his hands upon them, and blessed them, which presupposes they were either (as
most probably) baptized before; or visible members, and capable of Baptism. And
therefore Mr. T. Questions are answered again by Questions. 1. Does Christ take
children in his arms, and would he have all put out of the visible Church?
Answ. Christ does more than take them in his arms, for he laid his hands upon
them, and blessed them, and said the kingdom of God was of such; and shall not
we admit them to baptism, an Ordinance which imposition of hands, and
benediction presupposes? 2. Would he have us receive them in his name, and yet
not receive them into his visible Church? Answ. Christ bids us, Mat. 18. 5.
receive little children in age, either expressly, or a fo^tiori, and Luke 9. 48.
which to interpret of Apostles, and other preachers sent to be received in his
name is a spice of madness; The words are these, Jesus took a child, and set
him by him, and said unto them, whosoever shall receive this child (not
Apostles, or Preachers) receives me, and whosoever receives me, receives him
that sent me. The rest of his expressions relating ^o this second Question, are
the Paroxysms of a distempered brain, and stands in more need of Hellebore to
purge, than an answer. Therefore I say again in the words of Mr. Baxter; who is
indeed the learned, and godly Divine, seeing the Will of God is that I must
walk by, and his word I must be judged by, and he has given me so full a
discovery of his will in this point, I had rather answer him upon his own
encouragement for admitting an hundred Infants into his Church, than answer for
keeping out one; especially after the Anabaptist manner, too frequent among us,
who like Uzzah, or the sons of Sheva, adventure upon the office of the
Ministry without a call, or ordination, than with Nadab, and Abihu, offer
false fire, deliver unsound doctrine, than injuriously bereave Infants of
baptism, and sacrilegiously rebaptize, or dip those that were rightly baptized
before: error draws on another.

Mr. Tombs 17 Section.
MAster C. sixth Argument is, Infants are Disciples, Therefore they may be
baptized. The Antecedent be would prove from Acts 5. 10. in that it was
Circumcision, which was the yoke* which he proves from v. 5. but he confesses
it was not Circumcision only, but the attendants, and that it is no shift^,
but a clear truth, that it is not Circumcision as acted on Infants, but as
taught, imposed on the consciences of believing Gentiles, with the rest of
Moses his law, as necessary to salvation by some Teachers (which cannot be said
of Infants) is so manifest from the Text, that I dare boldly say, they that
assert, that by Disciples, Acts 15. 10. are meant, do but wrangle against clear
light, and spit against the Sun. That the Text, Isai. 54. 13. is not meant of
Infants of believing parents, as such, but of such, as having heard, and
learned of the father, come to Christ, is plain from those words of our
Savior, John 6. 45. alleged here by Mr. C. himself, as expounding the
Prophet.

Reply.
MY sixth Argument was, All disciples may be baptized; But Infants of believing
parents are disciples; Therefore some Infants may be baptized. The Minor I
proved from Acts 15. 10. in that it was Circumcision that was the yoke, why
tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples? Which I proved v. 5.
certain of the Sect of the Pharisees said, it was necessary to circumcise them,
Circumcision with the attendants is the yoke, taught to be imposed only upon
the Infants of believing Jews, upon believing parents with Infants among the
Gentiles. And that it was Circumcision acted appears v. 1. They taught the
brethren, except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be
saved. Moses his manner was Infants of eight days old. v. 5. they taught it
was needful to circumcise them. v. 14. Ye must be circumcised; whence it is
clear, that it is not only Circumcision taught, but acted, not acted upon
taught brethren only, but their Infants; That I dare boldly say, they that
assert the contrary, do but cavil against conscience, and with Julian the
Apostate throws the blood of their own self-conviction against the Son of
Righteousness. That Text Isai. 54. 13. is not meant only of them, that having
heard, and learned of the father, come unto Christ, but of Infants of believing
parents, as such, which the note of universality intimates, all thy children
shall be taught of God; All, but principally Infants which being not capable of
the instrumental, depend wholly upon the Efficient cause; which our Saviors
exposition clears, for when he applies it to actual hearers, he leaves out the
word [ children] saying they shall be all taught of God.

Mr. Tombs, 5. Section.
THe seventh Argument is, All that have faith, may be baptized: But some
Infants have faith; Therefore some Infants may be baptized. But 1. The Major is
not true of faith only in seed, or act secret, and not made known. 2. Mr. C.
alters the Conclusion, which should have been, that all Infants of Believers
may be baptized; But then he durst not avo^ch the Minor, that they all have
faith, at least in semine, the contrary being manifest from Scripture, and
experience, he proves the Minor, 1. from Mat. 18. where he says, Christ
expressly calls them believers, but Christ calls not little children in age
believers, v. 6. it had been ridiculous to threaten so heavy a doom to the
offending of little children in age, who are offended with none so much as
Nurses for dressing, or chiding them, when they cry: but the Apostles, and
other Christian Disciples are there meant. 2. They are said to receive the
kingdom of God, Mark. 10. That is the grace of God, remission of sins, and life
eternal; now the kingdom is not received, but by faith in Christ. But only
elect Infants do receive the kingdom, either by faith in the seed, not in the
act, or by faith in the act secret only, and yet are not to be baptized till
they make profession, nor are all, or any Children of believers, as theirs,
elect.

Reply.
MY seventh Argument was, All that have faith may be baptized; Some Infants
have faith; Therefore some Infants may be baptized. The major may have a
threefold acceptance, 1. All that have faith conferred, or to be conferred in
Baptism, though not Physically, or morally, or ex opere operato, yet of divine
promise, as some hold, all believers Infants have, because they cannot ponere
obicem; it will inevitably follow, these (if such) are baptizeable. 2. All that
have faith of the parents, or sureties imputed to them, as in the old
Cathechism, they do perform by their sureties, who do promise and vow them both
(faith and repentance) in their names, this granted makes Infants baptizable.
3. All that have faith in feed, secret act, or habit, may be baptized; this he
only insists upon, denying it, because it is not made known, confessing often,
if it were known, he would baptize them; this exception denies not, but they
are baptizable, but that he may not baptize them, as if God had given them a
right to baptism, and no means to attain it, and concludes as well against
baptism of elders; for if he baptize none, till their faith be made known, he
must supersede till this mortal put on immortallity: It is false that I alter
the conclusion, which in the dispute was, some Infants may be baptized: In the
Sermon indefinitly, Infants may be baptized, sometimes, as the mediunm affords,
I extend it to believers Infants, yea unbelievers, if under Christian
education, but the lowest is sufficient to overthrow his Tenet, who denies all
Infant Baptism. Its but his dream, that I have any need to avouch all Infants
of believers have says at least, in semine, and I think it hard for him to
manifest the contrary from Scripture, and experience; All that maintain an
impossibility of falling from grace in adultis, does not so in seminal graces
in Infants, but I wave that.

The Minor I proved from Matthew. 18. where Christ expressly calls little children
in age (as many interpret it) believers, from the authority of Luke, who
Chapter 9. 48. says; Christ says that of the little babe he took up in his
arms, and set in the midst of them, he that receives this little child in my
name, receives me, Mark 9. 36. 37. he that recieveth one of these little
children, without mention of any other foregoing, but the child it self taken
into his arms, receives me; However little children were patterns, they were
to imitate in faith and humility, propter quod unumquodque tale, illud magis
tale. It is not ridiculous, but rather blasphemous to say it is ridiculous to
threaten so heavy a doom to the offending, or scandalizing of little children
in age, whom he childishly, and untruly says are offended with none so much as
nurses for dressing or chiding them, when they cry: Mr. T. might know that
(...) is rendered by Budaeus, and others, offensionis causam afferre, vel
concitare, to bring or procure a cause of offense, which nurses do not; He that
should have said Mr. T. eldest son when an Infant, was a bastard, I think did
scandalize him, in defaming him, and rendering him incapable of temporal
birthright; but they that deny Infants spiritual birthright and church
membership, scandalize them much more. This he grants, that Infants are said to
receive the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. 10. that is, the grace of God, remission
of sins, and life eternal, now the kingdom is not received but by faith in
Christ, Elect Infants dying do receive the eternal kingdom either by faith in
the seed, not in the act, or by faith in the act secret only, and yet are to be
baptized, before they make profession, upon their birthright privilege
grounded on Gods promise, and char^^able hope of seminal, or actual faith,
which is confined to professors, and their children, as such, solis, sed non
omnibus; for out of the visible Church, we have neither commission to
administer the Ordinance, nor promise of Salvation.

Mr. Tombs, 19 Section.
THirdly says Mr. C. They please God, therefore Christ blesses them; but
without faith it is impossible to please God.

Answ. The like Argument is urged by the Remonstrants at the Synod at Dort, It
is impossible to please God without faith, therefore election which supposes
pleasing of God, presupposes says; The Answer is, that Heb. 11. 6. the
pleasing of God is meant of the works, as Enoch pleased God walking with him,
and so Infants please not God, and therefore may be without faith, not of the
persons, in which sense Infants may please God, that is be beloved with a love
of benevolence, though not of delight without faith. 4. Faith must be allowed
them, or not salvation, for faith purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9. and no
unclean thing shall enter into heaven. Answ. Faith in the seed is sufficient to
make them clean, which is not denied, may be in infants, though neither Isai.
65. 20. says any such thing, and Austins words express nothing but his own
conceit according to the language of his time, but faith in seed, or act
unknown does not entitle to baptism.

Reply.
THey please God, therefore declaratively (not causally) Christ blesses them,
it being impossible without faith to please God. The Argument (but far unlike)
is urged by the Remonstrants at the Synod at Dort, to prove foresight of faith
in time to be the cause of election before time; I speak of Infants that are in
being, and actually please God, and receive his benediction, which presupposes
their persons are accepted, and they have faith, these two differ toto coelo.
Hebr. 11. 6. Enoch pleased God by faith, manifesting it self by works in
walking with him, which Infants cannot do, at least in that degree, and manner;
yet are not therefore without faith; God loved them, as elect, from eternity,
with a love of intention, but not before they were in being, and had faith,
with a love of execution, which he expressed by blessing of them. I said from
Scripture-grounds that faith must be allowed them, or salvation denied them,
but the latter was cruel, and impious, therefore the former must be godly and
pious, faith only purifieth the heart Acts 15. 9. and no unclean thing shall
enter into Heaven; This he grants, saying faith in the seed is sufficient to
make them clean, which is not denied, may be in Infants; But denies that Isai.
65. 20. says any such thing; the contrary whereof has been formerly proved.
He takes no notice of the Testimonies of Paraeus, Hommius, Beza, Trelcatius,
and Vossius, but girds at Austin, who to Pelagius asking him, where he places
Infants baptized, answers in numero credentium, in the number of believers, and
adds, nec judicare aliter ullo modo audebis, si non vis esse aperte
haereticus, neither may thou presume to judge otherwise, if thou will not be a
plain heretic; to shake of this load that is laid in the right saddle, he
says Austins words expresses nothing, but his own conceit according to the
language of the time; when as indeed it is the language of Scripture, and all
ages, saving John of Leyden's, when he was backed with the German Boars, and
this present, when by reason of our late distractions, the hedge of discipline
was broken down; Mr. Tombs to get him a name with Erostratus, took liberty to
advance also his Idol, thought Antipaedobaptism most plausible, whereas
according to all antiquity, faith in seed, or act unknown, with
Covenant-holiness does entitle to baptism.

Mr. Tombs 18 Section.
THe eight Argument was answered before by denying the Major, and Minor, and
his calling those that expound 1 Cor. 7. 14. of legitimation gross
Anabaptists, does but involve Melanchton, Camerarius, Musculus, etc. in the
same censure, and that it is no bastard, as Dr. Featly called it, but a genuine
exposition is demonstrated at large in my Antipaedobaptism first part, and it is
granted, that Pagans children are holy in the Apostles sense, if lawfully
begotten; for the sanctifiedness of the yoke* fellow, and holiness of the
children is not ascribed to the faith of the one parent, but to the conjugal
relation between them. Romans 11. 16. The first fruits, and root are Abraham, not
every believier, the lump and branches are Abraham' s children by election, and
faith, not every believers, nor all Abraham' s natural children: and the
holiness, is meant of saving holiness, not mere outward visible holiness.
The breaking off, and graffing in, Romans 11. 17. are meant of the invisible
Church, in which sense parents, and children are not broken off, or graffed in
together. See my Antipaedobap. first part.

Reply.
THe eighth Argument was, those that are holy with a Covenant-holinesse may be
baptized; Infants of believing parents are holy with a Covenant-holinesse;
Therefore they may be baptized. The Major, and the Minor, which he says, he
denied, were proved before, to which in the Sermon I further added the
Testimonies of Vossius, Bullinger, Sharpius, and his friend Hugo Grotius, who
all (with the Assembly in the confession of faith, greater, lesser Catechism)
interpret 1. Cor. 7. 14. of Covenant-holyness, nor legitimation, as he says
Melanchton, Camerarius, and Musculus do, which are but three he can name
amongst Protestants, granting we have ten to one to the contrary, he might have
said ten times ten, and have kept within compass. Dr. Featly called it rightly
a bastard exposition, which to prove genuine Antip^dobap. first part, he has
spent many words in vain; -- rudis, indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners, congestaque eodem,
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
It is absurd to say Pagans children are holy in the Apostles sense, when the
Apostle speaks there of special privileges of Christians, and the
sanctifiednesse of the yoke fellow, and holiness of the children is ascribed to
the faith of one parent, not to the conjugal relation between them, which they
had before they were Christians. The first fruits, and root Romans 11. 16. are
Abraham as remote, every believer more immediately relating to their next
posterity; The lump, and branches are Abraham's children, not only by election
and faith, but visible Church Membership, which involves professors children,
and the holiness is meant as well of mere outward visible holiness, as of
saving holiness; Thus Grotius; loquitur Apostolus de sanctitate foederis,
credentium liberi foedere gratiae comprehensi sunt, and eatenus sancti a Deo
censentur, The Apostle speaks of Covenant-holiness, for the children of
believers are comprehended in the Covenant of Grace, and therefore are judged
holy of God. The breaking off, and graffing in, Romans 11, 17. are meant of the
visible Church, in which sense parents with children are broken off, and
graffed in together, not of the invisible which would imply Popery,
Pelagianism, and Arminianism, if the invisible members the elect could be
broken off. See Mr. Blake, Sermon. page 7, 8. his Answ. to Mr. T. page 29. Geree
Vindication, page 23. Mr. Marshals Defense, page 134. Cotton page 77. to 110.
Cobbet, page 151. to 168. Mr. Baxter, page 44. to 50.

Mr. Tombs 21 Section.
NInth Argument tells us of dangerous absurdities, if Infants should be out of
Covenant under the Gospel. But this is not all one as to be baptized, we may
grant them to be in Covenant of grace, and yet not to be baptized, and to be
baptized, and yet not in the Covenant of grace. But let us view the absurdites.
First, Infants (says he) would be loosers by Christ's coming, and in worse
condition than the Jewish Infants were, they with the parents were admitted to
the seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision, and not parents with Children
to Baptism. Answ. I rathe^ think that by being not admitted to Circumcision the
condition of parents, and children is the better by Christ's Coming, since as Mr.
C. teaches here, page, 100. Circumcision is the yoke, Acts 15. 10. Of which
the Apo^^le ^aith, neither we, nor our fathers were able to bear it, and is so
far from being the seal of the Covenant of grace, that (they are Mr. C. own
words) Circumcision was the seal, or ordinance by which the Jews were bound to
observe the Doctrine, and the Law, meaning of Moses. 2. Were it imagined a pure
Evangelical privilege, yet sure it is not such a privilege, but parents, and
children did well without it before Abraham's time, and all the femals from
Abraham's days till Christ's. I suppose what ever privilege it were, it was
abundantly recompensed by Christ's coming without Infant baptism, except a mere
empty title of visible Church membe^ship, which yet will not stand them so much
in stead, as to admit them to the Lords Supper, be such an inestimable treasure
as is not recompensed with the glory of the Gospel now exhibited to spiritual
persons in spiritual benefits by the spirit, in stead of the carnal promises,
ordinances, and Church state of the Law.

Reply.
THe ninth Argument is drawn from many dangerous absurdities that would follow,
if children should be ou^ of visible Covenant under the Gospel; it being all
one to be baptizable, or baptized, and to be in v^sible Covenant; none are in
visible Covenant, but are or may be baptized, all that are baptized, are in
visible covenant. The absurdities are these, Infants would be loosers by
Christ's coming, and in worse condition than the Jewish Infants were, they with
the parents were admitted to the seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision,
and not parents with children to baptism. Mr. T. his Answer is frivolous, and
impertinent, saying, he rather thinks that by being not admitted to
circumcision the condition of parents, and children is the better by Christ's
coming; which I grant, but it is nothing to the purpose; our condition under
the Gospel is better than theirs under the Law, theirs under the law infinitely
better than the heathens, which had not circumcision the seal of the
righteousness of faith; Christians Infants, if they had not baptism, were worse
than Jews Infants, no better than Pagans. Circumcision was the yoke Acts 15.
10. of which the Apostle said, neither we nor our fathers were able to bear it,
that seal, or ordinance by which the Jews were bound to observe the
ceremonial Law of Moses, and yet a rite that under that troublesome Oconomy
sealed the righteousness of faith in Christ to come, baptism under an easier
yoke seals Christ that is come.

Secondly, its acknowledged; though Baptism, and other Sacraments be pure
Evangelical privileges, yet they are not such privileges, but parents, and
children did well without them, as well as without Scriptures before Abraham's
time, and all the femals from Abraham's time, till Christ, that were without
actual^, but not virtual circumcision. What then? May we therefore cast away
Scriptures with the Anti Scripturians, cast off baptism with them above
ordinances? Tempora disting^^e, and tutus eris. There was first a time without
ordinances, then a time of legal, now a time of Gospel Ordinances. And those
privileges of the Law, what ever they were, are abundantly recompensed by
Christ's coming, and the Gospel Ordinances he instituted, whereof Infantbaptism
is one; which though it will not stand them in so much stead, as to admit them
to the Lords Supper, (for the seals ought not to be confounded) yet it brings
more with it, than an empty title of visible Church Membership; for its the
door, and the only ordinary way, we know God has appointed us to enter into
the invisible communion, and fellowship with Christ, and administers an
entrance to that inestimable treasure of the glory of the Gospel now exhibited
to spiritual persons in spiritual benefits by the spirit, instead of Levitical
rites, and ceremonial Church estate (wherein there were also spiritual
blessings) of the Jews.

Mr. Tombs 22 Section.
THe second is answered already, though Infants be not baptized, grace is
larger under the Gospel being extended to believers in all Nations, than under
the Law to the Israelites, and some few Pros^lites: The third is a speech that
has neither truth, nor sobriety of expression, nor proof, it is but a bug-hear
to affright the ignorant people to make use of such as he is, and to make
odious them that will not baptize Infants, as counting them as vile as the
children of Turks, Tartars, or Cannibals, even as they make them odious, that
will not bury their dead, as not affording them Christian burial (though they
are buried as Christ was, without ^ Priest) but burying as dogs. But we know
how to put a difference between Believers, and Pagans children in regard of the
love God bears to us, some promises he has made to us concerning them, the
hopefulness of them by reason of prayers, education, example, society,
confirmed by many experiences that are comfortable, all which things we should
be contented with, and not complain for want of an imaginary privilege, which
is indeed no privilege, but a damage to our children. I for my part look upon
the children of believers unsprinkled, as precious, and rather more hopeful
than those that are, and I think Mr. C. as hard a conceit as he has of the
Anabaptists and their children, yet would be ashamed to say as he does here of
them. That they are as vile as the children of Turks, Tartars or Canniballs.
But that which he closes with, shows he was minded to affright the poor
ignorant people, as the popish Priests did of old.

Reply.
THe second absurdity was, If Infants should be in covenant then and not now,
grace would be larger under the Law, than under the Gospel, which his Answer
does not reach; for the Question is not of extending means of salvation to
Gentiles, not proselired, but independent of the Jews, which by degrees were
multiplied, as was before from Abraham's sole family to a great nation
surpassing in number the sands of the sea; But whether all sexes, ages, degrees
be in covenant, which were before, from which if Infants were excluded till
actual professors, the one half of Christendom would be excommunicated, whereas
Bucer says on Mat. 19. that no age affords heaven so many Citizens as
infancy. The third for all his stormy blustering, speaks with a great deal of
evidence, the words of sobriety, and truth, and is used as a motive to bring
home the ignorant, but well meaning people (whom such as he has seduced) to
make use of godly, and Orthodox Ministers to baptize their Infants, as they,
and all their progenitors were, and to convince, not to make odious, those that
will not; whom we pity for making their own children (as much as in them lies)
as vile as the children of Turks, Tartars, and Canniballs; yet hope God will
not punish the innocent bab^^ for their sins. It is a malicious slander that we
make them odious that will not bury, that is, officiate at the burial of the
dead, in which some of us may challenge precedence of Master Tombs, who turned
not with (and its to be feared, for) the times, as he, but prevented them: yet
we cannot be persuaded Christ's burial ought to be a more necessary president
than his death, for ours, till he can prove the Jewish burial rites, and
amongst them, those that dyed as Malefactors, to be our directory; for then he
must bury his friends out of Towns, Churches, or Churchyard, in the fields, in
rocks, or caves, and not cover them with Earth: we know not from Scripture to
put any difference between believers, and Pagans children, unless the one be in
visible covenant, and may have the seal, whereas the others are without them;
God has made no promise to any that are out of visible covenant. And if the
hope fullness of our children without the covenant, or promise, depend only
upon our prayers, education, example, society; Their condition even in this
also, is no better than of Infidels children, who if they should live amongst
us, ought to participate of all these, which we ought not to be contented
withal, seeing God has enlarged his bounty further, but complain of them who
deny infants those real, and Scripture-grounded privileges, which would
consequently (for any thing we know) deprive them both of grace, and glory.

We look upon children of believers, that die unbaptized through invincible
necessity, as hopeful; despair not wholly of Anabaptists children, that
through Parents contempt are not baptized; It may be, he that said Genes. 17.
14. (The uncircumcised child shall be cut off from his people, he has broken
my covenant) will not visit the Parents sins upon the children, they being
federally holy, and in covenant, their Parents infidelity in that, perhaps
cannot defeat them, though they want the seal. And methinks Mr. T. might be
ashamed to use this forgery, when he had my words before him, to say I said,
The children of Anabaptists are as vile, as the children of Turks Tartars and
Cannibals, when my words were expressly, all the Infants of Christians (if they
were out of covenant) would be as vile, as the children of Turks, Tartars, and
Cannibals; I hope all Christians are not Anabaptists, and for the Parents to
contemn the seal, though commanded, is not simply to put the children out of
covenant. This is not to affright the poor ignorant people (as he further
traduces me) as the Popish priests did of old with a Limbo or Purgatory of
Infants, but to tell them their danger, who detract from, or diminish the word,
and institution of Christ, and make the way and entrance into the Church
narrower than God has made it.

Mr. Tombs 23. Section.
FOurthly says he, They would be without God, without Christ, without hope in
the World; not the children of God, but would all be damned, for out of the
covenant, and visible Church (ordinarily) there is no salvation. Answ. By
covenant, he means doubtless no other than the outward covenant, which is not
showed to be any other than Baptism, and indeed we do not otherwise put them
out of the covenant, than by denying of them baptism; which being presupposed,
Mr. C. speech must needs imply, that denying baptism infers all this. which
cannot be true without conceiving, that all that are unbaptized are without
God, without Christ, without hope in the World, not the children of God, but of
the Devil, will be all damned, have no salvation, which is not only more than
what the Epistler makes heinous in me, all that would be saved, must be
baptized after profession (though it were understood by me duly of necessity
of precept, which Mr. C. himself asserts to be imported Mark. 16. 16.) but
worse than Austin says, whom Mr. C. himself called the hard father of Infants,
and says went too far, worse than Papists themselves speak of the dying
unbaptized. which shows that he preached this Sermon with a bitter, and furious
spirit. His closing speech [out of covenant, and visible Church (ordinarily)
there is no salvation] if understood of the covenant of saving according to
election, I grant, that neither ordinarily, nor extraordinarily is there
salvation: If of the outward covenant (as they call it) that i^ there outward
administration of seals, it is certain there may be salvation unless profane
contempt, or wilful neglect against conscience do hinder salvation.

The speech, Out of the Church is no salvation, has been interpreted by
Protestants of the invisible church. A person of years that believes, though he
be joined to no particular visible Church, if there be not profane contempt,
or wilful neglect against conscience, may be saved. But they that are only
negatively, or privatively out of the Church visible merely for want of age to
understand the faith, and ability to make profession, may ordinarily, if it be
meant frequently, constantly be saved, though they be not ordinarily saved, are
[ordinarily] notes ordinary means, preaching the word, and profession of faith.

Reply.
THe fourth Absurdity was, If Christian Infants were without visible covenant,
and consequently baptism, they would be without God, without Christ, without
hope in the World, not the children of God, but of the Devil, would all be
damned, for out of the covenant, and visible Church (ordinarily) there is
salvation; which his answer does not impeach, for by covenant I mean outward
covenant, which is not only (nor properly at all) baptism; but foederall
holiness, that (as the Directory says) gives capacity thereto; By denying of
both of them, they put them out of covenant, and my speech implies, that
denial of visible covenantship, foederall holiness, and baptism, infers all
this; which comes far short of that the Epistle relates, and the Examiner
confesses, he delivered in his Sermon, for he affirmed, there was no hope of
salvation to those that were baptized when Infants, if they were not baptized
again, that is, that contemned a second baptism, as his necessity of precept
infers; which necessity I only understand for baptism of Infants, and conceive
that Austin was called a hard Father of Infants, for sometimes holding as well
a necessity of means, as precept. But Anabaptists deny not only the seal, but
foederall holiness, and visible Church Membership to Infants: This I delivered
in the Sermon with the spirit of truth, and meekeness, which for Mr. T. to
traduce, and aggravate (as he does) becomes no professed Christian, much less a
Minister of the Gospel.

By interpreting my closing speech [out of covenant, and visible Church
(ordinarily) there is no salvation] that is out of the covenant of sav^ng
according to election, he makes it a Tautologie, and nonsense, The word
[visible] added as Epithe^e to Church, might have chalked him out my meaning,
that out of the outward covenant, which g^ves capacity to the administration of
seals, is no salvation; which seals, though we be bound by necessity of precept
to accept, yet I confess, there may be salvation without them, unless profane
contempt, or some neglect not out of invincible ignorance, do hinder the
acceptance: However that speech of his [out of the Church is no salvation]
has been interpreted by Protestants, it weakens no^ the truth of mine [out of
covenant, and visible Church (ordinarily) is no salvation.] That supposition is
vain, and implies a contradiction, that a person of y^ars should be a believer,
and be joined to no particular visible Church congregational, Parochial,
Provincial, National etc. without profane contempt, or wilful neglect against
conscience; for i^ he receive baptism, and other ordinances from any of these,
he joins with them, if not, there is profane contempt, and wilful neglect;
And indeed is not intelligible how he became a believer without joining in some
measure with some. My meaning is out of covenant and visible Church
(ordinarily) is no salvation; That is, God has not promised, neither have we
ground to believe, or hope the salvation of any but of them, that are in
covenant, and members of the Church visible; Though I deny not, but God can by
his absolute power, and secret will save otherwise extraordinarily. Infants of
believers are neither negatively, nor privatively out of the Church visible,
for neither want of age to understand the faith, nor ability to make profession
excludes them more now, than it did the Jews children under the Law, who were
ordinarily, that is, according to Gods promise annexed to the covenant, saved;
If any Gentiles children unproselyted, were saved, it was extraordinarily, that
is, without promise, or visible covenant. And Anabaptists giving us no more
ground of Christians Infants salvation, than of these, are miserable comforters.

Mr. Tombs 24 Section.
HIs last Argument is, That which has continued since the Apostles times with
blessed success, must needs be lawful; But Infant Baptism has continued with
blessed success since the Apostles times; Ergo The Minor is denied. The blessed
success he proves not. In my exercitation I show many errors, and corruptions
which have come from it, not by accident in respect of some persons that
embraced it only, but even from the tendency of the practice it self. I may
truly say, that Paedobaptism has been as cursed a root of corrupting the
Churches, and loosing the gifts of the spirit conferred at first commonly at
baptism by laying on of hands* as, I think, (except some few) any other
corruption in the rites of Christian Religion. But Mr. C. thinks to draw it
down from the Apostles days. He begins with words of Dionysius Arcopagita; ^
Holy men have received a tradition of the Fathers, which very words show it was
not Dionysius Areopagita mentioned Acts 17. he would doubtless have said, I
have received it from blessed Paul, not have told what other holy men have
received from the Fathers, whom Mr. C. vainly conceives to be meant of the
Apostles. But the books that go under his name have been so often by so many
learned men, Papists, and Protestants proved to be mere counterfeits, that
either it is much ignorance, or much impudence that this is produced as his.
Salmatius sundry times speaks of them as certain* that the Author of them was
not till the fifth age. The Apostolical constitutions appear by many
observations of Sculte^us, and others, not to have been witten by Clement, but
of much later time. Irenaeus his words make nothing for Mr. C. as he cites
them, nor as they stand in his own works.

Reply.
THe last Argument was, That which has continued since the Apostles times with
blessed success must needs be lawful; But Infant Baptism has continued with
blessed success since the Apostles Therefore it must needs be lawful. He denies
the Minor, saying in his exercitation he showed many errors and corruptions
which have come from it, not by accident in respect of some persons that
embraced it only, but even from the tendency of the practice it self; whereas
Dr. Homes, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Hussy proves the contrary, and makes his own*
accusations recoyle as dung into his face, yet like the dragon in the
Revelation he casts out a venomous flood to poison the Churches of all ages;
saying, that Paedobaptism has been as cursed a root of corrupting the
Churches as he thinks (excepting some few) any other corruptions in the rites
of Christian Religion. I make no doubt, but the Antiscripturians will say as
much of the Bible, and the Ranters of marriage. But what are his corruptions
Infant Baptism has brought in? 1. Private baptism; Answ. as if we might not as
well baptize Infants in houses, As the Apostle did the Jayler; or two or three
of them steal to a river side to duck, or cuck a Proselyte. 2. Baptism by
women. Answ. Protestant Churches allows no such thing since Luther, but closes
with the Council of Carthage Can. 10. Mulier baptizare non praesumat, let not
a woman presume to baptize; Bold Zippora circumcising must be no president. 3.
Baptizing of Infants not yet brought into light. Answ. If he mean the mother
with child, Counsels are against it, If he mean the child, we know no such
approbation, or practice 4. Baptism of children of uncertain progeny, Answ. we
approve, and know of none, if the Parents be not believers, and Christians
engage for them. 5. They are baptized in the name of the Lord, that know not
the Lord. Answ. As well as Jewish Infants circumcised with the seal of
righteousness of faith in Christ, who knew not Christ. 6. It admits the
ignorant, and profane to the Lords supper, because the sacraments are
concommitants. Answ. The Antecedent, and consequent are both Scriptureless, and
false, the one is the Sacrament of initiation, the other of perfection, to
which the former is a preparative: 7 It. perverts the order of discipline, by
baptizing before Catechizing. Answ. In Infants it does, as in Isaac, and the
Jews males, but not in adultis, and what inconvenience? 8. Its turned to a
feast, and men forget baptism. Answ. There was a feast at the weaning of Isaac,
and feasts of charity at the Lords Supper without profaneness; we can mind at
ripe years what was bequeathed us by Legacy when we were Infants, may we not as
well our solemn vow which we are put in mind of daily? Thus his vainly
pretended errors and corruptions vanish, without impeaching the blessed
success of Infant Baptism since the Apostles; which briefly here I drew down
from the Apostles times, more largely before, beginning with the words of
Dionysius the Areopagite, whom the Apostles converted at Athens; who said, Holy
men have received a Tradition from the Fathers, that is the Apostles, to
baptize Infants, instancing not in one Apostle as Paul, but all former
authority, whom the converts called fathers, as they them children, which is no
vain, but a Scripture* grounded conceit, vos genui per Evangelium. Though I am
not ignorant some Papist, and Protestants have questioned the authority (which
censure the most books in Scripture have undergone;) But that either Council,
Synod, or University have declared them counterfeit, is more than I have heard;
And to produce them, as his whose nam^ they have born in all Libraries, in all
Countries, for many Centuries, is modest verity; which for one Grammatian
Salmatius, and one quondam Surrogate M. T. to oppose, relishes rather of
insolency. Clemens who is recorded by some of the Ancients to succeed Peter in
his Ministry at Rome, says, (...), baptize your Infants: does Master T. think
that we will admit of the conjecturall observations of one poor yesterdayes,
Palatinat Minister Scultetus, to overthrow the Apostolical constitutions, when
he himself denies the authority of all Protestants jointly, as conv^ncing*
Irenaeus who lived in the second Century says, Christus pro parvulis parvulus
factus est, Christ became a little one for little ones sake, and lib. 2. cap.
39. Christ came to save all that are new born by him into God: Infants, and
little ones, and boys, These that were new born, are the baptized in
Scripture Phrase, Tit. 3. 5. baptism is called (...), the washing of the new
birth, which to be so meant, Master Mead in his Diatriba, thinks none will deny.

Master Tombs 25. Section.
ORigens speeches are in the Latin books translated by Ruffinus* into which
many things were foysted by him, and these its probable were so, as being so
express against the Pelagians; nor do I find he was ever alleged by Austin, who
gathered the most ancient testimonies he could for original sin, and
infant baptism. Therefore says Vos^ius in his Theses of infant baptism, we
less care for Origin, because they are not in Greek Cyprian's testimony is
granted to be in the third Century, and Ambroses, and Austins, and the
Milevitan Councils, and in^umerable more, but all upon the Popish errors of
giving grace, and the necessity to save a child from damnation. Gregory
Nazianzen, and Tertullian before him dissuade from it, except in case of danger
of death in appearance near: out of which case the ancients did not baptize
infants, and in that case the Communion was given them. But otherwise they
baptized not infants, no not of believing Parents, till they came to years, and
then they were first Catechized in Lent, and then solemnly baptized at Easter,
and Whitsuntide, as may be gathered, even from the Common Prayer Book in the
Rubric before Baptism.

Reply.
Origin that lived in the beginning of the third Century says, The Church
received a tradition from the Apostles to baptize Infants, and gives a reason,
because they are born in impurity of sin; what is added is ingenuously
confessed by Ruffinus the Translator himself; Erasmus, Perkins, nor any that
plays the Critic upon him, impeaches him in the fore quoted place: A negative
argument from Scripture in matter of fact will not conclude, shall Austins
non-allegation then of Origin, or which is more ridiculous, Mr. T. not finding
it, disparage the authority of Origin? Vossius in his Theses of infant baptism,
less cares for those parts of Origin that are not in the Greek, yet does not
wholly discard them, some testimonies may be more authentic than others, yet
all creditable. Pelagius a great Scholar, who lived in the latter end of this
Century; Though he denied Original sin, yet confessed Infant Baptism, for when
they pressed him with this Argument, If Infants had not Original sin, what
need they baptism? He answered, that Christ appointed, and the Church practiced
Infant Baptism, not to purge sin by past, but to prevent it for the time to
come. This Mr. T. ingenuously passes by as unanswerable, and by silence gives
consent: Cyprian confirms it in his 59. Epistle to Fidus, and gives an account
of sixty six Bishops that decreed that Infants should be baptized. Ambrose
says, because every age is liable to sin, therefore every age is ^it for the
Sacrament of Baptism; Nazianzen says, it is better to Seal Infants with
Baptism (though they know it not) than to leave them unsealed. Austin Sermon. 15.
de verb. Apost.) speaking of Infant Baptism says, The Church always had it,
always observed it, received it from the faith of their Ancestors, keeps it
with perseverance to the end. The Milevitan Council decreed, That whosoever
should deny that Infants, even taken from the Mothers wombs, might be Baptized,
should be accursed. All this he grants, yet blasts it, (as his brethren of
Transylvania did the Trinity) with this infectious breath, that they were all
upon the Popish errors of giving grace, and the necessity to save a child from
damnation, when Popery was not yet, nor was this the error of all, or any of
them finally, as Dr. H^mes has proved; or if it were, shall the abuse of a
thing take away the lawful use, much less the evidence of fact, which is the
Question? How Gregory Nazianzen, and Tertullian before him disswades from it,
except in danger of death, is formerly answered; It was either Pagans, or if
believers, to consult their bodyly health, they did the like to young men
unmarryed, that were converted, and widows, neither do we find they prevailed
in the least against the general practice of Infant Baptism, which was so
inviolable, that as the Question is stated, I think he cannot show one instance
to the contrary; If some gave them the Communion, i^ no more impeaches the
lawfulness of their Baptism, than the Jesuits joining spittle, Salt, exorcism
in Baptizing the Indians of years, does Mr. T. supposed Baptism of believers.

That unless in danger of death the ancients Baptized not Infants, is as loud a
lie, as any is in the Golden legion, Ovid^ Metamorphosis, or Lucians Dialogues.
The Rubric of the Common Prayer book before Baptism, makes no mention of
Catechizing in Lent, much less that believers Infants were not Baptized till
they came to years, but that the Sacrament of Baptism in the old time, was not
commonly ministered, but at Easter, and Whitsontide; He that thus falsifies an
evidence, that every Boy* or Girl, that can but read, may check him in, Judge
what he does with the Greek, and Latin Fathers.

Mr. Tombs 26. Section.
IT is most false that all ages, all Churches agree in infant baptism; some
Churches never had it, Some Churches five hundred years ag^ of the godly, and
learned that then were, did oppose it, and practice the baptism of believers
only. If Mr. Fox, and others did account* Anabaptists Heretics, it was for
other Tenants than this. Master Baxter himself says, no sober divine did ever
reckon the Anabaptists as Heretics merely for the error of rebaptizing, plain
Scripture proof, etc. part. 1. chap. 1. yet Mr. C. bespatters Antipaedobaptism
thus, it robs the Scripture of its truth, infants of their right, Parents of
their comforts, the Church of its members, Christ of his merits, God of his
glory. Sure he has learned the art of him in the Comaedian to calumniate
boldly, imagining something will be believed, though there be not a word true.
But there is more of this venom behind; That it is the mother of many other
errors: Hence sprung the Ranters, Socinians, Antitrinitarians, Quakers,
Levellers, they that are above ordinances, Antiscripturians, will any believe
that from the Tenet, which does so stiffly maintain an ordinance, should spring
the error of being above ordinances? Or that the error of Antiscripturians
should spring from that Tenet which does s^ strictly insi^t on the Scripture?
Let Mr. C. show any the least connection between Antipaedobaptism, and the
errors he names, and he says something, else if only the persons, and not
the Tenet be guilty of these errors, he does but calumniate. He might with
like reason say, The Christian Religion is the Mother of many other errors;
hence sprung Ebionites, Corinthians, Nicholaitans, Gnostics, etc. such kind of
criminations are most stinking, and base slanders; unworthy a sober minded man,
much more a Divine in the Pulpit, speaking to many people, who examine not, but
take all for true, which such Rabbis talk with confidence.

Reply.
IT is most true, That all ages, all Churches agree in Infant Baptism; He
cannot name one Church, one particular Congregation that never had it; I have
already proved it a mere fiction, that any Church five hundred years ago,
either opposed it, or practiced the baptism of believers only; Master Baxter
challenges him to name one man, that was against, or did once question
Church Membership of infants from the Creation till two hundred years ago, and
less; which challenge is not yet answered. To these I further added the
harmonies of confessions of all Reformed Churches, the Church of England in the
Apology, the old Catechism, the twenty seventh Article, the Directory, the
confession of faith, the greater, and lesser Catechism composed by the Assembly
of Divines at Westminster, and approved by the General Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland; the late Parliament by a further Declaration, all confirming it. The
Canons of our Church did not only in former times declare, but the Laws of our
land did punish Anabaptists as Heretics: Master Fox in his Acts, and Monuments
approves of the Albigenses, Waldenses, Wickliffists, Lollards, poor men of
Lions, Brownists, Barrowists as members of the Reformed Churches, but wholly
excludes the Anabaptists as erring fundamentally* He passes by all these as
Forts impregnable, only parlyes with Master Fox saying, If he did account
Anabaptists Heretics, it was for other Tenants than this, to wit,
re-baptizing: yes, for denying Infants Church Membership, Covenant-holiness,
and baptism, which are enough; But those are not all, like Gad, it goes with a
Troop attending it. But he relieves himself from Mr. Baxter (crying quarter
from an enemy) who said no sober Divine did ever reckon the Anabaptists as
Heretics merely for the error of rebaptizing. This will throw Master Tombs
upon the horns of a dangerous Dilemma: for if they be not Heretics, Master T.
is no sober Divine for calling them Heretics, and a litter of grievous Wolves,
Treat* of Scandals page 323. If he be a sober Divine, Then they are Heretics;
utrum horum, let him choose. whether he pleases. But Mr. Tombs perhaps meant,
and Mr. Baxter says, merely for the error of rebaptizing; Its true; There is
Infant Church Membership, and baptism besides, which being denied with making a
party, and division, Mr. Baxter demonstrates monstrates how dangerous, and
heretical it is. Therefore I truly said Anabaptism with its attendants, was a
dangerous error, that robbes the Scripture of its truth, infants of their
right, Parents of their comforts, the Church of its members, Christ of his
merits, God of his glory, whereof every word is true, and free from the
calumniating art of Machiavell, studied so much by the Anabaptists, which he
falsely attributes to the Comaedian, In what Comaedy? Asinaria. I further
averred, at which he disgorges his venom, That it is the Mother of many other
errors; hence sprung the Ranters, Socinians, Antitrinitarians, Quakers,
Levellers, they that are above Ordinances, Antiscripturians; for it stands with
reason, and Gods just judgment, that Satan the Serpent, having winded in the
head, by making them deny Infant baptism, winds in further by degrees to the
denial of all baptism Communion, Ordinances; And having rejected plain
Scripture Proof for Infants, Church Membership, and baptism, are infatuated by
degrees, till they deny all Scripture: According to Mr. Sidenham, Anabaptism
has been always ominous, and of a wonderful strange influence, accompanied
with the most dangerous retinue of errors, since the first Embrio of it was
brought forth, whether from a judgment of God, or from its natural, and
secret connection with other principles of darkness, God has showed some black
Characters on it, in every Nation, where it prevailed. It is void of reason to
say, that the Christian Religion, which is the Mother of truth, should be the
Mother of error, Ex veris nil nisi verum: The Ebionites, Corinthians,
Nicholaitans Gnostics sprung from the corruptious of men transgressing
Scripture-rule; And it is somewhat blasphemous to compare Anabaptism to
Christian Religion, the one proceeding from the Holy Ghost, the other from an
impure Spirit. The Helchesaits, a kind of Anabaptists (as Bullinger says
adversus Anabaptist. Cap. 2.) did boast they had a Book sent from Heaven,
wherein mysteries were contained, which whosoever heard read, should have
pardon of sins. Nicholas Stock gave it out (as Guy de Bres. lib. 1. cont.
Anabapt.) That God spoke to him by an Angel, and revealed to him his will in
dreams, promising him the place of the Angel Gabriel. Muncer told his Soldiers
(as Sleiden Comment. lib. 5.) God had revealed unto him, that the day should be
theirs. Tuscoverer (as Gastius says,) told the people, God had revealed unto
him, that John of Leyden should have the Empire of the whole world: Do not our
Quakers, Levellers, those that are for a spiritual Monarchy, (which are all
Anabaptists) affirm the like? And if Mr. T. must have a further connection
between Anabaptism, and the errors I named, its this (to use his own words)
They are the litter of the same Wolf, fruits of the same Spirit; which being
their own confessions, recorded by learned, and Godly Authors, are no
criminations, or base slanders, but truths beseeming sober minded men, and
especially Divines in the Pulpit, whose charge it is to look to their flock,
that they be not worryed by that litter of grievous Wolves.

Mr. Tombs 27. Section.
THe like I say of the Judgments of God, Those in Germany were by war, the
events that have happened in our days should teach us to be sparing in our
Judging. Mr. Cottons speech was according to his prejudice. Solomon Eccles. 9.
1, 2. Chr. Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. ^eacheth us more sobriety, than so easily to
pronounce of Gods judgments.

If we should judge of men, and Tenants by outward judgments, Job had been
condemned justly. One man had his house burned that did not sprinkle his child,
thousands have had their houses burned, who did, and perhaps upon occasion of
that abuse, by means of provision for the feast. May not we as well say, God
thereby judged against infant sprinkling? Thousands have prospered after their
refusing to baptize infants, thousands have falln into calamities after they
have baptized them. May not we this way as well decide for Antipaedobaptists as
against them? Divines that maintain the Scriptures to be their rule should not
thus judge of what is true, or false by Gods dealing with men's persons, which
is often upon secret reasons, not discernable by us, but by his word, which is
our rule, and wherein he has revealed his mind. The rest of Mr. C. speech is
as vain. Does this benefit come to Parents, and children by infant baptism,
that God is not ashamed to be called their God, and the God of their seed after
them, Heb. 11. 16. what a ridiculous conceit is this? The text says, that
through the faith of the persons it is, that God is not ashamed to be called
their God, not their God, and the God of their seed, much less a word of infant
baptism, as if such a benefit came by it. All the benefit he talks of that
comes to infants is either a mere empty title, or else it comes to infants as
well without baptism, as with it. The Devils dealing, if it be, as Mr. C.
says, makes it appear the faith is good into which the pretended baptism is,
but not that the baptism is right.

Reply.
THe Signal judgments god expressed against them in Germany, and the sad
effects it has wrought since these late wars with us, may awake us to take
heed of the sin, lest we partake of the punishment. Read Calvin, Bullinger,
S^elden, Gastius, Guy-debrees. Mr. Cotton understood himself, when he told one
of his Apostated flock, that had his house burned, and his children in it, no
wonder that fire seized upon his house, and God denied water to quench it, who
denied that water should be brought to baptize his Infants. Eccles. 9, 1, 2,
one event falls out to the righteous, and to the wicked* and Luke 13, 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, Those whose blood Pilat mingled with the sacrifice, and they upon whom
fell the Tower of Siloam were not greater sinners than others; yet we may with
sobriety pronounce of Gods judgments against the Sodomites, Baalites, E^ymas
the Sorcerer, Simon Magus, and such: we judge not of men, and Tenants by
outward judgments; but of outward judgments by men, and their Tenants, so Job
was justifiable; One may have his house burned, that baptizes not his child,
perhaps another baptizes, these abstractly concludes nothing: But when Herod is
smitten with an Angel, while vaunting on his throne, Ananias and Saphyra, while
lying, Elymas the Sorcerer, while seducing, there is something remarkable in
it, especially, if it fall out always, or often: as it is observed,
disturbance of Peace, and divine Vengance has attended the Anabaptists in all
Countries hitherto. It may be some, (I doubt not thousands) have prospered
outwardly, for a while, after their refusing to baptize Infants; Thousands it
may be, have fallen into calamities, after they have baptized them, yet neither
of them for that cause, and yet the one a virtuous action, the other a sin
deserving punishment, which coming slowly will recompense the delay with a
heavy stroke at last: we judge of Gods dealing with persons by his word,
precepts, prohibitions, threats; If God say the child that is not circumcised,
shall be cut off from his people, for he has broken my covenant: we conceive
it is just, that God meets Moses, and for neglect of circumcision threatens to
slay him. The rest of Mr T. his speech is invective.

As privatively the contempt of Infant Baptism is dangerous, so positively it
is beneficial both to Parents and children. first much comfort comes thereby
to Parents, when they consider Gods free grace to them and theirs, that he is
not ashamed to be called their God, and the God of their seed after them, Heb.
11. Genes. 17, 7, And this comfort springs from Gods promise founded in Christ's
merits, conveyed by covenant-holiness or birthpriviledge, sealed by baptism,
laid hold on by faith of Parents; sometimes faith in the seed, or secret act of
Infants; which to enjoy, and be disobedient to the precept, and practice of
Infant Baptism is a ridiculous conceit: for Infant Baptism brings not with it a
mere empty title, but obedience, which is better than sacrifice, and the
benefit comes no more without Baptism, than clensing of Naamans leprosy
without washing in Jordan. Secondly much benefit comes to Infants by Baptism,
which the Devil knows well, when he causes Witches to renounce their Baptism
when they enter into Covenant with him; for they are thereby admitted into the
bosom of the Church, devoted, and consecrated unto God, his name is put upon
them, they wear his royal badge, and by it they are distinguished from
Heathens, and this so clearly from Scriptures truly, and spiritually
understood, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: This he
passes by, saving one gird at Witches, saying, the Devils dealing makes it
appear the faith is good into which the pretended Baptism is, but not that the
Baptism is right: Nay rather, if Infant Baptism (as he says) be a nullity,
mockery, will worship, They should stick to it, for therein the Devil
delights; he might as well say, The Devil causes Popish Conjurers (when they
enter into Covenant with him) to renounce Baptizing of Bells, worshipping of
Images, because driving away Devils, the end of the one, and adoring the
prototype the design of the other, is good.

Mr. Tombs. 28. Section.
ENough of this frothy, uncocted Sermon, calculated for the ignorant, and
superstitious common people, and the profane loose Gentry, who mind not
Godliness in earnest, and for the blind Teachers of those parts, who know not
the Gospel, but mind their own profits more than the understanding of the
truth, from whom the Lord deliver the dark parts of this land, and provide
Teachers for the people after his own heart, that it be not, as now it is in
too many parts, The blind lead the blind, and both fall into the ditch.

Reply.
HIs Epilogue, or Peroration is wholly invective, and beyond the bounds of the
most scurrilous Satyr, Calumniatory, Bespattering. 1. The Sermon. 2. The
Commonalty. 3. The Gentry. 4. The Ministry of our parts, concluding with John
of Leydens Liturgy, which he sung in procession upon his blind ass after his
three nights dream) from Luther, Melancthon, and the rest of the blind guides
of the Gospel, Good Lord deliver us. 1. For the Sermon, neither my Auditory
re(...)red, nor I affected curiosity, nor could it be expected from (...),
exercising again that afternoon, having preached a Funeral (...)mon that week,
and taught children every day; yet I am con(...)ent, it is truth in a homely
dr^ss, and free from that censure a learned man passed on his at Rosse, That he
never heard a speech ^or truth more questionable, for Method more disordered,
for language more discomposed, than it. 2. For our common people (as he calls
them defaming the Rock, out of which he was ^hewed,) They are neither ignorant,
nor superstitious, but well Catechized and grounded, saving a few Anabaptists,
and some others, whom they have scandalized by their opinions, practice, and
divisions, making Religion odious. 3. For our Gentry, (whom this Lycophrons
(...) calls profane and loose) Their judicious piety, and discreet sobriety is
so well known, that neither Shimeis railing, nor Doegs defamation can impeach
them; and they mind godliness so far in earnest, that he can not obtrude his
errors upon them, hence his gall overflows. 4. For the Teachers of our parts,
(whom he calls blind) They have all eyes enough to see his palpable mistakes;
Some knows the Gospel as well as himself, attending their flock with far more
fidelity, and constancy, not deserting them upon every trivial occasion, as
he; and contented with less than half his means, with patience undergoes a
double pains; This in answer. Now to gratify him. To much of this Examination,
like raging waves of the Sea foming out his own shame, Jude v. 13. Calculated
exactly for the new Gospel Horizon discovered by Baltazzar, Hubmir, Nicholas
Stock, John of Leyden, Barnard Rotman, John Tuscoverer, and the rest of the
Garrison of Munster; and may serve without any remarkable mistake for the
Midnight Meridian of our English Anabaptists, Ranters, Quakers, Levellers, from
whom the Lord deliver the enlightened parts of this Land, and confirm Teachers
for his people after his own heart; that it be not, as now it is in too many
places, the lowest of the rabble with Jeroboams Priests fill their hands, and
then advance their own Calves, destroying souls like Pestilence in the darkness.

(...).

