CUTTER OF COLEMAN-STREET. A COMEDY.

The Scene LONDON, in the year 1658.

Written by ABRAHAM COWLEY.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower
walk in the New-Exchange. Anno Dom. 1663.

PREFACE.
A Comedy, called the Guardian, and made by me when I was very Young, was Acted
formerly at Camebridge, and several times after privately during the troubles,
as I am told, with good approbation, as it has been lately too at Dublin There
being many things in it which I disliked, and finding my self for some days
idle, and alone in the Country, I fell upon the changing of it almost wholly,
as now it is, and as it was played since at his Royal Highness's Theater under
this New name. It met at the first representation with no favorable reception,
and I think there was something of Faction against it, by the early appearance
of some men's disapprobation before they had seen enough of it to build their
dislike upon their Judgment. Afterward it got some ground, and found Friends
as well as Adversarys. In which condition I should willingly let it dye, if the
main imputations under which it suffered, had been shot only against my Wit or
Art in these matters, and not directed against the tenderest parts of human
reputation, good Nature, good Manners, and Piety it self. The first clamor
which some malicious persons raised, and made a great noise with, was, That it
was a piece intended for abuse and Satyr against the Kings party. Good God!
Against the Kings party? After having served it twenty years during all the
time of their misfortunes and afflictions, I must be a very rash and imprudent
person if I chose out that of their Restitution to begin a Quarrel with them. I
must be too much a Madman to be trusted with such an Edged Tool as Comedy. But
first, why should either the whole party (as it was once distinguished by that
name, which I hope is abolisht now by Universal Loyalty) or any man of virtue
or honor in it, believe themselves injured or at all concerned, by the
representation of the faults and follies of a few who in the General division
of the Nation had crowded in among them? In all mixed numbers (which is the case
of Parties) nay, in the most entire and continued Bodies there are often some
degenerate and corrupted parts, which may be cast away from that, and even cut
off from this Unity, without any infection of scandal to the remaining Body.
The Church of Rome with all her arrogance, and her wide pretenses of certainty
in all truths, and exemption from all Errors, does not clap on this enchanted
Armor of Infallibility upon all her particular Subjects, nor is offended at
the reproof even of her greatest Doctors. We are not, I hope, become such
Puritans our selves as to assume the Name of the Congregation of the Spotless.
It is hard for any Party to be so Ill as that no Good, Impossible to be so Good
as that no Ill should be found among them. And it has been the perpetual
privilege of Satyr and Comedy to pluck their vices and follies though not
their Persons out of the Sanctuary of any Title. A Cowardly ranting Soldier,
an Ignorant Charlatanical Doctor, a foolish Cheating Lawyer, a silly Pedantical
Scholar, have, always been, and still are the Principal Subjects of all Comedye
without any scandal given to those Honorable Professions, or ever taken by
their severest Professors; And, if any good Physician or Divine should be
offended with me here for inveighing against a Quack, or for finding Deacon
Soaker too often in the Butteryes, my respect and reverence to their callings
would make me troubled at their displeasure, but I could not abstain from
taking them for very Cholerique and Quarrelsome persons. What does this
therefore amount to, if it were true which is objected? But it is far from
being so; for the representation of two Sharks about the Town (fellows merry
and Ingenious enough, and therefore admitted into better companyes than they
deserve, yet withal too very scoundrels, which is no unfrequent Character at
London) the representation I say of these as Pretended Officers of the Royal
Army, was made for no other purpose but to show the World, that the vices and
extravagancies imputed vulgarly to the Cavaliers, were really committed by
Aliens who only usurped that name, and endeavored to cover the reproach of
their Indigency or Infamy of their Actions with so honorable a Title. So that
the business was not here to correct or cut off any natural branches, though
never so corrupted or Luxuriant, but to separate and cast away that vermin
which by sticking so close to them had done great and considerable prejudice
both to the Beauty and Fertility of the Tree; And this is as plainly said, and
as often inculcated as if one should write round about a Sign, This is a Dog,
this is a Dog, out of overmuch caution lest some might happen to mistake it
for a Lion, Therefore when this Calumny could not hold (for the case is clear,
and will take no color) Some others sought out a subtiler hint to traduce me
upon the same score, and were angry that the person whom I made a true
Gentleman, and one both of considerable Quality and Sufferings in the Royal
party, should not have a fair and noble Character throughout, but should submit
in his great extremities to wrong his Niece for his own Relief. This is a
refined exception, such as I little foresaw, nor should with the dullness of my
usual Charity, have found out against another man in twenty years. The truth
is, I did not intend the Character of a Hero, one of exemplary virtue, and as
Homer often terms such men, Unblameable, but an ordinary jovial Gentleman,
commonly called a Good Fellow, one not so conscientious as to sterve rather
than do the least Injury, and yet endowed with so much sense of Honor as to
refuse when that necessity was removed, the gain of five thousand pounds which
he might have taken from his Niece by the rigor of a Forfeiture; And let the
frankness of this latter generosity so expiate for the former frailty, as may
make us not ashamed of his Company, for if his true Metal be but equal to his
Allay, it will not indeed render him one of the Finest sorts of men, but it
will make him Current, for ought I know, in any party that ever yet was in the
World. If you be to choose parts for a Comedy out of any noble or elevated rank
of persons, the most proper for that work are the worst of that kind. Comedy is
humble of her Nature, and has always been bred low, so that she knows not how
to behave her self with the great or the accomplished. She does not pretend to
the brisk and bold Qualities of Wine, but to the Stomachal Acidity of Vinegar,
and therefore is best placed among that sort of people which the Romans call
The Lees of Romulus. If I had designed here the celebration of the Virtues of
our Friends, I would have made the Scene nobler where I intended to erect their
Statues. They should have stood in Odes, and Tragedies, and Epique Poems,
(neither have I totally omitted those greater testimonies of my esteem of them)
Sed nunc non erat his Locus, etc. And so much for this little spiny objection
which a man cannot see without a Magnifying Glass. The next is enough to knock
a man down, and accuses me of no less than Profaneness. Profane, to deride the
Hypocrisy of those men whose skuls are not yet bare upon the Gates since the
public and just punishment of it? But there is some imitation of Scripture
Phrases; God forbid; There is no representation of the true face of Scripture,
but only of that Vizard which these Hypocrites (that is, by interpretation
Actors with a Vizard) draw upon it. It is Profane to speak of Harrisons return
to Life again, when some of his friends really professed their belief of it, and
he himself had been said to promise it? A man may be so imprudently scrupulous
as to find profaneness in any thing either said or written by applying it under
some similitude or other to some expressions in Scripture. This nicety is both
vain and endless. But I call God to witness, that rather than one tittle should
remain among all my writings which according to my severest judgment should be
found guilty of the crime objected, I would myself burn and extinguish them all
together. Nothing is so detestably lewd and rechless as the derision of things
sacred, and would be in me more unpardonable than any man else, who have
endeavored to root out the ordinary weeds of Poetry, and to plant it almost
wholly with Divinity. I am so far from allowing any loose or irreverent
expressions in matters of that Religion which I believe, that I am very tender
in this point even for the grossest errors of Conscientious persons, They are
the properest object (me thinks) both of our ^itty and Charity too; They are
the innocent and white Sectaries, in comparison of another kind who engraft
Pride upon Ignorance, Tyranny upon Liberty, and upon all their Heresies,
Treason and Rebellion. These are Principles so destructive to the Peace and
Society of Mankind that they deserve to be persued by our serious Hatred, and
the putting a Mask of Sanctity upon such Devils is do Ridiculous, that it ought
to be exposed to contempt and laughter. They are indeed Profane, who
counterfeit the softness of the voice of Holiness to disguize the roughness of
the hands of Impiety, and not they who with reverence to the thing which the
others dissemble, deride nothing but their Dissimulation. If some piece of an
admirable Artist should be ill Copyed even to ridiculousness by an ignorant
hand, and another Painter should undertake to draw that Copy, and make it yet
more ridiculous, to show apparently the difference of the two works, and
deformity of the latter, will not every man see plainly that the abuse is
intended to the foolish Imitation, and not to the Excellent Original? I might
say much more to confute and confound this very false and malicious accusation,
but this is enough I hope to clear the matter, and is I am afraid too much for
a Preface to a work of so little consideration. As for all other objections
which have been or may be made against the Invention or Elocution, or any thing
else which comes under the Critical Jurisdiction, let it stand or fall as it
can answer for it self, for I do not lay the great stress of my Reputation upon
a Structure of this Nature, much less upon the slight Reparations only of an
Old and unfashionable Building. There is no Writer but may fail sometimes in
point of Wit, and it is no less frequent for the Auditors to fail in point of
Judgment. I perceive plainly by daily experience that Fortune is Mistress of the
Theater, as Tully says it is of all popular Assemblies. No man can tell
sometimes from whence the Invisible winds arise that move them. There are a
multitude of people who are truly and only Spectators at a play, without any
use of their Understanding, and these carry it sometimes by the strength of
their Number. There are others who use their Understanding too much, who think
it a sign of weakness or stupidity to let any thing pass by them unattaqued,
and that the Honor of their Judgment (as some Brutals imagine of their
Courage) consists in Quarrelling with every thing. We are therefore wonderful
wise men, and have a fine business of it, we who spend our time in Poetry, I do
sometimes laugh, and am often angry with my self when I think on it, and if I
had a Son inclined by Nature to the same folly, I believe I should bind him
from it, by the strictest conjurations of a paternal Blessing. For what can be
more ridiculous than to labor to give men delight, whilst they labor on their
part more earnestly to take offense? to expose ones self voluntarily and
frankly to all the dangers of that narrow passage to unprofitable Fame, which
is defended by rude multitudes of the Ignorant, and by armed Troops of the
Malicious? If we do ill many discover it and all despise us, if we do well but
few men find it out, and fewer entertain it kindly. If we commit errors there
is no parson, if we could do wonders there would be but little thanks, and that
too extorted from unwilling Givers. But some perhaps may say, Was it not
always thus? Do you expect a particular privilege that was never yet enjoyed
by any Poet? were the ancient Grecian, or noble Roman Authors, was Virgil
himself exempt from this Passibility, Qui melior multis quam tu fuit, Improbe,
rebus, Who was in many things thy better far, Thou impudent Pretender? As was
said by Lucretius to a person who took it ill that he was to Dye, though he had
seen so many do it before him who better deserved Immortality; and this is to
repine at the natural condition of a Living Poet, as he did at that of a Living
Mortal. I do not only ackowledge the Prae-eminence of Virgil (whose Footsteps I
adore) but submit to many of his Roman Brethren, and I confess that even they
in their own times were not secure from the assaults of Detraction (though
Horace brags at last, Jam dente minus mordeor invido) but then the Barkings of
a few were drowned in the Applause of all the rest of the World, and the Poison
of their Bitings extiguisht by the Antidote of great rewards, and great
encouragements, which is a way of curing now out of use, and I really profess
that I neither expect, nor think I deserve it. Indolency would serve my turn
instead of Pleasure; But the case is not so well; for though I comfort my self
with some assurance of the favor and affection of very many candid and good
natured (and yet too judicious and even Critical) persons, yet this I do
affirm, that from all which I have written I never received the least benefit,
or the least advantage, but on the contrary have felt sometimes the effects of
Malice and Misfortune.

The Prologue.
AS when the Midland Sea is no where clear
From dreadful Fleets of Tunis and Argier,
Which coast about, to all they meet with Foes,
And upon which naught can be got but Blows,
The Merchand Ships so much their passage doubt,
That, though full-freighted, none dares venture out,
And Trade dacayes, and Scarcity ensues;
Just so the timorous Wits of late refuse,
Though laded, to put forth upon the Stage,
Affrighted by the Critiques of this age.
It is a Party numerous, watchful, bold;
They can from naught, which sails in sight, withold.
Nor do their cheap, though mortal, Thunder spare;
They shoot, alas, with Wind-gunns, charged with Air.
But yet, Gentlemen Critiques of Argier,
For your own interest I Would advise ye here
To let this little Forlorn Hope go by
Safe and untoucht; That must not be (you will cry)
If ye be wise, it must; I Will tell ye why.
There are Seven, Eight, Nine, -- stay -- there are behind
Ten Plays at least, which wait but for a Wind,
And the glad News that we the Enemy miss,
And those are all your own, if you spare This.
Some are but new trimmed up, others quite New,
Some by known Shipwrights built, and others too
By that great Author made, who ere he be,
That styles himself Person of Quality.
All these, if we miscarry here to day.
Will rather till they Rot in the Harbor stay,
Nay they will back again, though they were come,
Even to their last safe Rode, to Tyring room.
Therefore again I say, if you be wise,
Let this for once pass free; let it suffice
That we your Soveraing power here to avow,
Thus humbly ere we pass, strike sail to You.
Added at Court.
STay Gentlemen; what I have said, was all
But forced submission, which I now recall.
You Are all but Pirates now again; for here
Does the true Sovereign of the Seas appear.
The Sovereign of these Narrow Seas of wit;
It Is his own Thames; He knows and Governs it.
It Is his Dominion, and Domain; as He
Pleases, it is either Shut to us or Free.
Not only, if his Pasport we obtain,
We fear no little Rovers of the Main,
But if our Neptune his calm visage show,
No Wave shall dare to Rise or VVind to Blow.
The Persons.
Colonel Jolly A Gentleman whose Estate was confiscated in the late troubles.
Mistress Aurelia His Daughter. Mistress Lucia His Niece, left to his Tuition.
Cutter A merry sharking fellow about the Town, pretending to have been a
Colonel in the Kings Army. Worm His Companion, and such another fellow,
pretending to have been a Captain. Mr. Puny A young, rich, brisk Fop,
pretending to extraordinary wit, Suter to Mistress Lucia. Mr. Truman Senior. An
old, testy, Covetous Gentleman. Mr. Truman Junior His Son, in love with Mistress
Lucia. Mistress Barebottle A Sopeboylers widow, who had bought Jollys Estate, A
pretended Saint. Mistress Tabitha Her Daughter. Mistress Jane Mistress Lucias
Maid, a little laughing Fop. Mr. Soaker A little Fudling Deacon. Several
Servants
CUTTER OF COLEMAN-STREET.
Act 1.
Scene 1.
Truman Junior. HOW hard, alas, is that young Lover's fate,
Who has a father Covetous and Cholerique!
What has he made me swear? --
I dare not think upon the Oath, lest I should keep it --
Never to see my Mistress more, or hear her speak
Without his leave; And farewell then the use
Of Eyes and Ears; --
And all this Wickedness I submitted to,
For fear of being Disinherited;
For fear of losing Dirt and Dross, I lose
My Mistress -- There Is a Lover! Fitter much
For Hell than thousand perjuries could make him,
Fit to be made The Example which all Women
Should reproach Men with, when themselves grow false;
Yet she, the good and charitable Lucia,
With such a bounty as has only been
Practiced by Heaven, and Kings inspired from thence,
Forgives still, and still loves her perjured Rebel,
I Will to my father strait, and swear to him
Ten thousand Oaths never to observe that wicked one
Which he' has extorted from me -- Here he comes;
And my weak heart, already used to falsehood,
Begins to waver.

Scene 2.
Truman Senior, Truman Junior. Trum. Sen. Well, Dick, you know what you swore
to me yesterday,
And solemnly.
I have been considering, and considering all Night, Dick, for your good, and
methinks, supposing I were a young man again, and the case my own (for I love
to be just in all things) methinks it is hard for a young man, I say, who has
been a Lover so long as you have been, to break off on a sudden. Am I in the
right or no, Dick? Do you mark me?


Trum. Iun. Hard, Sir, it is harder much than any death
Prolonged by Tortures.

Trum. Sen. Why so I thought; and therefore out of my care for your ease, I
have hit upon an Expedient that I think will salve the matter!


Trum. jun. And I will thank you for it more, Sir,
Than for the life you gave me.

Trum. sen. Why! well said, Dick, and I Am glad with all my Heart, I thought
upon it; in brief, it is this, Dick; I have found out another Mistress for you.


Trum. jun. Another? Heaven forbid, Sir!

Trum. sen. I; Another, Good Man Jack Sauce; marry come up;
Will Not one of my choosing serve your turn, as well
As one of your own; sure I Am the older man,
Jack Sauce, and should be the Wiser!

Trum. jun. But Nature, Sir, that is wiser than all Mankind,
Is Mistress in the choice of our affections,
Affections are not raised from outward Reasons,
But inward Sympathies.

Trum. sen. Very well, Dick, if you be a dutiful son to me, you shall have a
good Estate, and so has she;

There Is Sympathy for you now; but I perceive
You Are hankring still after Mrs. Lucy,
Do, do! forswear your self; do, damn your self, and be a beggar too; sure I
would never undo my self, by perjury; if I had a mind to go to hell, Cromwell
should make me a Lord for it! I, and one of his Council too, I Would never be
damned for nothing, for a Whimwham in a Coif. But to be short, The person I
design for you is Mrs. Tabith Baarebottle, our neighbor the Widow's daughter.
What do you start at, Sir? I, Sir, Jack an-apes, if you start when your
father speaks to you.


Trum. jun. You did not think her father once I Am sure A person fit for your
Alliance, when he plundered your House in Hartfordshire, and took away the very
Hop-poles, pretending they were Arms too.


Trum. sen. He was a very Rogue, that is the Truth on it, as to the business
between man and man, but as to Godward he was always counted an Upright man,
and very devout. But that is all one, I Am sure h'as raised a fine Estate out of
nothing by his Industry in these Times: An' I had not been a Beast too -- but
Heaven's will be done, I could not have don't with a good conscience. Well,
Dick, I Will go talk with her mother about this matter, and examine fully what
her Estate is, for unless it prove a good one, I tell you true, Dick, I Am of
your Opinion, not to marry such a Rogues daughter.


Trum. jun. I beseech you, Sir -- Exit Trum: sen.
It is in vain to speak to him --
Though I to save this Dunghill an Estate
Have done a Crime like theirs,
Who have abjured their King for the same cause,
I will not yet, like them, pursue the guilt,
And in thy place, Lucia my lawful Soverain,
Set up a low and scandalous Usurper!

Enter Servant. Serve. It Is well the old man's just gone. There Is a Gentlewoman
without, Sir, desires to speak one word with you.


Trum. jun. With me? who is it?


Serve. It should be Mrs. Lucia by her voice, Sir, but she is veiled all over.
Will you please to see her, Sir?


Trum. Will I see her, Blockhead? yes; go out and kneel to her And pray her to
come in. (Exit Serve.)


Scene 3.
Lucia (veiled) Truman. Trum. This is a favor, Madam!
That I as little hoped, as I am able
To thank you for it -- But why all this muffling?
Why a disguise, my Dearest, between us?
Unless to increase, my desire first, and then my joy to see thee
Thou cast this subtle night before thy beauty.
And now like one scorched with some raging Fever,
Upon whose flames no dew of sleep has fallen,
I do begin to quarrel with the Darkness,
And blame the sloathful rising of the Morn,
And with more joy shall welcome it, than they
Whose Icy dwellings the cold Bear o're-looks,
When after half the years Winter and Night,
Day and the Spring at once salutes their sight!
Thus it appears, thus like thy matchless beauty, offers to pull off the Veil.
When this black Clowd is vanished.
Why do you you shrink back, my Dearest?
I prithee let me look a little on thee:
It Is all the pleasure Love has yet allowed me,
And more than Nature does in all things else.
At least speak to me; well may I call it Night
When Silence too thus joins it self with Darkness.
Ha! I had quite forgot the cursed Oath I made --
Pish! what is an Oath forced from a Lovers Tongue?
It Is not recorded in Heaven's dreadful book,
But scattered loosely by the breath that made it,
Away with it; to make it was but a Rashness,
To keep it were a Sin -- Dear Madam -- Offers again, but she refuses, and gives
him a Note
Ha! let us see this then first!
You know I have forgiven your unkind Oath to your He reads.
Father, and shall never suffer you to be perjured.
I come only to let you know, that the Physician and the 'Pothecary will do
this morning what we proposed, be ready at hand, if there should be occasion
for your presence, I dare not stay one minute. Farewell.

Now thousand Angels wait upon thee, Lucia,
And thousand Blessings upon all thou do.
Let me but kiss your hand, And I Will dismiss you.
Ah cruel father, when thou made the Oath,
Thou little thought that thou had left
Such blessings for me out of it. Exeunt.

Scene 4.
Colonel Jolly, Will (his Man.) Col. Jolly in an Indian Gown and Nightcap.
Ioll. Give me the Pills; what said the Doctor, Will?


Will. He said a great deal, Sir, but I was not Doctor enough to understand
half of it.


Ioll. A man may drink, he says, for all these Bawbles?


Will. He Is ill advised if he give your Worship drinking Pills, for when you
were drinking last together, a Fit took you to beat the Doctor, which your
Worship told him was a new Disease.


Ioll. He was drunk then himself first, and spoke False Latin, which becomes a
Doctor worse than a beating. But he does not remember that, I hope, now?


Will. I think he does, Sir, for he says the Pills
Are to purge Black Choler!

Ioll. I, Melancholy; I shall have need of them then, for my old Purger of
Melancholy, Canary, will grow too dear for me shortly; my own Estate was sold
for being with the King at Oxford. A Curse upon an old Dunce that needs must be
going to Oxford at my years! My good Neighbor, I thank him, Colonel Fear-the
Lord-Barebottle, a Saint and a Sope-boyler, bought it; But he is dead, and
boiling now himself, that is the best often; There Is a Cavalier's comfort! If his
damnable Wife now would marry me, it would return again, as I hope all things
will at last; and even that too were as hard a Composition for ones own, as
ever was made at Habber-dashers-Hall; but hang her, she will have none of me,
unless I were True Rich and Counterfeit Godly; let her go to her husband; (so
much for that -- It does not go down takes a Pill. so glib as an Egg in
Muskadine) Now when my Nieces Portion too goes out of my hands, which I can
keep but till a handsome Wench of eighteen pleases to marry (a pitiful slender
Tenure that is the truth on it) I have nothing to do but to live by Plots for the
King, or at least to be hanged by 'em. (So, go thou too) well, something must
be takes the two other Pills. done, unless a man could get true Gems by
drinking, or like a Mouse in a Cheese, make himself a house by eating.

Will, did you send for Colonel Cutter and Captain Worm, to come and keep me
company this morning that I take Physic? They Will be loath to come to day,
there is so little hope of drinking here.


Will. They said they would be here, Sir, before this time;
Some Morning's draught, I believe, has intercepted 'em.

Ioll. I could Repent now heartily, but that 'twould look as if I were
compelled to it, and besides if it should draw me to Amendment, 'twould undo me
now, till I have gotten something. It Is a hard case to wrong my pretty Niece;
but unless I get this wicked Widow, I and my daughter must starve else; and
that is harder yet; Necessity is, as I take it, Fatality, and that will excuse
all things, O! Here they are!


Scene 5.
Colonel Jolly, Colonel Cutter, Captain Worm. Ioll. Welcome! Men of war, what
news abroad in Town?


Cut. Brave news I faith, it arrived but yesterday by an Irish Priest, that
came over in the habit of a Fish-wife, a cunning fellow, and a man of business,
he is to lie Leiger here for a whole Irish College Beyond Sea, and do all their
Affairs of State. The Captain spoke with him last night at the Blew Anchor!


Ioll. Well, and what is it?


Worm. Why, Business is afloat again; the King has mustered five and twenty
thousand men in Flanders, as tall Fellows as any are in Christendom.


Ioll. A pox upon you for a couple of gross Cheats!

I wonder from what fools in what blind corners you get a dinner for this stuff.


Cut. Nay, there is another News that is stranger ye, but for that let the
Captain Answer.


Worcester. I confess I should have thought it very ridiculous, but that I saw it from
a good hand beyond Sea, under Black and White, and all in Cipher.


Ioll. Oh it cannot miss then; what may it be, pray?


Worcester. Why, that the Emperor of Muscovy has promised
To land ten thousand Bears in England to
Overrun the Country.

Ioll. Oh! that is in revenge of the late barbarous Murder of their brethren
here I warrant you!


Cut. Why, Colonel, things will come about again!
We shall have another 'bout for it!

Ioll. Why all this to a friend that knows you? where were thy former Bouts, I
prithee Cutter? where did thou ever serve the King, or when?


Cut. Why every where; and the last time at Worcester

If I never served him since, the faults not mine; an there had been any Action
--


Ioll. At Worcester, Cutter? prithee how got's thou thither?


Cut. Why as you and all other Gentlemen should have done; I carried him in a
Troop of Reformado Officers; most of them had been under my command before!


Ioll. I Will be sworn they were Reformado Tapsters then; but prithee how gots
thou off?


Cut. Why as the King himself, and all the rest of the great ones; in a
disguise; if you will needs know it.


Wor. He Is very cautious, Colonel, h'as kept it ever since.


Ioll. That Is too long 'ifaith, Cutter, prithee take one disguise now more at
last, and put thy self into the habit of a Gentleman.


Cut. I Will answer no more Prethees; Is this the Mornings-draught you sent for
me to?


Ioll. No, I have better news for ye both, than ever ye had from a good Irish
hand; the truth is I have a Plot for ye, which if it take, ye Shall no more
make monstrous Tales from Bruges to revive your sinking Credits in Loyal
Alehouses, nor inveigle into Taverns young Foremen of the Shop, or little
beardless Blades of the Inns of Court, to drink to the Royal Family
Parabolically, and with bouncing Oaths like Cannon at every Health; nor upon
unlucky failing afternoons take melancholy turns in the Temple Walks, and when
you meet acquaintance, cry, You wonder why your Lawyer stays so long with a pox
to him.


Wor. This Physic has stirred ill humors in the Colonel, would they were once
well purged, and we a Drinking again lovingly together as we were wont to do.


Ioll. Nor make headless quarrels about the Reckoning time, and leave the house
in confusion; nor when you go to bed produce ten several snuffs to make up one
poor Pipe of Tobacco!


Cut. Would I had one here now; I have n't had my morning Smoke yet, by this day!


Ioll. Nor change your names and lodgings as often as a Whore: for as yet if ye
lived like Tartars in a Cart (as I fear ye must die in one) your home could not
be more uncertain. To day at Wapping, and to morrow you appear again upon
Mill-bank (like a Duck that Dives at this end of the Pond, and rises
unexpectedly at the other) I do not think Pythagoras his Soul e're changed so
many dwellings as you have done within these two years.


Cut. Why, what then, Colonel? Soldiers must remove their Tents sometimes,
Alexander the Great did it a thousand times.


Worm. Nine hundred, Cutter, you are but a Dunce in Story;
But what is all this to the matter, Noble Colonel?
You run a Wool-gathering like a zealous Teacher;
Where Is the use of Consolation that you promised us?

Ioll. Why thou shall have it, little Worm, for these Damned Pills begin to
make me horrible sick, and are not like to allow of long Digressions; Thus
briefly then, as befits a man in my case!

When my brother the Merchant went into Afrique, to follow his great Trade
there --


Wor. How of Devil could he follow it? why he had quite lost his memory; I
knew him when he was fain to carry his own Name in Writing about him for fear
lest he should forget it.


Ioll. Oh his man John, you know, did all, yet still he would go about with old
John, and thought if he did Go, he did his business himself; well, when he went
he left his Daughter with a Portion of five thousand pounds to my Tuition, and
if she married without my consent, she was to have but a thousand of it. When
he was gone two years he died --


Worcester. He did a little forget himself methinks, when he left the Estate in your
hands, Colonel.


Ioll. Hold your tongue, Captain Coxcomb; now the case is this; ye shall give
me a thousand pounds for my interest and favor in this business, settle the
rest upon her, and her children, or me and mine, if she have none (do you mark me?
for I will not have one penny of the Principal pass through such glewy Fingers)
upon these terms I Will marry her to one of you; Always provided though, that he
whom she shall choose (for she shall have as fair a choice as can be between
two such fellows) shall give me good assurances of living afterward like a
Gentleman, as befits her husband, and cast off the to others company!


Cut. The Conditions may be admitted of, though if I have her, she will have no ill
bargain on it when the King comes home; but how, Colonel, if she should prove a
foolish fantastical Wench, and refuse to marry either of us?


Ioll. Why! then she shall never have my consent to marry any body; and she will be
hanged, I think, first in the Friar's Rope, ere she turn Nun.


Worcester. I Will be a Carthusian an she do!


Ioll. If It were not for Chastity and Obedience thou might be so; their
the other Vow of never carrying any money about them, thou have kept from thy
youth upwards.


Worcester. I Will have her; I Am the better Scholar; and we are both equal Soldiers,
I Am sure.


Cut. Thou, Captain Bobadil? what with that Ember-week face of thine? that
Rasor of thy Nose? thou look as if thou had never been fed since thou
suck'st thy mothers milk. Thy cheeks begin to fall into thy mouth, that thou
might eat them. Why thou very Lath, with a thing cut like a face at Top, and
a slit at bottom. I am a man have served my King and Country, a person of Honor,
Dogbolt, and a Colonel.


Worcester. Yes, as Priests are made now a days, a Colonel made by thine own self. I
must confess thus much of thy good parts, thou 'rt beholding to no body but thy
self for what thou art. Thou a Soldier? Did not I see thee once in a quarrel at
Nine-pins behind Sodom-lane disarmed with one of the pins? Alas, good Cutter!
there is difference, as I take it, betwixt the clattering of Swords and
Quart-pots, the effusion of Blood and Claret Wine --


Cut. (What a Barking little Curr's this?)


Worcester. The smoke of Guns and Tobacco -- nor can you, Cutter, fight the better,
because you have beat an old Bawd or a Drawer; besides, what parts have thou?
Have thou Scholarship enough to make a Brewers Clark? Can thou read the
Bible? I Am sure thou have not; can thou write more than thine own name, and
that in such vile Characters, that most men take 'em for Arabian Pot-hooks!
Do thou not live, Cutter, in the Chymaerian darkness of Ignorance?


Ioll. Cymmerian, Captain, prithee let it be Cymmerian!


Worcester. I; I know some will have it so; but by this light I always called
Chymaerian!


Cut. O brave Scholar! has the Colonel caught you in false Latin, you dunce
you? you would even as good stick to your Captainship; and that you may thank me
for, you ungrateful Pimp you, was not I the first that ever called you so? and
said you had served stoutly in my Regiment at Newberry?


Ioll. Thy Regiment? -- well! leave your quarrelling, Baboons, and try your
fortunes fairly; I begin to be very very sick, I Will leave you, and send in my
Niece to intertain you, upon my life, if you quarrel any more, As great
Soldiers as you are, I Will have you Cashiered for ever out of this Garrison
o'mine, look to it. Exit Col. Ioll.


Worcester. Come Cutter, we would even better play fair play with one another, than lose
all to a third. Let Us draw Cuts who shall accost her first when she comes in,
and the the other void the room for a little while.


Cut. Agreed! you may thank the Colonel for coming off so easily; you know
well enough I dare not offend him at such a time as this!


Worcester. The longest first -- Draw Lots.


Cut. Mine! Od's my life! here she is already!


Scene 6.
Lucia, Cutter, Worm. Luc. Not choose amiss? indeed I must do, Uncle, To her
self at her Entrance.
If I should choose again; especially,
If I should do it out of your drinking company;
Though I have seen these fellows here, I think
A hundred times, yet I so much despise 'em,
I never asked their names: But I must speak to 'em now. My Uncle, Gentlemen,
will wait upon you presently again, and sent me hither to desire your patience!


Cut. Patience, Madam, will be no Virtue requisite for us, whilst you are
pleased to stay here; Ha, ha! Cutter! that lit pretty pat 'ifaith for a
beginning, Worm goes out.


Luc. Is your friend going, Sir?


Cut. Friend, Madam? -- (I hope I shall be even with him presently) he is a
merry fellow that your Uncle and I divert our selves withal.


Luc. What is he? pray Sir.


Cut. That Is something difficult to tell you, Madam; But he has been all
things. He was a Scholar once, and since a Merchant, but broke the first half
year; after that he served a Justice of Peace, and from thence turned a kind of
Solicitor at Goldsmithshall; h'as a pretty Smattering too in Poetry, and would
have been my Lady Protectres's Poet; He writ once a Copy in praise of her
Beauty, but her Highness gave him for it but an old Half-crown piece in Gold,
which she had hoorded up before these troubles, and that discouraged him from
any further Applications to the Court. Since that, h'as been a little Agitator
for the Cavalier party, and drew in one of the 'Prentices that were hanged
lately; He Is a good ingenious fellow, that is the truth on it, and a pleasant
Droll when h'as got a cup of Wine in his pate, which your Uncle and I supply
him with; but for matters that concern the King neither of us trust him. Not
that I can say h'as betrayed any body, but he is so indigent a Varlet, that I Am
afraid he would sell his Soul to Oliver for a Noble. But Madam, what a pox
should we talk any more of that Mole-catcher? (Now I Am out again -- I am so
used only to ranting Whores, that an honest Gentlewoman puts me to a Nonplus!)


Luc. Why, my Uncle recommended him to me, Sir, as a Person of Quality, and of
the same Condition with your self, only that you had been a Colonel of Foot,
and he a Captain of Horse in his Majesty's Service.


Cut. You know your Uncle's Drolling humor, Madam; he thought there was no
danger in the Raillerie, and that you would quickly find out what he was; Here he
comes again, Enter Worm. I Will leave him with you, Madam, for a Minute, and wait
upon you immediately, (I am at a loss, and must recover my self) Captain, I have
dealt better by you than you deserved, and given you a high Character to her;
see you do me right too, if there be occasion -- I Will make bold though to
hearken whether you do or no.


Exit Cutter, and stands at the door. Worcester. Madam, my Noble friend your Uncle
has been pleased to honor me so far with his good Opinion, as to allow me the
liberty to kiss your hands.


Luc. You Are welcome, Sir, but pray, Sir, give me leave
Before you enter into farther Complement
To ask one question of you.

Worcester. I shall resolve you, Madam, with that truth
Which may, I hope, invite you to believe me
In what I Am to say afterward.

Luc. It Is to tell me your friends Name, Sir, and his Quality, which, though
I Have seen him often, I am yet ignorant of: I suppose him to be some honorable
person, who has eminently served the King in the late Wars.


Cut. It Is a shrewd discerning Wench, she has hit me at the door. right already!


Worcester. They call him Colonel Cutter, but to deal faithfully with you, Madam,
he is no more a Colonel than you are a Major General.


Cut. Ha! sure I mistake the Rogue!


Worcester. He never served his King, not he, no more than he does his Maker; It Is
true, h'as drunk his Health as often as any man, upon other men's charges, and
he was for a little while, I think, a kind of Hector, 'till he was soundly
beaten one day, and dragged about the room, like old Hector of Troy about the
Town.


Cut. What does this Dog mean, trow?


Wor. Once indeed he was very low for almost a twelvemonth, and had neither
money enough to hire a Barber, nor buy Sizars, and then he wore a Beard (he
said) for King Charles; he is now in pretty good clothes, but would you saw the
furniture of his Chamber! marry half a Chair, an Earthen Chamberpot without an
Ear, and the bottom of an Ink-horn for a Candle-stick, the rest is broken foul
Tobacco-pipes, and a dozen of Gally-pots with Sawfe in 'em.


Cut. Was there ever such a cursed Villain!


Wor. H'as been a known Cheat about the Town these twenty years.


Luc. What does my Uncle mean to keep him company, if he be such a one?


Wor. Why he is infatuated, I think! I have warned him on it a thousand times; he
has some wit (to give the devil his due) and that it is makes us endure him, but
however I Would advise your Uncle to be a a little more cautious how he talks
before him of State matters, for he is shrewdly wronged if he be n't Cromwell's
Agent for all the Taverns between Kings-street and the Devil at Temple Bar,
indeed he is a kind of Resident in 'em.


Cut. Flesh and blood can bear no longer -- Worm, you are a stinking, lying,
perjured, damned Villain; and if I do not bring you, Madam, his Nose and both
his Ears, and lay 'em at your feet here before night, may the Pillory and the
Pox take mine* till then, suspend your judgment. Exit Cutter.


Luc. Nay, you are both even; just such an excellent Character did he bestow on
you; Why, thou vile Wretch,

Go to the Stews, the Gaol, and there make love,
Thou Wilt find none there but such as will scorn thee!

Wor. Why here is brave work in faith! I have carried it swimmingly, I Will even go
steal away and drink a dozen before I venture to think one thought of the
business. Exit.


Luc. Go cursed race, which stick your loathsome crimes
Upon the Honorable Cause and Patty;
And to the Noble Loyal Sufferers,
A worser suffering add of Hate and Infamy.
Go to the Robbers and the Parricides,
And fix your Spots upon their Painted Vizards,
Not on the Native face of Innocence,
It Is you retard that Industry by which
Our Country would recover from this sickness;
Which, whilst it fears the eruption of such Ulcers,
Keeps a Disease tormenting it within,
But if kind Heaven please to restore our Health,
When once the great Physician shall return,
He quickly will I hope restore our Beauty. Exit.

Act. 2.
Scene 1.
Aurelia. I See it is no small part of policy
To keep some little Spies in an Enemies quarters:
The Parliament had reason --
I would not for five hundred pounds but have corrupted my Cousin Lucia's Maid;
and yet it costs me nothing but Sack-possets, and Wine, and Sugar when her
Mistress is a bed, and tawd'ry Ribbonds, or fine Trimmed Gloves sometimes, and
once I think a pair of Counterfeit Rubie Pendants That cost me half a Crown.
The poor Wench loves Died Glass like any Indian, for a Diamond Bob I Would have her
Madenhead if I were a Man and she a Maid. If her Mistress did but talk in her
sleep sometimes of my conscience she would sit up all night and watch her, only to
tell me in the morning what she said; It Is the prettiest diligent Wretch in her
Calling, now she has undertaken't.

Her intelligence just now was very good, and
May be of consequence; That young Truman is
Stolen up the back way into my Cousin's Chamber.
These are your grave Maids that study Romances, and will be all Mandanas and
Cassandras, and never spit but by the Rules of Honor; Oh, here she comes, I
hope, with fresh intelligence from the Foes Rendevouz.


Scene 2.
Aurelia, Jane. Jane. Ha, ha, ha! for the love of goodness hold me, or I shall
fall down with laughing, ha, ha, ha! It Is the best humor -- no -- I cannot tell
it you for laughing -- ha, ha, ha! the prettiest sport, ha, ha, ha!


Aur. Why, thou have not seen him lie with her, have thou?
The Wench is mad; prithee what is it?

Jane. Why (he, hei, ha!) My Mistress sits by her Servant in a long Veil that
covers her from Top to Toe, and says not one word to him, because of the Oath
you know that the old man forced his son to take after your Father had forbid
him the house, and he talks half an hour, like an Ass as he is, all alone, and
looks upon her hand all the while, and kisses it, But that which makes me die
with laughing at the conceit (ha, ha, ha!) is, that when he asks her any thing,
she goes to the Table, and writes her answer, you never saw such an innocent
Puppet-play!


Aur. Dear Jane (kiss me, Jane,) how shall I do to see 'em?


Ian. Why, Madam, I Will go look the key of my Mistress Closet above, that looks
into her Chamber, where you may see all, and not be seen.


Aur. Why that is as good as the trick of the Veil; do, dear Jane, quickly,
'twill make us excellent sport at night, and we will fuddle our Noses together,
shall we, dear Jane?


Jane. I, dear Madam! I Will go seek out the key. Exit Jane.


Aur. It Is strange, if this trick of my Cousins should beget no trick of mine,
That would be pitiful dull doings.


Scene 3.
Aurelia, Mr. Puny. Aur. Here comes another of her Servants; a young, rich,
fantastical Fop, that would be a Wit, and has got a new way of being so; he
scorns to speak any thing that is common, and finds out some impertinent
similitude for every thing, The Devil I think cannot find out one for him. This
Coxcomb has so little Brains too, as to make me the Confident of his Amors,
I Will thank him for his Confidence ere I have done with him.


Pun: Whofe here? O Madam! is your father out of his Metaphorical Grave yet?
you understand my meaning, my dear Confident? you are a Wit!


Aur. Like what, Mr. Puny?


Pun. Why -- like -- me!


Aur. That Is right your way, Mr. Puny, its an odd similitude.


Pun. But where is your father little Queen of Diamonds? is he extant? I long
like a Woman big with Twins to speak with him!


Aur. You cannot now possibly, There was never any Creature so sick with a
disease as he is with Physic, to day, the Doctor and the 'Pothecarie's with
him; and will let no body come in. But, Mr. Puny, I have words of comfort for
you!


Pun. What, my dear Quenn of Sheba! and I have Ophir for thee if thou have.


Aur. Why your Rival is forbid our house, and has sworn to his father never to
see or hear your Mistress more.


Pun. I knew that yesterday as well as I knew my Credo, but I Am the very Jew of
Malta if she did not use me since that, worse than I Would use a rotten Apple.


Aur. Why that cannot be, Brother Wit, why that were uncivilly done of her!


Pun. O hang her, Queen of Fairies, (I Am all for Queens to day I think) she
cares much for that; No, that Assyrian Crocodile Truman is still swimming in
her praecordiums, but I Will so ferret him out, I Will beat him as a Bloomsbury
Whore beats Hemp; I Will spoil his Grave Dominical Postures; I Will make him sneak,
and look like a door off the hinges.


Aur. That Is hard! but he deserves it truly, if he strive to Annihilate.


Pun. Why well said, Sister Wit, now thou speak oddly too!


Aur. Well, without wit or foolery, Mr. Puny, what will you give me, if this
night, this very improbable night, I make you Marry my Cousin Lucia?


Pun. Thou talk like Medusa's head, thou astonishest me.


Aur. Well, in plain language as befits a Bargain; there is Pen and Inck in the
next Chamber, give but a Bill under your hand to pay me five hundred pounds in
Gold (upon forfeiture of a thousand if you fail) within an hour after the
business is done, and I Will be bound Body for Body my Cousin Lucia shall be your
Wife this night; if I deceive you, your Bond will do you no hurt, if, I do not,
consider a little beforehand, whether the Work deserves the Reward, and do as
you think fit.


Pun. There shall be no more considering than in a Hasty Pudding; I Will write it
an' you will, in Shorthand, to dispatch immediately, and presently go put five
hundred Mari-golds in a purse for you, Come away like an Arrow out of a
Scythian Bow.


Aur. I Will do your business for you, I Will warrant you; Allons Mon-Cher. Exeunt.


Scene 4.
Cutter, Worm. Cut. Now I have thee at the place, where thou affronted'st me,
here will I cut thy throat.


Worcester. You Will be hanged first.


Cut. No by this light.


Worcester. You Will be hanged after then.


Cut. Not so neither; for I Will hew thee into so many morsels, that the Crowner
shall not be able to give his Verdict whether 'twas the Body of a Man or of a
Beast, as thou art. Thou shall be mince-meat, Worm, within this hour.


Worcester. He was a Coward once, nor have I ever heard one syllable since of his
Reformation, he shall not daunt me.


Cut. Come on; I Will send thee presently to Erebus Draws. without either Bail or
Main-prize.


Worcester. Have at you, Cutter, an' thou had as many lives as are in Plutarch, I Would
make an end of them all.


Cut. Come on, Miscreant.


Worcester. Do, do! strike an' thou dare.


Cut. Coward, I Will give thee the advantage of the first push, Coward.


Worcester. I scorn to take any thing of thee, Jew.


Cut. If thou dare not strike first, thou submitt'ft, and I give thee thy
life.


Worcester. Remember, Cutter, you were treacherous first to me, and therefore must
begin. Come, pox upon it, this quarrel will cost us quarts of Wine a piece
before the Treaty of Peace be ended.


Cut. Here Is company coming in; I Will hear of no Treaties, Worm, we will fight it
out.


Scene 5.
Aurelia, Puny, Cutter, Worm. Aur. Five hundred neat Gentlemen-like
twenty-shilling Reading. pieces, though never washed nor barb'd -- A curse upon
him, cannot he write a Bond without these sotteries?


Pun. Why how now Panims? fighting like two Seafish in the Map? Why how now my
little Gallimaufry, my Oleopodrido of Arts and Arms; Hold the feirce Gudgings!


Aur. 'Ods my life, Puny, let us go in again; that is the only way to part 'em.


Pun. Do, do! kill one another and be hanged like Ropes of Onyons.


Cut. At your command? no, Puny! I Will be forced by no man; put up, Worm; we will
fight for no man's pleasure but our own.


Wor. Agreed! I will not make sport with murdering any man, an' he were a Turk.


Pun. Why now ye speak like the Pacifique Sea; we will to the King's Poleanon, and
drink all into Pylados again; we will drink up a whole Vessel there to
Redintegration, and that so big, that the Tun of Heidelberg shall seem but a
Barel of Pickled Oisters to it; mean time, thou pretty little Smith of my good
fortune, beat hard upon the Anvil of your Plot, I Will go and provide the
Spankers. Exit Puny.


Cut. Your Cousin, Mrs. Aurelia, has abused us most irreverently.


Aur. Why what is the matter?


Cut. Your father recommended us two as Suitors to her.


Aur. And she would have none of you? What a foolish Girl it is, to stand in her own
light so?


Wor. Nay, that is not all, but she used us worse than if we'd been the veriest
Rogues upon the face of the whole Earth.


Aur. That Is a little thought too much, but 'twas safer erring of that hand.


Cut. I, we are like to get much, I see, by complaining to you.


Enter Jane. Ian. Ha, ha, ha! Here Is the key of the Closet, go up softly,
Madam, ha, ha, ha! and make no noise, dear Madam, I must be gone.


Exit. Aur. Why does this little Foppitee laugh always? it is such a Ninny that
she betrays her Mistress, and thinks she does no hurt at all, no, not she; well,
wretched Lovers, come along with me now, (but softly upon your lives, as you
would steal to a Mistress through her Mothers Chamber) and I Will show you this
severe Penelope, locked up alone in a Chamber with your Rival.


Cut. As softly as Snow falls.


Wor. Or Vapors rise.


Aur. What are you Punish too with your Similitudes? Mum -- not a word --
pull off your shoes at bottom of the stairs, and follovv me.


Scene 6.
Enter Truman junior. And presently Aurelia, Cutter, and Worm appear at a
little Window. Trum. Why should her cruel Uncle seek to oppose
A Love in all respects so good and equal?
He has some wicked end in it, and deserves
To be deceived!

Cut. Deceived? pray mark that Madam.

Trum. She is gone in to see if things be ripe yet
To make our last attempt upon her Uncle;
If our Plot fail --

Aur. A Plot 'ifaith, and I shall Counter-plot ye.

Trum. In spite of our vvorst Enemies, our kindred,
And a rash Oath that is cancelled in the making,
We will pursue our Loves to the last point,
And buy that Paradise though 't be with Martyrdom!

Scene 7.
Enter Lucia. She goes to the Table and Writes whilst he Speaks, and gives him
the Paper. Trum. She Is come, methinks I see her through her Veil;
She Is naked in my heart with all her Beauties.

Worcester. Thou have a Bawdy heart I Will warrant thee.


Cut. Hold your peace, Coxcomb.


Trum. That has, I think, taken an Oath
Quite contrary to mine, never to see
Any thing else!
He Is extreme sick, and thinks he shall die, Reads a paper given him by Lucia.
the Doctor and 'Pothecary have acted very well; I Will be with him presently, go
into my little Oratory, and pray for the A cry within, Mrs. Aurelia. success --
I Will pray with as much zeal as any sinner, converted just upon the point of
death, prays his short time out. Exeunt Truman and Lucia.


Aur. What can this mean? and They cry within. the cry within there? pray let us
go down and see what is the matter.


Enter Will and Ralph crying. Will. Ah, Lord! my poor Master! Mrs. Aurelia,
Mrs. Aurelia.


Aur. Here, what is the business?


Ralph. Oh Lord! the saddest accident.


Aur. For the love of Heaven speak quickly.


Will. I cannot speak for weeping; my poor Master's poisoned.


Aur. Poisoned? how prithee, and by whom?


Will. Why by the strangest Accident, Mistress.

The Doctor prescribed one what dee' call it with a hard name, and that
careless Rogue the 'Pothecaries man (mistaking one Glass for another that stood
by it) put in another what dee' call it, that is a mortal poison.


Aur. Oh then it is plain, this was the Plot they talked of; ye heard,
Gentlemen, what they said; pray follow me and bear witness. Exit Aurelia.


Cut. Undoubtedly they had a hand in it; we shall be brought to swear against
them, Worm.


Worm. I Will swear what I heard, and what I heard not but I Will hang 'em. I see I
shall be revenged of that proud Tit; but it grieves me for the Colonel.


Scene 8.
Colonel Jolly (brought in a Chair) Aurelia, Cutter, Worm, Will, Ralph, other
Servants. Ioll. Oh! I have vomited out all my guts, and all my entrails --


Aur. Oh my dear Father!


Ioll. I Am going, daughter -- have ye sent the pocky Doctor and the plaguey
'Pothecary to a Justice of Peace to be examined?


Will. Yes, Sir, your Worship's Steward and the Constable are gone with 'em;
does your Worship think they did it out of malice, and not by a mistake? if I
had thought they did, I Would a hanged 'em presently, that you might have seen it
done before you died.


Ioll. Huh, huh, huh! I think that Rogue the Doctor did it, because I beat him
the other day in our drinking! huh, huh, huh!


Aur. No, Sir, (O my dear father) no, Sir, you little think who were the
Contrivers of your murder, even my Cousin Luce and her Gallant -- Oh Lord --
it is discovered by a miraculous providence -- they are both together in her
Chamber now, and there we overheard 'em as it pleased -- these two Gentlemen
heard 'em as well as I --


Ioll. Can they be such Monsters? Oh! I Am as hot as Lucifer -- Oh -- Oh --!
what did you hear them say? -- Oh my stomach!


Cut. Why that they had a Plot --


Aur. And that the Doctor and 'Pothecary had done it very well.


Wor. I and your Niece asked if he thought the Poison were strong enough.


Aur. There never was such an Impudence!


Will. How murder will out! I always thought, fellow Ralph, your Mistress Lucia
was naught with that young smooth-faced Varlet; do you remember, Ralph, what I
told you in the Butteries once?


Aur. Here she comes! O Impudence! Enter Lucia.


Ioll. Oh! Oh! Oh! -- go all aside a little, and let me speak with her alone.
Come hither, Niece -- Oh! Oh --! you see by what accident 'thas pleased -- huh
-- huh -- huh -- to take away your loving Uncle, Niece! huh: --


Luc. I see it, Sir, with that grief which your misfortune and mine in the loss
of you does require.


Cut. There Is a devil for you; but, Captain, Joll. and Luc: talk together. did
you hear her speak of poison, and whether it were strong enough?


Wor. No, but I love to strike home when, I do a business, I Am for
through-stich; I Am through paced, what a pox should a man stand mincing?


Luc. I hope, Sir, and have faith, that you will recover!
But, Sir, because the danger's too apparent,
And who (alas) knows how `Heaven may dispose of you? before it grow too late
(after your blessing) I humbly beg one Boon upon my knees.


Ioll. What is it (rise up Niece) Oh -- I can deny you nothing at this time sure!


Luc. It is (I wo' not rise, Sir, till you grant it)
That since the love 'twixt Truman and my self
Has been so sixth, and like our fortunes equal,
Ye would be pleased to sign before your death,
The confirmation of that Love, our Contract,
And when your Soul shall meet above, my fathers,
As soon as he has bid you welcome thither,
He Will thank you for this goodness to his daughter;
I do conjure you, Sir, by his memory!
By all your hopes of happiness hereafter!
In a better world! and all your dearest wishes of happiness for those whom ye
love most, and leave behind you here!


Ioll. You have deserved so well of me Niece, that it is impossible to deny you
any thing; where is gentle Mr. Truman?


Luc. In the next room, Sir, waiting on your will
As on the Sentence of his life and death too.

Ioll. Oh -- I Am very sick -- pray bring him in.


Luc. A thousand Angels guard your life, Sir!
Or if you die, carry you up to heaven. Exit.

Worcester. Was there ever such a young dissembling Witch?


Cut. Here Is Woman in perfection!
The Devil's in their tails and in their tongues!
Their possessed both ways!

Ioll. Will* Ralph, is Jeremy there too? be ready when I speak to you.


Enter Truman, Lucia, (veiled.) Trum. Our prayers are heard, it is as we wished,
dear Lucia, Oh this blessed hour!


Ioll. Take him and carry him up to the Green Chamber -- Oh my belly -- lock
him in sure there, till you see what becomes of me; if I do die, he and his
Mistress shall have but an ill Match of it at Tyburn. Oh my Guts -- lock up Luce
too in her Chamber.


Trum. What do ye mean, Gentlemen? are ye mad?


Will. We mean to lock you up safe, Sir, for a great Jewel as you are!


Luc. Pray hear me all.


Ioll. Away with 'em. Exit all the Servants, with Truman and Lucia several ways.


Aur. How do you, Sir? I hope you may o're-come it, your Natures strong, Sir.


Ioll. No, it is impossible; and yet I find a little ease, but it is but a flash
-- Aurelia -- Oh there it wrings me again -- fetch me the Cordial-glass in the
Cabinet window, and the little Prayer Book; I would fain repent, but it comes
so hardly -- I am very unfit to die, if it would please Heaven -- so, set down
the Glass -- there -- give me --


Aur. The Prayer Book, Sir, 's all moldy, I must wipe it first.


Ioll. Lay it down too -- so -- it begins t'asswage a little -- there lay down
the Book; 'twill but trouble my Brains now I Am a dying.


Enter Will. Will. Here Is the Widow, Sir, without, and Mrs. Tabitha her
daughter, they have heard of your misfortune, and have brought Mr. Knock-down to
comfort you.


Ioll. How? everlasting Knock-down! will they trouble a Man thus when he is a
dying? Sirrah! Blockhead! let in Joseph Knock-down, and I Will send thee to Heaven
before me; I have but an hour or two to live perhaps, and that is not enough for
him I Am sure to preach in!


Will. Shall Mrs. Barebottle come in, Sir?


Ioll. That Is a She Knock-down too; well, let her come in -- huh! huh! huh! I
must bear all things patiently now; but Sirrah, Rogue! take heed of Joseph
Knock-down, thou shall not live with ears if Joseph Knock-down enter.


Enter Widow, Tabitha. Wid. How de' you Neighbor Colonel? how is it? take
comfort.


Ioll. Cut off in the flower of my age, Widow.


Wid. Why, Man's life is but a Flower, Mr. Jolly, and the Flower withers, and
Man withers, as Mr. Knock-down observed last Sabbath Day at Evening Exercise;
But, Neighbor, you are past the Flower, you are grown old as well as I --


Ioll. In The very flower; that damned Quack-salver --


Tabith. Me-thoughts he was the ugliest fellow, Mother,
And they say he is a Papish too, forsooth.

Wid. I never liked a Doctor with a Red Nose; my Husband was wont to say -- how
do you, Mrs. Aurelia? comfort your self, we must all die sooner or later; to
day here, to morrow gone.


Ioll. Oh the torture of such a tongue! would I were dead already, and this my
Funeral Sermon.


Wid. Alas poor man! his tongue I warrant ye is hot as passes; you have a
better memory than I, Tabitha, tell him what Mr. Knock-down said was a Saints
duty in tormenting sicknesses, now Poison's a great tormentor.


Ioll. Oh! Oh! -- this additional Poison will certainly make an end of me!


Wid. Why seek for spiritual Incomes, Mr. Colonel; I Will tell you what my Husband
Barebottle was wont to observe (and he was a Colonel too) he never sought for
Incomes but he had some Blessing followed immediately; once he sought for em in
Hartfordshire, and the next day he took as many Horses and Arms in the Country
as served to raise three Troops; another time he sought for 'em in
Bucklersbury, and three days after a friend of his, that he owed five hundred
pounds too, was hanged for a Malignant, and the Debt forgiven him by the
Parliament; a third time he sought for 'em in Hartfordshire --


Tabith. No, Mother, 'twas in VVorcester-shire, forsooth.


Wid. I, Child, it was indeed in VVorcester-shire; and within two months after
the Dean of VVorcester's Estate fell to him.


Ioll. He sought for 'em once out of my Estate too, I thank him; Oh my head!


Wid. Why truly, Neighbor Colonel, he had that but for his Penny, and would
have had but a hard Bargain of it, if he had not by a friends means of the
Council hooked in two thousand pounds of his Arrears.


Cut. For shame let us relieve him; Colonel, you said you had a mind to settle
some affairs of your Estate with me, and Captain Worm here.


Wid. I Will leave you then for a while, pray send for me, Neighbor, when you have
a mind to it Heaven strengthen you; come, Tabitha.


Ioll. Aurelia, go out with them, and leave us three together for half an hour.
Exit Wid. Tab. Aur. Stay you, Will, and reach me the Cordial; I begin to hope
that my extreme violent fit of Vomiting and Purging has wrought out all the
Poison, and saved my life -- my Pain's almost quite gone, but I Am so sore and
faint -- give me the Glass.


Worcester. What d' you mean, Colonel? you will not dote, I hope, now you are dying?
drink I know not what there, made by a Doctor and a 'Pothecary? Drink a cup of
Sack, Man; healing Sack; you will find your old Antidote best.


Cut. H'as reason, Colonel, it agrees best with your nature; it is good to
recover your strength -- as for the danger, that is past, I Am confident, already.


Iol. Do thou think so, honest Cutter? fetch him a Bottle of Sack, Will, for
that news; I Will drink a little my self, one little Beerglass.


Cut. Poor creature! he would try all ways to live!


Ioll. Why if I do die, Cutter, a Glass of Sack will do me no hurt I hope; I do
not intend to die the Whining way, like a Girl that is afraid to lead Apes in
Hell -- So, Enter Will, with a Bottle and great Glass give it me; a little
fuller, -- yet -- it warms exceedingly -- and is very Cordial -- So, -- fill to
the Gentlemen.


Worcester. Let Us drink, let us drink, whilst breath we have; Sings.
You Will find but cold, but cold drinking in the Grave.

Cut. A Catch 'ifaith! Boy, go down, Boy, go down,
And fill us the other quart,
That we may drink the Colonel's health

Worcester. That we may drink the Colonel's health

Both. Before that we do part.

Worcester. Why do thou frown, thou arrant Clown?
Hey boys -- Tope --

Ioll. Why this is very cheerly! pray let us have the Catch that we made to other
night against the Doctor.


Worcester. Away with it, Cutter; hum --
Come fill us the Glass of Sack.

Cut. What Health do we lack?

Wor. Confusion to the Quack.

Both. Confound him, Confound him,
Diseases all around him.

Cut. And fill again the Sack,

Worcester. That no man may Lack,

Cut. Confusion to the Quack,

Both. Confusion to the Quack,
Confound him, Confound him,
Diseases all Around him.

Worcester. He Is a kind of Grave-maker,

Cut. A Urinal Shaker,

Wor. A wretched Groat-taker,

Cut. A stinking close-Stool raker,

Wor. He Is a Quack that is worse than a Quaker.

Both. He Is a Quack, etc.

Wor. Hey, Boys -- Gingo --

Ioll. Give me the Glass,

Will. I Will venture once more what e're come on it, here is a Health to the Royal
Travailer, and so Finis Coronat.


Wor. Come on Boys, Vivat; have at you again then.
Now a Pox on the Poll, of old Politic Noll.

Both. We Will drink till we bring,
In Triumph back the King.

Wor. May he Live till he see,
Old Noll upon a Tree.

Wor. And many such as he.

Both. May he Live till, etc.

Ioll. I Am very Sick again;

Will. help me into my Bed; rest you merry, Gentlemen.


Cut. Nay, we will go in with him, Captain, he shall not die this bout.


Worcester. It Is pity but he should, he dos't so bravely; come along then, kiss me,
Cutter; is not this better than quarrelling?


Both. May he live till he see, etc.
Hey for Fiddlers now! Exeunt.

Act 3.
Scene 1.
Jolly, Aurelia. Ioll. It Is true, Aurelia, the Story they all agree in; 'twas
nothing but a simple Plot of the two Lovers to put me in fear of death, in hope
to work then upon my good Nature, or my Conscience, and Quack conspired with
them out of revenge; 'Twas a cursed Rogue though to give me such an unmerciful
Dose of Scammony! It might have proved but an ill jest; but however, I will not
be a loser by the business, ere I have done with it.


Aur. Methinks there might be something extracted out of it.


Ioll. Why so there shall; I Will pretend, Aurelia, to be still desperately sick,
and that I was really poisoned, no man will blame me after that, for whatsoever
I do with my Niece. But that is not all, I will be mightily troubled in
Conscience, send for the Widow, and be converted by her, that will win her
heart, joined with the hopes of my swallowing Lucia's portion.


Aur. For that point I Will assist you, Sir, Assure her that my Cousin Lucia is
married privately this afternoon to Mr. Puny.


Ioll. I would she were, Wench, (for thine and my sake) her Portion would be
forfeited then indeed, and she would have no great need often, for that Fop's
very rich.


Aur. Well, Sir, I Will bring sufficient proofs of that, to satisfy the Widow,
and that is all you require; be pleased to let the secret of the business rest
with me yet a while, to morrow you shall know it. But for my own part, Sir, if I
were in your place, I Would rather patiently lose my Estate for ever, than take it
again with her.


Ioll. Oh! hold your self contented, good frank-hearted Aurelia; would I were
to marry such a one every week these two years: see how we differ now?


Aur. Bless us! what humming and hawing will be in this house! what preaching,
and houling, and fasting, and eating among the Saints! Their first pious work
will be to banish Fletcher and Ben Johnson out of the Parlour, and bring in
their rooms Martin Mar-Prelate, and Posies of Holy Hony-suckles, and a Sawf-box
for a Wounded Conscience, and a Bundle of Grapes from Canaan. I cannot abide
'em; but I Will break my sister Tabitha's heart within a month one way or other.
But, Sir, suppose the King should come in again, (as I hope he will for all
these Villains) and you have your own again of course, you would be very proud of a
Soap-boylers Widow then in Hide-park, Sir.


Ioll. Oh! then the Bishops will come in too, and she will away to New England;
well, this does not do my business; I Will about it, and send for her. Exit.


Enter Ralph. Aur. And I Will about mine; Ralph, did you speak to Mr. Puny to meet
me an hour hence at the back-dore in the Garden? he must not know the estate
the house is in yet.


Ralph. Yes, forsooth, he bad me tell you, he would no more fail you than the Sun
fails Barnaby-day, I know not what he means by it, but he charged me to tell you
so, and he would bring (forsooth) his Regiment of five hundred. He Is a mad man,
I think.


Aurel. Well, did you speak to Mr. Soaker to stay within too, the little Deacon
that uses to drink with Will and you?


Ral. Yes, forsooth, he is in the Buttery.


Aur. Pray Heaven he don't forget my Instructions there! But first I have a
little trick for my Lovers to begin withal, they shall have twenty more before
I have done with 'em. Exit:


Scene 2.
Enter Truman junior. Trum. The Veil of this mistake will soon be cast away, I
would I could remove Lucia's as easily, and see her face again, as fair, as
shortly our Innocence will appear.

But if my angry father come to know our late Intelligence in this unlucky
business, though we have fulfilled the Letter of his Will, that which can
satisfy a Lover's Conscience, will hardly do so to an old man's Passion; Ye
Heavenly Powers, or take away my life, or give me quickly that for which I
only am content to keep it.


Scene 3.
Enter Aurelia, (veiled.) Ha! I did but speak just now of Heavenly powers,
And my blessed Angel enters, sure they have
Heard me, and promise what I prayed for.
My dear Lucia, I thought you would been a kind of prisoner too.
She gives him a Paper and embraces him. She Is kinder too than she was wont to
be;
My prayers are heard and granted, I Am confirmed in it.
By my Maid's means I have gotten Keys both of my Reads. own Chamber and yours;
we may escape if you please; but that I fear would ruin you; We lie both now
in the same house, a good fortune that is not like to continue; since I have
the engagement of your faith, I account my self your Wife already, and shall
put my honor into your hands; about Midnight I shall steal to you; If I were to
speak this I should blush, but I know whom I trust.

Yours, Lucia.


Trum. Thou do not know me, Lucia, aside.
And have forgot thy self: I am amazed.
Stay, here is a Postscript.
(Burn this Paper as soon as you have read it.)
Burn it? yes, would I had don't before, Burns it at the Candle.
May all remembrance of thee perish with thee,
Unhappy paper!
Thy very ashes sure will not be innocent,
But fly about and hurt some chaste man's eyes,
As they do mine. weeps.
Oh, Lucia, this I thought of all misfortunes
Would never have befaln me, to see thee
Forget the ways of Virtue and of Honor.
I little thought to see upon our love,
That flourished with so sweet and fresh a Beauty,
The slimy traces of that Serpent, Lust.
What Devil has poisoned her? I know not what to say to her.
Go, Lucia, retire, prithee, to thy Chamber,
And call thy wandering Virtue home again,
It is not yet far gone, but call it quickly,
It Is in a dangerous way; I will forget thy error,
And spend this night in prayers that Heaven may do so.
Exit Aur. Would she have had me been mine own Adulterer?
Before my Marriage? -- Oh lust -- Oh frailty --
Where in all human nature shall we miss
The ulcerous fermentations of thy heat,
When thus (alas) we find thee breaking out
Upon the comli'st Visage of perfection? Exit.

Scene 4.
Aurelia. Aur. Pray Heaven, I ha'nt made my foolish Wit stay for me; if he talk
with others of the house before me, I Am undone. Stay, have I my Paper ready?
Oh! that is Pulls out a Paeper. well! my Hand I Am sure's as like hers as the
Left is to the Right, we were taught by the same Master, pure Italian, there is
her A's and her G's I Will swear -- Oh! are you come? that is well.


Scene 5.
Enter Puny. It Is almost four of clock and that is the precious hour.

Pun. My little Heliogabalus, here I am, Praesto!


Aur. You Are always calling me names, Mr. Puny, that is unkindly done to one
that is laboring for you, as I am.


Pun. I have made more haste hither than a Parson does to a Living of three
hundred and fifty pounds a year.


Aur. Puny, you are not a man of business I see, that is not the style of
business; Well, I have done, I think, the work for you, it is as odd a Plot as
ever you heard.


Pun. I like it better, I love odd things.


Aur. Why thus then, you know Mr. Truman took an Oath to his father never to
see my Cousin more without his leave.


Pun. Pish, do I know that a Lawyer loves to take money in Michaelmas Term?


Aur. A pies upon you: well, my father has made Lucy swear too never to see
Truman without his consent.


Pun. Good, there will be a good Bo-peep love.


Aur. For all this, thy'r resolved to marry this afternoon, (nay don't
interrupt me with your Fopperies, or I Will be gone) and to save their Oaths (like
cunning Caluists, as all Lovers are) they will be married in a dark room (do you
mark me?) the Minister, Mr. Soaker, is to marry them without Book; and because
thei'r bound not to speak to one another (for that I forgot to tell you) they are
to signify their consent, when he asks 'em, Will you such a one -- by
reverences, and giving their hands; you never heard of such a humor, but their
both mad --


Pun. Ha! ha! ha! Rare, as Fantastical as a Whirl-gig -- but how come you to
know all this, my little pretty Witch of Lancashire?


Aur. Why that I Am coming to; her Maid you must know is my Pensioner, and
betrays all Counsels; And to confirm all this to you, here is her last Letter to
Truman about the business, which my Intelligencer has Delivered to me instead
of him, you know her hand, Read it all over to your self.


Pun. I Will swear by her Foot, this is her Hand, -- hum -- my Uncles sick, and no
Body will be at this [Reads.] side of the House, -- the matted Chamber -- hum
-- In at the Back door which shall be left only put to -- (ha, ha, ha!) Mr.
Soaker with you -- just at four -- you must not stay long with me -- (ha, ha,
ha!) when it is done and past recovery they will release us of our Oaths -- hum --
I shall not fail -- yours L. (ha, ha, ha.)


Aur. Now he knows nothing of the time, for that he should have known by this
Letter; and you conceive my design, I hope? you are not a Wit for nothing.


Pun. My dear Pythagorean, that I should go in and Marry her instead of him?


Aur. Right! thou'st a shrewd reach.


Pun. But where is old Soaker all this while?


Aur. Why, I have told all this to him, only naming you in all things instead of
Truman; and that 'twas my Contrivance all for my Cosens and your Sake; he is
within at a Call, I Will send for him; whose there? Mary? call hither Mr. Soaker;
I have given him five Pounds, and for so much more he will Marry you to another to
morrow, if you will.


Pun. I adore thee Queen Solomon; I had rather be Married by such a Plot as
this, than be Nephew to Prester John -- I Will mak't a thousand Spankers.


Enter Mr. Soaker. Aur. Oh come it is time Mr. Soaker; as soon as you have done
leave the Married couple together, I Will lock this Door upon you, go out at the
to'ther, where she will come in to you.


Pun. It Is as dark as the Devil's conscience; but the best is, the Parson has
a good Fieri Facies, like a Holiday, that will give some Light.


Aur. No! there is Light enough to keep you from Stumbling within. Oh! I forgot
to tell you, break a piece of Gold, and give her half, for a proof of the -- do
you understand me?


Pun. It Is well thought on; but Domine Doctoribus, can you say the Service
without Book are you sure?


Soaker. I warrant you Sir; can you Lie with her without Book afterward?


Pun. He Is a Wit too by Juno; all are Wits that have a finger in this Venison
pasty.


Aur. She Will come, immediately, go in; do not stay above half an hour, Mr.
Puny, my Cozen will be mist else, and all spoiled.


Pun. I Will warrant you, let us in; dear Learning lead the way. They go in, and
Aurelia locks the Door of the outside.


Aur. So, all is sure this way; I Will be with you straight.


Exit. Scene 6.
Enter Jolly, Cutter. Ioll. So, now the Widdow's gone, I may breathe a little;
I believe really that true Devotion is a great Pleasure, but it is a damned
constraint and drudgery methinks, this Dissimulation of it. I wonder how the
new Saints can endure it, to be always at the work, Day and Night Acting; But
great Gain makes every thing seem easy; And they have, I suppose, good Lusty
Recreations in private. She Is gone, the Little Holy thing, as proud as Lucifer,
with the Imagination of having been the Chosen Instrument of my Conversion from
Popery, Prelacy, and Cavalerism, she is gone to bragg often to Joseph Knock-down,
and bring him to Confirm me. But Cutter, thine was the best Humor that ever was
begot in a Rogues Noddle, to be Converted in an instant, the Inspiration way,
by my example! It may hap to get thee Tabitha.


Cut. Nay, and I hit just pat upon her way, for though the Mother be a kind of
Brownist, (I know not what the Devil she is indeed) yet Tabitha is of the Fifth
Monarchy Faith, and was wont to go every Sunday a-foot over the Bridge to hear
Mr. Feak, when he was Prisoner in Lambeth house, she has had a Vision too her
self of Horns, and strange things.


Ioll. Pish! Cutter, for the way that is not material, so there be but enough of
Nonsense and Hypocrisy; But Cutter, you must reform your Habit too, a little;
Off with that Sword and Buff and greasy Plume of Ribbons in your Hat. They Will
be back here presently, do it quickly.


Cut. I Will be changed in an instant, like a Scene, and then I Will fetch 'em to
you. Exit.


Scene 7.
Enter Truman Senior. Sen. Trum. I, there goes one of his Swaggerers; I could
have Swagger'd with him once -- Oh! Colonel, you are finely Poisoned, are you not?
would I had the Poisoning of you -- where is my Son Dick? what have you done with
him?


Ioll. Mr. Truman. --


Trum. True me no more than I true you -- come -- Colonel you are but a
Swaggering -- I Will have the Law to Swagger with you, that I will.


Ioll. First leave your Raging; though you should rage like Tamerlain at the
Bull, 'twould do no good here.


Trum. Do you call me names too? I Will have an Action of Scandalum. Well Colonel,
since you provoke me, the Protector shall know what you are, and what you would
have had me done for the King in the time of the last rising.


Ioll. Mr. Truman, I took you for a Person of Honor, and a Friend to his
Majesty; I little thought to hear you speak of betraying a Gentleman to the
Protector.


Trum. s. Betraying? no Sir, I scorn it as much as you, but I Will let him know
what you are, and so forth, an' you keep my Son from me.


Ioll. Mr. Truman, if you will but hear me patiently, I shall propose a thing that
will, I hope, be good and acceptable both to your Son and you.


Trum. Say you so Sir? well; but I will not be called Tamerlain.


Ioll. My Niece, not only by her wicked design to Poison me, but by Marrying
her self without my consent this day to Puny, has (as you know very well, for
you were a witness Sir to my Brother's will) lost all the right she had to a
plentiful Portion. Aurelia shall have that and my Estate, (which now within
few days I shall recover) after my Death; she is not I think Unhandsome, and all
that know her will confess she wants no Wit; with these Qualities, and this
Fortune, if your Son like her, (for though h'as injured me, Sir, I forget that,
and attribute it only to the Enchantments of my Niece) I do so well approve
both of his Birth and Parts, and of that Fortune, which you I think will please
to make him, that I should be extremely glad of the Alliance.


Trum. s. Good Colonel, you were always a kind Neighbor and loving Friend to
our Family, and so were we to you, and had respects for you; you know I would
have had Dick marry your Niece, till you declared he should have no Portion with
her.


Ioll. For that I had a particular reason, Sir; your Son's above in my House,
shall I call him, Sir, that we may know his mind? I would not have him forced.


Trum. s. Pray send for him good Colonel; forced? no, I Will make him do it, I Will
warrant you. Boys must not be their own choosers, Colonel, they must not
'ifaith, they have their Sympathies and Fiddle-come-saddles in their Brain, and
know not what they would have themselves.


Scene 8.
Enter Lucia. Ioll. Why how now Lucia? how come you from your Chamber?


Luc. I hope you did not mean me a Prisoner, Sir, since now you are satisfied
sufficiently that you are not Poisoned?


Ioll. I am not Dead, that is true. But I may thank Heaven, and a strong
Constitution for it; you did your weak endeavors; however, for the honor of
our Family, and for your Father's sake, I Will speak no more of that, but I could
wish, for the security of my Life hereafter, that you would go home to your
Husband, for they say you are married Niece this day without my knowledge -- Nay,
-- I Am content, -- go home to him when you please, you shall have your thousand
Pounds.


Trum. s. Hark you, Colonel, she should not have a groat of e'em, not a groat;
she cannot recover't by Law, I know the Will.


Luc. I married Sir? it is the first news I Have heard often.


Scene 9.
Enter Trum. Jun. Lucia goes to put on her Veil. Ioll. Nay, leave your pretty
Jesuitical Love-tricks to salve an Oath; Mr. Truman, you may let your Son see
her now.


Trum. s. I Dick you may see her as much as you please; she is married.


Trum. j. Married?


Trum. s. I married, so I say, Married this afternoon to Mr. Puny.


Luc. What do they mean?


Trum. s. And Dick I have got a Wife too for you, you shall have pretty Mrs.
Aurelia.


Trum. j. Lucia married?


Trum. s. Her Father and I are agreed of all things; Hark you Dick, she has a
brave Fortune now.


Trum. j. Married to Puny?


Trum. s. You shall have her presently.


Trum. j. This afternoon?


Trum. s. Come Dick; there is a Wife for you Dick.


Trum. j. I will not marry, Sir.


Trum. s. What do you say Sir?


Trum. j. I wo' not marry Sir.


Trum. s. Get you out of my sight you Rebel.


Ioll. Nay, good Mr. Truman.


Trum. s. I Will never acknowledge him for my Son again; I tell you Colonel, he is
always thus with his wo'nots and his Cannots.


Scene 10.
Enter Puny. Pun. We have made short work on it; it was a brave quick Parsonides;
The little Skittish Philly got away from me I know not how, like an Eele out of
a Basket.


Ioll. Give him a little time Mr. Truman, he is troubled yet at my Nieces
marriage, it will over quickly.


True. s. Give my Son time, Mr. Jolly? marry come up --


Scene 11.
Enter Aurelia, ( after Puny.) Aur. What have you done already? you are a sweet
Husband indeed.


Pun. Oh! my little Pimp of honor! here, here is the five hundred Marigolds;
hold thy hand Dido -- yonder is my Wife, by Satan; how a Devil did that little
Mephistophilus get hither before me?


Aur. To her Puny; never conceal the mystery any longer, it is too good a Jest
to be kept close.


Trum. s. For your sake I will then, Colonel; Come prithee, Dick, be cheerful.
--


Trum. j. I beseech you, -- Sir --


Trum. s. Look you there Colonel, now he should do what I would have him, now
he is a beseeching -- it is the proudest stubborn'st Coxcomb --


Pun. And now my noble Uncle -- nay, never to Jolly. be angry at a Marriage
in the way of wit -- My fair Egyptian Queen, come to thine Antony.


Luc. What would this rude fellow have?


Trum. j. I am drowned in wonder!


Pun. 'Twas I, my dear Philoclea, that married thee even row in the dark room,
like an amorous Cat; you may remember the Damask Bed by a better Token of Two
than a bowed Philip and Mary.


Luc. I call Heaven to witness,
Which will protect and justify the Innocent,
I understand not the least word he utters,
But as I took him always for a Fool,
I now do for a Madman.

Aur. She Is angry yet to have mistook her Man. It Is true, Sir, all that Mr.
Puny says, I mean for to Jolly the Marriage, for the rest, she is best able to
answer for her self.


Luc. True, Cousin, then I see it is some conspiracy t'ensnare my Honor and my
Innocence.


Aur. The Parson, Mr. Soaker, that married 'em is still within.


Will. He Is in the Buttery, shall I call him, Sir?


Ioll. I, quickly.


Trum. j. It Is the sight of me, no doubt, confounds her with a shame to confess
any thing; It seems that sudden fit of raging lust, that brought her to my
Chamber, could not rest till it was satisfied, it seems I know not what.


Enter Mr. Soaker. Ioll. Mr. Soaker, did you marry my Niece this afternoon to
Mr. Puny in the Matted Chamber?


Soak. Yes, Sir, I hope your Worship will not be angry, Marriage, your Worship
knows, is honorable.


Luc. Have thou no conscience neither?


Scene 12.
Enter Widow, Tabitha, Cutter in a Puritanical habit. Ioll. Niece, go in a
little, I Will come to you presently and examine this matter further; Mr. Puny,
lead in your wife for shame.


Luc. Villain, come not near me,
I Will sooner touch a Scorpion or a Viper. Exit.

Pun. She Is as humerous as a Bel-rope; she need not be so cholerique, I Am sure
I behaved my self like Propria quae maribus.


Aur. Come in with me, Mr. Puny, I Will teach you how you shall handle her. Exeunt
Aur. Pun.


Ioll. Mr. Truman, pray take your son home, and see how you can work upon him
there; speak fairly to him.


Trum. s. Speak fairly to my son? I Will see him buried first.


Ioll. I mean persuade him --


Trum. s. Oh! that is another matter; I will persuade him, Colonel, but if ever
I speak fair to him till he mends his manners -- Come along with me,
Jack-sawce, come home. Exeunt Trum. sen. Trum. jun.


Trum. j. I Sir, any whither.


Wid. What Is the matter, brother Colonel, are there any broils here?


Ioll. Why, Sister, my Niece has married without my consent, and so it pleases,
it even pleases Heaven to bestow her Estate upon me.


Wid. Why, brother, there is a Blessing now already; If you had been a wicked
Cavalier still she would have done her duty, I warrant you, and defrauded you of the
whole Estate; my brother Cutter here is grown the Heavenliest man of the sudden,
it is his work.


Cut. Sister Barebottle, I must not be called Cutter any more, that is a name
of Cavalero darkness, the Devil was a Cutter from the beginning, my name is now
Abednego, I had a Vision which whispered to me through a Keyhole, Go call thy
self Abednego.


Tab. The wonderful Vocation of some Vessels!


Cut. It is a name that signifies Fiery Furnaces, and Tribulation, and
Martyrdom, I know I am to suffer for the Truth.


Tab. Not as to death, Brother, if it be his will.


Cut. As to death, Sister, but I shall gloriously return.


Ioll. What, Brother, after death? that were miraculous.


Cut. Why the wonder of it is, that it is to be miraculous.


Ioll. But Miracles are ceased, Brother, in this wicked Age of Cavalerism.


Cut. They are not ceased, Brother, nor shall they cease till the Monarchy be
established.

I say again I am to return, and to return upon a Purple Dromadary, which
signifies Magistracy, with an Ax in my hand that is called Reformation, and I
am to strike with that Ax upon the Gate of Westminster Hall, and cry, Down
Babylon, and the Building called Westminster Hall is to run away and cast it
self into the River, and then Major General Harrison is to come in Green
sleeves from the North upon a Sky-colour'd Mule, which signifies heavenly
Instruction.


Tab. Oh the Father! he is as full of Mysteries as an Egg is full of meat.


Cut. And he is to have a Trumpet in his mouth as big as a Steeple, and at the
sounding of that Trumpet all the Churches in London are to fall down.


Wid. O strange, what times shall we see here in poor England!


Cut. And then Venner shall march up to us from the West in the figure of a
Wave of the Sea, holding in his hand a Ship that shall be called the Ark of the
Reformed.


Ioll. But when must this be, Brother Abednego?


Cut. Why all these things are to be when the Cat of the North has o're-come
the Lion of the South, and when the Mouse of the West has slain the Elephant of
the East. I do hear a silent Voice within me, that bids me rise up presently
and declare these things to the Congregation of the Lovely in Coleman-street.
Tabitha, Tabitha, Tabitha, I call thee thrice, come along with me, Tabitha.


Exit. Tab. There was something of this, as I remember, in my last Vision of
Horns the other day. Holy man! I follow thee; farewell, forsooth, Mother, till
anon.


Ioll. Come, let us go in too, Sister. Exeunt.


Act 4.
Scene 1.
Truman Junior. WHat shall I think henceforth of Womankind?
When I know Lucia was the best of it,
And see her what she is? What are they made of?
Their Love, their Faith, their Souls enslaved to passion!
Nothing at their Command beside their Tears,
And we, vain men, whom such Heat-drops deceive!
Hereafter I will set my self at Liberty,
And if I sigh or grieve, it shall not be
For Love of One, but Pity of all the Sex.

Scene 2.
Enter Lucia. Ha! she will not let me see her sure;
If ever, Lucia, a Veil befitted thee,
It Is now, that thou may hide thy guilty blushes.
Luc. If all their malice yet
Have not prevailed on Truman's Constancy,
They Will miss their wicked end, and I shall live still.
I Will go and speak to him.

Trum. Forbear, Lucia, for I have made a second Oath, which I shall keep, I
hope, with lesser trouble, never to see thy face more.


Luc. You were wont, Sir,
To say, you could not live without the sight often.

Trum. I; 'twas a good one then.


Luc. Has one day spoiled it?


Trum. O yes, more than a hundred years of time, made as much more by sorrow,
and by sickness, could e're have done.


Luc. Pray hear me, Truman:
For never innocent Maid was wronged as I am;
Believe what I shall say to you, and confirm
By all the holiest Vows that can bind Souls.

Trum. I have believed those Female tricks too long;
I know thou can speak winningly, but thy Words
Are not what Nature meant them, thy Minds Picture;
I Will believe now what represents it better,
Thine own Hand, and the proof of mine own Eyes.

Luc. I know not what you mean; believe my Tears.

Trum. They Are idle empty Bubbles.
Raised by the Agitation of thy Passions,
And hollow as thy heart; there is no weight in 'em.
Go thou once, Lucia; Farewell,
Thou that were dearer to me once, than all
The outward things of all the World beside,
Or my own Soul within me, farewell for ever;
Go to thine Husband, and love him better than
Thou did thy Lover.
I never will see the more, nor shall, I fear,
Ere see my self again.

Luc. Here me but once. kneels.

Trum. No, it is enough; Heaven hear thee when thou kneel'st to it. Exit.

Luc. Will he? he is gone; now all the world has left me, rises.
And I am desolately miserable;
It Is done unkindly, most unkindly, Truman.
Had a blessed Angel come to me and said
That thou were false, I should have sworn it li'd,
And thought that rather fallen than thee.
Go, dear, false man, go seek out a new Mistress;
But when you have talked, and loved, and vowed, and sworn
A little while, take heed of using her
As you do me; no, may your love to her
Be such as mine to you, which all thy injuries
Shall never change, nor death it self abolish.
May she be worthier of your bed than I,
And when the happy course of many years
Shall make you appear old to all but her,
May you in the fair Glass of your fresh Issue
See your own youth again; but I would have 'em
True in their Loves, and kill no innocent Maids;
For me it is no matter; when I Am dead,
My busy soul shall flutter still about him,
'Twill not be else in Heaven; it shall watch
Over his sleeps, and drive away all dreams
That come not with a soft and downy wing;
If any dangers threaten, it shall becken
And call his spirit away, till they be past,
And be more diligent than his Guardian Angel;
And when just Heaven, as I Am assured it will,
Shall clear my Honor and my Innocence,
He Will sigh, I know, and pity my misfortunes,
And blame himself, and curse my false Accusers,
And weep upon my Grave
For my wronged Virtue, and mistaken Truth,
And unjust Death, I ask no more. Exit.

Scene 3.
Enter Truman Junior. 'Twas barbarously done to leave her so;
Kneeling and weeping to me; 'twas inhuman;
I Will back and take my leave more civilly,
So as befits one who was once her Worshipper. Goes over the Stage, and comes
back.
She Is gone; why let her go; I feel her still;
I feel the root of her, laboring within
To sprout afresh, but I will pluck it up,
Or tear my heart with 't.
Scene 4.
Enter Jolly, Truman Senior. Ioll. He Is there, Sir, pray let him now resolve
you positively what he means to do.


Trum. s. What he means to do, Colonel? that were fine
'Ifaith; if he be my son he shall mean nothing;
Boys must not have their meanings, Colonel:
Let him mean what I mean with a Wennion.

Trum. j. I shall be pressed, I see, by 'em, upon the hateful Subject of a
Marriage;
And to fill up the measure of Affliction,
Now I have lost that which I loved, compelled
To take that which I hate.

Trum. s. I will not be troubled, Colonel, with his meanings, if he do not marry
her this very evening (for I Will have none of his Flim-flams and his May-be's)
I Will send for my son Tom from St. John's College (he is a pretty Scholar I can
tell you, Colonel, I have heard him syllogize it with Mr. Soaker in Mood and
Figure) and settle my Estate upon him with her; if he have his Meanings too*
and his Sympathies, I Will disinherit 'em both, and marry the Maid my self, if she
can like me, I have one Tooth yet left, Colonel, and that is a Colt's one.


Trum. j. Did I submit to lose the sight of Lucia
Only to save my unfortunate Inheritance,
And can there be imposed a harder Article
For me to boggle at?
Would I had been born some wretched Peasants son,
And never known what Love or Riches were.
Ha -- I Will marry her -- why should I not? if I
Must marry some body,
And hold my Estate by such a slavish Tenure,
Why not her as well as any else?
All Women are alike I see by Lucia,
It Is but resolving to be miserable,
And that is resolved for me by my Destiny.

Ioll. Well, try him pray, but do it kindly, Sir,
And artificially.

Trum. s. I warrant you; Dick, I Will have you marry Mrs. Aurelia to night.


Trum. j. To night? the warning's short, Sir, and it may be --


Trum. s. Why look you, Colonel, he is at's old look, he is at's May-bees again.


Trum. j. I know not, Sir --


Trum. s. I, and his Know-nots, you shall have him at his Wo' nots presently;
Sir -- I will have you know, Sir --


Ioll. Nay, good Mr. Truman -- you know not yet what answer he intends to make
you.


Trum. j. Be pleased, Sir, to consider --


Trum. s. Look you, Sir, I must consider now, he upbraids his father with the
want of consideration, like a Varlet as he is.


Trum. j. What shall I do? why should not I do any thing,
Since all things are indifferent?

Ioll. I beseech you, Mr. Truman, have but a little patience -- Your father,
Sir, desires to know --


Trum. s. I do not desire him, Colonel, nor never will desire him, I command
him upon the duty of a Child --


Ioll. Whether you can dispose your self to love and marry my daughter Aurelia,
and if you can, for several reasons we desire it may be presently consummated.


Trum. j. Out with it, stubborn Tongue;
I shall obey my father, Sir, in all things.

Trum. s. Ha! what dee' you say, Sir?


Ioll. This old testy Fool is angry, I think, to have no more occasion given
him of being so.


Trum. j. I shall obey you, Sir.


Ioll. You speak, Sir, like a virtuous Gentleman, the same obedience and
resignation, to a father's will, I found in my Aurelia, and where two such
persons meet, the issue cannot choose but be successful.


Trum. s. Ah Dick, my son Dick, he was always the best natured Boy -- he was
like his father in that -- he makes me weep with tenderness, like an old fool
as I am -- Thou shall have all my Estate, Dick, I Will put my self to a pension
rather than thou shall want -- go spruse up thy self a little presently, thou
art not merry 'Ifaith, Dick, prithee be merry, Dick, and fetch fine Mrs.
Aurelia presently to the little Church behind the Colonel's Garden, Mr. Soaker
shall be there immediately and wait for you at the Porch (we will have it
instantly, Colonel, done, lest the young fool should relapse) come, dear Dick,
let us go cheerily on with the business.


Trum. j. What have I said? what am I doing? the best is, it is no matter what
I say or do.


Ioll. I Will see Aurelia shall be ready, and all things on my part within this
half hour.


Trum. s. Good, honest, noble Colonel, let me shake you by the hand. Come, dear
Dick, we lose time. Exeunt.


Scene 5. Enter Cutter, Tabitha, a Boy.
Cut. And the Vision told me, sister Tabitha, that this same day, the first of
the seventh month, in the year of Grace 1658. and of Revelation, and Confusion
of Carnal Monarchies the tenth, that we two, who are both holy Vessels, should
by an holy Man be joined together in the holy Bond of sanctified Matrimony.


Tab: I brother Abednego, but our friends consents --


Cut. Heaven is our friend, and, Sister, Heaven puts this into our thoughts; it
is, no doubt, for propagation of the great Mystery; there shall arise from our
two bodies, a great Confounder of Gogmagog, who shall be called the Pestle of
Antichrist, and his children shall inherit the Grapes of Canaan.


Tab. My mother will be angry, I Am afraid.


Cut. Your Mother will rejoice, the Vision says so, sister, the Vision says
your Mother will rejoice; how will it rejoice her righteous heart to see you,
Tabitha, riding behind me upon the Purple Dromedary? I would not for the world
that you should do it, but that we are commanded from above; for to do things
without the aforesaid Command is like unto the building of a Fire without the
Bottom-cake.


Tab. I I, that it is, he knows.


Cut. Now to confirm to you the truth of this Vision, there is to meet us at a
zealous Shoomaker's habitation hard by here, by the command of a Vision too,
our Brother Zephaniah Fats, an Opener of Revelations to the Worthy in Mary
White-chapel, and he is the chosen Vessel to join our hands.


Tab. I would my Mother knew't; but if that holy man come too by a Vision, I
shall have grace, I hope, not to resist.


Cut. Sister, let me speak one word of Instruction to yonder Babe.


Tab. Oh how my bowels yern!


Cut. Sir, is my little Doctor already staying for me at Tom Underleather my
Shoomaker's house?


Boy. Yes, Sir, but he is in so strange a Habit, that Mr. Underleather's Boy
Franck and I were ready to die with laughing at him.


Cut. Oh so much the better; go you little piece of a Rogue and get every thing
ready against I come back. Exit Boy. Sister, that Babe you saw me speaking to
is predestined to Spiritual Mightiness, and is to be restorer of the Mystical
Tribe of Gad --


Tab. Oh the Wondrous -- but, Brother Abednego, will you not pronounce this
Evening tide before the Congregation of the Spotless in Coleman-street?


Cut. The will of the latter Vision is to be fulfilled first, as a Preparatory
Vision; let us not make the Messenger of Mystery, who is sent by a Vision so
far as from Mary White-chapel for our sakes, to stay too long from his lawful
Vocation of Basket-making. Come, Sister Tabitha.


Tab. Hei, ho! but I will not resist. Exeunt.


Scene 6.
Enter Jolly, Puny, Worm. Ioll. Mr. Puny, since you threaten me, I tell you
plainly I think my Niece has undone her self by marrying thee, for though thou
have a fair Estate at present, I Am hainously mistaken if thou be not cheated
of it all within these three years by such Rabbit-suckers as these, that keep
thee company, and like lying sons of the Devil as they are, cry thee up for a
Wit, when there is nothing so unlike, no not any of thy own Similitudes, thy
odious Comparisons.


Pun. The Colonel's raging mad, like a Baker in the Subburbs, when his Oven's
overheated.


Worcester. Good, very good in faith.


Ioll. I, that was one of 'em; as for her Portion, I thought to have given her a
thousand pounds, but --


Pun. O magnanimous Colonel! what a Portion for a Toothpick-maker's daughter!


Worcester. Good, shoot him thick with similies like Hail-shot.


Ioll. But now thou shall not have a groat with her.


Pun. What not a poor old Harry-Groat that looks as thin as a Poet's Cloak? But
however, my noble Mountain hearted Uncle, I have made her Maidenhead a Cracked
Groat already, and if I have nothing more from her, she shall have nothing more
from me; no, she shall foot Stokins in a Stall for me, or make Childrens Caps
in a Garret fifteen stories high.


Ioll. For that matter (for though thou speak no sense I guess thy brutish
meaning) the Law will allow her honorable Alimony out of your Foolship's
Fortune.


Pun. And the Law will allow me her Portion too, good Colonel Uncle, you are not
too big to be brought into Westminster Hall; nay, Captain, his Niece uses me
worse too, she will not let me touch the Nail of her little finger, and rails
at me like a Flounder-mouth'd Fish-woman with a face like Billingsgate.


Ioll. What flesh can support such an affected Widgen, who has not a design to
cheat him of something as that Vermin has? well, I shall be able to Live now I
hope as befits a Gentleman, and therefore I Will endure the company of Fopps and
Knaves no longer.


Worcester. Come Colonel, let us go in, and dispute the difference conscienciously
over a Bottle of Sack.


Ioll. I keep no Tavern, Worm; or if I did, thy whole Estate would hardly reach
to a Gill.


Worcester. Colonel, thou art grown Unkind, and art Drunk this afternoon without me.


Ioll. Without thee, Buffoon? why I tell thee, thou shall never show that Odd,
Pimping, Cheating face of thine within my Doors again, I Will turn away any man of
mine that shall disparage himself to drink with such a fellow as thou art.


Worcester. As I? why what am I? pray? Mighty Colonel!


Ioll. Thou art or have been every thing that is ill, there is no Scandalous way
of Living, no Vocation of the Devil, that thou have not set up in at one time
or other; Fortune has Whipped thee about through all her streets; Thou 'rt one
that Lives like a Raven, by Providence and Rapin; now thou 'rt feeding upon
that raw young fellow, and do Devour and Kaw him; thou 'rt one that if thou
should by chance go to Bed sober, would write it down in thy Almanac,
for an Unlucky day; sleep is not the Image of Death to thee, unless thou be
Dead drunk; Thou art -- I know not what -- you are any thing, and shall be to
me herafter nothing.


Pun. This Colonel pisses Vinegar to day.


Worcester. This is uncivil Language Colonel to an old Camerade, and one of your own
party.


Ioll. My Comrade? of my party thou? or any but the party of the Pick-purses!


Pun. This bouncing Bear of a Colonel will break the back of my little Whelp of
a Captain, unless I take him off; come away Captain, I Will firk his back with
two Bum-baylies, till he spew up every Stiver of her Portion.


Ioll. Fare-ye-well, Gentlemen, come not near these Doors if you love your own
Leather, I Will have my Scullions batter you with Bones and Turnips, and the Maids
drown you with Piss-pots, if you do but approach the Windows; these are saucy
Knaves indeed, to come to me for Pounds and Portions. Exit.


Worcester. Poverty, the Pox, an ill Wife, and the Devil go with thee, Colonel.


Pun. I vexed him to the Gills, Worm, when I put that bitter Bob of the Baker
upon him.


Worcester. I? is it e'n so? not come to your House? by Jove I Will turn him out of it
himself by a trick that I have.


Pun. Pish! thou talk as Ravingly as a Costermonger in a Fever.


Worcester. I Will do it by Jove.


Pun. How, prithee, Captain? what does thy Pericranium mean?


Wor. Why here I have it, by Jove; I Am ravished with the fancy of it; let me see
-- let me see -- his Brother went seven years ago to Guiny. --


Pun. I, but the Merchants say he is Dead long since, and gone to the Blackamores
below.


Wor. The more Knaves they; he Lives, and I Am the man.


Pun. Ha! ha! ha! thou talk like a Sowc'd Hoggs-face.


Wor. I knew him very well, and am pretty like him, liker than any of your
Similitudes, Puny; by long Conversation with him, and the Colonel, I know all
passages betwixt 'em; and what his Humor and his Estate was, much better than
he himself, when he was Alive; he was a Stranger thing than any Monster in
Afrique where he Traded.


Pun. How! prithee Captain? I love these Odd fantastical things as an Alderman
loves Lobsters.


Wor. Why, you must know, he had quite lost his memory, totally, and yet
thought himself an able man for business, and that he did himself all that was
done by his man John, who went always along with him; like a Dog with a Blind
man.


Pun. Ha! ha! ha! Sublimely fantastical


Wor. He carried a Scrowl about him of Memorandums, even of his Daughters and
his Brothers names, and where his House stood; for as I told you, he remembered
nothing; and where his Scrowl failed, John was his remembrancer, we were wont
to call him Remembrancer John.


Pun. Ha, ha, ha! Rarely exotique! I Will Act that apple John, never was such a
John as I; not John of Gant, or John of Nokes, I will turn Remembrancer John,
as round as a Wedding Ring, ha, ha, ha!


Wor. Well said! but you must lay aside conceits for a while, and remote
fancies. I Will teach you his humor instantly; now will I and my man John swarthy
our faces over as if that Country's heat had made 'em so, (which will Disguise
us sufficiently) and attire our selves in some strange Habits of those Parts,
(I know not how yet, but we shall see it in Speed's Mapps) and come and take
Possession of our House and Estate.


Pun. Dear Ovid, let us about thy Metamorphosis.


Wor. 'Twill be discovered perhaps at last, but however, for the present
'twill break off his match with the Widow, (which makes him so Proud now) and
therefore it must be done in the twinkling of an Eye, for they say he is to
marry her this Night; if all fail, 'twill be at least a merry 'bout for an
hour, and a mask to the Wedding.


Pun. Quick, dear Rogue! quick as Precipitation.


Wor. I know where we can have Clothes, hard by here; give me ten Pounds to
hire 'em, and come away, but of all things, man John, take heed of being witty.


Pun. I, that is the Devil on it; well, go; I Will follow you behind like a long
Rapier. Exeunt.


Scene 7.
Aurelia. Aur. If they would allow me but a little time, I could play such a
trick with Mr. Truman, as should smart sorely for the rest of his Life, and be
revenged abundantly on my Cozen, for getting of him from me, when I was such a
foolish Girl three year ago as to be in Love with him.

But they would have us married instantly, The Parson stays for us at Church. I
know not what to do -- all must out -- Odds my life he is coming to fetch me
here to Church already.


Scene 8.
Enter Truman Junior. Trum. j. I must go through with it now; I Will marry her,
And live with her according to the forms,
But I will never touch her as a Woman.
She stays for me -- Madam --

Aur. Sir.

Trum. j. I cannot out with it -- Madam.

Aur. Sir --

Trum. j. Must we go marry, Madam?

Aur. Our friends will have it so, it seems.

Trum. Why will you marry me? what is there in me
That can deserve your liking? I shall be
The most untoward and ill-favored Husband
That ever took a melting Maid to his Bed;
The faculties of my Soul are all untuned,
And every Glory of my Springing youth
Is fallen into a strange and sudden Winter,
You cannot Love me sure.

Aur. Not to Distraction, Sir.

Trum. No, nor I you; why should we marry then?
It were a folly, were it not, Aurelia?

Aur. Why they say, it is the best marriage, when like is Joined to like; now we
shall make a very even match, for neither you Love me, nor I Love you, and it is
to be hoped we may get Children that will Love neither of us.


Trum. Nay, by my soul I love you, but alas,
Not in that way that Husbands should their Wives;
I cannot Toy, nor Kiss, nor do I know not what,
And yet I was a Lover, as true a Lover --

Aur. Alack a day!

Trum. 'Twas then, (me-thoughts) the only happiness
To sit and talk, and look upon my Mistress,
Or if she was not by, to think upon her;
Then every Morning, next to my Devotion,
Nay often too (forgive me Heaven) before it,
She slipped into my fancy, and I took it
As a good Omen for the following day;
It was a pretty foolish kind of Life,
An honest, harmless Vanity; but now
The fairest Face moves me no more, than Snow
Or Lillies when I see 'em, and pass by;
And I as soon should deeply fall in Love
With the fresh Scarlet of an Eastern Cloud,
As the Red Lips and Cheeks of any Woman;
I do confess, Aurelia, thou art Fair,
And very Witty, and (I think) Well-natur'd,
But you are a Woman still.

Aur. The sight of you Sir,
Makes me not repent at all my being so.

Trum. And prithee now, Aurelia, tell me truly,
Are any Women constant in their Vows?
Can they continue a whole Month, a Week,
And never change their faith? Oh! if they could,
They would be excellent things; nay never dissemble;
Are not their Lusts unruly, and to them
Such Tyrants as their Beauties are to us?
Are their tears true, and solid when they weep?

Aur. Sure Mr. Truman you ha'nt slept of late,
If we should be married to Night, what would you do for Sleep?

Trum. Why? do not married people sleep of Nights?

Aur. Yes! yes! alas good innocence.

Trum. They have a scurvy Life on it if they don't;
But we will not Live as other people do,
We Will find out some new handsome way of Love,
Some way of Love that few shall imitate,
Yet all admire; for it is a sordid thing,
That Lust should dare to insinuate it self
Into the Marriage Bed; we will get no Children,
The worst of Men and Women can do that;
Besides too, if our Issue should be Female,
They would all Learn to flatter and dissemble,
They would deceive with Promises and Vows
Some simple men, and then prove False and Kill 'em,
Would they not do it, Aurelia?

Aur. I, any thing Mr. Truman; but what shall we do Sir, when we are married,
pray?


Trum. Why! we will live very Lovingly together,
Sometimes we will sit and talk of excellent things,
And laugh at all the Nonsense of the world;
Sometimes we will walk together,
Sometimes we will read, and sometimes eat, and sometimes sleep;
And sometimes pray, and then at last, we will dye,
And go to Heaven together; 'twill be rare!

Aur. We may do all this (methinks) and never marry for the matter.


Trum. It Is true, we may so!
But since our Parents are resolved upon it,
In such a Circumstance let 'em have their humor.
My father sent me in to Complement,
And keep a Prating here, and play the Fool;
I cannot do it, what should I say, Aurelia?
What do they use to say?

Aur. I believe you knew Sir, when you Wooed my Cozen.

Trum. I, but those Days are past; they are go for ever,
And nothing else, but Nights are to succeed 'em;
Gone like the faith and truth of Women kind,
And never to be seen again! O Lucia!
Thou wast a woundrous Angel in those days of thy blessed state of Innocence.
There was a Cheek! a Forehead! and an Eye! --
Did you observe her Eye, Aurelia?

Aur. O yes Sir! there were very pretty Babies in it.

Trum. It was as glorious as the Eye of Heaven;
Like the souls Eye it pierced through every thing;
And then her Hands -- her Hands of Liquid Ivory!
Did she but touch her Lute (the pleasing'st Harmony then upon Earth when she
her self was silent)
The subtle motion of her Flying fingers
Taught Music a New art, to take the Sight, as well as Ear.

Aur. I, Sir, I! you would best go look her out, and marry her, she has but one
Husband yet.


Trum. Nay, prithee, good Aurelia be not angry,
For I will never Love or See her more.
I do not say she was more Fair than thou art,
Yet if I did? No, but I wo'not say so!
Only allow me this one short last remembrance of one I loved so long. And now
I think on it, I Will beg a favor of you, you will Laugh at me I know, when you
have heard it, but prithee grant it; it is that you would be Veiled, as Lucia
was of late, for this one day; I would fain marry thee so; It Is an odd foolish
fancy, I confess, But Love and Grief may be allowed sometimes A little Innocent
folly.


Aur. Good! this Fool will help me I see to cheat himself;
At a dead lift, a little hint will serve me.
I Will do it for him to the Life.

Trum. Will you Aurelia?

Aur. That Is but a small Compliance; you will have power anon to Command me greater
things.


Trum. We shall be married very privately;
None but our selves; and that is even best, Aurelia.
Why do I stick here at a Fatal step
That must be made? Aurelia, are you ready?
The Minister stays for us.

Aur. I Will but go in and take my Veil, as you Command me Sir; Walk but a few
turns in the Garden, in less than half an hour I Will come to you, ha, ha, ha!
Exit.


Trum. I go, I am Condemned, and must Obey;
The Executioner stays for me at Church.

Exit. Act 5.
Scene 1.
Colonel Jolly, Will. Ioll. So, I have her at last, and honest Joseph
Knock-down married us, methinks, with convenient brevity; I have some hold now
upon my Estate again (though she, I confess, be a clog upon it worse than a
Mort-gage) that, my good Neighbor Barebottle left wholly to his wife; almost
all the rest of the Incomes upon his seeking, go to his daughter Tabitha, whom
Cutter has got by this time, and promises me to live like an honest Gentleman
hereafter; now he may do so comfortably and merrily. She married me thus
suddenly, like a good Houswife, purely to save charges; however though, we will
have a good Supper for her, and her eating Tribe; Will, is the Cook a doing
according to my directions?


Will. Yes, Sir, he is very hard at his business; he is swearing and cursing in
the Kitchen, that your Worship may hear him hither, he will fright my new old
Mistress out of the house.


Ioll. It Is such an over-roasted coxcomb -- bid him be sure to season well the
Venison that came in luckily to day.


Will. Troth, Sir, I dare not speak to him now, unless I should put on your
Worship's Armor that lies hid in the Barel below; he would like to have spitted me
just now, like a Goose as I was, for telling him he looked like the Ox that is
roasted whole in St. James's Fair. Who Is there?


Ioll. See who is at door. I shall have some plundered Plate, I hope, to entertain
my friends with, when we come to visit the Truncks with Iron hoops; who is it?


Will. Nay, Heaven knows, Sir; two Fiends, I think, to take away the Cook for
swearing. They have thrust in after me.


Scene 2.
Enter Worm and Puny disguised like the Merchant and John. Worcester. They Will hardly
know us at first in these foreign habits.


Pun. I Sir, and as the Sun has used us in those hot Countries.


Worcester. Why, this is my old house here, John; ha, ha! little thought I to see my
old house upon Tower Hill again. Where Is my brother Jolly?


Ioll. They call me Colonel Jolly.


Worcester. Ha! let me see, A burly man of a Looks on his Note. moderate stature -- a
beard a little greyish -- ha! a quick Eye, and a Nose inclining to red --


Pun. Nay, it is my Master's Worship, Sir, would we were no more altered since
our Travels.


Worcester. It agrees very well -- Save you good brother, you little thought to see
me here again, though I dare say you wished it; stay, let me see, how many
years, John, is it since we went from hence?


Pun. It Is now seven years, Sir.


Worcester. Seven? methinks I was here but yesterday, how the what
deye-call-it-runs? how do you call it?


Pun. The Time, Sir.


Worcester. I, I, the time, John; what was I saying? I was telling you, brother, that
I had quite forgot you; was I not telling him so, John?


Ioll. Faith we are both quits then; I Will swear I have forgot you; why you were
dead five years ago.


Worcester. Was I? I have quite forgot it; John, was I dead five years ago? my memory
fails me very much of late.


Pun. We were worse than dead, Sir, we were taken by a barbarous Nation, and
there made slaves; John, quoth he? I was poor John I Am sure; they kept us three
whole years with nothing but Water and Acorns, till we looked like Wicker
bottles.


Worcester. What, Sirrah, did your Master look like? I Will teach you to say your Master
looked like what de-ye-call 'ums.


Ioll. Where did they take you prisoners?


Worcester. Nay, ask John, he can tell you I warrant you; 'twas in -- tell him, John,
where it was.


Pun. In Guiny.


Ioll. By what Countrymen were you taken?


Worcester. Why they were called -- I have forgot what they call'em, 'twas an odd kind
of name, but John can tell you.


Pun. Who I, Sir? do you think I can remember all things?


Worcester. It Is in my Book here I remember well. Name any Nation under the Sun.


Pun. I know the name, Sir, well enough; but I only tried my Master's memory,
'Twas the Tartarians.


Worcester. I, I, those were the men.


Ioll. How, John? why all the world man lies betwixt 'em, they live up in the
North.


Pun. The North?


Ioll. I the very North, John.


Pun. That Is true indeed, but these were another Nation of Tartarians that
lived in the South, they came anciently from the others.


Ioll. How got you from 'em, John, at last?


Pun. Why faith, Sir, by a Ladies means, who, to tell you the truth, fell in
love with me; my Master has it all in his Book, it is a brave story.


Ioll. In what Ship came you back?


Pun. A plague often, that question will be our ruin.


Wor. What Ship? 'twas called a thing that swims, what dee you called?


Ioll. The Mermaid?


Wor. No, no, let me see.


Ioll. The Triton?


Wor. No, no, a thing that in the water does -- it swims in the water --


Ioll. What is it? the Dolphin?


Wor. No, no, I have quite forgot the name on it, but it is no matter, it swims
--


Ioll. What say you, John?


Pun. I, Sir, my Master knows well enough; you cannot conceive the misery we
endured, Sir.


Ioll. Well, Brother, I Will but ask you one question more, where did you leave
your Will?


Pun. 'Life, now he is posed again -- we shall never carry't through.


Wor. I Will tell you presently, Brother -- let me see, Reads in his Scrowl.
Memorandums about my Will; left to my Brother the whole charge of my Estate --
hum -- hum -- five thousand pounds -- hum -- What did you ask me, brother?


Ioll. In what place you left your Will?


Wor. I that was it indeed --, that was the very thing you asked me; what a
treacherous memory have I? my memory is so short --


Ioll. This is no Answer to my Question yet.


Worcester. It Is true indeed; what was your Question, brother?


Ioll. Where you left your Will?


Worcester. Good Lord, that I should forget you asked me that! I had forgot it,
in faith law that I had, you will pardon, I hope, my Infirmity, for I alas -- alas
-- I have forgot what I was going to say to you, but I was saying something,
that I was.


Ioll. Well, Gentlemen, I Am now in haste, walk but a while into the Parlour
there, I Will come to you presently.


Worcester. But where is my daughter --


Pun. Lucia, Sir?


Worcester. I, Lucia -- put me in mind to ask for her (a plague of your Tartarians.)


Pun. And o'your What dee-ye-call-'ems.


Worcester. 'Life, Tartarians!


Exeunt Worm, Puny. Ioll. If these be Rogues, (as Rogues they seem to be) I
will so exercise my Rogues, the tyranny of a new Beadle over a Beggar shall be
nothing to it; what think thou of 'em, Will?


Will. Faith, Sir, I know not -- h'as just my Masters Nose and Upper-lip; but
if you think it be not he, Sir, I Will beat 'em worse than the Tartarians did.


Ioll. No, let us try 'em first -- trick for trick -- Thou were wont to be a
precious Knave, and a great Actor too, a very Roscius; did not thou play
once the Clown in Musidorus?


Will. No, but I played the Bear, Sir.


Ioll. The Bear! why that is as good a Part; thou 'rt an Actor then I Will warrant
thee, the Bears a well-penn'd Part, and you remember my Brother's humor, don't
you? They have almost hit it.


Will. I, Sir, I knew the shortness of his memory, he would always forget to
pay me my Wages, till he was put in mind often.


Ioll. Well said, I Will dress thee within, and all the Servants shall acknowledge
thee, you conceive the Design -- be confident, and thou cast not miss; but who
shall do trusty John?


Will: Oh, Ralph the Butler, Sir, 's an excellent tried Actor, he played a King
once; I have heard him speak a Play ex tempore in the Butteries.


Ioll. O excellent Ralph! incomparable Ralph against the world! Come away,
William, I Will give you instructions within, it must be done in a moment. Exeunt.


Scene 3.
Enter Aurelia, Jane. Jane. Ha, ha, ha! this is the best Plot of yours, dear
Madam, to marry me to Mr. Truman in a Veil instead of your self; I cannot choose
but laugh at the very conceit often; 'twill make excellent sport: My Mistress
will be so mad when she knows that I have got her Servant from her, ha, ha, ha!


Aur. Well, are you ready? Veil your self all over, and never speak one word to
him, what ever he says, (he will have no mind to talk much) but give him your hand,
and go along with him to Church; and when you come to, I take thee -- mumble it
over that he may n't distinguish the voice.


Jane. Ha, ha, ha! I cannot speak for laughing -- dear honey Madam, let me but
go in and put on a couple of Patches; you cannot imagine how much prettier I
look with a Lozenge under the Left Eye, and a Half Moon of this cheek; and then
I Will but slip on the Silver-lac'd Shoes that you gave me, and be with him in a
trice.


Aur. Don't stay, he is a fantastical fellow, if the whimsey take him he will be
gone. Exeunt.


Scene 4.
Lucia. They say he is to pass instantly this way
To lead his Bride to Church; ungrateful Man!
I Will stand here to upbraid his guilty Conscience,
And in that black attire in which he saw me
When he spoke the last kind words to me;
'Twill now befit my sorrows, and the Widow-hood of my Love;
He comes alone, what can that mean?

Scene 5.
Enter Truman junior. Trum. Come, Madam, the Priest stays for us too long;
I ask your pardon for my dull delay,
And am ashamed of 't.

Luc. What does he mean? I Will go with him what ever it mean.

Exeunt Scene 6.
Enter Cutter, Tabitha, Boy. Cut. Come to my bed, my dear, my dear, Sings.
My dear come to my bed,
For the pleasant pain, and the loss with gain
Is the loss of a Maidenhead.
For the pleasant, etc.

Tab. Is that a Psalm, Brother Husband, which you sing?

Cut. No, Sister Wife, a short Ejaculation only.
Well said, Boy, bring in the things, -- Boy brings a Hat and Feather, Sword
and Belt, broad Laced Band, and Periwig.

Tab. What do you mean, Brother Abednego? you will not turn Cavalier, I hope,
again, you will not open before Sion in the dressings of Babylon?


Cut. What do these clothes befit Queen Tabitha's husband upon her day of
Nuptials? this Hat with a high black chimney for a crown, and a brim no broader
than a Hatband? Shall I, who am to ride the Purple Dromedary, go dressed like
Revelation Fats the Basket-maker? Give me the Peruique, Boy; shall Empress
Tabitha's husband go as if his head were scalded? or wear the Seam of a shirt
here for a a Band? Shall I who am zealous even to slaying, walk in the streets
without a Sword, and not dare to thrust men from the wall, if any shall presume
to take it of Empress Tabitha? Are the Fiddlers coming, Boy?


Tab. Pish, I cannot abide these doings; are you mad? there come no profane
Fiddlers here.


Cut. Be peaceable gentle Tabitha; they will not bring the Organs with them
hither; I say be peaceable, and conform to Revelations; It was the Vision bad
me do this; Will It thou resist the Vision?


Tab. An' these be your Visions? little did I think I wusse -- O what shall I
do? is this your Conversion? which of all the Prophets wore such a Map about
their Ears, or such a Sheet about their Necks? Oh! my Mother! what shall I do?
I Am undone.


Cut. What shall thou do? why, thou shall Dance, and Sing, and Drink, and be
Merry; thou shall go with thy Hair Curled, and thy Breasts Open; thou shall wear
fine black Stars upon thy Face, and Bobs in thy Ears bigger than bouncing
Pears; Nay, if thou do begin but to look rustily -- I Will have thee Paint thy
self, like the Whore of Babylon.


Tab. Oh! that ever I was Born to see this day --


Cut. What, do thou weep, Queen Dido? thou shall have Sack to drive away thy
Sorrows; bring in the Bottle, Boy, I Will be a Loving Husband, the Vision must be
Obeyed; Sing Tabitha; Weep o'thy Wedding day? it is ominous; Come to my Bed my
Dear, etc. Oh, art thou come Boy? fill a Brimmer, nay, fuller yet, yet a little
fuller! Here Lady Spouse, here is to our sport at Night.


Tab. Drink it your self, an you will; I Will not touch it, not I.


Cut. By this hand thou shal't pledge me, seeing the Vision said so; Drink, or
I Will take a Coach, and carry thee to the Opera immediately.


Tab. Oh Lord, I cannot abide it -- Drinks off.


Cut. Why, this will cheer thy Heart; Sack, and a Husband? both comfortable
things; have at you again.


Tab. I Will pledge you no more, not I.


Cut. Here take the Glass, and take it off -- off every drop, or I Will swear a
hundred Oaths in a breathing time.


Tab. Well! you are the strangest man -- Drink.


Cut. Why, this is right; nay, off with it; so -- but the Vision said, that if
we left our Drink behind us we should be Hanged, as many other Honest men
na'been, only by a little negligence in the like case; Here Is to you Tabitha
once again, we must fulfill the Vision to a Tittle.


Tab. What must I drink again? well! you are such another Brother -- Husband.


Cut. Bravely done, Tabitha! now thou Obey'st the Vision, thou will it have
Revelations presently.


Tab. Oh! Lord! my Head's giddy -- nay, Brother, Husband, the Boy's taking away
the Bottle, and there is another Glass or two in it still.


Cut. O Villainous Boy! fill out you Bastard, and squeeze out the last drop.


Tab. I Will drink to you now, my Dear; it is not handsome for you to begin always
-- Come to my Bed my Drinks. Dear, and how wast? 'twas a pretty Song,
methoughts.


Cut. O Divine Tabitha! here come the Fiddlers too, strike up ye Rogues.


Tab. What must we Dance too? is that the Fashion? I could have Danced the
Curranto when I was a Girl, the Curranto's a curious Dance.


Cut. We Will out-dance the Dancing disease; but Tabitha, there is one poor Health
left still to be drunk with Music.


Tab. Let me begin't; here Duck, here is to all that Drinks. Love us.


Cut. A Health, ye Eternal Scrapers, sound a Health; rarely done Tabitha, what
think thou now of thy Mother?


Tab. A fig for my Mother; I Will be a Mother my self shortly; Come Duckling,
shall we go home?


Cut. Go home? the Bridegroom and his Spouse go home? no, we will Dance home;
before us Squeakers, that way, and be Hanged you Sempiternal Rakers. O brave!
Queen Tabitha! Excellent Empress Tabitha, on ye Rogues. Exeunt.


Scene 7.
Enter Jolly, Worm, Puny. Worcester. But where is my what dee ye call her, Brother?


Ioll. What Sir?


Worcester. My Daughter -- Lucia, a pretty fair Complexioned Reads. Girl, with a
Black Eye, a Round Chin, a little Dimpled, and a Mole upon -- I would fain see
my Daughter -- Brother.


Ioll. Why, you shall Sir presently, she is very well; what Noise is that? how
now? what is the matter?


Enter Servant. Serve. Ho! my old Master! my old Masters come, he is Lighted just
now at the door with his man John; he is asking for you, he longs to see you; my
Master, my old Master.


Ioll. This fellows Mad.


Serve. If you will not believe me, go but in and see Sir; he is not so much
altered, but you will quickly know him, I knew him before he was Lighted, pray, go
in Sir.


Ioll. Why, this is strange -- there was indeed some weeks since a report at
the Exchange that he was Alive still, which was brought by a Ship that came
from Barbary; but that he should be Split in two after his Death, and Live again
in both, is wonderful to me. I Will go see what is the matter.


Exeunt Jolly, Servant. Pun. I begin to shake like a Plum-tree Leaf.


Worcester. It Is a mere Plot of the Devils to have us beaten, if he send him in just
at this Nick.


Scene 8.
Enter Ralph ( as John) and two or three Servants. 1. Serve. Ah Rogue, art thou
come at last?


2. Serve. Why, you will not look upon your Old friends! give me your Golls, John.


Ral. Thank ye all heartily for your Love; thank you with all my Heart; my old
Bedfellow, Robin, and how does little Ginny do?


3. Serve. A murren take you, you will never leave your Waggery.


Pun. A murren take ye all, I shall be paid the Portion here with a witness.


Ral. And how does Ralph? good honest Ralph; there is not an honester Fellow in
Christendom, though I say it my self, that should not say it.


2. Serve. Ha, ha, ha! Why Ralph the Rogue's well still; Come let us go to him
into the Buttery, he will be Overjoyed to see thee, and give us a Cup of the best
Stingo there.


Ral. Well said; Steel to the back still Robin; that was your word you know;
my Masters coming in! go, go, I Will follow you.


1 Serve. Make haste, good John.


Ral. Here Is a Company of as honest Fellow Servants; I Am glad, I Am come among
'em again.


Worcester. And would I were got out from 'em, as honest as they are; that Robin has
a thrashing hand.


Pun. John with a Pox to him! would I were hid like a Maggot in a Pescod.


Scene 9.
Enter Jolly, William. Ioll. Methinks you are not returned, but born to us anew.


Will. Thank you good Brother; truly we have past through many dangers; my man
John shall tell you all, I Am Old and Crazie.


Enter Servant. 4 Serve. Sir, the Widow (my Mistress I should say) is coming
in here with Mr. Knock-down, and four or five more.


Ioll. O'ds my Life! this farce is neither of Doctrine nor Use to them! keep
'em here, John, till I come back.


Exit Jolly. Worcester. I Am glad the Colonel's gone; now will I sneak away, as if I
had stolen a Silver spoon.


Will. Who are those, John? by your leave Sir, would you speak with any body
here?


Wor. The Colonel, Sir? but I Will take some other time to wait upon him, my
occasions call me now.


Will. Pray stay, Sir, who did you say you would have spoken with?


Wor. The Colonel, Sir; but another time will serve; he has business now.


Will. Whom would he speak with, John? I forget still.


Ral. The Colonel, Sir.


Will. Colonel! what Colonel?


Worcester. Your brother, I suppose he is Sir, but another time --


Will. It Is true indeed; I had forgot, I faith, my Brother was a Colonel; I cry
you mercy Sir, he will be here presently. Ye seem to be Foreiners by your habits
Gentlemen.


Worcester. No Sir, we are Englishmen.


Will. Englishmen? law you there now! would you have spoke with me, Sir?


Worcester. No Sir, your Brother; but my business requires no haste, and therefore --


Will. You Are not in haste, you say; pray Sir, sit down then, may I crave your
name, Sir?


Worcester. My name's not worth the knowing Sir --


Will. This Gentleman?


Worcester. It Is my man, Sir, his name's John.


Pun. I Will be John no more, not I, I Will be Iackanapes first; No, my name's
Timothy Sir.


Will. Mr. John Timothy, very well, Sir; ye seem to be Travelers.


Worcester. We are just now as you see, arrived out of Afrique, Sir, and therefore
have some business that requires --


Will. Of Afrique? law ye there now; what Country, pray?


Worcester. Prester-Iohn's Country; fare you well, Sir, for the present, I must be
excused.


Will. Marry God forbid; what come from Prester-Iohn, and we not Drink a Cup of
Sack together.


Worcester. What shall I do? Friend, shall I trouble you to show me a private place?
I Will wait upon you presently again, Sir.


Will. You Will stay here Master? --


Pun. I Will only make a little Maids water Sir, and come back to you immediately.


Ral. The door's locked Sir, the Colonel has locked us in here -- why do you
shake Sir?


Pun. Nothing -- only I have extreme list to make water.
Here Is the Colonel, I Will sneak behind the Hangings.

Scene 10.
Enter Jolly, Widow. Ioll. We Will leave those Gentlemen within a while upon the
point of Reprobation; but Sweet heart, I have two Brothers here, newly arrived,
which you must be acquainted with.


Wid. Marry, Heaven fore-shield! not the Merchant I hope?


Ioll. No, brethren in Love, only -- How dee you Brother?


Worcester. I your Brother; what de'e mean?


Ioll. Why, are not you my brother Jolly, that was taken Prisoner by the
Southern Tartars?


Wor. I Brother, I by Tartars?


Ioll. What an impudent Slave is this? Sir, Monster, did thou not come
with thy man John?


Wor. I my man John? here is no such person here; you see you are mistaken.


Ioll. Sir, I Will strike thee Dead.


Wor. Hold, hold, Sir, I do remember now I was the Merchant Jolly, but when
you asked me I had quite forgot it; alas, I Am very Crasie.


Ioll. That Is not amiss; but since thou art not he, I must know who thou art.


Wor. Why, do'nt you know me? I Am Captain Worm, and Puny was my man John.


Ioll. Where Is the fool, Puny? is he slipped away?


Pun. Yes, and no fool for it neither for ought I know yet.


Wor. Why, we hit upon this frolique, Colonel, only for a kind of Mask (de' ye
conceive me, Colonel?) to celebrate your Nuptials; Mr. Puny had a mind to
reconcile himself with you in a merry way of Drollery, and so had I too, though
I hope you were not in earnest with me.


Ioll. Oh! is that all? well said Will, bravely done Will, I faith; I told
thee, Will, what 'twas to have Acted a Bear; and Ralph was an excellent John
too.


Wor. How Is this? then I Am an Ass again; this damned Punies fearfulness spoiled
all.


Pun. This cursed Coward Worm! I thought they were not the right ones.


Ioll. Here Is something for you to drink; go look to Supper, this is your Cue
or Exit. Ex. Will and Ralph.


Wid. What need you, Love, have given 'em any thing? in truth, Love, (...)' too
lavish.


Wor. 'Twas wittily put off of me however.


Scene 11.
Enter Cutter, Tabitha, with Fiddlers. Ioll. Here are more Maskers too, I think;
this Masking is a Heavenly entertainment for the Widow, who never saw any Show
yet but the Puppet-play of Ninive.


Cut. Stay without, Scrapers.


Tab. Oh Lord, I Am as weary with Dancing as passes; Husband, husband, yonder is
my Mother; O mother what do you think I have been doing to day?


Wid. Why what, Child? no hurt, I hope.


Tab. Nay nothing, I have only been married a little, and my husband Abednego
and I have so danced it since.


Cut. Brave Tabitha still; never be angry Mother, you know where Marriages are
made, your Daughters and your own were made in the same place, I warrant you,
they are so like.


Wid. Well, his will be done -- there is -- no resisting Providence -- but
how, son Abednego, come you into that roaring habit of Perdition?


Cut. Mother, I was commanded by the Vision, there is some great end for it of
Edification, which you shall know by the sequel.


Scene 12.
Enter Truman senior, Truman junior, Lucia veiled. Trum. sen. Come, Dick, bring
in your wife to your the other father, and ask him blessing handsomely;

Welcome, dear daughter; off with your Veil; Luc. unveils.
Heaven bless ye both.

Ioll. Ha! what is this? more masking? why how now, Mr. Truman? you have not
married my Niece, I hope, instead of my daughter?


Trum. j. I only did, Sir, as I was appointed,
And am amazed as much as you.

Trum. s. Villain, Rebel, Traitor, out of my sight you son of a --

Ioll. Nay, hold him; patience, good Mr. Truman, let us understand the matter a
little --


Trum. s. I wo'not understand, no that I wo'not, I wo'not understand a word,
whilst he and his Whore are in my fight.


Ioll. Nay, good Sir -- Why, what Niece? two husbands in one afternoon? that is
too much of conscience.


Luc. Two, Sir? I know of none but this,
And how I came by him too, that I know not.

Ioll. This is Ridle me ridle me -- where is my Daughter? ho! Aurelia.

Scene 13.
Enter Aurelia. Aur. Here, Sir, I was just coming in.


Ioll. Have not you married young Mr. Truman?


Aur. No, Sir.


Ioll. Why, who then has he married?


Aur. Nay that, Sir, he may answer for himself,
If he be of age to marry.

Ioll. But did not you promise me you would marry him this afternoon, and go to
Church with him presently to do it?


Aur. But, Sir, my Husband forbad the Banes.


Ioll. They Are all mad; your Husband?


Aur. I Sir, the truth of the matter, Sir, is this, (for it must out I see)
'twas I that was married this afternoon in the Matted Chamber to Mr. Puny,
instead of my Cousin Lucia.


Ioll. Stranger and stranger! what, and he not know it?


Aur. No, nor the Parson, Sir, himself.


Ioll. Hey day!


Aur. 'Twas done in the dark, Sir, and I veiled like my Cousin; 'twas a very
clandestine marriage, I confess, but there are sufficient proofs of it; and for
one, here is half the Piece of Gold he broke with me, which he will know when he
sees.


Pun. O rare, by Hymen I Am glad of the change; it is a pretty Sorceress by my
troath; Wit to Wit quoth the Devil to the Lawyer; I Will out amongst 'em
presently, 't has saved me a beating too, which perhaps is all her Portion.


Ioll. You turn my Head, you dizzie me; but would thou marry him without
either knowing my mind, or so much as his?


Aur. His, Sir? he gave me five hundred pieces in Gold to make the Match; look,
they are here still, Sir.


Ioll. Thou have lost thy senses, VVench, and wilt make me do so too.


Aur. Briefly the truth is this, Sir, he gave me these five hundred Pieces to
marry him by a Trick to my Cousin Lucia, and by another Trick I took the money
and married him my self; the manner, Sir, you shall know anon at leisure, only
your pardon, Sir, for the omission of my duty to you, I beg upon my knees.


Ioll. Nay, Wench, there is no hurt done, fifteen hundred pounds a year is no
ill match for the daughter of a Sequestered Cavalier --


Aur. I thought so, Sir.


Ioll. If we could but cure him of some sottish affectations, but that must be
thy task.


Aur. My life on it, Sir.


Pun. I Will out; Uncle Father your Blessing -- my little Matchivil, I knew well
enough 'twas you; what did you think I knew not Cross from Pile?


Aur. Did you in faith?


Pun. I by this kiss of Amber-grees, or I Am a Cabbage.


Aur. Why then you outwitted me, and I Am content.


Pun. A pox upon you Merchant Jolly, are you there?


Ioll. But stay, how come you, Niece, to be married to Mr. Truman?


Luc. I know not, Sir, as I was walking in the Garden.


Trum. j. I thought 'thad been -- but blessed be the mistake,
What ever prove the Consequence to all
The less important fortunes of my life.

Ioll. Nay, there is no hurt done here neither --


Trum. s. No hurt, Colonel? I Will see him hanged at my door before he shall have
a beggarly --


Ioll. Hark you, Mr. Truman, one word aside Talk aside. (for it is not
necessary yet my wife should know so much.)


Aur. This foolish Jane (as I perceive by the story) has lost a Husband by
staying for a Black patch.


Ioll. Though I in rigor by my brothers Will might claim the forfeiture of her
Estate, yet I assure you she shall have it all to the utmost farthing; in a day
like this, when Heaven bestows on me and on my daughter so unexpected and so
fair a fortune, it were an ill return to rob an Orphan committed to my Charge.


Aur My father's in the right.
And as he clears her Fortune, so will I
Her Honor. Hark you, Sir.

Trum. s. Why you speak, Sir, like a Virtuous Noble Gentleman, and do just as I
should do my self in the same case; it is --


Aur. 'Twas I upon my credit in a Veil; to Trum. jun. I Will tell, if you please,
all that you said, when you had read the Letter. But d' you hear, Mr. Truman,
do not you believe now that I had a design to lie with you (if you had
consented to my coming at midnight) for upon my faith I had not, bud did it
purely to try upon what terms your two Romantique Loves stood.


Cut. Ha, ha, ha! but your Farce was not right methinks at the end.


Pun. Why how, pray?


Cut. Why there should have been a Beating, a lusty Cudgeling to make it come
off smartly with a twang at the tail.


Worcester. Say you so? h'as got a set of damnable brawny Servingmen.


Cut. At least John Pudding here should have been basted.


Worcester. A curse upon him, he saved himself like a Rat behind the Hangings.


Trum. j. O Lucia, how shall I beg thy pardon
For my unjust suspicions of thy Virtue?
Can you forgive a very Repentant sinner?
Will a whole life of Penitence absolve me?

Trum. s. It Is enough, good noble Colonel, I Am satisfied; Come, Dick, I see
'twas Heavens will, and she is a very worthy virtuous Gentlewoman; I Am old and
testy, but it is quickly over; my blessing upon you both.


Cut. Why so, all is well of all sides then; let me see, here is a brave
Coupling day, only poor Worm must lead a Monkish life of 't.


Aur: I Will have a Wife for him too, if you will, fine Mrs. Jane within; I Will
undertake for her, I have set her a gog aside. to day for a husband, the first
comer has her sure.


Worcester. I, but what Portion has she, Mrs. Puny? for we Captains of the King's
side have no need of Wives with nothing.


Aur. Why Lozenges, and Half-moons, and a pair of Silverlac'd Shoes; but that
Tropes lost to you; well, we will see among us what may be done for her.


Ioll. Come, let us go in to Supper; there never was such a day of Intrigues as
this in one Family. If my true Brother had come in at last too after his being
five years dead, 'twould have been a very Play.

Exeunt.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by CUTTER.
Methinks a Vision bids me silence break, Without his Peruique.
And some words to this Congregation speak,
So great and gay a one I never did meet
At the Fifth Monarch's Court in Coleman-street.
But yet I wonder much not to espy a
Brother in all this Court called Zephaniah.
Bless me! where are we? What may this place be?
For I begin by Vision now to see
That this is a mere Theater; well then,
If It be even so, I Will Cutter be again. Puts on his Peruique.
Not Cutter the pretended Cavaleer,
For to confess ingenuously here
To you who always of that Party were,
I never was of any; up and down
I rowld, a very Rakehell of this Town.
But now my Follies and my Faults are ended,
My Fortune and my Mind are both amended,
And if we may believe one who has failed before,
Our Author says He Will mend, that is, He Will write no more.
EPILOGUE, At Court.
THe Madness of your People, and the Rage,
You Have seen too long upon the Public Stage,
It Is time at last (great Sir) it is time to see
Their Tragique Follies brought to Comedy.
If any blame the Lowness of our Scene,
We humbly think some Persons there have been
On the Worlds Theater not long ago,
Much more too High, than here they are too Low.
And well we know that Comedy of old,
Did her Plebeian rank with so much Honor hold,
That it appeared not then too Base or Light,
For the Great Scipio's Conquering hand to Write.
How e're, if such mean Persons seem too rude,
When into Royal presence they intrude,
Yet we shall hope a pardon to receive
From you, a Prince so practiced to forgive;
A Prince, who with the applause of Earth and Heaven,
The rudeness of the Vulgar has Forgiven.
FINIS.

