A VISION, Concerning his late Pretended HIGHNESS Cromwell, the Wicked;
Containing a Discourse in Vindication of him by a pretended Angel, and the
Confutation thereof by the Author.

Virgil. -- Sua cuique Deus fit dira Libido.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the lower walk in the
New Exchange. 1661.

ADVERTISEMENT
THIS Discourse was written in the time of the late Protector Richard the
Little, and was but the first Book of Three that were designed by the Author.
The second was to be a Discourse with the Guardian-Angel of England, concerning
all the late Confusions and Misfortunes of it. The third to denounce heavy
Judgments against the three Kingdoms, and several Places and Parties in them,
unless they prevented them speedily by serious Repentance, and that greatest
and hardest work of it, Restitution. There was to be upon this Subject, The
Burden of England, The Burden of Scotland, The Burden of Ireland, The Burden of
London, The Burden of the Army, The Burden of the Divines, The Burden of the
Lawyers, and many others, after the manner of Prophetical Threatenings in the
Old Testament: But by the extraordinary Mercy of God, (for which we had no
pretense of Merit, nor the least glympse of Hope) in the sudden Restoration of
Reason, and Right, and Happiness to us, it became not only unnecessary, but
unseasonable and impertinent to prosecute the work. However, it seemed not so
to the Author to publish this first Part, because, though no man can justify
or approve the actions of Cromwell, without having all the seeds and principles
of wickedness in his heart, yet many there are, even honest and well-meaning
people, who without wading into any depth of Consideration in the matter, and
purely deceived by splendid words, and the outward appearances of vanity, are
apt to admire him as a great and eminent Person; which is a Fallacy that
extraordinary and especially successful Villainies impose often upon the world.
It is the corruption and depravation of human Nature that is the root of this
Opinion, though it lie sometimes so deep under ground that we our selves are
not able to perceive it; and when we account any man Great, or Brave, or Wise,
or of good Parts, who advances himself and his Family by any other ways but
those of Virtue, we are certainly biased to that judgment by a secret impulse,
or at least inclination of the viciousness of our own spirit. It is so
necessary for the good and peace of Mankind, that this Error (which grows
almost every where, and is spontaneously generated by the rankness of the soil)
should be weeded out, and for ever extirpated, that the Author was content not
to suppress this Discourse, because it may contribute somewhat to that end,
though it be but a small piece of that which was his original Design.

THE VISIONS AND PROPHECIES Concerning ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, And IRELAND.
IT was the Funeral day of the late man who made himself to be called
Protector, and though I bore but little affection, either to the memory of
him, or to the trouble and folly of all public Pageantry, yet I was forced by
the importunity of my company to go along with them, and be a Spectator of that
solemnity, the expectation of which had been so great, that it was said to have
brought some very curious persons (and no doubt singular Virtuosos) as far as
from the Mount in Cornwall, and from the Orcades. I found there had been much
more cost bestowed than either the dead man, or indeed Death it self could
deserve. There was a mighty train of black assistants, among which too diverse
Princes in the persons of their Ambassadors (being infinitely afflicted for the
loss of their Brother) were pleased to attend; the Horse was Magnificent, the
Idol Crowned, and (not to mention all other Ceremonies which are practiced at
Royal interrements, and therefore by no means could be omitted here) the vast
multitude of Spectators made up, as it uses to do, no small part of the
Spectacle it self. But yet I know not how, the whole was so managed, that,
methoughts, it somewhat represented the life of him for whom it was made; Much
noise, much tumult, much expense, much magnificence, much vainglory; briefly,
a great show, and yet after all this, but an ill sight. At last (for it seemed
long to me, and like his short Reign too, very tedious) the whole Scene past
by, and I retired back to my Chamber, weary, and I think more melancholy than
any of the Mourners. Where I began to reflect upon the whole life of this
Prodigious Man, and sometimes I was filled with horror and detestation of his
actions, and sometimes I inclined a little to reverence and admiration of his
courage, conduct, and success; till by these different motions and agitations
of mind rocked, as it were, a sleep, I fell at last into this Vision, or if you
please to call it but a Dream, I shall not take it ill, because the Father of
Poets tells us, Even Dreams too are from God.

But sure it was no Dream; for I was suddenly transported afar off (whether in
the body, or out of the body, like St. Paul, I know not) and found my self upon
the top of that famous Hill in the Island Mona, which has the prospect of three
Great, and Not-long-since most happy King doms; As soon as ever I looked upon
them, the Not-long-since struck upon my Memory, and called forth the sad
representation of all the Sins, and all the Miseries that had overwhelmed them
these twenty years. And I wept bitterly for two or three hours, and when my
present stook of moisture was all wasted, I fell a sighing for an hour more,
and as soon as I recovered from my passion the use of speech and reason, I
broke forth, as I remember (looking upon England) into this complaint. 1.
Ah, happy Isle, how art thou changed and cursed,
Since I was born, and knew thee first!
When Peace, which had forsook the World around,
(Frighted with noise, and the shrill Trumpets found)
Thee for a private place of rest,
And a secure retirement chose
Wherein to build her Halcyon Nest;
No wind durst stir abroad the Air to discompose.
2.
When all the Riches of the Globe beside
Flowed in to Thee with every Tide;
When all that Nature did thy soil deny,
The Grouth was of thy fruitful Industry,
When all the proud and dreadful Sea,
And all his Tributary streams,
A constant Tribute paid to Thee.
When all the liquid World was one extended Thames.
3.
When Plenty in each Village did appear,
And Bounty was it is Steward there;
When Gold walked free about in open view,
Ere it one Conquering parties Prisoner grew;
When the Religion of our State
Had Face and Substance with her Voice,
Ere she by 'er foolish Loves of late,
Like Echo (once a Nymph) turned only into Noise.
4.
When Men to Men respect and friendship bore,
And God with Reverence did adore;
When upon Earth no Kingdom could have shown
A happier Monarch to us than our own,
And yet his Subjects by him were
(Which is a Truth will hardly be
Received by any vulgar Ear,
A secret known to few) made happi'r even than He.
5.
Thou do a Chaos, and Confusion now,
A Babel, and a Bedlam grow,
And like a Frantic person thou do tear
The Ornaments and Clothes which thou should wear,
And cut thy Limbs; and if we see
(Just as thy Barbarous Britons did)
Thy Body with Hypocrisy
Painted all ore, thou think, Thy naked shame is hid.
6.
The Nations, which envied thee erewhile,
Now hugh (too little it is to smile)
They laugh, and would have pitty'd thee (alas!)
But that thy Faults all Pity do surpass.
Art thou the Country which did hate,
And mock the French Inconstancy?
And have we, have we seen of late
Less change of Habits there, than Governments in Thee?
7.
Unhappy Isle! No ship of thine at Sea,
Was ever tossed and torn like Thee.
Thy naked Hulk loose on the Waves does beat,
The Rocks and Banks around her ruin threat;
What did thy foolish Pilots ail,
To lay the Compass quite aside?
Without a Law or Rule to sail,
And rather take the Winds, then Heavens to be their Guide?
8.
Yet, mighty God, yet, yet, we humbly crave,
This floating Isle from shipwreck save;
And though to wash that Blood which does it stain,
It well deserves to sink into the Main;
Yet for the Royal Martyrs prayer
(The Royal Martyr plays we know)
This guilty, perishing Vessel spare;
Hear but his Soul above, and not his blood below.


I think I should have gone on, but that I was interrupted by a strange and
terrible Apparition, for there appeared to me (arising out of the earth, as I
conceived) the figure of a man taller than a Giant, or indeed than the shadow
of any Giant in the evening. His body was naked, but that nakedness adorned,
or rather deformed all over, with several figures, after the manner of the
ancient Britons, painted upon it: and I perceived that most of them were the
representation of the late battles in our civil Wars, and (if I be not much
mistaken) it was the battle of Nasbey that was drawn upon his Breast. His Eyes
were like burning Brass, and there were three Crowns of the same metal (as I
guest) and that looked as red-hot too, upon his Head. He held in his right hand
a Sword that was yet bloody, and nevertheless the Motto of it was Pax
quaeritur bello, and in his left hand a thick Book, upon the back of which was
written in Letters of Gold, Acts, Ordinances, Protestations, Covenants,
Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, etc. Though this sudden, unusual,
and dreadful object might have quelled a greater courage than mine, yet so it
pleased God (for there is nothhing bolder than a Man in a Vision) that I was
not at all daunted, but asked him resolutely and briefly, What art thou? And he
said, I am called The North-west Principality, His Highness, the Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions
belonging thereunto, for I am that Angel to whom the Almighty has committed the
Government of those three Kingdoms which thou see from this place. And I
answered and said, If it be so, Sir, it seems to me that for almost these^
twenty years past your Highness has been absent from your charge: for not
only if any Angel, but if any wise and honest Men had since that time been our
Governor, we should not have wandered thus long in these laborious and endless
Labyrinths of confusion, but either not have entered at all into them, or at
least have returned back ere we had absolutely lost our way; but instead of
your Highness, we have had since such a Protector as was his Predecessor
Richard the Third to the King his Nephew; for he presently slew the
Commonwealth, which he pretended to protect, and set up himself in the place
of it; a little less guilty indeed in one respect, because the other slew an
Innocent, and this Man did but murder a Muderer. Such a Protector we have had
as we would have been glad to have changed for any Enemy, and rather received a
constant Turk, than this every months Apostate; such a Protector as Man is to
his Flocks, which he sheers, and sells, or devours himself; and I would fain
know, what the Wolf, which he protects him from, could' do more. Such a
Protector -- and as I was proceeding, me-thoughts, his Highness began to put
on a displeased and threatening countenance, as men use to do when their dearest
Friends happen to be traduced in their company, which gave me the first rise of
jealousy against him, for I did not believe that Cromwell amongst all his
foreign Correspondences had ever held any with Angels. However I was not hardened
enough yet to venture a quarrel with him then; and therefore (as if I had
spoken to the Protector himself in White Hall) I desired him that his Highness
would please to pardon me if I had unwittingly spoken any thing to the
disparagement of a person, whose relations to his Highness I had not the
honor to kuow. At which he told me, that he had no other concernment for his
late Highness, than as he took him to be the greatest Man that ever was of the
English Nation, if not (said he) of the whole World, which gives me a just
title to the defense of his reputation, since I now account my self, as it
were, a naturalized English Angel, by having had so long the management of the
affairs of that Country. And pray Countryman (said he, very kindly and very
flateringly) for I would not have you fall into the general error of the
World, that detests and decryes so extraordinary a Virtue, what can be more
extraordinary than that a person of mean birth, no fortune, no eminent
qualities of Body (which have sometimes) or of Mind (which have often raised
men to the highest dignities) should have the courage to attempt, and the
happiness to succeed in so improbable a design, as the destruction of one of
the most ancient, and in all appearance most solidly founded Monarchies upon
the Earth? that he should have the power or boldness to put his Prince and
Master to an open and infamous death? to banish that numerous, and
strongly-allied Family? to do all this under the name and wages of a
Parliament; to trample upon them too as he pleased, and spurn them out of doors
when he grew weary of them; to raise up a new and unheard of Monster out of
their Ashes; to stifle that in the very infancy, and set up himself above all
things that ever were called Sovereign in England; to oppress all his Enemies
by Arms, and all his Friends afterward by Artifice; to serve all parties
patiently for a while, and to command them victoriously at last; to overrun
each corner of the three Nations, and overcome with equal facility both the
riches of the South, and the poverty of the North; to be feared and courted by
all foreign Princes, and adopted a Brother to the gods of the earth; to call
together Parliaments with a word of his Pen, and scatter them again with the
Breath of his Mouth; to be humbly and daily petitioned that he would please to
be hired at the rate of two millions a year, to be the Master of those who had
hired him before to be their Servant; to have the Estates and Lives of three
Kingdoms as much at his disposal, as was the little inheritance of his Father,
and to be as noble and liberal in the spending of them; and lastly (for there
is no end of all the particulars of his glory) to bequeath all this with one
word to his Posterity; to die with peace at home, and triumph abroad; to be
buried among Kings, and with more than Regal solemnity; and to leave a name
behind him, not to be extinguished, but with the whole World, which as it is now
too little for his praises, so might have been too for his Conquests if the
short line of his Humane Life could have been strecht out to the extent of his
immortal designs?

By this speech I began to understand perfectly well what kind of Angel his
pretended Highness was, and having fortified my self privately with a short
mental Prayer, and with the sign of the Cross (not out of any superstition to
the sign, but as a recognition of my Baptism in Christ) I grew a little bolder,
and replied in this manner; I should not venture to oppose what you are pleased
to say in commendation of the late great, and (I confess) extraordinary
person, but that I remember Christ forbids us to give assent to any other
doctrine but what himself has taught us, even though it should be delivered by
an Angel; and if such you be, Sir, it may be you have spoken all this rather to
try than to tempt my frailty: For sure I am, that we must renounce or forget
all the Laws of the New and Old Testament, and those which are the foundation
of both, even the Laws of Moral and Natural Honesty, if we approve of the
actions of that man whom I suppose you commend by Irony. There would be no end
to instance in the particulars of all his wickedness; but to sum up a part of
it briefly; What can be more extraordinarily wicked, than for a person, such as
your self qualify him rightly, to endeavor not only to exalt himself above,
but to trample upon all his equals and betters? to pretend freedom for all men,
and under the help of that petence to make all men his servants? to take Arms
against Taxes of scarce two hundred thousand pounds a year, and to raise them
himself to above two Milions? to quarrel for the loss of three or four Ears,
and strike off three or four hundred Heads? to fight against an imaginary
suspicion of I know not what two thousand Guards to be fetched for the King, I
know not from whence, and to keep up for himself no less than forty thousand?
to pretend the defense of Parliaments, and violently to dissolve all even of
his own calling, and almost choosing? to undertake the Reformation of Religion,
to rob it even to the very skin, and then to expose it naked to the rage of all
Sects and Heresies? to set up Counsels of Rapine, and Courts of Murder? to
fight against the King under a commission for him; to take him forceably out
out the hands of those for whom he had conquered him; to draw him into his Net,
with protestations and vows of fidelity, and when he had caught him in it, to
butcher him, with as little shame, as Conscience, or Humanity, in the open face
of the whole World? to receive a Commission for King and Parliament, to murder
(as I said) the one, and destroy no less impudently the other? to fight
against Monarchy when he declared for it, and declare against it when he
contrived for it in his own person? to abase perfideously and supplant
ingratefully his own General first, and afterward most of those Officers, who
with the loss of their Honor, and hazard of their Souls, had lifted him up to
the top of his unreasonable ambitions? to break his faith with all Enemies, and
with all Friends equally? and to make no less frequent use of the most solemn
Perjuries than the looser sort of People do of customary Oaths? to usurp three
Kingdoms without any shadow of the least pretensions, and to govern them as
unjustly as he got them? to set himself up as an Idol (which we know as St.
Paul says, in it self is nothing) and make the very streets of London, like
the Valley of Hinnon, by burning the bowels of men as a sacrifice to his
Moloch-ship? to seek to entail this usurpation upon his Posterity, and with it
an endless War upon the Nation? and lastly, by the severest Judgment of
Almighty God, to dye hardened, and mad, and unrepentant, with the curses of the
present Age, and the detestation of all to succeed.

Though I had much more to say (for the Life of man is so short, that it allows
not time enough to speak against a Tyrant) yet because I had a mind to hear how
my strange Adversary would behave himself upon this subject, and to give even
the Devil (as they say) his right, and fair play in a disputation, I stopped
here, and expected (not without the frailty of a little fear) that he should
have broke into a violent passion in behalf of his Favorite; but he on the
contrary very calmly, and with the Dove-like innocence of a Serpent that was
not yet warmed enough to sting, thus replied to me.

It is not so much out of my affection to that person whom we discourse of
(whose greatness is too solid to be shaken by the breath of any Oratory) as
for your own sake (honest Countryman) whom I conceive to err, rather by
mistake than out of malice, that I shall endeavor to reform your uncharitable
and unjust opinion. And in the first place I must needs put you in mind of a
Sentence of the most ancient of the Heathen Divines, that you men are
acquainted withal, (...),
It Is wicked with insulting feet to tread
Upon the Monuments of the Dead.


And the intention of the reproof there is no less proper for this Subject;
for it is spoken to a person who was proud and insolent against those dead men
to whom he had been humble and obedient whilst they lived. Your Highness may
please (said I) to add the Verse that follows, as no less proper for this
Subject Whom God's just doom and their own sins have sent
Already to their punishment.


But I take this to be the rule in the case, that when we fix any infamy upon
deceased persons, it should not be done out of hatred to the Dead, but out of
love and charity to the Living, that the curses which only remain in men's
thoughts, and dare not come forth against Tyrants (because they are Tyrants)
whilst they are so, may at least be for ever settled and engraven upon their
Memories, to deter all others from the like wickedness, which else in the
time of their foolish prosperity, the flattery of their own hearts, and of
other men's Toungs, would not suffer them to perceive. Ambition is so subtle a
Tempter, and the corruption of humane nature so susceptible of the temptation,
that a man can hardly resist it, be he never so much forewarned of the evil
consequences, much less if he find not only the concurrence of the present,
but the approbation too of following ages, which have the liberty to judge more
freely. The mischief of Tyranny is too great, even in the shortest time that it
can continue, it is endless and insupportable, if the Example be to reign too,
and if a Lambert must be invited to follow the steps of a Cromwell as well by
the voice of Honor, as by the sight of power and riches. Though it may seem to
some fantastically, yet was it wisely done of the Syracusians, to implead with
the forms of their ordinary justice, to condemn, and destroy even the Statues
of all their Tyrants; If it were possible to cut them out of all History, and
to extinguish their very names, I am of opinion that it ought to be done; but
since they have left behind them too deep wounds to be ever closed up without a
Scar, at least let us set such a mark upon their memory, that men of the same
wicked inclinations may be no less affrighted with their lasting Ignominy,
than enticed by their momentary glories. And that your Highness may perceive
that I speak not all this out of any private animosity against the person of
the late Protector, I assure you upon my faith that I bear no more hatred to
his name, than I do to that of Marius or Sylla, who never did me or any friend
of mine the least injury; and with that transported by a holy fury, I fell into
this sudden rapture. 1.
Cursed be the Man (what do I wish? as though
The wretch already were not so;
But cursed on let him be) who thinks it brave
And great, his Country to enslave.
Who seeks to overpoise alone
The Balance of a Nation;
Against the whole but naked State,
Who in his own light Scale makes up with Arms the weight.
2.
Who of his Nation loves to be the first,
Though at the rate of being worst.
Who would be rather a great Monster, than
A well-proportion'd Man.
The Son of Earth with hundred hands
Upon his three-pil'd Mountain stands,
Till Thunder strikes him from the sky;
The Son of Earth again in his Earths womb does lie.
3.
What Blood, Confusion, Ruin, to obtain
A short and miserable Reign?
In what oblique, and humble creeping wise
Does the mischievous Serpent rise?
But even his forked Tongue strikes dead,
When h'as reard up his wicked Head,
He murders with his mortal frown,
A Basilisk he grows, if once he get a Crown.
4.
But no Guards can oppose assaulting Cares,
Or undermining Fears.
No more than doors, or close-drawn Curtains keep
The swarming Dreams out when we sleep.
That bloody Conscience too of his
(For, oh, a Rebel Red-Coat it is)
Does here his early Hell begin,
He sees his Slaves without, his Tyrant feels within.
5.
Let, Gracious God, let never more thine hand
List up this Red against our Land.
A Tyrant is a Rod and Serpent too,
And brings worse Plagues than Egypt knew.
What Rivers stained with Blood have been?
What Storm and Hail-shot have we seen?
What Sores deformed the Ulcerous State?
What darkness to be felt has buried us of late?
6.
How has it snatched our Flocks and Herds away?
And made even of our Sons a prey?
What croaking Sects and Vermin has it sent
The restless Nation to torment?
What greedy Troops, what armed power
Of Flies and Locusts to devour
The Land which every where they fill?
Nor fly they, Lord, away; no, they devour it still.
7.
Come the eleventh Plague, rather than this should be;
Come sink us rather in the Sea.
Come rather Pestilence, and reap us down;
Come Gods Sword rather than our own.
Let rather Roman come again,
Or Saxon, Norman, or the Dane,
In all the Bonds we ever bore,
We grieved, we sighed, we wept; we never blushed before.
8.
If by our sins the Divine Justice be
Called to this last extremity,
Let some denouncing Jonas first be sent,
To try if England can repent.
Methinks at least some Prodigy,
Some dreadful Comet from on high,
Should terribly forewarn the Earth,
As of good Princes Deaths, so of a Tyrants birth.


Here the spirit of Verse beginning a little to fail, I stopped, and his
Highness smiling said, I was glad to see you engaged in the Enclosures of
Meeter, for if you had staid in the open plain of Declaiming against the word
Tyrant, I must have had patience for half a dosen hours, till you had tired
your self as well as me. But pray, Countryman, to avoid this sciomachy, or
imaginary Combat with words, let me know first what you mean by the name of
Tyrant, for I remember that among your ancient Authors, not only all Kings,
but even Jupiter himself (your Juvans Pater) is so termed, and perhaps as it
was used formerly in a good sense, so we shall find it upon better
consideration to be still a good thing for the benefit and peace of mankind, at
least it will appear whether your interpretation of it may be justly applied to
the person who is now the subject of our Discourse. I call him (said I) a
Tyrant, who either intrudes himself forcibly into the Government of his fellow
Citizens without any legal Authority over them, or who having a just Title to
the Government of a people, abuses it to the destruction, or tormenting of
them. So that all Tyrants are at the same time Usurpers, either of the whole or
at least of a part of that power which they assume to themselves, and no less
are they to be accounted Rebels, since no man can Usurp Authority over others,
but by rebelling against them who had it before, or at least against those Laws
which were his Superiors; and in all these senses no History can affoard us a
more evident example of Tyranny, or more out all possibility of excuse, or
palliation, than that of the person whom you are pleased to defend, whether we
consider his reiterated rebellions against all his superiors, or his usurpation
of the Supreme power to himself, or his Tyranny in the exercise of it; and if
lawful Princes have been esteemed Tyrants by not containing themselves within
the bounds of those Laws which have been left them as the sphere of their
Authority by their forefathers, what shall we say of that man, who having by
right no power at all in this Nation, could not content himself with that which
had satisfied the most ambitious of our Princes? nay, not with those vastly
extended limits of Soverainty, which he (disdaining all that had been
prescribed and observed before) was pleased (but of great modesty) to set to
himself? not abstaining from Rebellion and Usurpation even against his own Laws
as well as those of the Nation?

Hold friend (said his Highness, (pulling me by my Arm) for I see your zeal is
transporting you again) whether the Protector were a Tyrant in the exorbitant
exercise of his power we shall see anon, it is requisite to examine first
whether he were so in the Usurpation of it. And I say, that not only He, but
no man else ever was, or can be so; and that for these reasons. First, because
all power belongs only to God, who is the source and fountain of it, as Kings
are of all Honors in their Dominions. Princes are but his Viceroys in the
little Provinces of this World, and to some he gives their places for a few
years, to some for their lives, and to others (upon ends or deserts best known
to himself, or merely for his undisputable good pleasure) he bestows as it were
Leases upon them, and their posterity, for such a date of time as is prefixed in
that Patent of their Destiny, which is not legible to you men below. Neither is
it more unlawful for Oliver to succeed Charles in the Kingdom of England, when
God so disposes of it, than it had been for him to have succeeded the Lord
Strafford in the Lieutenancy of Ireland, if he had been appointed to it by the
King then reigning. Men are in both the cases obliged to obey him whom they see
actually invested with the Authority by that Sovereign from whom he ought to
derive it, without disputing or examining the causes, either of the removeal of
the one, or the preferment of the other. Secondly, because all power is
attained either by the Election and consent of the people, and that takes away
your objection of forcible intrusion; or else by a Conquest of them, and that
gives such a legal Authority as you mention to be wanting in the Usurpation of
a tyrant; so that either this Title is right, and then there are no Usurpers,
or else it is a wrong one, and then there are none else but Usurpers, if you
examine the Original pretenses of the Princes of the World. Thirdly, (which
quitting the dispute in general, is a particular justification of his
Highness) the Government of England was totally broken and dissolved, and
extinguished by the confusions of a Civil War, so that his Highness could not
be accused to have possessed himself violently of the ancient building of the
Commonwealth, but to have prudently and peaceably built up a new one out of the
ruins and ashes of the former; and he who after a deplorable shipwreck can with
extraordinary Industry gather together the dispersed and broken planks and
pieces of it, and with no less wonderful art and felicity so rejoyn them as
to make a new Vessel more tight and beautiful than the old one, deserves no
doubt to have the command of her (even as his Highness had) by the desire of
the Seamen and Passengers themselves. And do but consider lastly (for I omit
multitude of weighty things that might be spoken upon this noble argument) do
but consider seriously and impartially with your self, what admirable parts of
wit and prudence, what indefatigable diligence and invincible courage must of
necessity have concurred in the person of that man, who from so contemptible
beginnings (as I observed before) and through so many thousand difficulties,
was able not only to make himself the greatest and most absolute Monarch of
this Nation, but to add to it the entire Conquest of Ireland and Scotland
(which the whole force of the World joined with the Roman virtue could never
attain to) and to Crown all this with Illustrious and Heroical undertakings,
and successes upon all our foreign Enemies; do but (I say again) consider this,
and you will confess, that his prodigious Merits were a better Title to
Imperial Dignity, than the blood of an hundred Royal Progenitors; and will
rather lament that he lived not to overcome more Nations, than envy him the
Conquest and Dominion of these. Who ever you are (said I, my indignation making
me somewhat bolder) your discourse (methinks) becomes as little the person of a
Tutelar Angel, as Cromwels actions did that of a Protector. It is upon these
Principles that all the great Crimes of the World have been committed, and most
particularly those which I have had the misfortune to see in my own time, and
in my own Country. If these be to be allowed, we must break up human society,
retire into the Woods, and equally there stand upon our Guards against our
Brethren Mankind, and our Rebels the Wild Beasts. For if there can be no
Usurpation upon the rights of a whole Nation, there can be none most certainly
upon those of a private person; and if the Robbers of Countries be Gods
Vicegerents, there is no doubt but the Thieves, and Banditos, and Murderers are
his under Officers. It is true which you say, that God is the scource and
fountain of all power, and it it is no less true that he is the Creator of
Serpents as well as Angels, nor does his goodness fail of its ends even in the
malice of his own Creatures. What power he suffers the Devil to exercise in
this World, is too apparent by our daily experience, and by nothing more than
the late monsterous iniquities which you dispute for, and patronize in England;
but would you infer from thence, that the power of the Devil is a just and
lawful one, and that all men ought, as well as most men do, obey him? God is
the fountain of all Powers; but some flow from the right hand (as it were) of
his Goodness, and others from the left hand of his Justice; and the World,
like an Island between these two Rivers, is sometimes refresht and nourished by
the one, and sometimes overrun and ruined by the other; and (to continue a
little farther the Allegory) we are never overwhelmed with the latter, till
either by our malice or negligence we have stopped and damm'd up the former. But
to come a little closer to your Argument, or rather the Image of an Argument,
your similitude; If Cromwell had come to command Ireland in the place of the
late Lord Strafford, I should have yielded obedience, not for the equipage, and
the strength, and the guards which he brought with him, but for the Commission
which he should first have showed me from our common Sovereign that sent him;
and if He could have done that from God Almighty, I would have obeyed him too
in England; but that he was so far from being able to do, that on the contrary,
I read nothing but commands, and even public Proclamations from God Almighty,
not to admit him. Your second Argument is, that he had the same right for his
authority, that is the foundation of all others, even the right of Conquest.
Are we then so unhappy as to be conquered by the person, whom we hired at a
daily rate, like a Labourer, to conquer others for us? did we furnish him with
Arms, only to draw and try upon our Enemies (as we, it seems, falsely thought
them) and keep them for ever sheathed in the bowels of his Friends? did we
fight for Liberty against our Prince, that we might become Slaves to our
Servant? this is such an impudent pretense, as neither He nor any of his
Flatterers for him had ever the face to mention. Though it can hardly be spoken
or thought of without passion, yet I shall, if you please, argue it more calmly
than the case deserves. The right certainly of Conquest can only be exercised
upon those against whom the War is declared, and the Victory obtained. So that
no whole Nation can be said to be conquered but by foreign force. In all civil
Wars men are so far from stating the quarrel against their Country, that they
do it only against a person or party which they really believe, or at least
pretend to be pernicious to it, neither can there be any just cause for the
destruction of a part of the Body, but when it is done for the preservation and
safety of the Whole. It Is our Country that raises men in the quarrel, our
Country that arms, our Country that pays them, our Country that authorizes the
undertaking, and by that distinguishes it from rapine and murder; lastly, it is
our Country that directs and commands the Army, and is indeed their General. So
that to say in Civil Wars that the prevailing party conquers their Country, is
to say, the Country conquers it self. And if the General only of that party be
the Conqueror, the Army by which he is made so, is no less conquered than the
Army which is beaten, and have as little reason to triumph in that Victory, by
which they lose both their Honor and Liberty. So that if Cromwell conquered
any party, it was only that against which he was sent, and what that was, must
appear by his Commission. It was (says that) against a company of evil
Counselors, and disaffected persons, who kept the King from a good
intelligence and conjunction with his People. It was not then against the
People. It is so far from being so, that even of that party which was beaten,
the Conquest did not belong to Cromwell but to the Parliament which employed
him in their Service, or rather indeed to the King and Parliament, for whose
Service (if there had been any faith in men's vows and protestations) the Wars
were undertaken. Merciful God! did the right of this miserable Conquest remain
then in his Majesty, and did thou suffer him to be destroyed with more
barbarity than if he had been conquered even by Savages and Cannibals? was it
for King and Parliament that we fought, and has it fared with them just as with
the Army which we fought against, the one part being slain, and the other fled?
It appears therefore plainly, that Cromwell was not a Conqueror, but a Thief
and Robber of the Rights of the King and Parliament, and an Usurper upon those
of the People. I do not here deny Conquest to be sometimes (though it be very
rarely) a true title, but I deny this to be a true Conquest. Sure I am, that
the race of our Princes came not in by such a one. One Nation may conquer
another sometimes justly, and if it be unjusty, yet still it is a true
Conquest, and they are to answer for the injustice only to God Almighty
(having nothing else in authority above them) and not as particular Rebels to
their Country, which is, and ought always to be their Superior and their Lord.
If perhaps we find Usurpation instead of Conquest in the Original Titles of
some Royal Families abroad (as no doubt there have been many Usurpers before
ours, though none in so impudent and execrable a manner) all I can say for them
is, that their Title was very weak, till by length of time, and the death of
all juster pretenders, it became to be the true, because it was the only one.
Your third defense of his Highness (as your Highness pleases to call him)
enters in most seasonably after his pretense of Conquest, for then a man may
say any thing. The Government was broken; Who broke it? It was dissolved; Who
dissolved it? It was extinguished; Who was it but Cromwell, who not only put
out the Light, but cast away even the very snuff of it? As if a man should
murder a whole Family, and then possess himself of the House, because it is
better that He than that only Rats should live there. Jesus God! (said I, and
at that word I perceived my pretended Angel to give a start, and trembled, but
I took no notice of it, and went on) this were a wicked pretension even though
the whole Family were destroyed, but the Heirs (blessed be God) are yet
surviveing, and likely to outlive all Heirs of their dispossessors, besides
their Infamy. Rode Caper vitem, etc. There will be yet wine enough left for the
Sacrifice of those wild Beasts that have made so much spoil in the Vineyard.
But did Cromwell think, like Nero, to set the City on fire, only that he might
have the honor of being founder of a new and more beautiful one? He could not
have such a shadow of Virtue in his wickedness; he meant only to rob more
securely and more richly in midst of the combustion; he little thought then
that he should ever have been able to make himself Master of the Palace, as
well as plunder the Goods of the Commonwealth. He was glad to see the public
Vessel (the Sovereign of the Seas) in as desperate a condition as his own
little Canou, and thought only with some scattered planks of that great
shipwreck to make a better Fisherboat for himself. But when he saw that by the
drowning of the Master (whom he himself treacherously knocked on the head as he
was swimming for his life) by the flight and dispersion of others, and cowardly
patience of the remaining company, that all was abandoned to his pleasure, with
the old Hulk and new misshapen and disagreeing pieces of his own, he made up
with much ado that Piratical Vessel which we have seen him command, and which
how tight indeed it was, may best be judged by it is perpetual Leaking. First
then (much more wicked than those foolish daughters in the Fable, who cut their
old Father into pieces, in hope by charms and witchcraft to make him young and
lusty again) this man endeavored to destroy the Building, before he could
imagine in what manner, with what materials, by what workmen, or what Architect
it was to be rebuilt. Secondly, if he had dreamed himself to be able to revive
that body which he had killed, yet it had been but the insupportable insolence
of an ignorant Mountebanck; and thirdly (which concerns us nearest) that very
new thing which he made out of the ruins of the old, is no more like the
Original, either for beauty, use, or duration, than an artificial Plant raised
by the fire of a Chemist is comparable to the true and natural one watch he
first burnt, that out of the ashes of it he might produce an imperfect
similitude of his own making. Your last argument is such (when reduced to
Syllogism) that the Major Proposition of it would make strange work in the
World, if it were received for truth; to wit, that he who has the best parts in
a Nation, has the right of being King over it. We had enough to do here of old
with the contention between two branches of the same Family, what would become
of us when every man in England should lay his claim to the Government? and
truly if Cromwell should have commenced his plea when he seems to have begun
his ambition, there were few persons besides that might not at the same time
have put in theirs to. But his Deserts I suppose you will date from the same
term that I do his great Demerits, that is, from the beginning of our late
calamities, (for as for his private faults before, I can only wish (and that
with as much Charity to him as to the public) that he had continued in them
till his death, rather than changed them for those of his latter days) and
therefore we must begin the consideration of his greatness from the unlucky
Era of our own misfortunes, which puts me in mind of what was said less truly
of Pompey the Great, Nostra Miseria Magnus es. But because the general ground
of your argumentation consists in this, that all men who are the effecters of
extraordinary mutations in the world, must needs have extraordinary forces of
Nature by which they are enabled to turn about, as they please, so great a
Wheel; I shall speak first a few words upon this universal proposition, which
seems so reasonable, and is so popular, before I descend to the particular
examination of the eminences of that person which is in question.

I have often observed (with all submission and resignation of spirit to the
inscrutable mysteries of Eternal Providence) that when the fullness and
maturity of time is come that produces the great confusions and changes in the
World, it usually pleases God to make it appear by the manner of them, that
they are not the effects of humane force or policy, but of the Divine Justice
and Predestination, and though we see a Man, like that which we call Jack of
the Clock-house, striking; as it were, the Hour of that fullness of time, yet
our reason must needs be convinced, that his hand is moved by some secret, and,
to us who stand without, invisible direction. And the stream of the Current is
then so violent, that the strongest men in the World cannot draw up against it,
and none are so weak, but they may sail down with it. These are the
Spring-tides of public affairs which we see often happen, but seek in vain to
discover any certain causes, -- Omnia Fluminis Hor. Carm. 3. 29.

Ritu feruntur, nunc medio alveo
Cum pace delabentis Hetruscum
In mare, nunc lapides adesos
Stirpesque raptas, and pecus and domos
Volventis una, non sine montium
Clamore, vicinaeque silvae;
Cumfera Diluvies quietos
Irritat amnes, --
and one man then, by malltiously opening all the Sluices that he can come at,
can never be the sole Author of all this (though he may be as guilty as if
really he were, by intending and imagining to be so) but it is God that breaks
up the Floodgates of so general a Deluge, and all the art then and industry of
mankind is not sufficient to raise up Dikes and Ramparts against it. In such a
time it was as this, that not all the wisdom and power of the Roman Senate, nor
the wit and eloquence of Cicero, nor the Courage and Virtue of Brutus was able
to defend their Country or Themselves against the unexperienced rashness of a
beardlesse Boy, and the loose rage of a voluptuous Madman. The valor and
prudent Counsels on the one side are made fruitless, and the errors and
cowardice on the other harmless, by unexpected accidents. The one General
saves his life, and gains the whole World, by a very Dream; and the other loses
both at once by a little mistake of the shortness of his sight. And though
this be not always so, for we see that in the translation of the great
Monarchies from one to another, it pleased God to make choice of the most
Eminent men in Nature, as Cyrus, Alexander, Scipio and his contemporaries, for
his chief instruments and actors in so admirable a work (the end of this being
not only to destroy or punish one Nation, which may be done by the worst of
mankind, but to exalt and bless another, which is only to be effected by
great and virtuous persons) yet when God only intends the temporary
chastisement of a people, he does not raise up his servant Cyrus (as he himself
is pleased to call him) or an Alexander (who had as many Virtues to do good, as
Vices to do harm) but he makes the Massanellos, and the John's of Leyden the
instruments of his vengeance, that the power of the Almighty might be more
evident by the weakness of the means which he chooses to demonstrate it. He
did not assemble the Serpents and the Monsters of Afrique to correct the pride
of the Egyptians, but called for his Armies of Locusts out of AEthiopia, and
formed new ones of Vermin out of the very dust; and because you see a whole
Country destroyed by these, will you argue from thence that they must needs
have had both the craft of Foxes, and the courage of Lions? It is easy to
apply this general observation to the particular case of our troubles in
England, and that they seem only to be meant for a temporary chastisement of
our sins, and not for a total abolishment of the old, and introduction of a new
Government, appears probable to me from these considerations, as far as we
may be bold to make a judgment of the will of God in future events. First,
because he has suffered nothing to settle or take root in the place of that
which has been so unwisely and unjustly removed, that none of these untempered
Mortars can hold out against the next blast of Wind, nor any stone stick to a
stone, till that which these Foolish Builders have refused be made again the
Head of the Corner. For when the indisposed and long tormented Commonwealth has
wearied and spent it self almost to nothing with the chargeable, various, and
dangerous experiments of several Mountebanks, it is to be supposed it will have
the wit at last to send for a true Physician, especially when it sees (which is
the second consideration) most evidently (as it now begins to do, and will do
every day more and more, and might have done perfectly long since) that no
Usurpation (under what name or pretext soever) can be kept up without open
force, nor force without the continuance of those oppressions upon the people,
which will at last tire out their patience, though it be great even to
stupidity. They cannot be so dull (when poverty and hunger begins to whet their
understanding) as not to find out this no extraordinary mystery, that it is
madness in a Nation to pay three Millions a year for the maintaining of their
servitude under Tyrants, when they might live free for nothing under their
Princes. This, I say, will not alwayesly hid even to the slowest capacities,
and the next truth they will discover afterward, is, that a whole people can
never have the will without having at the same time the Power to redeem
themselves. Thirdly, it does not look (methinks) as if God had forsaken the
family of that man, from whom he has raised up five Children, of as Eminent
virtue, and all other commendable qualities, as ever lived perhaps (for so many
together, and so young) in any other family in the whole World. Especially if
we add hereto this consideration, that by protecting and preserving some of
them already through as great dangers as ever were past with safety, either by
Prince or private person, he has given them already (as we may reasonably hope
it to be meant) a promise and earnest of his future favors. And lastly (to
return closely to the discourse from which I have a little digrest) because I
see nothing of those excellent parts of nature, and mixture of Merit with their
Vices in the late disturbers of our peace and happiness, that uses to be found
in the persons of those who are born for the erection of new Empires. And I
confess I find nothing of that kind, no not any shadow (taking away the false
light of some prosperity) in the man whom you extol for the first example of
it. And certainly all Virtues being rightly divided into Moral and
Intellectual, I know not how we can better judge of the former than by men's
actions, or of the latter than by their Writings or Speeches. As for these
latter (which are least in merit, or rather which are only the instruments of
mischief where the other are wanting) I think you can hardly pick out the name
of a man who ever was called Great, besides him we are now speaking of, who
never left the memory behind him of one wise or witty Apothegm even amongst his
Domestique Servants or greatest Flatterers. That little in print which remains
upon a sad record for him, is such, as a Satyr against him would not have made
him say, for fear of transgressing too much the rules of Probability. I know
not what you can produce for the justification of his parts in this kind, but
his having been able to deceive so many particular persons, and so many whole
parties; which if you please to take notice of for the advantage of his
Intellectuals, I desire you to allow me the liberty to do so too, when I am to
speak of his Morals. The truth of the thing is this, That if Craft be Wisdom,
and Dissimulation Wit, (assisted both and improved with Hypocrisies and
Perjuries) I must not deny him to have been singular in both; but so gross was
the manner in which he made use of them, that as wisemen ought not to have
believed him at first, so no man was Fool enough to believe him at last;
neither did any man seem to do it, but those who thought they gained as much by
that dissembling, as he did by his. His very actings of Godliness grew at last
as ridiculous, as if a Player, by putting on a Gown, should think he
represented excellently a Woman, though his Beard at the same time were seen by
all the Spectators. If you ask me why they did not hiss, and explode him off
of the Stage, I can only answer, that they durst not do so, because the Actors
and the Door-keepers were too strong for the Company. I must confess that by
these arts (how grossly soever managed, as by Hypocritical praying, and silly
preaching, by unmanly tears and whinings, by falsehoods and perjuries even
Diabolical) he had at first the good fortune (as men call it, that is the Ill
Fortune) to attain his ends; but it was because his ends were so unreasonable,
that no human reason could foresee them; which made them who had to do with him
believe that he was rather a well meaning and deluded Bigot, than a crafty and
malicious Impostor, that these arts were helped by an Indefatigable industry (as
you term it) I am so far from doubting, that I intended to Object that
diligence as the worst of his Crimes. It makes me almost mad when I hear a man
commended for his diligence in wickedness. If I were his Son I should wish to
God he had been a more lazy person, and that we might have found him sleeping
at the hours when other men are ordinarily waking, rather than waking for those
ends of his when other men were ordinarily asleep; how diligent the wicked are
the Scripture often tells us; Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to
shed innocent blood, Isa. 59. 7. He travels with iniquity, Psalm. 7. 14. He
devises mischief upon his bed, Psalm. 34. 4. They search out iniquity, they
accomplish a diligent search, Psalm. 64. 6. and in a multitude of other places.
And would it not seem ridiculous to praise a Wolf for his watchfulness, and
for his indefatigable industry in ranging all night about the Country, whilst
the sheep, and perhaps the shepherd, and perhaps thevery Dogs too are all
asleep? The Charireux wants the warning of a Bell
To call him to the duties of his Cell;
There needs no noise at all to awaken sin,
The Adulterer and the Thief his Larum has within.


And if the diligence of wicked persons be so much to be blamed, as that it is
only an Emphasis and Exaggeration of their wickedness, I see not how their
Courage can avoid the same censure. If the undertaking bold, and vast, and
unreasonable designs can deserve that honorable name, I am sure Faux and his
fellow Gunpowder Fiends will have cause to pretend, though not an equal, yet
at least the next place of Honor, neither can I doubt but if they too had
succeeded, they would have found their Applauders and Admirer. It was bold
unquestionably for a man in defiance of all human and divine Laws (and with so
little probability of a long impunity) so publicly and so outragiously to
murder his Master; It was bold with so much insolence and affront to expel and
disperse all the chief Partners of his guilt, and Creators of his power; It was
bold to violate so openly and so scornfully all Acts and Constitutions of a
Nation, and afterward even of his own making; it was bold to assume the
Authority of calling, and bolder yet of breaking so many Parliaments; it was
bold to trample upon the patience of his own, and provoke that of all
neighboring Countries; It was bold, I say, above all boldnesses, to Usurp this
Tyranny to himself, and impudent above all impudences to endeavor to transmit
it to his posterity. But all this boldness is so far from being a sign of
manly Courage, (which dares not transgress the rules of any other Virtue) that
it is only a Demonstration of Brutish Madness or Diabolical Possession. In
both which last cases there uses frequent examples to appear of such
extraordinary force as may justly seem more wonderful and astonishing than the
actions of Cromwell, neither is it stranger to believe that a whole Nation
should not be able to govern Him and a Mad Army, than that five or six men
should not be strong enough to bind a Distracted Girl. There is no man ever
succeeds in one wickedness but it gives him the boldness to attempt a
greater; 'Twas boldly done of Niro to kill his Mother, and all the chief
Nobility of the Empire; 'twas boldly done to set the Metropolis of the whole
World on fire, and undauntedly play upon his Harp whilst he saw it burning; I
could reckon up five hundred boldnesses of that Great person (for why should
not He too be called so?) who wanted when he was to die that courage which
could hardly have failed any, Woman in the like necessity. It would look (I
must confess) like Envy or too much partiality if I should say that personal
kind of Courage had been deficient in the man we speak of; I am confident it
was not, and yet I may venture I think to affirm, that no man ever bore the
honor of so many victories, at the rate of fewer wounds or dangers of his own
body, and though his valor might perhaps have given him a just pretension to
one of the first charges in an Army, it could not certainly be a sufficient
ground for a Title to the command of three Nations. What then shall we say?
that he did all this by Witchcraft? He did so indeed in a great measure by a
sin that is called like it in the Scriptures. But truly and unpassionately
reflecting upon the advantages of his person which might be thought to have
produced those of his Fortune, I can espy no other but extraordinary Diligence
and infinite Dissimulation; and believe he was exalted above his Nation partly
by his own Faults, but chiefly for Ours. We have brought him thus briefly (not
through all his Labyrinths) to the Supreme Uusurpt Authority, and because you
say it was great pity he did not live to command more Kingdoms, be pleased to
let me represent to you in a few words, how well I conceive he governed these.
And we will divide the consideration into that of his foreign and domestique
actions. The first of his foreign was a Peace with our Brethren of Holland (who
were the first of our neighbors that God chastised for having had so great a
hand in the encouraging and abetting our troubles at home) who would not
imagine at first glympse that this had been the most virtuous and laudable deed
that his whole Life could make any parade of? but no man can look upon all the
circumstances without perceiving, that it was purely the sale and sacrifizing
of the greatest advantages that this Country could ever hope, and was ready to
reap, from a foreign War, to the private interests of his covetousness and
ambition, and the security of his new and unsettled Usurpation. No sooner is
that danger past, but this Beatus Pacificus is kindling a fire in the Northern
World, and carrying a War two thousand miles off Westwards. Two millions a year
(besides all the Vales of his Protectorship) is as little capable to suffice
now either his Avarice or Prodigality, as the two hundred Pounds were that he
was born to. He must have his prey of the whole Indies both by Sea and Land,
this great Aligator. To satisfy our Anti- Solomon (who has made Silver almost
as rare as Gold, and Gold as Precious stones in his new Jerusalem) we must go,
ten thousand of his slaves, to fetch him riches from his fantastical Ophir. And
because his flatterers brag of him as the most Fortunate Prince (the Faustus as
well as Sylla of our Nation, whom God never forsook in any of his undertakings)
I desire them to consider, how since the English name was ever heard of, it
never received so great and so infamous a blow as under the imprudent conduct
of this unlucky Faustus; and herein let me admire the Justice of God in this
circumstance, that they who had enslaved their Country (though a great Army,
which I wish may be observed by ours with trembling) should be so shamefully
defeated by the hands of forty Slaves. It was very ridiculous to see how
prettily they endeavored to hide this ignominy under the great name of the
Conquest of Jamaica, as if a defeated Army should have the impudence to brag
afterward of the Victory, because though they had fled out of the Field of
Battle, yet they quartered that night in a Village of the Enemies. The War with
Spain was a necessary consequence of this folly, and how much we have gotten by
it, let the Custom-house and Exchange inform you; and if he please to boast of
the taking a part of the Silver-Fleet (which indeed no body else but he, who
was the sole gainer, has cause to do) at least let him give leave to the rest
of the Nation (which is the only loser) to complain of the loss of twelve
hundred of her ships. But because it may here perhaps be answered, that his
successes nearer home have extinguished the disgrace of so remote miscariages,
and that Dunkirk ought more to be remembered for his glory, than St. Domingo for
his disadvantage; I must confess, as to the honor of the English courage,
that they were not wanting upon that occasion (excepting only the fault of
serving at least indirectly against their Master) to the upholding of the
renown of their warlike Ancestors. But for his particular share of it, who sat
still at home, and exposed them so frankly abroad, I can only say, that for
less money than he in the short time of his reign exacted from his fellow
Subjects, some of our former Princes (with the daily hazard of their own
persons) have added to the Dominion of England not only one Town, but even a
greater Kingdom than it self. And this being all considerable as concerning
his enterprises abroad, let us examine in the next place, how much we owe him
for his Justice and good Government at home. And first he found the
Commonwealth (as they then called it) in a ready stock of about 800m pounds,
he left the Commonwealth (as he had the impudent Raillery still to call it)
some two Millions and an half in debt. He found our Trade very much decayed
indeed, in comparison of the golden times of our late Princes; he left it as
much again more decayed than he found it; and yet not only no Prince in
England, but no Tyrant in the World ever sought out more base or infamous means
to raise moneys. I shall only instance in one that he put in practice, and
another that he attempted, but was frighted from the execution (even He) by the
infamy of it. That which he put in practice was Decimation; which was the most
impudent breach of all public Faith that the whole Nation had given, and all
private capitulations which himself had made, as the Nations General and
Servant, that can be found out (I believe) in all History from any of the most
barbarous Generals of the most barbarous People. Which because it has been most
excellently and most largely laid open by a whole Book written upon that
Subject, I shall only desire you here to remember the thing in general, and to
be pleased to look upon that Author when you would recollect all the
particulars and circumstances of the iniquity. The other design of raising a
present sum of Money, which he violently persued, but durst not put in
execution, was by the calling in and establishment of the Jews at London; from
which he was rebuted by the universal outcry of the Divines, and even of the
Citizens too, who took it ill that a considerable number at least amongst
themselves were not thought Jews enough by their own Herod. And for this
design, they say, he invented (Oh Antichrist! (...) and (...)!) to sell St.
Paul's to them for a Synagogue, if their purses and devotions could have reached
to the purchase. And this indeed if he had done only to reward that Nation
which had given the first noble example of crucifying their King, it might have
had some appearance of Gratitude, but he did it only for love of their Mammon;
and would have sold afterward for as much more St. Peter's (even at his own
Westminster) to the Turks for a Mosquito. Such was his extraordinary Piety to
God, that he desired he might be worshipped in all manners, excepting only
that heathenish way of the Common Prayer Book. But what do I speak of his
wicked inventions for getting money? when every penny that for almost five
years he took every day from every man living in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, was as much Robbery as if it had been taken by a Thief upon the
Highways. Was it not so? or can any man think that Cromwell with the
assistance of his Forces and Moss Troopers, had more right to the command of
all men's purses, than he might have had to any ones whom he had met and been
too strong for upon a Road? and yet when this came in the case of Mr. Coney, to
be disputed by a legal trial, he (which was the highest act of Tyranny that
ever was seen in England) not only discouraged and threatened, but violently
imprisoned the Council of the Plaintiff; that is, he shut up the Law it self
close Prisoner, that no man might have relief from, or access to it. And it
ought to be remembered, that this was done by those men, who a few years before
had so bitterly decried, and openly opposed the Kings regular and formal way of
proceeding in the trial of a little Ship Money. But though we lost the benefit
of our old Courts of Justice, it cannot be denied that he set up new ones; and
such they were, that as no virtuous Prince before would, so no ill one durst
erect. What? have we lived so many hundred years under such a form of Justice
as has been able regularly to punish all men that offended against it, and is
it so deficient just now, that we must seek out new ways how to proceed
against offenders? The reason which can only be given in nature for a
necessity of this, is, because those things are now made Crimes, which were
never esteemed so informer Ages; and there must needs be a new Court set up to
punish that, which all the old ones were bound to protect and reward. But I am
so far from Declaming (as you call it) against these wickednesses (which if I
should undertake to do, I should never get to the Peroration) that you see I
only give a hint of some few, and pass over the rest as things that are too
many to be numbered, and must only be weighed in gross. Let any man show me
(for though I pretend not to much reading, I will defy him in all History) let
any man show me (I say) an Example of any Nation in the World (though much
greater than ours) where there have in the space of four years been made so
many Prisoners only out of the endless Jealousies of one Tyrants guilty
Imagination. I grant you that Marius and Sylla, and the accursed. Triumvirate
after them, put more People to death, but the reason I think partly was,
because in those times that had a mixture of some honor with their madness,
they thought it a more civil revenge against a Roman to take away his Life,
than to take away his Liberty. But truly in the point of murder too, we have
little reason to think that our late Tyranny has been deficient to the examples
that have ever been set it in other Countries. Our Judges and our Courts of
Justice have not been idle; And to omit the whole reign of our late King (till
the beginning of the War) in which no drop of blood was ever drawn but from two
or three Ears, I think the longest time of our worst Princes scarce saw many
more Executions than the short one of our blessed Reformer. And we saw, and
smelt in our open streets, (as I marked to you at first) the broyling of humane
bowels as a Burnt Offering of a sweet Savor to our Idol; but all murdering,
and all torturing (though after the subtilest invention of his Predecessors of
Sicilie) is more Humane and more supportable, than his selling of Christians,
Englishmen, Gentlemen; his selling of them (oh monstrous! oh incredible!) to
be Slaves in America. If his whole life could be reproacht with no other
action, yet this alone would weigh down all the multiplicity of Crimes in any
of our Tyrants; and I dare only touch, without stopping or insisting upon so
insolent and so execrable a cruelty, for fear of falling into so violent
(though a just) Passion, as would make me exceed that temper and moderation
which I resolve to observe in this Discourse with you. These are great
calamities; but even these are not the most insupportable that we have
endured; for so it is, that the scorn, and mockery, and insultings of an Enemy,
are more painful than the deepest wounds of his serious fury. This Man was
wanton and merry (unwittily and ungracefully merry) with our sufferings; He
loved to say and do senseless and fantastical things, only to show his power
of doing or saying any thing. It would ill befit mine, or any civil Mouth, to
repeat those words which he spoke concerning the most sacred of our English
Laws, the Petition of Right, and Magna Charta. To day you should see him
ranting so wildly, that no body durst come near him, the morrow flinging of
cushions, and playing at Snow-balls with his Servants. This month he
assembles a Parliament, and professes himself with humble tears to be only
their Servant and their Minister; the next month he swears By the Living God,
that he will turn them out of doors, and he does so, in his princely way of
threatening bidding them, Turn the buckles of their girdles behind them. The
Representative of a whole, nay of three whole Nations, was in his esteem so
contemptible a meeting, that he thought the affronting and expelling of them
to be a thing of so little consequence, as not to deserve that he should
advise with any mortal man about it. What shall we call this? Boldness, or
Brutishness? Rashness, or Frenzy? there is no name can come up to it, and
therefore we must leave it without one. Now a Parliament must be chosen in
the new manner, next time in the old form, but all cashiered still after the
newest mode. Now he will govern by Major Generals, now by One House, now by
Another House, now by No House; now the freak takes him, and he makes seventy
Peers of the Land at one clap (Extempore, and stans pede in uno) and to
manifest the absolute power of the Potter, he chooses not only the worst Clay
he could find, but picks up even the Dirt and Mire, to form out of it his
Vessels of Honor. It was said anciently of Fortune, that when she had a mind
to be merry and to divert her self, she was wont to raise up such kind of
people to the highest Dignities. This Son of Fortune, Cromwell (who was himself
one of the primest of her Jests) found out the true haut goust of this
pleasure, and rejoiced in the extravagance of his ways as the fullest
demonstration of his uncontrollable Soverainty. Good God! what have we seen?
and what have we suffered? what do all these actions signify, what do they say
aloud to the whole Nation, but this (even as plainly as if it were proclaimed by
Heralds through the streets of London) You are Slaves and Fools, and so I Will use
you? These are briefly a part of those merits which you lament to have wanted
the reward of more Kingdoms, and suppose that if he had lived longer he might
have had them; Which I am so far from concurring to, that I believe his
seasonable dying to have been a greater good fortune to him than all the
victories and prosperities of his Life. For he seemed evidently (methinks) to
be near the end of his deceitful Glories; his own Army grew at last as weary
of him as the rest of the People; and I never past of late before his Palace
(His, do I call it? I ask God and the King pardon) but I never past of late
before Whitehall without reading upon the Gate of it, Mean, Mean, Tekel,
upharsin. But it pleased God to take him from the ordinary Courts of Men, and
Juries of his Peers, to his own High Court of Justice, which being more
merciful than Ours below, there is a little room yet left for the hope of his
friends, if he have any; though the outward unrepentance of his death affoard
but small materials for the work of Charity, especially if he designed even
then to Entail his own injustice upon his Children, and by it inextricable
confusions and Civil Wars upon the Nation. But here is at last an end of him;
And where is now the fruit of all that blood and calamity which his Ambition has
cost the World? Where is it? Why, his Son (you will say) has the whole Crop; I
doubt he will find it quickly Blasted; I have nothing to say against the
Gentleman, or any living of his family, on the contrary I wish him better
fortune than to have a long and unquiet possession of his Masters Inheritance.
Whatsoever I have spoken against his Father, is that which I should have
thought (though Decency perhaps might have hindered me from saying it) even
against mine Own, if I had been so unhappy, as that Mine by the same ways
should have left me Three Kingdoms.

Here I stopped; and my pretended Protector, who, I expected, should have been
very angry, fell a laughing; it seems at the simplicity of my discourse, for
thus he replied: You seem to pretend extremely to the old obsolete rules of
Virtue and Conscience, which makes me doubt very much whether from this vast
prospect of three Kingdoms you can show me any Acres of your own. But these are
so far from making you a Prince, that I am afraid your friends will never
have the contentment to see you so much as a Justice of Peace in your own
Country. For this I perceive which you call Virtue, is nothing else but either
the frowardness of a Cynick, or the laziness of an Epicurean. I am glad you
allow me at least Artfull Dissimulation, and unwearied Diligence in my Hero,
and I assure you that he whose Life is constantly drawn by those two, shall
never be misled out of the way of Greatness. But I see you are a Pedant, and
Platonical Statesman, a Theoretical Commonwealths man, an Utopian Dreamer. Was
ever Riches gotten by your Golden Mediocrities? or the Supreme place attained
to by Virtues that must not stir out the middle? Do you study Aristotle's
Politiques, and write, if you please, Comments upon them, and let another but
practice Matchavil, and let us see then which of you two will come to the
greatest preferments. If the desire of rule and superiority be a Virtue (as
sure I am it is more imprinted in human Nature than any of your Lethargical
Morals; and what is the Virtue of any Creature but the exercise of those powers
and inclinations which God has infused into it?) if that (I say) be Virtue, we
ought not to esteem any thing Vice, which is the most proper, if not the only
means of attaining of it. It is a Truth so certain, and so clear,
That to the firstborn Man it did appear;
Did not, the mighty Heir, the noble Cain,
By the fresh Laws of Nature taught, disdain
That (though a Brother) any one should be
A greater Favorite to God than He?
He struck him down; and, so (said He) so fell
The sheep which thou did Sacrifize so well.
Since all the fullest Sheaves which I could bring,
Since all were Blasted in the Offering,
Lest God should my next Victime too despise,
The acceptable Priest I Will Sacrifize.
Hence Coward Fears; for the first Blood so spilt
As a Reward, He the first City built.
'Twas a beginning generous and high,
Fit for a Grandchild of the Deity.
So well advanced, 'twas pity there he staid;
One step of Glory more he should have made,
And to the utmost bounds of Greatness gone;
Had Adam too been killed, He might have Reigned Alone.
One Brother's death what do I mean to name,
A small Oblation to Revenge and Fame?
The mighty-soul'd Abimelec to show
What for high place a higher Spirit can do,
A Hecatomb almost of Brethren slew,
And seventy times in nearest blood he died
(To make it hold) his Royal Purple Pride.
Why do I name the Lordly Creature Man?
The weak, the mild, the Coward Woman, can,
When to a Crown she cuts her sacred way,
All that oppose with Manlike courage slay.
So Athaliah, when she saw her Son,
And with his Life her dearer Greatness gone,
With a Majestique fury slaughtered all
Whom high birth might to high pretenses call.
Since he was dead who all her power sustained,
Resolved to reign alone; Resolved, and Reigned.
In vain her Sex, in vain the Laws withstood,
In vain the sacred plea of David's Blood,
A noble, and a bold contention, She,
(One Woman) undertook with Destiny.
She to pluck down, Destiny to uphold
(Obliged by holy Oracles of old)
The great Jessaean race on Juda's Throne;
Till 'twas at last an equal Wager grown,
Scarce Fate, with much ado, the Better got by One.
Tell me not she her self at list was slain;
Did she not first seven years (a Lifetime) reign?
Seven royal years to a public spirit will seem
More than the private Life of a Methusalem.
It Is Godlike to be Great; and as they say
A thousand years to God are but a Day:
So to a Man, when once a Crown he wears,
The Coronation Day's more than a Thousand years.


He would have gone on I perceived in his blasphemies, but that by Gods Grace I
became so bold as thus to interrupt him. I understand now perfectly (which I
guest at long before) what kind of Angel and Protector you are; and though your
style in verse be very much mended since you were wont to deliver Oracles, yet
your Doctrine is much worse than ever you had formerly (that I heard of) the
face to publish; whether your long Practice with mankind has encreast and
improved your malice, or whether you think Us in this age to be grown so
impudently wicked, that there needs no more art or disguises to draw us to your
party. My Dominion (said he hastily, and with a dreadfulll furious look) is so
great in this World, and I am so powerful a Monarch of it, that I need not be
ashamed that you should know me; and that you may see know you too, I know you
to be an obstinate and inveterate Malignant; and for that reason I shall take
you along with me to the next Garrison of Ours; from whence you shall go to
the Tower, and from thence to the Court of Justice, and from thence you know
whither. I was almost in the very pounces of the great Bird of prey, When, Lo,
ere the last words were fully spoke,
From a fair clowd, which rather ope'd, than broke,
A flash of Light, rather than Lightning came,
So swift, and yet so gentle was the Flame.
Upon it rode, and in his full Career,
Seemed to my Eyes no sooner There than Here,
The comelyest Youth of all the Angelique race;
Lovely his shape, ineffable his Face.
The Frowns with which he struck the trembling Fiend,
All Smiles of Humane beauty did transcend.
His Beams of Locks fell part disheveled down,
Part upwards curld, and formed a natural Crown,
Such as the British Monarchs used to wear;
If Gold might be compared with Angels Hair.
His Coat and flowing Mantle were so bright,
They seemed both made of woven Silver Light,
Acrosse his breast an azure Ruban went,
At which a Medal hung that did present
In wondrous, living figures to the sight,
The mystic Champion's, and old Dragon's fight,
And from his Mantles side there shone afar,
A fixed, and, I believe, a Real Star.
In his fair hand (what need was there of more?)
No Arms but the English bloody Cross he bore,
Which when he toward the affrighted Tyrant bent,
And some few words pronounced (but what they meant,
Or were, could not, alas, by me be known,
Only I well perceived Jesus was one)
He trembled, and he roard, and fled away;
Mad to quit thus his more than hop'd-for prey.
Such rage inflames the Wolves wild heart and eyes
(Robbed as he thinks unjusty of his prize)
Whom unawares the Shepherd spies, and draws
The bleating Lamb from out his ravenous jaws.
The Shepherd fain himself would he assail,
But Fear above his Hunger does prevail,
He knows his Foe too strong, and must be gone;
He grins as he looks back, and howls as he goes on.


FINIS.

