THE LIGHT OF Gods Countenance: OR, THE GLORY OF GOD IN THE FACE OF GHRIST
JESUS, Infinitely out-shining all earthly VANITIES.

Set out in a Sermon preached at Lantilio Pertholy, in Monmouth-shire, June 5.
1653.

By JOHN CRAGGE, Master of Arts, and Dispenser of the GOSPEL there.

JOHN 1.9. (...).

MAT. 13.45, 46. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man, seeking
goodly Pearls, who, when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went and
sold all that he had, and bought it.

LONDON, Printed by J.G. for NATH: WEB and WILL: GRANTHAM, at the sign of the
Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door. 1654.

To my much honored Friend Mr. William Williams, and Mrs. Margaret Williams
his Wife, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
WORTHIES,
I Present you here with a small Token of my Love, and Thankfulness, which may
be worth your acceptance, not as mine, for so it is rude and homely; but as
it is God's, a truth most dear, and precious: Diamonds are esteemed not for the
curiosity of cutting, but for their weight and worth; when you heard it, it
affected the ear, and I (hope) the heart, which made you desire a copy of it:
I dare not quench the Spirit, but (according to promise) tender it to the eye,
though not so soon as expected, yet perhaps in a dress unexpected.

Segnius irritant animum demissa per aurea.
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus, etc. -- Hor.
It contains a heavenly Jewel, in an earthly Cabinet, worth all the Arabian
Gold, Indian Pearl, Riches of China, the wealth of the West Indians company,
or that which Solomon's Navy brought from Tarshish; for it is that one precious
Rearle, Christ, for which the Merchant sold all that he had, and bought it.

Chemists boast much of the Philosophers Stone, that turns all mettalls into
Gold; Empericks of Aesculsapius his Herb Panase, that cures all diseases;
Warriers of Vulcans Panoplie, or Armor of proof against all weapons; Jewellers
of the precious Stone, Opalum, that has the virtue of all Stones; But here is
an Elixir, or Quintescence, that turns all things into Gold of the Sanctuary;
an Herb of Grace, that cures all Soule-sicknesses; Christ's whole Armorie, both
offensive, and defensive, to shield against all spiritual enemies; a precious
Corner Stone, that comprises the virtue of all stones in the building of the
New Jerusalem, nay it is the New Jerusalem it self, from above, whose light is
the Lamb, a light, which (if truly received) would quell Schism in
Discipline, Heresy in Doctrine, Sects in the Church, Factions in the State:
Quench that Granado of Selfishness, and Pride, that rends the mystical body of
Christ in pieces. I can assure you in the Word of Life, and Truth, the richest
and rarest confluence of all humane happinesses, the most exquisite excellency,
and variety of the greatest worldly pomp and splendor that ever the Sun saw,
since the first moment of its creation, or shall look upon while it shines in
heaven, is but dust in the balance to one grain of grace, it is but dung to
an humble mind savingly enlightened, but with the fore-tast, but of the least
glimpse of that incomprehensible endless glory which shall shortly be
revealed, it is all in the true valuation but as vain smoke, which does not
only vanish as it rises, it utterly loses it self at the highest, but also
draws tears from a man's eyes, nay at last, wrings the very heartstrings of
every impenitent soul, with that extremest everlasting honor, which would
burst ten thousand hearts, seriously and sensibly to think on it before hand;
it is not only vanity but vexation of spirit, let worldly wisdom say what it
will, and disparage them, who sincerely by the help of the holy Ghost, hold a
constant counter motion to the course of the world, and corrections of the
time, that they may keep a good Conscience, the richest Treasure, the dearest
Jewel that ever the heart of man was acquainted with, who infinitely desire
rather to be Religious than Rich, to be Good than Great, to enjoy the favor of
God than the Sovereignty, and pleasures of all the Kingdoms of the Earth: yet
assuredly, when all is said, and summed up, it is only the true fear of Gods
blessed Name, a zealous forwardness for his Glory Goodness, and good Causes,
that at the last day shall truly beautify and adorn both all other personal
sufficiencies, and indeed, sanctify and bless all public Employment, and
services of State. Go then in this golden mean betwixt Profaneness on the
one hand, and Singularity and Hypocrisy on the other; and yours shall be the
crown and comfort, when wickedness shall lie buried in the dust, and dungeon
of hell. To this end the thirsty longing of my heart, and heartiest prayers
shall ever be, that you may shine every day more and more gloriously, in all
personal sanctity, in all holy zeal, in setting forward the affairs of God,
that when the last period of your mortal abode in this vale of tears, which
draws on apase, shall present it self; you may look death in the face
without doubt, the grave without fear, the Lord Jesus with comfort, and
Jehovah blessed for ever with everlasting joy.

That as God has blessed you and your parents with the things of this life, he
may bless you and your posterity with the treasures of grace and the life to
come, which are the serious votes of him, who will be for ever

Yours to serve you, in the LORD JESUS, JOHN CRAGGE.

PSALM. 4 6. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us.


THe heavenly language of this Psalm informs us, That it was inspired by the
holy Ghost; the Inscription, that it was penned by David; the matter, and
manner in general, that it was a comfortable sob of a distressed soul in time
of affliction. The stream of Interpreters, the whole course and current of the
Text, his mixed passion of joy and sorrow, distraction and consolation, (as the
pings of a woman in travel) compared with the History in Samuel (as shreds of
a broken vessel laid one to another) tells us, that it was occasioned by Saul's
persecuting of him after he was elected, and chosen King by Samuel.

This will appear more plainly by the parts, which are three; The first
concerns God, and David, and that is a (...) or deprecation, wherein he
petitions God, that he would shield him from Saul and his accomplices. The second
concerns David and his enemies, for having made God his shield, he falls into
an expostulation with them in the second verse: the third verse is a defense
and apology for himself, being deeply slandered: the fourth and fifth show of
what spirit he is, like Christ, that came out of his loins, he spends his
breath for their Instruction, that sought his Destruction. The third part is an
earnest prayer unto God again for us, he was his Alpha, so he must be his
Omega, (...), beginning and ending (as the Serpent before the Fight drinks,
when she is wounded, runs to the Spring again) runs to God the Fountain of
Living water, and so concludes thus the Analysis.

The Text is a parcel of the third part, and such a principal one, as it
gives denomination to all the rest, a Petition; For as Prayer is an act of the
nobler part of Man, the Soul, so it is to be performed by the noblest, and
most spiritual faculties of the souls. David here makes choice of the noblest
and purest object, Light, and of all Light, the noblest, the light of Gods
countenance. And as the light of the Sun is to the bodily eye, best known by
Darkness, the contrary; by effects the beams and heat of it: so is this
spiritual light to the eye of the so ule. Therefore David proves the
incomparable worth of it, 1. From an Argument drawn from an Antithesis, or
opposition with it, and all other Creatures, in the Text. 2. From the effects
it works, which are two, 1. Spiritual comfort in the soul, ver. 7.2. Security
and safety of both body and soul, ver. 8.

The Antithesis in the words of the Text stands thus: As if he had said, Let
some swell with Pride, some boil with Revenge, some burn with Lust, some
gasp for Honor, some gape for Riches, all sweat, and toil, and cling for
Something, and some for All things, while the world is dealing her Legacies;
yet none, nor all these, can give my Soul content; there is unum necessariam,
One only necessary thing, which neither Prince nor People, Men nor Angels,
have in their keeping; Height nor Depth, Principalities nor Powers, Life nor
Death, can take away, which makes my Prayers break through the Clouds toward
Heaven, importunes God to bow down the Heavens, and come down into my heart;
Lord life up the light of thy countenance upon us.

The division of the Text we have pre-occupated in the context, which you see
is an Antithesis, or opposition betwixt the Worldlings wish, and the Saints
wish; the Worldlings wish in these words, There be many that will say, who will
show us any good? The Saints wish, in these, Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us. This will be made more clears from the parts: 1. Consider
the opposition betwixt the Subjects, or parties who, the children of the World,
and the children of Light. 2. The quantity, the multitude of the one, (...),
many that say; the paucity and scantling of the other, but David, and some few
that tread in his foot-stepts, that we can scarce trace them out. 3. The
Object, or diverse wishes, The Worldlings wish is like Himself, Momentaris,
fading, temporaris trash, any good; The Sames wish like unto God, grate,
favor, the light of his countenance, an inheritance laid up in heaven, an
everlasting good. 4. The modality or manner. The Worldling only says, the
Saint prays; the Worldling, as he would have any good, so he cares not from
what hand, who will, etc. the Saint, as he would have the chief good, so only
from the hand of God, Lord lift, etc. The Worldlings wish is propounded
interogatively, full of Passion, distraction, distrust, despair; the Saints
wish is preferred in an humble petition before the Throne of grace, full of
faith, Hope, confidence, and spiritual consolation, Lord life, etc.

Now we should pass from the Div sion to Observations, but that the words are
to be unfolded, for clearer understanding of the matter, there be many: Many is
always a note of Universality, and sometimes taken so universally, as it
includes all, excludes none, Romans 5.19. By the disobedience of One many are
made sinners, that is, all men: sometimes for a great number simply considered,
yet but a few compared with others, By the obedience of some many shall be made
righteous, that is, a great number saved, yet but a few in comparison of
Reprobates. 3. It signifies the most and greatest part of men: Mat. 7.13. Wide
is the gate that leads to destruction, and many there be that enter in.

In the first sense, to say that all men wished thus, were not charity; in the
second, to say these Worldlings were but few in comparison of Saints, were
neither truth nor piety; in the third, to say they are many in comparison of
Saints, agrees with Scripture, truth, experience, and the true meaning of this
place.

That say: Saying sometimes imports an act of the Understanding, when one
thinks so; of the Will, when one desices so; of the Affection, when one
inordinately desires, properly of the tongue when they express that in words,
which they think and desire with the heart. All this suits with this place,
with all worldlings, their Thoughts are wholly taken up, their Wills wholly
bent, their Affections set a whoring after the things of this world, and
sometimes out of abundance of the heart the tongue will not stick to speak as
much; and if many say so, more think so: And though men carry not their hearts
on their tongues ends, it is hard to think so always, and never to speak so.
No children but they that want their due conception, or still-borne, but they
cry at the birth, no vile thoughts but those that are choked in the heart, by
grace, but will sometimes be uttered by the tongue.

Who? This note of interrogation sometimes has the force of negation, and
denies more strongly than a plain negation would do, as psalm. 76.7. Who may
stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? That Is none.

And true it is, that such is the wavering distrust, and boundless wishes of
Worldlings, that they are often times wracked with despair of ever receiving
good; and if they enjoy it, it is but in handling a feather, in fight a shadow,
in weight a smoke, in opening an Image of plaister-work, nay plain nothing:
But this is not the meaning: Quis? Who? (says Piscator) is as much, as O si
quis, O that any would, optatively, and in conclusion, this jumps with the
former, for oftentimes, where there are the greatest Wishes, there are the
greatest Wants, nay greatest despair. And here we may observe, an employed
diminution: 1. O si quis, O that any would; as if it were but wish and have:
then a Si quis, or Proclamation, if any will; then (as if he were at a loss)
interrogatively, Quis? Who will? What Prince? what People? what Man? what
Angel? what Saint? what Reprobates? nay, before they stick out, what Devil?
rather than their hands be empty, with Ahaziah will go to Beelzebub, the God
of Ecron, for Health, with Saul to the Witch for Counsel, with those of
Lapland, so they arrive at their Wishedfor port, buy wind of the Devil, if
their souls will purchase it.

Show, that is, perform, it has relation to the word (say) going before, and
must answer to it, as if he should say present to our understandings, consent
to our Wills, satisfy our Concupiscences, perform that indeed which we affect
with the Heart, and desire with the Tongue.

Any. This word (any) is not found in the Original, yet it is employed here,
and written in every Worldlings heart, which, as it makes the proposition
indefinit, so it argues their lusts are infinite.

Good, The word (...) too, here in the Original, is sometimes put for that
which is Pleasant, sometimes for that which is Profitable, as for that which is
Good, as they either please or profit, of Concupiscence, Beauty, Bravery,
disports of Ambition, Honor, Pomp, Glory, of covetousness, Riches, Lands,
Revenewes; all or some of these have a fan, that winnowes nothing out, All is
fish that comes to net.

Thus much for the opening of the words in the former part of the Text; before
we proceed, let us build up this we have cut down: the point of Doctrine we will
raise from this foundation is this, That Many, even the greatest part of the
world, are wholly, disorderly, distractedly, exceedingly bewitched, and taken up
with the things of this world; or (if you please) thus, That there is an
overruling Concupiscence in the souls of most men, for Faculties universal,
for Degrees extensive, for Measure endless, dragging them after the things of
this world, as their main, and architectonicall end.

That we have builded no more upon this Foundation than the words will bear,
first that the Text shall prove, then afterward we will prove the Text.

First, That the greatest part of men are possessed with this epidemicall
disease, that here they are said to be many, compared with Mat. 7.13. Many
there be that enter in at the broad gate: And Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but
few chosen, makes it plain, where many is opposed to few: But how many does
David mean? To say nothing that he was now in persecution, in banishment, where
none durst be seen in his defense, none durst speak in his behalf; it is to be
feared he had as few favorers of his Doctrine as of his Fortune, and those
that are not with him, are against him.

Secondly, That it is a leprosy of the soul that has universally spread
through all the faculties, appears in that they say so; for as books that are
printed, cum privilegio, pre-supposes that they have been examined, reviewed,
approved by the Scrutators: so when men express themselves outwardly, it is
presumed they consent inwardly: True it is, that hypocrites may disguise,
speak better, and think worse, but on the other side, we may be sure that in
this, conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem, if men speak ill, they think as
ill, or worse.

Thirdly, That their souls are winded up to a high pitch of Concupiscence,
exteramely bewitched with these Vanities, appears by this distracted
Interrogation, Quis! Who will? For as sparkling Iron pulled out of the Smiths
Forge, shows the Furnace is hot, so these wishes the passionate Rhetorique of a
distracted soul; one while breathing out Hope, another while Despair, (like
the transes of a frenzy, or the fits of a Fever) shows that the forge of the
Affections does extremely boil.

Fourthly, that their lusts are boundless and endless, is shown in this, That
they hunger after (...) any good; for as those greedy stomachs that revennously
devour any meat, have the dog-like appetite, and can never be satisfied; so
those that go a whoring after all things, cannot be satisfied with any thing,
but as cold drink given in a hot fever, increase the scorching.

Fifthly, That they make them their architectionical end, and the only mark they
aim at; may be proved, 1. from an opposition employed in the Text, for if they
long after any good, they cannot attain the chief good; Christ tells us we
cannot love God and Mammon: 2. From the weakness of the faculties of our
soul, as those that would know the bigness of a Star, or the proportion and
color of any thing a far off, suffers not their eyes to gaze abroad, but
looks through their perspective glasses; so those that would look up at God, a
brightness of glory that no mortal eye can see, must not fix their spiritual
eyes upon the things of this world, as Honor, Profit, Pleasure, for if they
do, they will never pierce the clouds.

Thus you see the Text affords the point without strainig, without wresting:
now we will prove it: 1: In particular, then in general, by Testimony, by
Scripture.

First, to prove the subject of the Question (which every Science takes for
granted) that there are worldlings, or worldly-minded men, were as needless,
as for a man in the world, while he beheld the Heavens that encompassed him,
the Stars that gave him light to go about, to prove there were a world, or
for a man that was tossed in the midst of the Sea, and could see no Land to
prove there were a Sea.

2. That there are many worldlings arises from the former, as one link of a
chain joined to another; if a Leprosy has infected a part, it will spread
over the whole; when a Gangreen has seized upon one limb, the rest can scarce
escape putrefaction; if there be carnal and worldly-minded men, there will be
many; and whilst the seeds of this corruption lies within all, apt to be
kindled by any spark, disposed by nature, and kindled by imitation, one Beacon
gives warning to the rest. All Scriptures, all ages, men of all conditions,
have given incontroulable evidence to this truth, Scriptures, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists have foretold, reproved, dehorted from this multitude.
All ages before the Flood, many thousands first spiritually drowned in
Adultery, Fornication, Uuncleanness, Lasciviousness, after bodily in the
waters, only eight that forsook the world, and escaped the flood. Since the
flood till Christ, who stood in opposition with the world, he found but twelve
that would forsake it, and one of them a Devil. Since Christ, in these last
days, as last so worst and most perilous most men lovers of Pleasure more than
lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.1. Men of all conditions, Jews, Gentiles, Turks,
Pagans, Christians, Young, Old, Rich, Poor, so many, that while we cite all to
bring in evidence, we shall scarce find any to be judge or witness, that is
not a party not partial. Thus you see the multitude.

3. That all the powers of the soul are possessed with it, and that in a high
degree it is as easy to prove; we will instance only in the voluptuous man, for
the point is so large, and the time so short, that we must examine one for all
the rest. To begin with his understanding, for there all vanities enters
aboard, and loses anchor, it is wholly occupied (as Phalaris was in new
torments) in inventing new pleasures to delight the Eye, Arbors, Orchards,
stately Buildings: to delight the Palate, new Junkets, Meats, Drinks, Wines;
new Recreations in their Sports, Plays, Revellings. Now the understanding once
kindled, though (like a match) it be but slow in burning, when it presents but
the least spark to the will, it is up aloft (as a train of Gun powder) dicto
citius, one faculty inflames another, till the whole man be in a combustion,
and that so fiercely, so furiousty, so outragiously, that neither Reason nor
Scripture, Counsels nor Reproofs, Fear nor shame, can reclaim them: Thus you
see the universality and extremity of it.

4. That their lusts and labors are endless, in pursuing these vanities, as
their only end, we need not toil to prove, as before in the voluptuous: We
will instance now in the Covetous Man, whereof the one thinks the other the
greatest fool in the world, the one for sparing, the other for spending; and
yet the Seripture calls them both fools. O consider how the caresof the world
rush upon them, in the morning as soon as they awake, accompany, and rack them
in the day, scare them in the night, follow them to bed, hinder them from
sleep, affright them in their dreams; and for what? to build stately Houses,
purchase. Lands, heap up Riches, procure Dgnities, make Marriages, join
Kindreds, as though there were no Death, no Grave, no Resurrection, no
Judgment, no God, no Devil, no Heaven, no Hell hereafter.

Thus it is proved in patricular; a word or two in general, and we will pass
on First by the testimony of Heathen men, that had but the lgith Nature; of the
Apostles, that had the light of Inspiration; of Christ, that was the light it
self; and so we have found the Spring.

First, That Heathen men that were of the world should discry this enormity of
the world, and they that were blindfold should espy others go astray, had been
a wonder, if it were not so palpable, so universal, so extreme, that the very
blind might grope it; that well might Juvenall say, Prima fere vota, and tantis
notissima templis, divitiae ut Crescant, Every man's first wish's, first prayers
are, when he enters into Church, that riches may increale. Were it a satyr, or
too harsh a reproof to say so in therese days? The truth is, our Doctrine now
is far purer than the Heathens were, but in point of practice we differ
little; I do not speak of all, but as my Text leads me, of (...) many.

Secondly, Of the Apostles, take one for all, 1 John 2.16. All that is in the
World, is, the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and pride of Life. Lust
of the Flesh as carnal Recreations, Banqueting, Laughing, Playing; lust of the
Eyes, Riches, Wealth, Profits; pride of Life, as vain Glory. Promotion,
Nobility, carnal Wisdom, Beanty, excess in Apparel: these almost share the
world amongst them; if there be some Saints of purer metal, it is but like a
vein of Gold mixed with much Dross, none pure and altogether refined, but those
triumphant in Haven.

Thirdly, let him witness this, that mnst judge us all, our Savior, amongst
that (...), or throng of suitors that pressed upon him while he sojourned here,
how many surd forthis world? how few for the world to come? Indeed some
troubled with Issues of Blood, Lepers, Blind, Lame, Dumb, Lunatic, possessed
with Devils came to him; but for clensing original Sin, leprosy of the Soul,
blindness of the Heart, lameness of the Affections, spiritual Phrensies,
casting out legions of Iniquities; he had almost as few Suitors in his Life, as
Rescuers at his Death: There came indeed two or three to him, to ask what they
should do to attain Heaven, being told that they must sell their Goods,
forsake the World (as that Cardinal that would not forego his part in Paris
for that in Paradise) they forsook Christ and clove to the World. The Jews
hoped, the Romans feared, Herod was troubled, Caesar was disquieted, his
Enemies were jealous, his Friends and Apostles stood expecting, and all but for
a temporal Monarchy; when that failed, they failed, only a Thief that was
nailed with im sticked to him; and what thanks was that to him, now to contemn
(and crucify the world) that had already condemned and crucified him? Thus the
proof in general arguments and reasions, farther to confirm it, may be four:

1. The first is drawn from the Worldings ignorance; many make choice of these
vanities, highly prize them, earnestly pursue them, rest in them being got,
because they know no better: our Eyes are blind, our Ears deaf, our
Understandings darkened, our Hearts dull, our Affections dead, our Consciences
seared, that they cannot discern spiritual things, God, Glory, and Life
everlasting. This Christ witnesses with his Word to the worman of Samaria, Si
nosses petiisses, if thou had known thou would have asked: With his tears
over Jeresalem: Luke 19.42. O si nosses! Othat thou had known the things that
belong to thy peacel By his pangs in his Agony, Si nossent, if they had known,
they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Butlwhat then? because we are
blind in spiritual, are we therefore quick sighted in temporal things?
because we know no God, shall we know and proze the World the more? Yes: Owls
and Bats that cannot see in the day, are so much quicker in the night: Noals
that have not eyes to look up to heaven, are the best armed for digging in the
earth: Man's soul is a discouersing creature, that must needs bring conclusions
from some premises, if it know to better than the world, it will conclude the
world is best. God and his Word should be the food of our soul; but for lack
of that, like a greedy distempred stomach, it will feed upon any thing, even
(as the disease the wolf) upon the corruptions of our own filthy flesh. The
Philosophers reason concludes here, the Sphinx and Eagle are quicker in sight,
the Vultur in smelling, the Spider in touching, and so in the rest, than man
(though he be of a nobler complexion) because nature has bounded them there,
induing him farther with reason; which darkens the inferior faculties, as the
Sun the rest of the Stars: so if Gods grace shine in our hearts, all worldly
glory is darkened, Beauty seems a painted snaile, Riches but vanity, Honor but
a blast of idle wind: But if we make this brittle, glassy world (which should
be our Perspective, and spectacles to look up toward Heaven) our
looking-glass; our own vanities will reflect upon our eyes, as Pigmalion with
his picture, or Narcissus with his own shadow, we shall dout upon our selves,
the world, and the flesh.

2. The second reason is drawn from our indistinct knowledge; for though we
know heavenly things in part, yet so fully, so plenarily, so distinctly, as
these below; what man amongst us so ignorant, so brutish that has not heard
of Heaven? cannot discourse of Heaven? sometimes thinks not of Heaven? meditates
not that there will come a day of death, of judgment? that our life will
vanish away as a smoke, as a vapor, as a dream? and as death leaves us, so
judgment will find us. But alas, this Knowledge is but Ignorance, cannot
distinguish us from Reprobates, nay, from Devils; they know more of this by
contemplation, by observation, than we: here is the default, that it is not
grounded in the Understanding, settled in the Affections, wrought into the
heart, established in the Conscience; this is the true and distinct knowledge,
and what our knowledge has indefinite of spiritual, it will have in excess of
temporal: This arises from the disproportion and distance betwixt our souls
and spiritual things, from the proportion and nearness betwixt them, and
temporal; they are continually in our sight, fills our eyes more, affects us
deeplyer, and though they be like the Moon, now w^xing, now wayning, now
eclipsed, now altogether gone; yet because they are nearest us, they seem
bigger than Grace, Mercy, Peace, and other fixed Stars in the firmament of
glory.

3. The third reason to prove the we are passionately carried after the things
of this world, is drawn from the cause, which in general is the corruption,
and depravation of our nature, and the improvement of these cursed seeds in
particular to every unregenerate man, who can bring Light out of Darkness,
gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figgs of Thistles?

Who being earthly, can desire any thing but earthly? it is Christ's own saying,
Joh. 3.31. Qui ex terra, terrena etc. He that is of the earth is earthly, and
speaks of the earth; nay, he not only speaks of it, but he thinks of it, dreams
of it, twings, and galls, and toils his soul for it; places his health, his
wealth, his felicity in it, that men are become like brambles, growing with
both ands into the ground: as waspes can relish nothing but poison, as spiders
weave webbs out of nothing but the principles of our corrupted nature; as amber
draws nothing but stubble, trash, and straw unto us: Lust reigns in the throne
of the flesh, the world besieges it; Satan strives to be the Porter; these
three are the Tritarkes of the Soul, that either bribes or casts Conscience
into a sleep, suffering the Will, Understanding, and Affections to entertain
no guest, till they have first sworn Allegiance to them: hence is that
disorder in the soul, distempered heat of a feavour, now carking, now cating,
now burning, now boiling, now loving, now loathing, still coveting, never
satisfied.

4 Fourthly, the general example of others, and daily conversing with them,
begets in men an esteem, that some unvaluable excellency is in them: All places
seem to worship this Mammon, or Idol of the World; Towns, Viliages, Countries,
Cities, Courts, and Commonwealths makes suits for this; Debates in common
Pleas, upper Bench, Chancery, Court of Wards; Trialls for Lands, Goods,
Liberty, Honor pleads answer to this interrogatorie, Who will show us any
good? Men ventures themselves on the angry Seas, diggs into the bowels of the
Earth, exposes their bodies in wars to Wounds, Scarrs, Schirmages, Massakers,
Death, for Honor, Riches, Wealth, Empire, Dignity; the Young man hopes, the
Strong man enjoyes, the O d fears to lose them, the Poor sorrows for them,
the Rich rejoices in them, and yet still craves more; an Earldome, a Dukedom,
a Kingdom, an Empire, nay, if the whole would could be granted; such is the
boundless ambition of man, that he would weep with Alexander, that there were
no more worlds to be conquered but one; nay, for this they will swear, lie,
deceive, oppress, extort, toil Body, wound Soul, gall and gash Conscience, and
are not so many examples by Sea, Land, Young, Old, Rich, Poor, able to draw a
world after them? Hitherto the reasons, the uses follow, 1. Of information:

Qu And, Whether it be lawful, agreeable to Gods will, any prejudice to the
health of the Soul, to desire these tempor all things or no?

Answ. The truth is, we may: for all good is (...), quasi (...) amiable, (...),
very divine, having some spark of Gods Image in it; goods temporal,
spiritual, internal, external, eternal for this life, for the life to come.

Are all attractive, desirable in their places, in their order? 1. Because they
are Gods Creatures which are all good, all for some use: 2. Because God has
implanted in us, by nature, a desire of them; omne appetit bonum, every thing
desires that which is good, and nothing is desired but that which is good or
seems to be so, in that we call evil good, desire it excessively, disorderly;
it came by corrupted nature, not by nature: 3. Because we cannot live without
them; they are scrips, and baggs that we must use in our pilgrimage to the
heavenly Canaan, barques that must ferry us over Jordan to the Land of Promise:
4. They are means whereby we may serve God with more cheerfulness here, in
providing helps, distributing to the necessity of Saints, charitably
succouring the poor; 5. They are means to further us in our journey to heaven;
for if in the creatures here below, we descry Beauty, Goodness, Glory: O then
how good, how beautiful, how glorious is He that made them? But now, as the
world uses them, they are become thorns, stumbling blocks, impediments,
hindrances for Heaven: and that in these three respects,

1. First, Ratione ordinis, when we desires them disorderly, as children that
delight themselves with the gilded outside of the book, and look not within,
or as swine that feed upon the acrons and look not up at the tree, look not up
at God (except as Mariners at the pole) that thereby they may better arrive at
their earthly shore; desire riches, honor as their chief felicity and end, not
as means leading to that end: this made our Savior direct and prescribe the
right order, Mat. 6 33. Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and the righteousness
thereof, and other things shall be added unto you, for Body, for Soul, for
Health, for Wealth, for this Life as well as for the Life to come: but if the
things of this life that should be Gods Ambassadors, Soldiers, Ledgers,
Factors, rob him of his Glory, and challenge Sovereignty to themselves, though
with Absalom they may seduce, flitter, and b^witch for a time, yet this treason
will be punished, and attach the worldlings conscience, that neither Field, nor
town, nor Bed, nor Board, nor Life, nor Death, nor Depth, nor Grave can render
them secure.

2. Secondly, the things of this world become hurtful, respectu medi, when
they are desired out of measure excessively, when the understanding too highly
prizes them, the will too earnestly desires them, the affections (like
Soldiers about a prey) are at jatre amongst themselves, and at mutiny with God
for them, crying passionately with the Israelites in the Wilderness for Manna,
or Rachael, Genesis 30.1. Da liberos, Give me Children or I die. This is, 1. when
we desire them without condition, not submitting our will to Gods will: 2.
without bounds, that our whole soul is taken up with them, that faith, zeal,
charity are expelled: 3. without end, that if all worldly contentment should
flow upon them, as Rivers into the Sea, yet the boundless bank of their
ambition would never be filled.

3. In the third place, the things of this world become hurtful, respectu
mediorum, when they care not by what means, swearing, lying, fraud, guile,
cousenage, oppression, extortion, dum potiantur modo, so they may get them; rob
Belly, Back, Wife, Children, Friends, Kinsfolks; such the blood of Orphans,
oppress the Widow, grind the face of the Poor, use false Weights and Measures,
deceitful Billances, speak like Angels, practice like Devils, have ravenous
claws under their Harpyes saces, Peacocks feathers, Dragons tails, care not
what point in the compass that wind blows, what Religion be professed, so it
bring them profit: In a word, forgo Credit, Soul, Conscience, Heaven, and
Salvation for them.

The second use arising from the premises, may serve to reprove three sorts of
men:

First, Those that make Mammon their God, Wealth their Felicity, rest here in
things below, as if they had an abiding City; Whether shall we now first chide,
or weep to see that foretold by S. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.2. in these last days come
to pass, Men Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Heady,
high-minded, more men lovers of Pleasure than lovers of God: Would it not make
one's heart to bleed, to see Christians in name, live Epicures lives in deed,
eat, drink and be merry, for to morrow we shall die; like the fool in the
Gospel, sing Requiems to their souls. Luke 12.19. Scule, thou have goods laid
up for many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and be merry; with Achitophel
trust in Policy, with Senacharib in strength of Armies, sacrifice to their own
nets, and draggs, never sincerely think of God, always think of the World, and
though they seem first to pray for spiritual things, and afterward for
temporal, their affections reads them backwards like figures, valuing the
latter ten times more than the former.

Secondly, this reproves and lashes those, if they have not inward lashes
enough, that torment themselves with carking, and will never be satisfied, that
enlarge their desires as Hell, as Hell in desiring all, end less, infinite,
receive Hell into their Souls here, and without repentance be received for
ever into Hell hereafter. Ah Brethren! to see in many, how this care breaks the
Legs, looses the Joints, consumes the Marrow, burns up the Spirits, dries up
the Moisture, wounds their Hearts, deads their Souls, and murders their
Consciences.

Thirdly, this reproves those that care not who trouble the Water, God, Angels,
Devils, or Men, so they be cured; come preferment from East, West, or South, so
they enjoy it: Let Joseph lie in Prison, Daniel in the Lions Den, the three
Children in the hot fiery Furnace; so they laugh, quaffe with Belshazar, fare
deliciously with the rich Glutron, oppress with Zacheus, lie to their own
Consciences with Ananias, so they may enjoy their darling pleasure, profitss,
delights; with Felix, Agrippa, Festus, forsake Christ for the present world;
betray Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, dearest Friend for gain, Flatter,
Seduce, Crouch, look Big, use courteous Equivocations, carry many Faces
under one hood, with Judas betray our Savior for money: O that many men's
consciences did not witness this! I say, O that Countries, Villages, Towns,
Cities, Markets, Fayers, public Courts, and private Families did not testify
this!

The third use should serve to examine our souls, whether we be of this number
that thus preposterously, excessively, by inordinate means stand for the
world, or no? But alas! the symptoms and disasterous effects it works (if
every man's conscience would give up a bill) shows the disease is too
epidemicall: let us rather use means for the cure, first ripping up the sore,
then apply the salve.

1. First consider all things of this world, separated from Christ, are but
vanities: Let the ambitious man's pride be a looking glass for this, see how he
robs all creatures to adorn his body, from one takes his Wool, from another
his Skin, from another his Furre, from another his Excrements, as Silk from
Worms, beggs Pearls of Fishes, diggs into the ground for Gold and Silver,
turns up the sands of the Sea for precious Stones; then Peackock-like, pride
themselves in these, which are but liveries of Beasts, skum of the Earth,
badges of Sin, earnests of Death, and recognisants of Hell. And as these, so
Riches, Honor, Wealtth, are but vain: Why should we then cark for them?

Obj. But you will say, how can we live in credit with out this inordinate
carking?

Answ. Yes: What if thou go bare? wholsoms Frize is better than infected
Velvet. What though thou fare hard? dry Bread is better than poisoned
Dainties. What though thy childred be kept Short? It is better to pinch them
than to feed them with blood. What if thou must yet come lower? It is better to
fall into the Dust, than into Hell with the damned.

2. Secondly, they are not only vanities, but also deceits, that Promise
fair, but perform nothing; golden Apples of Sodom, a deceitful Laban, a
false Merchant, a cunning Fisher, that lays pleasant Baits on dangerous Hooks,
a Strumpet of Babylon that gives poisoned Drinks in golden Cups, an alluring
Jaeb a flattering Joab, betraying Judas: Go over the whole world, behold
Counties, view Provinces, look into Cities, hearken at the Doors, and Windows
of private Houses, of Princes Palaces, of secret Chambers, and you shall hear
nothing but lamentable complaints; one for what he has lost, another for what
he has not won, a third for that he is not satisfied, ten thousand for that
they are deceived.

3. Thirdly, as they are Deceits, so they are also Torments that afflict the
Body, wound the Soul, gall and gash Conscience; they bring vexation of
Thoughts, tribulation of Fears, pricking of Cares, unquietness of Soul,
Flies of Egypt, grapes of Sodom, clusters of Gomorrah, gall of Dragons, poison
of Cockatrice; that brings a Curse with them that will be a Canker in thy
wealth, a Moth in thy richest Garment, a Worm in thy tallest Cedar, a Rust in
thy purest Gold, which one day, as the frenzy of Caine, despair of Judas,
madness of Achitophel, trembling of Felix, will dump all thy delights; who
therefore, if the whole World were a Globe of Gold the Earth a Center of
Diamond; if the Heavens poured down Balm, and the Clouds showred down
precious Ointment, if Sea and Land, Sun and Stars paid tribute, and every
year that went about, strove to crown them with Goodness, who (I say) would
shackle his soul within that stinking Dungeon of this World, but would rather
look through the grates and crevises of the flesh at God, a fixed Star of
glory, farr^ above any moveable Firmament. So we have done with the former part
of the Text, this point, we pass on to the latter, Lord lift thou up, etc.

These words are an Epiphonema, occasioned by the premises, partly
Declamatory, inveighing against the folly of the Worldlings, partly
Acclamatory, petitioning God, partly Consolatory, comforting the Saints in the
person of David. By this Asyndeton here, that these words are coupled to the
former by no distructive note, as but Lord, are yet Lord: we may observe the
Divine Rhetoric, and Suador of the Spirit, as by the Matter, so by the Manner,
implying that there is no more comparison betwixt God and Mammon, than there is
betwixt Light and Darkness: Hence two points of Doctrine employed might arise,
if you look back at the Antecedent this: though the Worldlings be high in
Dignity, glorious in Title, infinite in Number, yet they are not to be
followed; if forward at the Consequence, this; that there is a Pearl in Gods
keeping, for gaining of which, all worldly things are to be trodden under foot:
but we must leave these as lesser Stars, hid under a cloud: we come to that
which is expressed, The light of Gods Countenance, a Star able to set all
mortal eyes on Earth immortal in Heaven at a gaze, at a maze: Lift thou up
the Light, etc. There is no darkness in the words, unless too much light
dazzle our eyes: it is a speech borrowed from men that use to cast a lightsome
Countenance upon those they favor or affect, as though he should say, O Lord
affect our Souls, ravish our Spirits with the sensible feeling of thy Favor,
Grace, and Blessing that flows from thee: Hence issues this point of Doctrine,
that the Grace of God, and the Light of his Countenance, is a Blessing beyond
all prices unvaluable, beyond all contradictions impregnable, beyond all
conceptions transcendet, beyond all comparisons superlatively great.

Every word in the Text has a special Emphasis to prove this; Lord, the word
in the Original is Jehovah, composed of spirtuall letters, to note the
spiritual simplicity of his infinite Being, a (...) that the Hebrews durst
not speak, only used in the singular number, to note the Unity of the Daity,
appropriated to none but him, excluding all creatures, having Being independent
in himself, giving subsistence to all other things, faithfully performing his
promises, and then shall not be that is All in All, made All, sustaines All, is
All-sufficient, perform that to his Saints more than a World, or thousands of
worlds beside?

But what is the suit, that none but such a Majesty can grant? It is Light: not
the Light created the first day, though that enlivened the blind Chaos, not
those on the fourth day; the greater and the lesser Lights hung up in the
Canopy of Heaven, to enlighten the Theater of the World against man's entrance
on the stage; not the force of reason implanted in man, though John 1.4. that
be the Light of Man, not the Word of God; though that be a Light unto our Feet;
not the Ministers of the Gospel, though they ( Math. 5.14.) be Lights of the
World; not Christ alone (which truly is virtually All) though ( John 1.8.) he
be the true Light that enlightens every one that comes into the World; not that
in Heaven ( Colos. 1.12.) the Inheritance of Saints in Light: but a Light that
includes all these, that God, Christ Jesus, his Word, his Ministers, Light
temporal, spiritual, eternal, are all ours, and that (...) here, by way of
eminence, The Light of Gods Countenance; Christ was comforted in his Agony with
the Light of Angels; Moses his Face shined at the light of Gods hinder parts: O
then, The Light of Gods Countenance! What Comfort brings it here, what eternal
Bliss hereafter?

First, To prove that The Light of Gods Countenance is beyond all Prices
unvaluable: Consider,

1. But what this Light was before sin put it out: 2. What it cost before it
could be lighted again:
Before sin put it out, it was Gods gracious favor in giving Man the
comfortable use and interest in all Gods creatures, the Hosts of Heaven, Sun,
Moon and Stars, Fowls of the Air, Fishes of the Sea, Beasts of the Barth,
Creeping things, Herbs, Fruit, Corn, Wine, Oil, were lines drawn from the
infinite circumference of Gods goodness, to the center of Man's felicity: These
were but blanks, besides the Communion of Angels in Heaven, that seems to be a
Price, the blessed Vision, eternal Union with God through Christ; a Price able
to make Men and Angels sound up their Trumpets of praise for ever.

Secondly, what the lighting of it again cost: The Vestals fire put our, might
not be kindled but by the beams of the Sun, nor the light of Gods Grace, but by
the obedience of his only Son; Men, Angels, Blood of Martyrs, Incence of
Saints, a thousand Worlds, ten thousand Rivers of Oil could not, but the Death
of him that was the Lord of Life.

Secondly, that it is beyond all contradictions impregnable the whole legion of
Saints can witness, it is Armor of Proof, a strong Tower, an invincible
Fort, a rock of Salvation, that if Men, Devils, Behemoths, Leviathans, Losses,
Diseases, Torments swarm about one like the flies of Egypt; it will make one
sing under the whip at the stake, in the flames, make the patient laugh, when
the spectator weeps, carry frail flash singing and rejoicing through a world
of bonds, rodds, swords, racks, wheels, flames, strappadoes, break through
torments, armies tempests, floods, toward Heaven, shake off bonds, fetters,
manacles, and lead captivity captive.

Thirdly, That it is beyond all Conceptions transcendent, Reasons, Scripture,
Testimony, Experience, can all tell; for Man or Angel to conceive or express
the secret VVorking, the powerful Operation, the infinite splendour of Gods
Grace, were to span the Heavens with his Fingers, to grasp the waves of the Sea
in his Fist, gather the waters of the Ocean into a bottle; Reason cannot
fathom it, but is at a stand, Scripture expresses nothing so much as that it
is unexpressible, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of Man, 1 Cor. 2.9. the Saints at the sense of it are
wrapped into an ecstasy, Cherubims veil their Faces, sanctifying grace in man
comes somewhat near it, which causes Groans of the spirit unutterable, Joy in
the heart unspeakable; and yet there is as great a dis-proportion, as for one
Star that is enlightened by the Sun, to express the whole glory of the Sun;
the world is but a printed Map, the real Vision is in Heaven; all creatures
are but leaves in this imperfect Abridgement, the large Volume is sealed up by
him that keeps the keys of life.

Fourthly, That it is beyond all comparisons superlatively great, the very
devils can tell, and therefore to rob one man of it, will offer the whole world
in counterpoise: we are like Sun Dials, unless it shine, blaze Torches,
Tapers, Candles, all Stars at ones, are of no use, flow Riches, Honor,
Strength, Wives, Friends, Childen to our contentment; without that Sun it is
still night; they may be Copies of Gods Grace, but without Seal, Ciphers of no
value, unless the Unity of the Spirit be joined with them: we cannot conceive
so great a number of earthly things, but still more may be added, more may be
desired; but he that has The Light of Gods Countenance is ravished in Spirit,
cannot conceive more, has contentment in heart, cannot desire more, his cup
does overflow.

All this may be confirmed by the Effects, and Fruits of it, by Examples; by
the Effects, it is Light, that we may see all things, expells Darkness, that
the mist of Ignorance vanishes, enlightens us that we are lights in our selves,
that Reason, Will, Affections are improved, inflames our souls with the heat
of Zeal, causes Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, Long-suffering, bud out as
herbs in the spiritual garden of the heart, if God lift up this Light over
the Zenith of our souls, it causes these earthly shadows of Honor, Beauty,
Ambition, to be the shortest, our days of Comfort the longest, it is All
things, a Castle to the Besieged, Liberty to the Prisoner, a Father to the
Fatherless, a Husband to the Widow, Clothes to the Naked, Bread to the
Hungry, Health to the Sick, Ointment to the Head, Oil to the Face, Wine to the
Heart, Marrow to the Bones, Strength to the Body, Comfort to the Sole, eternal
Salvation to both Body and Sole.

By examples, this Light held up, confirmed the blessed Angles, when the rest
fell into utter darkness; guided Enoch that he walked with God, preserved Noah
in the Arc from the Flood, Jasswaged the heat of fire to the three Children in
the Furnace, stopped the mouth of the Lions against Daniel in the Den, made
the Apostles sing Psalms at midnight in the Gaoles, comforted the Martyrs in
the Racks, Torments, Executions, made Stephen in the midst of hellish pains to
see Heaven open, as the Star the wise men, guides all Saints to Christ in
glory.

All the reasons we will give of this point, is, that it is a Blessing beyond
all Reason, a Star above our Firmament, that our understanding cannot
calculate, our Jacobs Staff cannot reach to; if we attain to it by any
means, it must be (with the Angels) by Jacobs Ladder, Christ Jesus: in that we
cannot conceive it, it arises from the disproportion betwixt our knowledge and
it, in that it is our chiefest bliss, it is from the proportion betwivt our
souls and it. We have done with the former, a word of the latter: Man's soul
was created by God, nothing can satisfy it, but God has some part of Gods
image in it, like the pin of a D^all, still restless, till it be fixed upon
him the Pole; or Noah's Dove, still flichring for the windows of Heaven. Now
Gods Grace is the earnes, the seal in the forehead, the wedding garment, which
if we keep here, will assure us of all hereafter, the soul being in
continuance eternal, in desire infinite, cannot be contented with a finite:
Man being of creatures the noblest, cannot rest in an inferior creature; but
when the Creator supports the Creature, the clearest light shines in deepest
darkness, strength uponlds weakness; heaven is promised to him that is
rescued out of hell; and is not this able to sway with all men in the world,
with the wise men to forsake Herds, Cattle Friends, Lands, Revenews, and
follow this Star that guides us unto Christ, at his Fathers right hand in
glory? Thus the reason, the uses follow.

Obj. Are all worldly things, as Gloe worms, and rotten stocks in the dark,
obscured, when God puts brightness of his face? Some men seem to have as
sincere joy in their Corn, Wine, Children, and in their eyes seem as bright
Stars as Gods favor.

Answ. I answer, it is either in the night of their ignorance, before this
morning Star appear in their hearts, or if after they are but Pareliosses,
which may shine, but it is when the true Sun is under a cloud: again, what
light they have it is borrowed from the other by reflection.

2. Obj. The Saints, in whom this Light dwells, suffer afflictions,
persecutions, sorrows without, sometimes pangs of Conscience within, as though
their light was put out in utter darkness, whiles the Worldings rejoice.

Answ. I answer, though God sometimes cover his face with clouds, yet in these
storms there are signs of his favor, which as the Rainbow shows some small
shower will follow, yet they are a sure pledge, he will not utterly destroy
them.

3. Obj. If the light of Gods countenance so far exceed all things, why do
so few men sue for it, so many for earthly things?

Ans. I answer, they are like blazing Stars, and Meteors in the lower regions,
that set all eyes at gaze; man by nature is blinded with this ignis fatuus, or
foolish fire, that leads him into every ditch: in that the Saints are freed,
they are like the celestial Orbs, having a peculiar motion to themselves,
besides the common motion.

The second use may let us see, wherein this grace of God consists, it is not
his favor in bestowing natural endowments, as good temperature, in body,
blood, spirits, which has the usual name of cheerfulness; it is not a moral
comfort at sing from the exercise of high and heroical moral virtues which
breeds a kind of solace and contentment in the exercise, and work delight.

Thirdly, it is not a civil blessing consisting in honor, riches, wealth and
other things temporal; for thus far the worlding may go, but it is a
spiritual favor arising from the presence of Gods holy spirit, curing us,
healing us, sealing us to the everlasting love of God in Christ Jesus. See the
links of this golden Chain; by this grace we are become new creatures,
conceived of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. reconciled unto God in Christ, freed from
Satan's bondage, made spiritual Kings, and Priests, sanctified by degrees,
assured of ou a loption, encouraged to come to the throne of Grace, have peace
of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, enjoys light that guides us in the narrow
straights of death, makes Saints shine at the Resurrection, as stars carries
us into heaven, where neither Sun nor Moon, but the Lamb shall enlighten us
for ever.

The third use may serve for humbling, from whence comes our foylings and
faylings, our courage and valor, only from Gods grace: 1. It makes us able to
do any thing; 2. fuffer any thing; 3. saves us from all things.

1. Do any thing; subdue the flesh, encounter Satan, conquer the world, when
all friends forsake us at death, and follow us but to the grave; it makes our
beds in sickness, causes us to dye softer, stands by us when we groan, and
comforts u^; heartens us upon death when it is coming, and says our Redeemer
lives; whispers us when we are departing, and says our warfare is
accomplished; lodges our body in the grave, as in a bed; man's our soul to
heaven, makes it able to look God in the face without terror; nay, sustains us
when Riches, Parents, Husband, Friends, Breath, Life, even Patience, Hope,
Faith have left us, in some measure it will not leave us.

Secondly, suffer any thing, Rage. Dragons, Bears, Lions, if God be pacified,
frown Tyrants and Executioners so he smile; mangling of Bodies, ripping of
Bowels, racking of Joints, burning of Flesh, boiling in Oil become tolerable;
when a murdering Theodorick sees the face of a Man in the mouth of a Fish, it
lets us see the power of God in weak flesh; when Bessus hears the cry of murder
in the chattering of Birds, it shows the sweet whispers of comfort in the
soul: when Sanders runs over Irish mountains out of his wits, it makes us run
to God; when Reprobates call for hills and mountains to cover them, it makes
us look at the brightness of Gods face (as the Gymnosophists at the Sun) with
undazled eyes.

Thirdly, it saves us from all encounters, suppose Hell be let loose upon us,
the D^vils let sl p all their Dogs at once, some bark, some bite, all pursue;
Gods grace stops all their mou^hs that they cannot hurt. This Light of Gods
countenance is to us as a pillar of a cloud by day, a pillar of fire by night,
stands still, like the Sun to Joshua, till we have vanquished our bodily and
ghostly enemies, when our joys seem to set, it turns back (as the Sun to
Hezekiah) that neither Plague, nor Sword, nor Famine of the Word, nor Death,
nor Hell, nor Damnation shall prevail over us.

Lastly, a word of Exhortation, and we have done. Now then (Brethren) Is not
this Light worth the beholding? you cannot have always comfort in Wealth,
comfort in Health, comfort in Friends, Neighbors, Wives, Children, these be
not always, and while they be, they sometimes minister matter of discomfort;
yea sometime their life and presence do discourage, but in the presence of God
is constant Peace, constant Comfort, and Joy to be found, he is constantly
Good, True: O get this favou however you do, get it, and you shall have all,
come what will come, this changes not; these Comforts in Christ are sure, never
cease seeking, begging hearing, conferring, till his face shine upon you and
you be sure of his love; you have seen the comforts of the world, you see how
all cisterns fail you;go to the fountain in the word of God, in the House of
God, in the Favor of God, you shall have comfort in his Light, you shall see
light, when others nothing but Darkness round about. O then, thou that sit
in darkness of Affliction, darkness of Poverty, D^bt, in the darkness of
Temptation, of Sin, thou that see no light, none within thee, none without
thee, none in thy Soul, none in thy Mind, none in thine Estate, Friends; arise,
put on Beauty, come into the Light, stand up from the Dead; dead Comforts, dead
Companions, dead Works; and the Lord shall lift up the light of his countenance
upon thee for ever.

(...).


