THE JUSTIFICATION OF A SINNER: Being the Maine ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE TO THE
GALATIANS.

By a Reverend and Learned Divine.

printer's or publisher's device depicting a duck bearing the word "WICK" in
its bill (McKerrow, 368) NON ALTVM PETO I.S.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to be sold at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1650.

THE PREFACE, For the Reading of the Epistle to the GALATIANS; In five
Particulars.
The situation of Galatia. Her Inhabitants Her reception of the Gospel. Her
false Teachers. Their false Doctrine. Their Arguments for it. Their design in
it. The Scope and parts of this Epistle three. Paul's Apostleship is immediate
from Christ; and no way inferior to the chief Apostles; Circumcision is of it
self, a thing indifferent. Justification makes us a right unto Blessedness,
whereto Faith in Christ is our title, and works of Love are our tenure: (and
these two are sufficient.) But works of the Law are neither title nor tenure.
Paul exhorts to several holy duties. He argues variously: 1. Gravely, 2.
Severely, 3. Gently. For the time and the place.

1. The Direction.
IT is addressed to the Churches of Galatia. The Land of Judea (extending it
so, as sometime it is, to include Samaria and Galilee) is bounded on the South
with Arabia the Desert, wherein the Famous Mount Sinai is seated. But on the
North, it bordereth upon Syria (whereof anciently it was a Province;) for
therefore the King of Syria is by the Prophet Daniel frequently called the King
of the North. And North from Syria lies Cilicia, the Native Country of St.
Paul; and North from Cilicia is Galatia, whereof the Metropolis or Chief City
is the Famou^ Ancyra, from whence the people of the whole Country are by some
Historians called Ancyrans: So that the Countries of Arabia, Judea, Syria,
Cilicia, and Galatia, lie as it were in a Line under the same Meridian
successively Northward, the latter still more Northerly then the former.

Galatia being a large Province of Asia the less, was originally inhabited by
the Greeks: But afterward (some 360 years before Christ) was possessed by the
Gauls or French, who quartering and mingling themselves with Greeks, gave
occasion that the Country was called Gallo-Graecia, or Graeco-Gallia, i. e.
that part of Greece wherein the Gauls lived. At last the Jews, whose manner
was (being a populous Nation) to disperse their Families into diverse other
Countries, seated themselves as sojourners or strangers, in the chief Cities
of Galatia, where they had their several Synagogues, as the French and Dutch
in some Cities of England, have their proper Congregations.

Into this Country of Galatia bordering upon Cilicia, Paul being a Cilician
borne, did in discharge of his Ministry, make two several journeys. The first
by way of Plantation to publish the Gospel; and the second by way of
Visitation, to confirm the Believers in it. And those Believers of Galatia,
who came in unto the Faith, whether from the Jews or from the Gentiles (for
there came in from both) are in respect of their several Congregations, styled
by the Apostle, the Churches of Galatia, unto whom he directs this Epistle.

2. The Occasion.
AFter Paul's final departure from Galatia into other Countries, to plant and
settle the Greek and Latin Churches, there arose in the Congregations of
Galatia certain false Teachers; who by Birth and Nation were not Jews, but
Proselytes or Strangers, who had lived among the Jews in Judea, where by
Religion they became Christians, and from thence traveled afterward into
Galatia; amongst whom (it seems by Ecclesiastical Writers) Cerinthus was the
leading man.

The false Doctrine taught by these, was, That unto Salvation, the Ceremonies
of the Jewish Law were necessary, especially that of Circumcision. Yet
heerewith they taught not, that Faith in Christ, and Holiness of life, were
either to be rejected or neglected: But approving the necessity of these, they
pressed their insufficiency; alleging, that Faith and Holiness were not
sufficient and prevalent, to procure us a right, interest, and claim unto the
Blessings promised in the Gospel, unless to our Faith and Holiness we
super-added Circumcision. Thus they framed a compliance of Christ with Moses,
to compound the Gospel with the Law; or rather if we consider the moment of
the matter, to substitute the Law instead of the Gospel; for both of them
cannot subsist together.

The Arguments whereby they raised and maintained this Doctrine, were chiefly
Calumnies against St. Paul; partly by extolling Peter, James, and John, as the
chief Pillars of the Church, as Apostles ordained by Christ himself, as
Residentiaries of Jerusalem in the Consistory of Christ; partly by disparaging
Paul's Apostleship, and opposing the authority of the Apostles against his
authority; as, that he had not the authority of an Apostle, or if he had any,
it was but derivative only from them, and therefore was inferior to them;
That he was the only man who opposed the Ceremonies of the Law, for the rest
of the Apostles allowed of them; (and indeed for a time they seemed to allow
them, prudently concealing their mind in that point, lest otherwise the Jews
of Judea, where they chiefly preached, being blindly zealous for the Law,
should have taken distaste against the Gospel.) That he in the point of
Circumcision was inconstant and various; sometime urging it, as he did upon
Timothy; and sometime opposing it, as he did in Titus.

The Design or end of this Doctrine was double. 1. That by this means these
Teachers might render themselves gracious amongst the Jews, who highly
esteemed the use of their ancient Laws; and consequently that hereby they
might become capable of all Honors, Offices, Privileges, and Commodities
granted then to the Jews in diverse places. 2. That hereby they might decline
those persecutions and other inconveniences, whereto those Christians were
subject, who professed the purity of the Gospel stripped from the Jewish
Ceremonies. For in those times by the Civil Laws of Rome, and by the Edicts
of the Roman Emperors, the Jews in all places enjoyed the free exercise of
their Religion: But so did not the Christians, who were every where vexed by
all Unbelievers on all hands both by Jews and Gentiles, as appears throughout
the Acts of the Apostles.

3. The Intention.
THE maine Scope of St. Paul in this Epistle, is to reduce the Galatians from
their Jewish error, in retaining and adhering to the works and Ceremonies of
the Law, unto the sincerity and purity of the Gospel; as will best appear in
the parts of the Epistle, which besides the Salutation and Valediction, seem
principally three.

1. A Defense of his Apostleship. cap. 1. ver. 6. etc. For because the false
teachers by impugning his Apostleship, had grounded and raised their error;
therefore he with great courage and freedom of language, does vindicate the
Office and authority thereof; as that he had not his Apostleship from the
Apostles, nor by the Apostles, but as immediately from Christ as ever they had
theirs; That he was no way inferior to the chief of the Apostles, either for
knowledge in the mysteries of Christ, or for power in Preaching the Gospel;
That they acknowledged the Authority of his Commission, the largeness of his
circuit, and the efficacy of his ministry among the Gentiles; That for
Circumcision, he allowed the liberty of it, as a thing indifferent, to be used
or omitted, as occasions and circumstances should require for the advance of
the Gospel: But he opposed the Necessity of it, that it should be imposed and
forced as a yoke upon all the faithful, without any distinction of persons,
times or places; for such a necessity was inconsistent with the liberty of the
Gospel, which by the necessity of Circumcision must necessarily be overthrown.

2. The Doctrine of Justification. cap. 2. ver. 15. etc. Wherein he declares
the power and virtue of faith in Christ. That every Christian is justified. i.
e. has a present right, interest, or claim unto the future Blessings promised
in Gods Covenant, and bequeathed in his Will and Testament; for it is the
nature of promises and covenants of Wills and Testaments, to create, assign,
and convey, rights, interests, and claims. That the right, interest, or
claim, which we have by virtue of Gods Will and Testament, is a Right of
amity, alliance, and inheritance, whereunto we are instituted and adopted for
the Sons and Heirs of God, as co-heires with Christ; for Wills and Testaments
do produce amities and alliances, by devising Legacies, and settling
Inheritances. That the cause procreant or title whereby we acquire and have
this Right of Inheritance, is Faith in Christ; for by faith in him we covenant
and contract with God to accept and receive this Right; because Christ is the
Publisher, Probator, and Executor of Gods Will; and the Legatary or particular
Heir can never possess himself of the gift assigned him, but by means of the
Executor or heir general: because the performance of the Testators Will, as
to matter of gifts and Legacies is charged only upon the Executor. That the
cause conservant or Tenure whereby we preserve and hold this Right of
inheritance, is our works of love; for the greatness of this Blessing ought
so to animate and quicken our faith, as to make it lively and working by love,
without which our faith is an act imperfect, frustrate, void, and dead; and the
works of love are the conditions and services which we must perform in
acknowledgement and thankfulness unto God for his infinite grace and savor in
giving us this right of Inheritance; for without such works we become
ungrateful and disinheritable to forfeit our future possession of that
inheritance whereto our faith procures us a present right, interest, or claim;
seeing it is in vain for us to have a right unless we perform the services
whereby to hold it; for what Inheritance is there in the world, which requires
not a tenure whereby to hold it, as well as a title whereby to have it? Unto
Blessedness therefore these two only are necessary and sufficient on our
part; namely Faith in Christ, whereby we are Justified or made the Sons of God
jurally, to have the Rights of Sons: and works of love, whereby we are
sanctified or made the sons of God morally, to perform the duties of Sons. As
for works of the old Law, whether Moral, which are rather not-works then
works, as not to have many Gods, not to worship images, not to forswear our
selves, not to work on the Sabbath, etc. or whether Ceremonial, such as
Circumcision, and the rest thereon depending, these (especially the latter) are
no way effectual or causall, either procreant or conservant to our right,
interest, or claim of Blessedness; they are neither a title whereby we
acquire and have that Right, nor a tenure whereby we preserve and bold it: but
are rather destructive and extinctive to defeat, frustrate, and void it; for
seeing the Gospel is Gods last Will and Testament, and every last Will does
infringe all former, therefore he that will adhere to Gods former Will, debars
himself from the benefit of the latter. This Doctrine the Apostle proves, and
presses by reasons, authorityes, examples, and types from the old Testament;
and withal he solidly refutes the arguments alleged by the false teachers
for their false Doctrine.

3. An Exhortation to holiness. cap. 5. verse. 1. etc. Wherein he seriously
moves them to all holy duties; as To persist in their Christian liberty and to
use it without any abuse of it; To live in love and walk after the spirit,
whereby they should be enabled against the lusts of the flesh, the fulfilling
whereof would exclude them from possessing that inheritance, whereto by faith
they had a present right; To practice Christian toleration in bearing with one
another infirmities: To allow a liberal maintenance to their Teachers, whom
although they might mock and defraud of their means, yet God would not be
mocked; To persevere in doing good universally toward all men, especially,
faithfully to the faithful; To suffer persecution joyfully, even to glory in
the Cross of Christ. So that if we respect these two last parts of Doctrine
and Exhortation, this Epistle to the Galatians seems to be an Epitome or
breviat of that to the Romans.

4. The Composure.
THe style or frame of this Epistle is different and various; for the Apostle
earnestly laboring to reduce the Galatians from their Jewish error, summons up
all the sorces of reason and Scripture, omitting no kind of assertion, nor no
kind of argument, but winding and turning himself every way, assumes all forms
of persuasion, whereby to open the truth, and press it home upon them.
Sometime he is grave and stern, neglecting all manner of respect in saluting
them, not affording them any honorable appellation of Christianity, as to call
them Elect, Faithful, or Saints; as his manner is in other of his Epistles to
other Churches. Sometime time he is severe and sharp, reproving and
chasticing them with bitter rebukes, wondering at their sudden revolt from
Christ, and tearming them, a foolish and bewitched people. Sometime again he
is gentle and kind, cherishing and winning them with words of dear affection,
stiling them his brethren and his little children, of whom he traveled in
birth again, commemorating withal their former affection toward him, that at
first they received him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus, and would have
plucked out their own eyes to have given them to him. To this variety and
freedom of argumentation in a way so familiar, the Apostle might be therefore
induced, because the Galatians were his next neighbors bordering upon Cilicia,
whereof he was a Native.

5. The Date.
FOR the time when it was written; some think it was the first of all Paul's
Epistles: Others conceive it written about the same time that he wrote his
Epistle to the Romans; which they collect from the affinity of the argument
between these two Epistles: But if we suppose it written at Rome, then it
seems probable, that it was the last of all his Epistles, written while he
was there a Prisoner at large, after Luke had finished the Acts of the
Apostles, and was departed from him.

For the Place whence it was written, whether from Rome, or from elsewhere,
there is as much uncertainty as for the time. See the Poscript added at the end
of the Epistle.

GAL. CHAP. 1.
VERSE 1.
Text.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, who raised him from the dead. Sense.
Not of men.] (...). i. e. Not from men; men were not the authors from whom I
had my Apostleship.

Neither by man.] i. e. Neither was any mortal man, the secondary means by
whom I was made an Apostle.

But by Jesus Christ.].i. e. By the means of Jesus Christ.

And God the Father.].i. e. And from God the Father, who was the prime author,
from whom he had his Apostleship.

Reason.
These words show the Author of this Epistle, describing him by his name; by
his function, that he was an Apostle; and by his commission, that his
Apostleship was not humane, from men, or by men, but altogether divine, from
God by Jesus Christ. And this is therefore so done, that his Epistle might
carry with it the higher authority, and be received with the greater reverence:
partly for the procuring assent unto the matters therein contained, and partly
for the vindicating of his Apostleship from the calumny of the Judaizers, or
false teachers among the Galatians, who had traduced it, to be but of humane
authority.

Comment.
Paul first so called among the Romans. Many persons are binomious. The
Apostles were founders and planters of the Gospel. Other Ministers but
edifiers and waterers of it. Why Paul here styles himself an Apostle. The
authority of the Apostles was sacred. The Judaizers calumny against Paul's
Apostleship, and the ground of it. Paul's Apostleship not humane for the
author, nor for the means of it, either for his Instruction. or for his
Mission; though for some dismission it were humane. Another difference between
the Apostles and other Ministers. Paul's Apostleship Divine. Christ opposed unto
man. Man is some time put for an ordinary man. Paul's calling equal to the rest
of the Apostles, for the means, and the Author. grounded on Gods Mandate. An
Evangelicall Attribute of God as the sole Author of the Gospel, the Divinity
whereof was to be pressed. Paul's Apostleship singularly divine.

PAUL an Apostle.] The Author who wrote this Epistle, does always call himself
by the name of Paul. But Luke who in Acts of the Apostles, wrote the acts of
Paul's Ministry, does call him Saul, while he preached the Gospel among the
Jews and Syrians. Yet when he began to preach it among the Romans, and amongst
them he began in Cyprus, where Sergius Paulus the Proconsul of the Island,
desired to hear it from him: then, and from that time ever afterward, Luke
mentions him by the name of Paul. Which name being ordinary among the Romans,
might first be attributed unto him in the family of that Roman Proconsul, whose
name was also Paul. But whether Saul and Paul be two different names given to
one and the same person, (for among the Jews as well as other Nations, many
persons were binomious, and some trinomious, as appears by the three names of
Simon Peter and Cephas, al denoting the same person) or but one and the same
name, in different languages, like Silas and Silvanus, as Beza conjectures, I
stand not to determine. But his name of Paul he prefixeth before his Epistle,
because in those times it was the custom among most Nations, especially the
Romans, not to subscribe their name under or after their Letters, but to
prescribe or prefixe it above or before them in the first place, as Princes do
in these times.

And Paul styles himself by the title of an Apostle, i. e. of an Emissary,
Legate, or Messenger universal, sent forth by divine authority from God by
Christ, to be a founder and planter of the Gospel at large, without restraint
to any certain City or Country. For thus the Twelve were the Apostles of
Christ; and thus was Christ himself the Apostle of God: for of the Gospel,
Christ was the original Founder, who by a mission immediate from his Father,
laid the first stone for the foundation of it: and Christ in respect of his
mission, is therefore called, Heb. 3.1. The Apostle and high Priest of our
profession. And herein all other Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, are
different from the Apostles: because all other Ministers besides them, are not
founders and planters of the Gospel, but are only Edifiers and Waterers upon
that Foundation and plantation, which was first laid and made by Christ and his
Apostles. Or they are only Teachers and Pastors to feed and rule that flock
which by Christ and his Apostles was first constituted and collected. This
title of Apostle according to his usual manner, Paul attributes to himself in
all his Epistles: but in this Epistle above any of the rest, there was
especial reason for it. Because by this title he would establish his authority
in the Churches of Galatia, and confirm his doctrine there planted, which
after the plantation of it was by false Teachers amongst them, questioned and
challenged of falsehood. For to reject or but to question the doctrine of an
Apostle, being a sacred messenger from God, fortified with divine authority,
and for the most part armed with the power of miracles, was lawful for no man;
but for Christians to do it, was insufferable. This abuse therefore must be
rectified, by words that were proper to discountenance it.

Not of men.] The Greek particle is, (...), which here must needs signify
from. Because his meaning is, that men were not the prime authors from whom
he received the Commission or Mandate for his Apostleship; or, that the
authority from whence he derived that Function was not humane. And because his
words are a vindication of his Apostleship, and of his calling thereto, from a
malicious and subtle calumny cast upon his Function by the Judaizers and false
Teachers amongst the Galatians. For they allowed Paul to be an Apostle sent
forth to found and plant the Gospel: But they questioned his authority therein;
pretending that his Calling was not Divine, to come from God as from the prime
author of it: Or if it were from God, as from the prime author; yet that it
was not by the means of Christ, that he had not his Instruction and Mission
from God by Christ. But that he was taught his knowledge in the Gospel by some
mortal man, and preached it by the means of humane help; and that in this
respect, he was not comparable to the rest of the Apostles. For which opinion
(or rather calumny) of theirs, this may seem to be the ground. Because Paul
entered upon the office of his Apostleship, after Christ was ascended into
Heaven, whereas the rest of the Apostles had their mission from Christ
himself, while he yet remained upon earth. This calumny Paul removes by a
flat negation, that his authority or mandate to be an Apostle, was not humane,
for he received not his mission from men, as sent to Preach from men, as if men
were the prime authors of it. Before his conversion while he was a Pharisee,
his authority against the Gospel, was humane; for he had that calling from
men, and from men he had his mandate to persecute the professors of it,
seeing he had it from the chief Priests, as it appears, Act. 9.14. And here
he has authority from the chief Priests, to bind all that call on thy Name.
But after his conversion, when he was a Believer, his authority for the Gospel,
to preach and plant it, came not from men.

Neither by man.] His Apostleship was not from God mediately, by the means of
any person, who was a mortal or mere man. And here he takes man, for an
ordinary mortal man, in opposition unto Christ, who is both God and man, and
who though he be man, yet is an extraordinary and immortal man. First,
therefore for his Instruction in the Doctrine of the Gospel, he had it not by
man, as taught it by man; as before he had his knowledge in the Law by the
means of Gamaliel, at whose feet he was brought up in Jerusalem, Act. 22.3.
And taught according to the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers, and was
zealous toward God. Or as Apollos, who although he was before eloquent in the
Scriptures, and well catechized in the Christian Religion; yet afterward he
had his best and soundest knowledge therein by the means of Aquila and
Priscilla; for Acts 18.26. They took him unto them, and expounded unto him the
way of God more perfectly.

Secondly, neither had he his Mission by man; for some Preachers of the Gospel
in the Primitive Church, though they had their authority and calling from God;
yet they had their Mission into their Function by the means of men, being
instituted and ordained thereunto by men: As Mathias by the eleven, Timothy and
Titus by Paul, and others by the rest of the Apostles. But the Mission of Paul
was not effected by any such means; for although Ananias at Damascus put his
hands upon Paul, that he might receive his sight: Yet Paul had no Instruction
nor Mission from Ananias, but from the Lord only, who having first converted
him, sent Ananias to perform this office unto him, for the recovery of his
sight: But Christ reserved unto himself the Instruction of Paul, Act. 9.16. I
will show him, how great things he must suffer for my names sake. Likewise the
Presbytery at Antioch, Act. 13.3. When they had fasted and prayed, laid their
hands on Paul and Barnabas, and sent them away. But that Mission was not
autoritative, but only dismissive; for the Calling and the Warrant for their
sending away, was wholly from the Holy Ghost, who had said in the former verse,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work, whereunto I have called them.

Paul therefore does utterly disclaim this humane Instruction and Mission,
that thereby he might the more commend and improve the authority and credit of
his Apostleship, against the calumnies and obloquies of the false Teachers, who
had divulged, that Paul had received from Peter, James and John, both his
Instruction and his Mission. And here again the Calling of the Apostles
differs from ours, for although our Calling be Divine, and come from God;
yet it is not Primitively and immediately from God; but derivatively and
mediately, by the means of man. Because our Instruction and Mission is
derivative and delegate, to be instructed by the teachings and writings of
men, and to be sent forth to preach by the authority of men, who were in this
Office before us, and are the only competent Judges of our ability and
sincerity for our Function.

But by Jesus Christ and God the Father.] A full Declaration of his calling to
his Apostleship, whence he received it, and by whom; namely from God the
Father, as the prime Author of it, by the means of Jesus Christ, by whom he
had immediately his Instruction and his Mission. For having before removed the
calumny that was made against his Calling, he now asserts the verity and truth
of it. But in this Assertion he proceeds in an order retrograde to the former:
for in the first place he introduces Christ, as the immediate and proximous
person by whom he was called unto his Apostleship, opposing Christ to the last
words before mentioned, not by man: wherein the cause mediall was before
intimated. And then he specifies God the Father, as the prime and principal
person, from whom he was called by Christ: opposing God the Father, to the
remoter words before, not of or from men: wherein was intimated the cause prime
and principal of his humane calling.

But in opposing Christ unto man, by man he understands (as we said before) an
ordinary person, like other vulgar men, unto whom Christ though he also be man,
may with good reason be opposed. Because Christ is exempted and exalted from
and above the rank, quality, and condition, of all other men; for he is the
unigent Son of God, who was in the entire and perfect nature of man, even
then when he lived amongst men on earth. And therefore much more is he so now
in Heaven, where he is invested with immortality and glory, enjoying sovereign
dominion over all men and Angels. For Worthies, and persons of eminent quality
are wont to exempt themselves from the account and number of men, because they
are not like other vulgar men, but seem to themselves as petty gods. For so
Sampson said of himself, Judge. 16.17. If I be shaven, then my strength will
go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any man, i. e. like every
ordinary man. And from the number of men, Judges and Rulers are in a manner
exempted; and that by God himself, when he speaks to them in this form, Psalm.
82.6. I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children of the most High,
but ye shall die like men. i. e. Like other vulgar and ordinary men. If then
such persons as are Worthies and Judges, may be exempted from the number of
men, and be opposed unto them; much more may Christ be so, who is over all, God
blessed for ever, Romans 9.5.

With good reason therefore Paul here opposes Christ unto man. q. d. I am no
way inferior to the rest of the Apostles; for as they for their preaching of
the Gospel, had not their Instruction and Mission by man, but by Jesus Christ,
who first taught, and after sent them forth: so I, for my part, to preach among
the Gentiles, had my Instruction and Mission, not mediately by man, but
immediately by Christ, who immediately by himself, revealed and taught the
Gospel unto me; and by himself sent me forth to preach it among the Gentiles.
And as the rest of the Apostles had the original of their calling from God the
Father, whose will it was, that they should be taught and sent forth by
Christ; so the original author of my Apostleship is God the Father, by whose
will I am an Apostle of Christ. For concerning Gods will for his Apostleship,
see what himself says, 1. Cor. 1.1. and 2. Cor. 1.1. and Ephesians. 1.1. and
Coloss. 1.1. And his Apostleship was grounded not so much on Gods permissive
will to allow and suffer it, as on Gods imperative will to require and command
it: for hence he says, 1. Tim. 1.1. That he was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by
the commandment of God our Savior: which is a special will of God; for every
command is a special will, and every Mandate is a special Command.

Who raised him from the dead.] An Evangelicall attribute of God the Father,
frequently ascribed unto him in the New Testament. And the reason why there it
is so frequently alleged, is, partly to confirm the doctrine of the New
Testament, and partly to certify the perfect consent in all things, between
God the Father who ordained it, and Christ the Son who mediated it, and the
Apostles, who were the Ministers of Christ, to propagate and perpetuate it. For
God by raising Christ from the dead, did marveilously confirm the whole
doctrine, which Christ had publicly delivered unto the world, and did
manifestly declare that himself was the author of the doctrine taught by
Christ. Because God raised Christ from the dead, for the further prosecution of
the Gospel, whom the Jews had put to death for the publication of it. And
because for the greater honor and glory of Christ, the Gospel was afterward
propagated and confirmed by miracles, in the name of Christ crucified, and
raised again from the dead.

And this Divinity of the Gospel, that it came originally from God, as his last
Will and Testament, was a point to be seriously pressed; especially against the
unbeleeving Jews, who magnified and maintained the Law as a divine Institution
proceeding from God, and of ancient observance amongst Gods people. But they
despised and opposed the Gospel, as a humane Invention, and as a late novelty
newly sprung up, contrary and derogatory to the will of God. And besides, Paul
by mentioning the raising of Christ from the dead, does tacitly commend and
advance his Apostleship, above all the other Apostles, from this singularity in
it, that he was ordained an Apostle by Christ, after the Resurrection of Christ
from the dead. A special privilege unto him, which befell none of the rest,
who were all ordained before his Resurrection, while Christ was yet a mortal
man; and therefore his Calling was more divine then theirs, by how much Christ
being made immortal, was more Divine, then while he was mortal.

VERSE 2.
Text.
And all the Brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of Galatia. Sense.
And all the Brethren,] viz. All they of the Ministry, who preach the Gospel.

Which are with me.] i. e. Which are abiding for the present, where I am.

Unto the Churches of Galatia.] i. e. Unto the congregations or assemblies of
Christians within the Province of Galatia.

Reason.
In this verse are mentioned two things. 1. The approbation of his Epistle, in
being testified by all the Ministers of the Gospel then resident or abiding
with him, who by way of subscription did approve the contents thereof. And this
was done, that their Testimony might advance and improve the authority and
credit of his Epistle; which although it had authority enough from his
Apostleship, yet ex abundanti, had so much the more from their testimony. 2.
The Direction of the Epistle, which is not addressed to a single person, but
unto the Congregations of Christians in Galatia.

Comment.
Paul writes sometime singly, sometime jointly; and why so? Unprofitable
reasoning. The direction is general, and very abrupt. and why so? A Church
unfound may be truly a Church.

AND all the Brethren which are with me.] Paul in some of his Epistles writes
single in his own name only, without any Approver of his Doctrine, to
subscribe and testify it, besides himself; as in his Epistle to the Romans,
to the Ephesians, and to Timothy. In some of his Epistles, he adjoynes some one
of his fellow-Ministers; as Sosthenes in the first to the Corinthians, and
Timothy in the second: whom also he adjoynes in that to the Philippians, and in
that to the Colossians. In some he adjoynes two; as Silas and Timothy, in the
first and second to the Thessalonians. But in this to the Galatians, he assumes
not only one or two, but even all the Ministers his Brethren, that were at that
present abiding with him. Because, as it seems, all of them would have their
Judgment extant in this Epistle, that it might carry the greater weight and
authority with it. Partly to show their affection to the Galatians, but chiefly
to declare their approbation of Paul's doctrine; and to justify it from that
singularity, wherewith the Judaizers and false Teachers had charged it.

What persons these Brethren were, is neither expressed from any Scripture, nor
to be collected from any solid reason. Yet if we suppose that this Epistle was
written from Rome, as the Postscripts of many ancient copies date it, and the
conjectures of many learned men affirm it, then it seems they were Romans,
either for their Nation, or at least for their present residence. But by this
inference we gain no knowledge of their persons, and therefore desist from
further search after them. Because that Reasoning makes but small gains, which
in a matter of no moment, gathers but one uncertainty out of another.

Unto the Churches of Galatia.] The direction of the Epistle for the persons
unto whom it was addressed. And herein this Epistle of Paul is singular from
all the rest by him written, and that in two respects. 1. For the generality of
the direction: for Paul directs his other Epistles, either to some single
person, as unto Timothy, Titus, and Philemon; or to some one single Church or
congregation, assembled in some one City, as all the rest are directed; but
this is directed unto many Churches in many Cities. For Galatia was not a City,
but a large Country or Province, wherein were several Churches or Christian
Congregations, whereof, (as it seems) all, or the most part, were leavened
and sowred with Judaisme, or the false doctrine of super-adding the law of
Moses, unto the Gospel of Christ. Whereupon Paul directs his Epistle, not to
any one single Church of them in particular, but to them all in general:
because they were all equally concerned.

unto the Churches of Galatia. Whereby the holy Apostle would argue and declare
his holy indignation against the Galatians, as Congregations unworthy of those
gracious appellations, which otherwise he readily attributes unto all other
Christians. Because these Churches had partly corrupted the grace of God, and
partly rejected the Means of it by Christ; for they had sowred the liberty of
the Gospel with the necessity of legal Ceremonies, especially that of
Circumcision. Yet in saying, unto the Churches of Galatia, he allows them the
name of Churches, because they yet retained several parts of Christianity. As
in like manner he does to the Corinthians, who were fowly tainted and stained
with diverse corruptions both in doctrine and manners.

VERSE. 3.
Text.
Grace be to you and peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ. Sense.
Grace.] i. e. All love, favor, and kindness, be to you from God and Christ.

Peace.] i. e. All happiness and blessedness be to you from God and Christ.

Reason.
After the harsh Direction, follows a kind Salutation, in the best form,
which is by way of Benediction; and for the best Matter, which is Grace and
Peace from God and Christ. In the former verse Paul had denied unto the
Galatians that ordinary respect, which usually accompanies the Direction of
Epistles: and therefore he does here bespeake them with a most pious and
Christian Salutation, that he might seem to recompense the flatnesse and
sowrenesse of his former Direction, with the kindness and sweetness of this
Salutation. For although he were unwilling to vouchsafe them their Title, yet
he is ready to afford them his Prayer, in the best and holiest manner. And the
prudent Apostle practices this variety of discourse, that he might gain some
advantage by every form of Arguing, sometime by harshnesse, and sometime by
sweetness, leaving no means unassayed whereby to recover the Galatians from
their error.

Comment.
The form of salutation among the Jews. Grace what, and Peace. Of
blessedness, God the Author, and Christ the means. The title of the Father
of Christ. Yet neithers title exclude the others. There are many Gods, and many
Lords, yet to us, but one so, and but one supreamely so. Invocation is due to
Christ, the Ground thereof, the Command of it, and Practice of it. A
mis-reading of the Text, and a misconstruction of it.

GRace be to you and Peace. ] This is the ordinary form of Apostolic
Salutation and benediction in the Epistles of Paul, Peter, John, and Jude. And
the verb substantive Be, which by Paul is silenced in the original, is by
Peter expressed by the word Be multiplied, 1. Pet. 1.2. Grace unto you and
peace be multiplied. The ancient form of Salutation among the Hebrews, was,
Peace be unto you. Which form was also used by Christ himself; and he
commanded the use of it to his Apostles, Luke 10.5. And into whatsoever house
ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. But afterward among the
Christians, in memory of that rich Grace, which came by the means of Christ,
the word Grace was added and prefixed to the former ancient Salutation. Grace
then is the love, favor, or kindness of God by the means of Christ, or that
rich kindness of God toward us, whereof Christ is the Messenger and
Mediator, the Beginner and the Finisher, who first published the truth; and
procures the final effect of it. Peace denotes unto us Christians all the
effects, events, and issues of Grace; for Peace includes all those blessings,
which are the fruit growing from Grace as from the root: Whether those
blessings be temporal and spiritual in this life, or celestial and eternal
in the life to come, according to the sense of the Hebrews, who by Peace
understand all safety, prosperity, and happiness whatsoever.

From God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.] The persons from whom
Paul salutes them, and prays a benediction upon them, are expressed to be
two; namely, God the Father, as the original and prime cause from whence all
grace and peace does arise; and Christ our Lord, as the isntrumental and mean
cause, whereby all Grace and Peace is conveyed. For he wishes a blessing upon
them from the very same persons in the very same order that he had his
Calling; namely, from God the Father by Jesus Christ: Or to use the very same
words wherein he expresses himself elsewhere, 1 Cor. 8.6. From God, of whom
are all things, and from Christ, by whom are all things.

Unto each of these divine persons severally, Paul attributes a peculiar
dignity or title of honor. For unto the Father he gives the title of God, in
an eminent and transcendent sense; because the Father is the supreme and most
high God, who of himself has sovereign dominion and power over all things,
and over all persons; and who of himself is that person from whom all other
persons are descended. And unto Christ he gives the title of our Lord; because
Christ is the person, to whom the Father has communicated the universal
dominion and government over all things and persons, excepting one only, who
is the Father himself. For the Father has ordained Christ in a peculiar
manner to be the Lord or head over his Church in all matters thereto
pertaining. And hereby Christ in a peculiar relation unto us, becomes our
Lord, in whom we must believe and trust, and whom we must worship, serve, and
obey. Yet it is not Paul's meaning to make these titles so peculiar to each
person, as if Christ were not God, or as if the Father were not our Lord; for
each person bears both these titles; but that when they are mentioned both
together, these are the usual forms to difference them.

Hence from these two attributes, thus differenced and distributed unto these
two divine persons, of God unto the Father, and of Lord unto Christ, and
because there is but one Father, and one Christ; therefore it is frequent with
the Apostle Paul, to call the Father one God, and Christ one Lord. For although
there be extant many Gods and many Lords: Yet there is extant but one God and
one Lord, to be by us invocated and worshipded. i. e. God the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ; Because there is but one person, who unto us has that
relation of God, which the Father has; and but one person, who unto us has
that relation of Lord which Christ has. Hence it is said, 1 Cor. 8.5. For
though there be, that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth, as there
be Gods many, and Lords many: But to us there is but one God, the Father of
whom are all things, and we for him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him. Where by the way we may note, that there are made
three degrees; the first, is of those who are called Gods, but are not indeed
so, as the Sun and Moon in Heaven, Idols and Images on Earth; the next of
those, who are called so, and are indeed so, but not supreamely so, as the
Angels in Heaven, and Rulers on Earth; and the last of those, who are called
so, and are really or indeed so, and also are supreamely so, to be invocated
and worshipped, as God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hence also it appears that the divine service of invocation or prayers is due
unto Christ. Because this salutation here is an invocation (though indirectly
framed) wherein Paul prays for grace and peace unto the Galatians from God and
from Christ. For Christ (as it is evident from these words, and from the like
in other places, wherein the government and care of Gods Church is ascribed
unto him) does know the wants and the desires of the faithful, and therefore
also does hear their votes and prayers. Now the knowledge and the audience of
such things is a ground sufficient for invocation or prayer to be made unto
Christ; especially seeing his knowledge and audience are seconded with a power
and a will, whereby he is able and ready to help and to save those Believers
who call upon him. Hence Christ commands his Disciples to pray in his name, and
promises to effect their prayer, John 14.13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified by the Son; If ye
shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. This Invocation was preached by
Steven, when he was stoned, Act. 7.59. And they stoned Stephen, calling and
saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. And practiced by Paul, when there was
given him a thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.8. For this thing I besought the
Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

They therefore are in an error, who to bar Christ from the honor of
Invocation, do read this Text thus; From God our Father, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ; referring the Pronoune Our unto God the Father, and thereupon
construing the words; as if the Apostle prayed for grace and peace from the
Father only, and not from Christ: But would only intimate that God is the
common Father of us, and of Christ. But this construction is not only against
the sense of the words; but also against reason: For it is not reason, that
when the Apostle would call God the Father of Christ, and also our Father; he
should then first call him our Father, before he called him the Father of
Christ. Especially in a passage where he intends to magnify the honor of
Christ, as by the verse following, where he expressly calls God, our Father, it
appears he intends it. This place therefore, and the like, wherein the
Pronoune Our, in reference to the Father is omitted, does wholly oppose this
construction.

VERSE 4.
Text.
Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present
evil world, according to the will of God, and our Father. Sense.
Who gave himself.] viz. Unto death, and died.

For our sins.] i. e. For the remission or forgiveness of our sins; by
confirming through his death Gods last Will and Testament, wherein the Remission
of sins was devised unto us.

That he might deliver us.] i. e. That he might separate or withdraw us.

From this present evil world.] i. e. From the evil of this present world: or
from the present sinfulness or wickedness commonly practiced by the men of
this present world. In a word, That he might draw us to Repentance, or
holiness of life, or sanctify us.

According to the will of God.] i. e. According to the last Will and Testament
of God, who therein had expressed his mind and purpose, for the Death of
Christ, for the Remission of our sins, and for our repentance.

Of God, and our Father.] i. e. Of God, who is our Father; viz. By virtue of
his last Will and Testament, wherein he has adopted or justified us to be his
sons and heirs.

Reason.
Having in the former verse styled Christ our Lord, he gives here a tacit
reason, why he styled him so, showing by what right or title he is so; namely,
by right of Redemption. Because Christ through his death wrought for us a
double deliverance: one, from the punishment of our sins, by the remission or
forgiveness of them: the other, from the servitude of sin, by our Repentance
and forsaking of them. And further, he declares, that these three things, viz.
the Death of Christ, the Remission of our sins, and our Repentance, are
consequent, suitable, and according to the last Will and Testament of God,
wherein these things were thus ordained. Here therefore are described two
final causes, ends, or effects of Christ's death: first, the Remission of our
sins: and secondly, our Repentance from sin. Yet so as the latter is an end
or effect subordinate to the former, and the condition of it: for our sins are
remitted or forgiven to this end, and upon this condition, that we should
Repent and forsake them. And unto these final causes, is annexed the efficient
cause of Christ's death; that it was not merely according to the will of the
Jews, who put him to death; but it was according to the will of God, who in
his last Will and Testament had decreed his death, for the ends and effects
here specified. By all which he would intimate unto the Galatians, that for
their salvation, they were not to adhere unto Moses, and to the Ceremonies of
the Law according to Gods old testament; but must depend upon Christ, and the
benefits by his death, according to Gods last Will and Testament. For Paul
intends these words as an Evangelicall attribute or description of Christ our
Lord; as before ver. 1. the words, who raised him from the dead, were an
Evangelicall attribute unto God the Father.

Comment.
Giving is put for Dying. The word Remission is sometime silenced, sometime
expressed, sometime implied by Taking away, and Bearing away. Christ was not
punished for our sins, but only took and bare away the punishment from us,
as he took away sicknesses and diseases. Christ's death causes the
forgiveness of our sins, and our Repentance, which is a Deliverance from
sinfulness, which is wickedness. not Locally. but Morally. Deliverance from
evil in the Lords Prayer. The nature of Repentance, which is really all one
with holiness. The Motive to it is our Forgivenes. 2 Reasons of it, 1
Repentance is the purpose of Forgivenes. 2 Repentance is the condition of it.
and an adequate condition of it. Examples of the former Christ is to be Judge
of our Repentance: Yet he will judge of it in mercy. The Alliance between
remission and Repentance. Gods will is his Affection, Decree, Purpose,
Covenant, and Testament: Yet so taken chiefly in the Gospel; And so here, for
3 Reasons. And is the efficient cause of Christ's death. But the principal
efficient is God, by means of the New Testament, (...) the (...) the Testator,
the Executor, the Form, the Appearance, the Legataries, the Legacies and
Conditions. God is our Father Jurally, and Morally and to be styled our Father.

WHO gave himself.] We must here supply the word unto death; which many
times in Scripture is silenced: but is supposed, and must be understood, when
the words of giving himself, are ascribed unto Christ. Of whom they signify,
that his death was not wholly compulsory on the Jews and Pilates part, but
also voluntary on his own part, by yielding himself unto death. From which, if
he would have shunned it, he could easily have rescued himself, not only by
his own single power, but (Matt. 26.53.) by the aid of more then twelve
Legions of Angels, which at his request, his Father would have presently given
him: but he willingly yielded and gave himself up to death. So the word unto
death, must be understood, Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in love as Christ also has loved
us, and has given himself for us; viz. unto death: as the words immediately
following declare it. And Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ
also loved the Church, and gave himself for it; viz. unto death. And 1. Tim.
2.6. Christ gave himself a ransom for all. i. e. Gave himself unto death.
And Tit. 2.14. Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity. i. e. Gave himself unto death.

For our sins.] Here again another word must be supplied, which in many
places of Scripture is silenced, but yet supposed and understood; because in
other places it is mentioned. And that word is Remission or forgiveness; that
Christ gave himself unto death, for the remission or forgiveness of our
sins. So the word Remission must be understood, Romans 4.25. who was delivered
for our offenses. i. e. Was delivered unto death, for the remission or
forgiveness of our offenses; for this sense is declared by the words
immediately following, and rose again for our justification. And 1. Cor. 15.3.
I delivered unto you, how that Christ died for our sins. i. e. For the
remission of our sins. And Heb. 10.12. But this man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever. i. e. For the Remission of sins for ever. For
when in other places of Scripture, our sins are referred to the death of
Christ, or unto his blood, being put for his death, the word Remission, is
mentioned expressly. As Matt. 26.28. This is my blood of the new Testament,
which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. And Romans 3.25. Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past. And Ephesians. 1.7. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. All which sayings, and the like, are
explications or comments upon these words of Paul here, who gave himself for
our sins.

Sometime the word Remission is not mentioned expressly, but implicitly, by
substituting in stead thereof, some other word thereto equivalent; as the word
Taking away: for the Remission or forgiveness of sins, is nothing else but A
taking away of that punishment, which by the Law is due unto sin. Hence John
1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world: Here
Christ is compared to a Lamb, in respect of his death for sin, which by his
death is taken away, i. e. is remitted or forgiven. And 1. John 3.5. Ye know
that he was manifested to take away our sins. i. e. To remit or forgive our
sins. And the word Bearing, which when it is applied unto Christ, in respect
of sin, signifies bearing away. i.e. taking away from us the punishment of
sin; which is all one with Remission or forgiveness. As Esaias 53.11. By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, and shall bear their
iniquities. And again in the next verse following; He was numbered with the
transgressors, and bare the sin of many. i. e. He shall and did bear away or
take away from many, the punishment of their iniquities and sins; which in
one word, is the Remission or forgiveness of their sins. And 1. Pet. 2.24. Who
his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. i. e. Took away
from us the punishment of our sins.

Yet Christ did not take the punishment of our sins upon himself, to bear
and suffer in himself the punishment due to us for our sins; for he was not
punished in our stead for our sins; but he only took away, or bare away from
us the punishment of them, without inflicting it upon himself. The certainty
of this truth for this sense of these two words, taking and bearing, is taught
us by Matthew; for when the Prophet had said, Esaias 53.4. Surely he has borne
our griefs, and carried our sorrows; Matthew cites this upon the miracles of
Christ, in healing all that were sick, saying Matt. 8.17. Himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sickenesses. Now in healing the sick, Christ did not
so take their infirmities and bear their sicknesses, as to be infirm or sick
himself: but he only took away or bare away from the sick their infirmities
and sicknesses. For when a Physician cures a disease, he does not take it unto
himself, to be sick of it himself; but he only takes it away from the Patient:
So Christ in dying for our sins took not unto himself the punishment of the^,
to bear or suffer the punishment himself: but he only took away and bare away
from us the punishment of our sins. And when by the means of the Physician,
the disease is taken from the Patient, it is not necessary it should be laid on
the Physician, or on any body else; for it suffices if the disease be
abolished: So when by the means of Christ, the punishment of sin is taken away
from sinners, it is not necessary it should be laid upon Christ, or on any
else; because it is finally abolished. For the punishment of sin is eternal
death, which is already abolished in grant or promise, and shall be abolished
in esse, at the Resurrection; for death is the last enemy that shall be
destroyed.

Our sins then are not the efficient cause of Christ's death; for Christ died
not to be punished for them: but his death is an efficient cause of the
Remission or forgiveness of our sins; for by the means of his death, the
punishment of our sins is taken away, or borne away. And consequently, the
Remission of our sins, is a final cause, end or effect of Christ's death: yet
not immediate or proximous, but a remote effect. For (as shall be more largely
declared, cap. 2. ver. 21.) the immediate or proximous final causes, ends or
effects of Christ's death, were to testify, to confirm, and to execute the last
Will and Testament of God; whereof one article is the Remission of our sins,
which by way of Legacy is therein devised or promised unto us. Christ then gave
himself to death for our sins: partly because by his death he testified and
confirmed the new Testament, wherein the right of Remission of sins is given
us; for that Testament being confirmed, becomes of force; and we by means of
our faith, have a present right to the future forgiveness of our sins. And
partly because through his death he was made perfect with power to execute that
Testament, that he might actually remit or forgive our sins, by doing all
such acts whereby we might finally enjoy the benefit thereof, when he shall
raise us from death to give us the possession of eternal life.

That he might deliver us.] Here is another end or effect of Christ's death,
subordinat to the former, and therefore somewhat more remote from it; namely,
our deliverance from the servitude of sin; which though causally on his part it
be a deliverance, yet effectually on our part it is our Repentance. The Greek
word (...), does properly signify to exempt, take out, or pluck out, in
delivering from some sudden danger, and delivering in a special manner; namely,
powerfully and hastily plucking or snatching away the party by force and speed.
As Peter was delivered by the Angel out of prison from the hand of Herod, the
night before he should have been slain; whereof Peter making relation, uses
the same word, Act. 12.11. (...), says he, the Lord has sent his Angel and
delivered me out of the hand of Herod. Or as Paul was delivered by Lysias the
Colonel, who with an army or band of men rescued him from the Jews, when they
were about to kill him; as Lysias relates, Acts 23.27. where he uses the same
word (...), says he, which in our last English Translation, is there rendered
rescued. To the same sense the Scripture uses the word (...), which signifies
to exempt, redeem, or rescue.

From this present evil world.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. out of the
sinfulness; that he might deliver or pluck us out of that sinfulness which
reigns in the men of this present world. For evil is here put for
sinfulness, and the world for the men of the world, or worldly men, whose
manners, conditions, and actions, are evil, sinful, or wicked. If our
deliverance be good, (as coming from Christ it must needs be) then the term
or state from whence we are delivered must needs be evil. Yet the evil here
meant is not the evil of punishment; because thence we are delivered by the
Remission of sins, whereby the punishment is taken away: as was intimated in
the former clause of this verse. Nor the evil of Affliction; from which we are
many times delivered, and from which we pray for deliverance, as 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
That we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. i. e. From the
afflictions and violences which we suffer under them. But Affliction cannot be
here meant: because that is not an end or effect of Christ's death; for he died
not to deliver us from affliction, but rather to animate us against it, and to
encourage us to suffer it. But the Evil here intended, is the evil of sin, or
rather that degree of sin, which is wickedness, as it is opposed to sins of
Error and Frailty; such wickedness as Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, etc. For so
the word (...), does properly signify; and the substantive (...) in King JAMES
his Translation, is constantly Englished, Wickedness.

Wherefore, To be delivered from this present evil world, is not meant
locally, as if we should be taken away from being in the world, or be so
separated from worldly men, as not to fear any affliction from their
violences, or any corruption from their examples; for then we must altogether
go locally out of this world. But the words are to be understood Morally, for a
separation from their wicked courses, by abstayning from all wickedness, and
in undergoing a course of life contrary to the common course of this present
evil world, framing our selves to the works of love, and to the ways of
holiness, according to the precepts and rules of Christ. This distinction
between a local and a moral separation, is taught us by Christ, when he
prayed to his Father for his Disciples, Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them ((...))
from the evil. i. e. From doing that evil which is wickedness. And so I
understand Christ, when he taught us to pray, Matt. 6.13. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us ((...)) from evil. i. e. Not only from suffering of
that evil which proceeds from the wickedness of others, but chiefly from our
doing of any evil which is wickedness. For we pray, that God would not lead
us into temptation; now when we are tempted, whether by means of affliction,
or otherwise, the purpose whereat the temptation aymeth, is not our suffering
of evil, but our doing of it.

See here the nature of true Repentance. Repentance is a separation from
wickedness. For it is a deliverance or separation or turning from evil, not
from that of affliction which is the suffering of evil; but from that of sin,
which is the doing of evil. Yet not from all sin in every degree of it, as
errors and frailties; for unto such a Repentance as to be wholly sinlesse, no
sinner ever yet did, or ever can attain in this life. But it is a separation
from that degree of sin which is (...), i. e. malignity, malice, or
wickedness; which consists either in a wilful custom of sin, or in the act
of some one sin, whereof the pravity amounts to a custom. Repentance then is a
liberty or freedom from wickedness; for when Christ by forgiving our
wickedness delivers us from it, then he causes our repentance: and when we
by forsaking wickedness are delivered from it, then are we come to
Repentance. Unto this Repentance many have attained, and thereto every Believer
may and must attain in this life, or else his faith is not effectual unto
salvation. And this Repentance is really one and the same thing with holiness,
though between them there may be some rational differences, as the words in
diverse men's understandings may be diversely dilated or restrained. For
holiness may be in a person who never sinned, as is that of God, of Christ,
and of Angels: but when the subject of holiness is a person that was a sinner,
and the term from whence it began was sin, then such holiness is repentance;
and in this life the holiness of Believers is no other; although thereof there
are diverse degrees, wherein some far exceed others.

The Motive unto repentance or holiness of life, or the cause that should
invite and draw us unto the works worthy thereof, or (which is all one) the
Means whereby Christ delivers us from the evil or sinfulness of this
present world, is the remission or forgivenes of our sins. For to what end or
effect did Christ die for us? It was to this end, to testify and confirm the
New Testament, that it might be in force unto us, and that we might have a
present right to the Legacies therein devised or promised, whereon one is the
Remission or forgiveness of our sins. And to what end or effect are our
sins forgiven? Certainly not to this; that thereupon we should imagine
Repentance or holiness to be a thing impossible, or should esteem good works
not necessary, or should differ from the evil men of this present world, in
nothing but in our faith; taking liberty to live licentiously, without fear of
punishment, that grace may abound, and God may have all the glory of it: as the
false teachers among the Galatians (who besides the faith of the Gospel urged
the works of the Law) conceived of Paul's doctrine, and in the next Chapter ver.
17. will object it against him. But the end or effect which the remission of
our sins should have upon us, is to move and draw us to Repentance or
holiness of life. For Christ died or gave himself for the remission of our
sins, that he might deliver us from that servitude of sin, wherein the men of
this present world are enthralled. Now this deliverance is done only by
Repentance: because Repentance only does separate and withdraw us from the
service of sin and wickedness. And the Reasons why the forgiveness of our
sins should cause our Repentance, are two.

1. Because the forgiveness of our sins is granted us in relation to our
repentance. It has been the business of Gods spirit in all ages to struggle
with man, and to draw him from wickedness. Under the Law God ordained several
punishments by violent death for it: but this was a base and servile way for
Gods people to be kept in aw, only through fear: and it was a defective,
faulty, or weak way; because those penalties by death could not do the deed,
to deliver or withdraw men from wickedness. Under the Gospel therefore God
proceeds in a contrary course, by reversing all penalties, and granting a
general pardon for all sins; to the end, that what the Law could not do by
way of fear, that the Gospel might effect by reasons of Gods love: that we in
thankfulness for so great a blessing, might answer his love with our love, and
thereupon for his sake might forsake the ways of wickedness. And God sealed
this Pardon with the blood of Christ, that his love in not sparing his own Son,
and the love of Christ in laying down his life for us, might the more endeare
and engage us to the works of Repentance and holiness. Unto which effect, what
further means are there conducent, besides the fear of God in punishing sin,
and the love of God in forgiving it?

2. Because our Repentance or holiness is the condition whereupon the
forgiveness of our sins is to take effect. Every Believer by virtue of his
belief or faith, has a present right to the future forgiveness of his
sins; and his present right to that forgiveness is absolute or simple
without any condition. For his belief or faith is not the condition thereof,
but the nomination whereby the Right of forgiveness, and the rest of the
Legacies devised in Gods Will, are assigned unto him; for that and the rest are
settled upon all the faithful, by their name of Believers. But the future
fruition of that forgiveness is conditional; for it is limited or restrained
unto the condition of Repentance or holiness: for though all Believers have a
present right to the forgiveness of their sins; yet only those Believers who
are penitent or holy shall enjoy the future benefit of that Right. By reason of
which limitation, the benefit or effect of actual forgiveness is suspended,
until the condition of holiness be accomplished. Which condition being never
performed, God stands no way engaged for the future, to forgive actually those
sins, unto the forgiveness whereof the Believer had once a present Right.

Hence Christ makes our Forgiving of one another an adequate condition of Gods
forgiving us; that if we forgive one another, (which act in us is a good degree
of our repentance or holiness) then will God forgive us: but if we forgive
not, God will not forgive us; what former promise soever he has made, or what
present right soever we have thereto: Matt. 6.14. If ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. If Gods
forgiveness here mentioned be not conditional, then must we needs aver,
that either there is no such thing as a condition, or that hitherto the thing
is not rightly understood, what it means. Likewise every time we pray to God
for forgiveness, as Christ taught us to pray for it, we ask it upon this
condition of forgiving others. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. Or if on our part this condition be not expressed;
yet on Gods part it is always implied and understood. But if in this life our
sins be absolutely and actually forgiven, there can be no cause why we
should daily pray for their forgivenes: because no man prays for what he
already has and enjoys. But because Gods promise to forgive us is
conditional, therefore we daily pray, that God would finally perform his
promise, upon our performance of the condition.

Heerupon it is, that Christ makes the forgivenes of sins a Motive unto
Repentance, in saying to the Cripple whom he had healed, John 5.14. Thou art
now made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. Under the
words, Thou art made whole, Christ comprehends the forgivenes of his sins:
because the ordinary form of words wherewith Christ healed, was by saying, Thy
sins are forgiven thee. Peter also presses the same doctrine, that the
forgiveness of our sins, should make us to repent, or die to sin, 1. Pet.
2.24. Who his own self bare (or took away) our sins in his own body on the
tree; that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness. The word
here in the original for dead, does properly signify departed: but is
elegantly Englished dead: because it is opposed to live, in the clause
following: but especially because all the dead are departed; and therefore all
that are dead to sin, are departed from sin; which makes the nature of
repentance. And the woman who had been a sinner, did carefully put this
doctrine in practice, and showed us an example of it in her own person; for
she upon the forgiveness of her sins, was thereby moved unto acts of
holiness in the works of love; and because her sins were many, her love was
so much the more, in washing, and wiping, in kissing and anointing the feet of
Christ. And Christ afterward declared, that her motive to this great love, was
the forgiveness of her many sins; adding withal this verity, Luke 7.47. To
whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. From whence it follows, that
he who loves not, to him nothing is forgiven; or at least the forgiveness
will come to nothing: because if it. come to something, it must needs come to
some love.

And Christ must be the Judge of the condition. For his office it is to
examine the reality of it, whether it have been truly performed, according to
the precept of the New Testament, wherein the forgiveness of sins is
promised. Because Christ is the sole Executor of that Testament; and unto the
Executor it belongs to examine, judge, and allow the conditions of Legacies
conditional, that accordingly he may discharge them; for the discharge of
Legacies lies always upon the Executor. And at the day of judgment, when
Christ shall sit Judge of the quick and the dead, he will also discuss the
condition of our repentance or holiness, judging thereof by the works of
love, in giving meat to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, clothing to the
naked, etc. as it is largely described, Mat. 25.35. And accordingly he will
frame the final sentence, either for the remission of sins unto the
inheritance of everlasting life; or for the retention of sins unto the
punishment of eternal death. Yet Christ will not examine the condition of our
repentance or holiness by the Rules of severity and rigor, but of grace,
mercy, and kindness, accepting and allowing of a competent holiness in a
mean degree, though it have not been precisely performed. Because the New
Testament is a Testament ad pias causis, or for charitable uses; and such
Testaments admit of this privilege; that their conditions are at the mercy of
the Executor, and he has power to allow them, though they be not precisely
performed.

Thus Remission of sins and Repentance are of such near relation, that they
go hand in hand, as the blessing and the condition of it; being in several
passages of the New Testament, joined and coupled together as the two maine
points or substantialls thereof; and as the two maine subjects which make up
the work of preaching the Gospel. For the New Testament being commonly
distributed into the two maine branches of Promises and Precepts, or (which is
all one) of Legacies and conditions; remission of sins is many times put for
all the promises or legacies, and repentance for all the precepts or
conditions. Hence these two made up the preaching of John the Baptist, Luke
3.3. And he came into all the Country about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins. Hence these two made up the sum of
that Gospel, which the Apostles were to preach in the name of Christ, Luke
24.46. And Christ said unto them, thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations.
Hence for the execution and effecting of these two, Christ was exalted to be a
Prince and a Savior, Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to
be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness
of sins.

According to the will of God.] The will of God will not admit of a definition;
for it is not definite to be defined, but rather definitive and does define;
and therefore it must be designed by such marks as may notify it; and they
are chiefly three: Namely, his Affects, Decrees, and Purposes. For 1. Every
affect of God is his will, as his Love, Grace, and Mercy, his Hatred and Anger.
2. Every Decree of God is his will, as his Promises, Precepts, and Judgments.
3. Every purpose of God is his will, as his Precognition, Prevision, and
Predestination; which Acts being the forethoughts or counsels of his will,
whereby he constituteth his Decrees, do note an antecesse of time, that the
Decree thereby constituted, was a long time predestined or purposed before it
was destinated or ordained. Hence it will follow, that every Covenant of God is
his Will; because his Covenant is his present Decree for things to be done for
the future. And every testament of God is his will; because his testament is
his present decree for things to be done after death; for that futurity which
is limited unto death, does specify Gods Testament from his Covenant. For Gods
Testament, and his Covenant are not wills opposite or diverse, but subordinate
or graduous; because his Covenant is more ample and large; for all Gods
Covenants are not Testaments; but all his Testaments are his Covenants. And
every Testament whatsoever, when it takes effect, becomes a Covenant; because
when the Executor undertakes it, there is a full agreement between his will
and the testators will, for the performance of the whole Testament, and an
agreement of Wills makes up a full Covenant.

The will of God in express terms is no where mentioned, either in the Law,
or the Prophets, or in the Old Testament, excepting only once, Ezra. 7.18. But
in the New Testament we frequently find the word, and there it is commonly
taken for the New Testament it self, or for that will of God, which is his
last will and testament. So John 1.13. Which were borne not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, i. e. of Gods last
will and testament. And John 6.38. I came down from Heaven, not to do mine
own will; but the will of him that sent me, i, e. to execute and fulfill the
last will and testament of God. And Romans 12.2. That ye may prove what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, i. e. What are the Precepts or
Commands of his last will and testament. And Ephesians. 1.5. According to the good
pleasure of his will, i. e. of his last will and testament; in which sense it
is also taken in the same Chapter, verse. 9.11. And 1 These. 4.3. This is the
will of God, even your sanctification, i. e. This is a Precept of Gods last
will and testament. And Heb. 10.9. Then said he, ^e I come to the thy will O
God, i. e. to execute and perform thy last will and testament, as by the words
following is plainly declared. He takes away the first, that he may
establish the second, i. e. He takes away the Old Testament, which was the
first will of God, that he may establish the New, which is his second and last
will.

And in this sense is the will of God taken here, when Paul says, according
to the will of God; and that for three Reasons. 1. Because Christ gave himself
to death according to no other will of God, then his last Will and Testament;
for Christ dyed for this end or effect, that by the means of his death he
might testify, confirm, and execute the New Testament; that thereupon it
might be in force, and take effect according to the purpose or meaning of God
therein expressed. 2. Because remission of sins, for which Christ is here
said to dye, is according to no other will of God, then his last Will and
Testament; for the Old Testament or Covenant of works allowed not the
remission of all sins, but only Errors and Frailties; and those also were
not remitted, unless they were expiated by the means of a sin offering, and
(in case of damage) of a trespas-offering. 3. Because Repentance which is here
called a Deliverance from the evil of this present World, was according to no
other will of God, then his last Will and Testament; for the Old Testament
granted not the benefit of Repentance for any sin; but the transgressor of a
penal Law must by the Law undergo the penalty of it, whether he repented or
not; in which respect, the Law was armed and strengthened with diverse penalties,
whereof the most were capital, and from which no Repentance could excuse the
Offendour.

These words then show the efficient cause of Christ's death, as those
immediately before declared the final cause of it; and these here seem added
by way of answer to a tacit objection; for some man might say or think, that
Christ indeed gave himself to death, and it on purpose to confirm the New
Testament; but his death might proceed from the violence of the Jews, who put
him to death, and not from any Ordinance of God, that his death should be
effectual to that end. To this the Apostle answers fully and plainly, that it
was the will, counsel, and purpose of God, according to his last Will and
Testament, that Christ should dye for the confirmation of that Testament, to
this end, that accordingly our sins might be forgiven; and our sins are
forgiven to this further end, that thenceforth we should repent by forsaking
the works of sin; for all this was according to the last Will and Testament
of God the Father.

For the forgiveness of our sins is not the sole act or deed of Christ; but
principally of God the Father; unto whom Christ is therein Ministerial,
receiving power and command from his Father, to perform all acts conducing to
that effect. Because the forgiveness of our sins is a legacy devised or
promised unto us in Gods last Will and Testament, whereof Christ is the
Executor or Mediator. Now the Author or principal cause of every Legacy is
the Testatour, according to whose will it is devised; and the Executor is the
hand or mean, whereby the Legacy is conveyed; for a Legacy (according to the
nature of it) is a gift devised by the Testator, to be performed by the
Executor. And this forgiveness of sins is the most necessary Legacy or
promise above all the rest contained in Gods last Will and Testament. Because
without it, we can never enjoy any of the rest; for unless our sins be
forgiven, we can never attain the Resurrection of the body; and without our
Resurrection, we cannot enjoy life everlasting. So likewise our Repentance or
Holiness is the Precept or Command of Gods last Will and Testament; for
throughout the whole body of that Testament, Holiness is made the condition of
the Legacies or Promises, which are thereby so suspended, that without it (...)
of no effect. Thus forgiveness and repentance (...) ^^^ording to the will of
God; for forgiveness is ac^g to the promise of his will, and repentance is
according to the precept of his will, as the condition whereupon the promise is
to be performed.

Hence it appears, that The Gospel is the last Will and Testament of God: Which
saying is soon delivered, but not so soon proved: For indeed it can never
be proved. Yet not therefore, because it is false; but therefore, because it
is so true, and the truth of it so high, that there is no cause or reason above
it why it is true. For this truth is a prime verity, which we call a
principle; and it is a prime principle, which we call a definition: See
therefore in it an exact and easy definition of the Gospel. Nominally indeed,
the Gospel signifies glad tidings or good news; but really it is the name of
Gods last Will and Testament: Although then some Grammatical or nominall cause
may be given for the single words, why it is called the Gospel, or why a
Testament? Yet for the verity why one is affirmed of the other, there is no
rational or real cause, because the affirmation is a definition. Which
definition, though it cannot be proved, may easily be declared thus: A
Testament is a Decree of things to be executed after death; and God who
himself cannot dye may make a Testament; because he may make a Decree of
things to be executed after the death, not of himself, but of another. God
has made two several Testaments; whereof the first is called by the name of
the Law, and the last by the name of the Gospel: Where by the way we have also
an exact definition of the Law thus; the Law is the first Will and Testament of
God: Yet we may note, that throughout the Scripture, the Law is not called the
will of God; not that it was not his will; for being his Testament, it must
therefore needs be also his will; but because it was not his good will, as is
the Gospel, wherein are devised unto us far better blessings.

The Testatour who is the Author of this Will, and who framed it, is God the
Father; for here, and constantly elsewhere it is called the will of God. The
Executor or principal Heir upon whom this will is grounded, is Jesus Christ;
for he is the person who receives the maine benefit thereby, and who is to
perform it, by discharging the Legacies, which are therein charged upon him.
The death whereto this will was limited, was the death of Christ; for Christ
was the substitute of God to dye instead of God, that by the death of Christ
the Testament of God might be confirmed, to be and stand in force for ever,
till the final execution of it: For a Testament is of force after men are
dead, and not before. The form of this Will was Nuncupative or a Will-parol;
for at the constitution of it God first declared it unto Christ, and Christ
published it to his Apostles, and they afterward consigned unto writing,
whereby it became that part of the holy Scripture, which we call the New
Testament. The appearance or certainety of this will, that it is the whole true
and last will of God, was effected by the testimony of Christ, who made
sufficient and full proof thereof, by his Doctrine, his Miracles, his Death
and Resurrection; for all Wills have their appearance or certainety either by
writing or witness; as the Old Testament appeared by the writing of Moses, and
the New by the witness of Christ.

The Legataries who in this Will are made the co-heires with Christ, are all
men who are Believers, or who through Christ believe in God; for in Gods Will
men are nominated by no other name, then by the appellative or common name of
Believers. The Legacies or promises made unto Believers in this Will, are the
Graces and blessings of Adoption to be the sons of God, of sanctification by
the Spirit of God, of the Remission of their sins, of the Resurrection of
their bodies, and of Everlasting life in heaven; for unto all these blessings,
Believers are called and justified, to have a present right to the future
possession of them. The Terms or words whereby these Legacies or promises are
disposed and conveyed unto Believers, are imputing, ordayning, and
predestinating; which in this respect signify no more, then what men commonly
understand by the two usual Testamentary words of Devising and bequeathing.
The Conditions or precepts whereto these Legacies or promises are limited, and
without which they shall never be possessed, are the Duties of Repentance or
holiness in the works of love toward our selves, toward our neighbor, and
toward God; which works who so performs, that person is truly said to be
delivered from this present evil world, according to the will of God.

And our Father.] i. e. who is our Father. For the particle and is not here
copulative, as if it joined and argued diverse persons, whereof God is one, and
our Father another: but explicative, to specify diverse attributes of the same
person: because the person according to whose will Christ died for our sins,
the same is both God and our Father. Wherefore the particle and, is here put
for that is, or rather for the pronoune relative, who is. And heerby Paul does
tacitly insinuate the fundamental Legacy of Gods last Will and Testament,
which is the grace of divine alliance by adoption, whereby God makes over unto
us the donation of himself, to become our Father; and whereby he accepts us
for his sons and heirs, and coheirs with Christ, who was his only native
son. For our Adoption, whereby we acquire this divine alliance, that God is
our father, is the Testamentary foundation, whereon are grounded and settled all
the subsequent Legacies whereto we are justified, as the Sanctification of the
spirit, the Remission of sins, the Resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting. For because initially in the first place God gives himself unto
us to become our Father; therefore consequently he will do all further acts
which become a father to do for his sons, and will impart unto them the
fullness of his blessings.

And further, he attributes unto God this title of being our father, as a
Motive unto us for our holiness. Because our deliverance from the evil and sin
of this world, which makes our holiness is according to the will of God our
father, who is himself holy in all his works, and requires from us works of
holiness, and enableth us to perform them. For by his last Will and Testament,
he promises and covenanteth with us to regenerate or sanctify us with his
holy spirit, and to write in the tables of our hearts those laws and rules,
which contain in themselves, and require from us, a greater measure and degree
of holiness then ever were in those laws which once he wrote in the tables of
stone. See and compare Jer. 24.7. and Jer. 31.33. and Ezech. 11.19. 20. and
Ezech. 36.27.28. and 2. Cor. 3.3. and Heb. 8.10. And because by our holiness of
life, God becomes most really and properly our Father; for upon our adoption,
God is but our jurall father, whereby we have a right to blessedness, even the
same right with Christ, to be coheirs with him thereunto; but upon our holiness
of life, God becomes our moral father, after whose likeness we do right,
wherein we most resemble God; for thereby we put on the new man, which after
Gods image is renewed in righteousness and true holiness. Thus our most gracious
God, who before verse. 1. was by the Apostle styled the father, by way of
community in general, is now by virtue of his last Will and Testament, related
to us in particular, and styled our father.

Although by virtue of Gods first testament, God became a father unto the
Jews, and they to him were children; yet in that testament God does not
ordinarily style himself their father, but their God and their Lord. Because
though he were their father, yet he carried himself toward them not in the
condition or quality of a Father, but of their Lord and Master: and they,
though they were his heirs, yet because they were children in their nonage,
they differed nothing from the condition or quality of servants; for they were
held in bondage under the worldly elements of carnal commandments: as will
appear afterward, Cap. 4.1. of this Epistle. But by virtue of his last will
and testament, God becomes unto Christians not only a Father indeed and
condition, but also in title and appellation, stiling himself constantly by
the name of our Father, and commanding us to petition, or pray to him by the
title of our Father; which title argues a relation of more comfort, favor,
love, and grace, then that of Lord. They therefore are in an error, who in
their Prayers, Sermons, or other discourses, esteem it a higher honor to God,
and affect it as a greater grace to themselves, to mention God by the name of
the Lord, according to the Jewish form under the Law, then by the name of our
Father, which is the Christian form under the Gospel.

VERSE 5.
Text.
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Sense.
To whom.] i. e. To God our Father.

Be glory.] i. e. Be given the Supreme and highest degree of honor.

For ever and ever.] i. e. Throughout all ages in this world, and also in the
world to come.

Amen.] i. e. so be it, or God grant it may be so.

Reason.
These words return a Devotion by way of doxology, benediction or thanksgiving
unto God, for his grace unto us by Christ. For seeing Christ has died for the
remission of our sins, and for our sanctification to deliver or withdraw us
from the sinfulnes of this present world: and seeing this is done according to
the will and testament of God, who is thereby become our father; therefore what
less thankfulness can we return for these blessings, then to glorify our
heavenly Father?

Comment.
Christ must be glorified by us. Amen, an adverb, not of swearing, but of
affirming, and of wishing.

TO whom be glory.] Though Grammatically, the Relative to whom, be of the
singular number, and referred to the person last mentioned, who is God our
Father: yet Theologically it must also be referred more antecedently to the
person mentioned further off, who is Christ our Lord. Because we must not by
any means exclude Christ from the right and due of glory; for as the blessing
unto us comes primarily from God, and derivatively by Christ: so our Blessing,
or thanksgiving for it, must be derived or conveyed unto God by Christ, who
brought this grace from God unto us, and who is the Person by, and through whom
we must glorify God. See Romans 16.27. and Ephesians. 3.21. and Heb. 13.21. For how
can we contain our selves from blessing and glorifying of God our Father, by
Christ our Lord, when we apprehend and consider, that God is become our Father
at so dear a rate, as the death of his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord?

For ever and ever.] Because God and Christ do live, and reign for ever, and
we who are true Christians shall live with them for ever; for everlasting life
is the final Legacy devised unto us in Gods last testament; therefore our
divine service of thanksgiving must continue for ever and ever, to glorify God
and Christ, not only in this world, but in the world to come; for there both
Saints and Angels shall glorify both for ever and ever. See Revel. 4.9, 10.
and Revel. 5.13. and Revel. 7.11, 12, and Revel. 19.1, 4.

Amen.] An acclamation setting our fiat to testify and ratify the sincerity
of our devotion in glorifying God our Father, and Christ our Lord. The word
Amen is no wherein Scripture used as a form of swearing; for it signifies no
divine attribute whereby God is invoked as a Witness of verity, or an Avenger
of perjury. But in the new Testament where it is joined or referred to a verb
Indicative, there it is an adverb of Affirming, or Assevering; and then it is
the same with the Greek word (...), which signifies verily; for in this sense
we frequently meet with it in the Evangelists, who use indifferently the words
Amen and verily; and the thing which in one Evangelist is assevered by Amen, is
by another, especially by Luke, expressed by verily: this form of asseveration
was very frequent in the speeches of Christ; because he assevered and assured
the greatest and strangest truth that ever was published on earth, and which
for the substance and certainty thereof is by way of eminency called the Truth.
But where Amen is joined or referred to a verb Optative, there it is an
adverbe of wishing or praying, and then it is the same with (...), which
signifies Vtinam. i. e. God grant; in which sense it is a Petition to God,
wherein we pray for some desired good, redounding either to God, our neighbor,
or our selves; and in this sense Amen is opposed to the Greek word (...),
which is an adverbe of forbidding, and signifies absit. i. e. God forbid, which
is a supplication to God, wherein we pray against some impending evil, which
concerns either God, our neighbor, or our selves. See afterward, Cap. 6.
verse. 14. Hitherto is the Proeme, or Preface of the Apostle.

VERSE. 6.
Text.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ unto another Gospel. Sense.
Removed.] i. e. Changed or turned away. From him that called you.] i. e. from
Christ who called you.

Into the grace.] i. e. with or by his grace.

Unto another Gospel.] i. e. pretended so to be.

Reason.
These words are an Entrance upon the body of the Epistle; wherein he
obliquely and gently reproves the Galatians for their levity in suffering
themselves to be turned from the sincere doctrine of the Gospel containing the
grace of Christ, unto a counterfeit and pretended Gospel.

Comment.
A gentle reproof of the Galatians. for their relapse. and the suddenness of
it. The construction of the words for the least difficulty, and for the most
plainness. Calling is a declaring of Gods will, and a Metaphor taken from
inviting, which is effectual by our acceptance. Our title to salvation is by
grace, which is a word Evangelicall, opposed to Nature, and to our Works, and
to the Law. There is but one Gospel.

I Marvel that ye are so soon removed.] His words are a reproof of their
fact, in that he marvelleth at it; yet his reproof is but gentle, in that he
does but marvel; for he that says he marvelleth at a fact that is foul,
does not reproove it sharply; but only declares, that he hoped far
otherwise of them, then by their fact appears; which was so inconsiderate and
rash, that it was altogether besides his expectation. But the things whereat
the Apostle marvells, and thereby reproves, are two; whereof the one is, the
nature of their fact, that they were removed or turned from the Gospel of
Christ; wherein he again mollifies his reproof, partly by using a Verb of
the passive voice, of their being removed; whereby he seems to remove the
fact from themselves, and to translate the fault of it upon their false
Teachers, who had troubled and perverted them, as more plainly he declares
himself in the next verse following; and partly by putting the Verb passive
in the present tense, (...). as if he did not conceive them, yet perfectly and
fully removed in facto esse, but only upon a Remove in fieri. The other thing
whereat he marvells, is the suddainenesse of their fact, that they were so
soon removed, which argued much inconstancy and levity of mind; for this
sudden removal must not be understood in respect of time only; but also of
their judgment, in that after Paul had planted the Gospel amongst them, and
once watered it by a visitation; they, while yet it was but green, and as it
were in the blade, should suddenly and rashly be removed from it, without
expecting any fruit of it, or without consulting him who planted it.

From him that called you into the Grace of Christ.] The Greek is, (...);
whereof the construction seems to be thus, (...), i. e. from Christ, who has
called you by Grace, or by his Grace: For although the Genitive (...) be not
in construction governed by the Noune (...). yet in sense, the matter of grace
must needs be referred unto Christ: But if (...) be governed by the
Preposition (...), then we shall have in the Text a Substantive for the
Participle (...), and not be forced by way of supplement, to seek for such a
Substantive out of the Text, either in God or Paul; because we shall run
into greater difficulties, before we shall determine and agree upon the right
Substantive to be understood. The reading we have proposed has of all others
least difficulty, and besides is no novelty; for so are the words read by the
Syriack Interpreter, so by Jerome, and so by Erasmus, so also by the Vulgar
French Translation. But if we take them in their literal order, and refer
Christ unto Grace; then we shall hardly determine of him that called; who that
person should be, whether God or Paul; for between those two the different
opinions lie, and each of those opinions has his difficulty: For although
sometime God be wholly understood in, and by the single Participle Calling, as
he is afterward, cap. 5.8. see also, Romans 9.11. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. And
although for the most part in the writings of the Apostles, our Calling be
attributed unto God, as see Romans 8.30. and 1. Cor. 1.9. and Act. 2.39. and 1.
Cor. 7.15. and 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. and 2. Tim. 1.9. and 1. Pet.
5.10. Yet if in this place the Apostle had understood the Calling here of God,
he would hardly have said, that God had called them by the Grace of Christ;
but rather by his grace, as afterward in this cap. ver. 15. Paul speaking of
God calling him to his Apostleship, says, who called me by h^^ grace. And
besides, to speak properly and truly, the Galatians were not removed from
God, for they continued still zealous toward God, and really adhered to the
Law of God; but they were removed from Christ unto Moses, i. e. from that
Discipline which God delivered by Christ, unto that which God delivered by
Moses. And as for Paul, the action of calling is no where in Scripture ascribed
unto him, nor to any other of the Apostles: And it seems somewhat too much for
Paul, to say of himself, that the Galatians were removed from him, or from his
Gospel, unto another Gospel; for the Gospel is really and truly the Gospel of
God and of Christ, and is constantly so called; albeit in some passages, Paul
in reference to his Ministry and preaching of the Gospel, calls it his
Gospel. See Romans 2.16. and Romans 16.25. and 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.
and 2. Tim. 2.8. Yet so he calls it, only in respect of the line or circuit
where he was to preach it, because the Ministry thereof unto the
uncircumcision or Gentiles was committed unto him; as afterward in this Epistle
he expresses it, cap. 2.7. Where he opposes the Gospel of uncircumcision
committed unto him, to the Gospel of Circumcision committed unto Peter. The
plainest sense therefore of these words is, to refer the Calling unto Christ;
and that for these three Reasons. 1. Because Christ is named in the Text, under
a Genitive that may govern the Participle (...), and may be governed as well
by the Preposition (...), as by the Noune (...). 2. Because Christ is the
person who under God calls us, and by whom God calls us; for hence the
faithful are said, to be the called of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.6. 3. Because the
Galatians were removed from Christ and his Gospel, unto Moses and his
Ceremonies, especially unto that of Circumcision, as Paul plainly intimates
afterward, cap. 5. verse. 2.4. Where he professes to the Galatians, that if
they be circumcised, Christ shall profit them nothing, and Christ is become of
no effect unto them.

That called you.] In the word called, is expressed the manner of our access
to the Right and Privilege of Blessedness, which is our Heavenly Inheritance;
for unto this Right or Privilege we are called, i. e. the will and good
pleasure of God to give and grant us a right thereto, is revealed or signified
unto us; for by this calling, we have our first notice or knowledge of Gods
good will toward us, to justify and adopt us for his Sons and Heirs, as
Co-heires with Christ, whereby we have a right to the Inheritance of
Blessedness. This will of God was revealed or signified to men, first by Christ,
after by his Apostles, and ever since successively by Gods Ministers, who by
preaching and publishing the word of his will, do daily invite and call men to
become the Sons of God, and Heirs unto Blessedness. For this Calling is a
Metaphor taken from a public Feast, whereunto diverse Guests are invited,
called, or bidden; who before they are invited have of themselves no right to
come, no desert to come, no desire to come, nor no will to come; for in being
invited, they are entreated to come, as it were against, or beyond their will;
and many will not come at all, but request to be excused, because they have
other business in the world, which as they conceive is of more importance then
to come to a Feast. According to this manner is our Calling to become the
Sons of God, and Co-heires with Christ to the Inheritance of Heaven; for
before we are thereto called, we are in the condition of Guests before they
are invited to the Feast; for we to that Inheritance have of our selves no
right, no desert, no desire, no knowledge, and therefore no will: For we are
invited or called, i. e. entreated to it as it were against, besides, or beyond
our will; and many will by no means accept it, but desire to be excused, that
they may follow their worldly business, as appears in the Parable of the
Wedding, whereto the Guests were invited or called. Mat. 22.2. When an
invitation or calling to a Feast is accepted by the Guest, then the invitation
or calling is effectual; because according to the will and purpose of the
Inviter it takes effect; and that effect consists in this, that the Guest
has a right to come to the Feast; for the will and purpose of the Invitor is,
that upon the invitatio^ the Guest should have a right to come; and the Guest
by his acceptance of the Invitation has a right to that whereto he was
invited. And the title whereby the Guest has this right to come to the Feast,
is only by the grace, favor, or courtesy of the Invitor, and not by any works
in the guest meriting that right, nor by any Law constraining the Invitor to
give it; for invitations are not ordered by any such Rules, as works and Laws;
neither are or can be any Laws extant in the World to regulate Invitations. So
we, when by the Ministry of the Gospel we are invited or called to the
inheritance of blessedness, if we accept of it, our calling is effectual, and
thereby we have a right to it, for the son and heir has a right to his
Inheritance: Yet our title to that right is neither by birth, nor by works, nor
by law, but only by Grace. Into the Grace.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. By,
with, or through Grace; for all these make but one sense, and one of these
ways, the words, (...), mentioned elsewhere, are always rendered by our last
English Translation. See 2. Cor. 1.12. and Col. 3, 16. and Col. 4.6. and 2.
These. 2.16. And so it is rendered here by the Syriak Interpreter, and by the
vulgar French Translation. For the word, by Grace, does declare our title
specifying what kind of right we have to that Inheritance, whereto we are
invited or called; that on Gods part, our title thereto is only by grace, and
not by any act of Justice or Duty, whereby God stands bound to call us; as by
grace only it is, that a Guest is invited or called to a Feast. And Grace is
not the term or state whereinto we are called; but the motive or means
whereby we are called; for Grace is the original ground, or prime cause of
our calling, and our calling is in order of Nature after Grace, because it is
an effect of Grace. But Grace is on Gods part the title to our right in the
state of filiation or Christian Liberty, whereby we are made the sons of
God, and co-heires with Christ to the Inheritance of Blessedness; for unto
that right we are called by no other title on Gods part, but by his Grace,
(though the title on our part be our acceptance of that right, which is our
Faith) as when a Guest has a right to come to a Feast; his title to that right
on the Feasters part, is only by the Grace, Favor, or Courtesy of the
Feaster; and the title on the Guests part is his acceptance of the invitation
or calling to the Feast. Now Grace is not a legal word belonging to the Old
Covenant of the Law; for in the Old Testament, we shall very rarely find the
word at all in any sense, but never in the genuine sense: But Grace is a word
Evangelicall, belonging to the New Testament or Covenant, whereof Christ is the
Mediator; for hence the Gospel and the subject thereof, which is the New
Covenant, is called the Gospel and the Covenant of Grace, and in that
Evangelicall sense, wherein the word stands in this place, (for to take the
word in the whole latitude would be tedious and needelesse) Grace is the will
and act of God, whereby we are made the sons of God, and co-heires with
Christ to the Inheritance of Blessedness. For hence Grace is opposed to
Nature, which is an act of God, whereby we are made men, to have an earthly
dominion and inheritance after the Image or likeness of God: So Grace is an
Act of God, whereby we are made Christians to have an Heavenly Dominion and
Inheritance after the Image and Likeness of Christ, who was the natural son
of God, borne to that Inheritance whereto we after his likeness as co-heires
with him, are adopted. And hence Gods Grace is opposed to our Works, which as
a title to that Inheritance are incompatible with Gods grace; for if we have a
right to that Inheritance by grace, we cannot have it by works no more then
we have by nature or birth: Yet our works are a tenure consequent and
according to Gods grace, whereby we hold the right we have by grace; for
because of Gods grace to make us his sons, we must be grateful and
thankful to carry our selves as his sons by the works of obedience to so
gracious a Father; for otherwise we are ungracious sons. And lastly, hence
Gods grace is opposed contrarily to his wrath and his Law; extremely contrary
to his wrath, and meanly to his Law; because Gods Law is a mean between the
two extremes of his grace and his wrath; for when God does us more good or
less evil then his Law allows, this is grace; but when he does us more
evil or less good then his Law provides, this is wrath; and his wrath he
many times executes upon us, by taking judgment into his own hands, and
punishing our sins by himself, when the Ruler is negligent of his duty, in
laying upon us the punishment assigned by Law; and extreme grace is, when God
without any Law or equity obliging him thereto, bestows upon us the supreme
favor of making us his sons and co-heires with Christ unto the Inheritance
of eternal Blessedness. Now the Apostle does therefore tell the Galatians
that they were removed from Christ, who had called them by grace; because he
would acquaint them with the admirable benefit or blessing, whereof by that
removal they had voluntarily deprived themselves, that seeing and
acknowledging the rashness of their fact, they might repent of it, and turn to
the Gospel of Christ, by whose grace they had been called.

Unto another Gospel.] Another, i. e. a foreign or strange Gospel, pretended
so to be. These words show the term of access whereto they were removed; and
are opposed to the former words, from Christ who called them by grace; as the
term of Recesse from whence they were removed. The new doctrine which they had
exchanged for the doctrine of Christ, who called them by grace, he calls
another Gospel; not that it was so indeed, but only in the opinion of the
Galatians, and of their false teachers, who obtruded upon them this counterfeit
Gospel, and thereby taught them another way of obtaining a right to blessedness,
then by the grace of God. The sum of which counterfeit and pretended Gospel
was this; that the right and title to the inheritance of blessedness, was to
be had by the Law of God formerly given by Moses; that the inheritance was due
unto them for the service and desert of their works performed according to that
Law; and that God was to give them that inheritance by an act of his Justice,
in consequence to his Law for their obedience unto it. For these seem to be
the principal points in the confutation whereof, the Apostle bends his
arguments prosecuted in this Epistle.

VERSE 7.
Text.
Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert
the Gospel of Christ. Sense.
Which is not another.] i. e. Either is not another Gospel, or which is nothing
else, but that some trouble you. Some that trouble you. i. e. Disquiet your
consciences. Pervert the Gospel of Christ. viz. By compounding and mingling it
with the Law of Moses.

Reason.
The words are a further mollifying of his former reproof, by showing the true
cause of their removeall from Christ, and translating the fault of it upon
others, who drove them into it by troubling them.

Comment.
The cause of the Galatians revolt, and the event of it.

Which is not another.] The Greek is, (...); which words may bear a twofold
sense. A first sense, 1. Thus; which is not another Gospel; for if the Relative
which, be referred to the word Gospel in the former verse, then this saying is
a correction of his former reproof for that clause of it, in saying they were
removed to another Gospel. q. d. Though I said you were removed to another
Gospel, yet indeed there is no other Gospel at all, besides that which I
preached amongst you: but only some trouble you with another doctrine, and
persuade you that their doctrine is the true Gospel. A second sense. 2. Thus;
which is nothing else, but that there be some who trouble you; for if this
whole sentence, with the rest of this verse be referred to the whole reproof
in the former verse, then it is an excuse of the Galatians revolt, by
discovering the true cause of it, and by translating the fault of it upon some
others who troubled them, q. d. This your removeall from the Gospel of Christ
unto another Gospel, is nothing else, or the cause of it is no other, but that
there be some who trouble you. Either of these two senses is so allowable, that
neither of them is to be maintained or pressed against the other: because
neither of them is of such consequence as to be elementary and serviceable for
the illustrating or concluding of any other verity in the New Testament.

But there be some that trouble you.] The true cause of their revolt from the
true Gospel. The false teachers amongst the Galatians, to avoid persecution for
preaching the true and sincere Gospel of Christ, troubled and disquieted the
consciences of the Galatians, constrayning them to Circumcision and other
Legal ceremonies. The truth many times may, and sometime does breed trouble to
him that teaches it: but it seldom troubles the soul that receives it;
whereas error disquiets and distracts the conscience, leaving her uncertain
of the issue pretended, and troubling her about the means thereto leading.

And would pervert the Gospel of Christ.] The issue of their counterfeit
Gospel; which though it might not be the intent of the false teachers, yet it
would be the event, that the Gospel of Christ would thereby be perverted. i.
e. it would be cast into a new mould or frame contrary to the form it had
before. The addition of Circumcision and other legal Ceremonies does
adulterate and corrupt the Gospel of Christ, by compounding it into a new
nature, contrary to the genuine simplicity and sincerity, wherein it was
originally planted and taught; for they confound the Gospel, who compound and
complie it with the law; because they who unto the Gospel of Christ, would
super-adde the law of Moses, must consequently needs teach, that Grace on Gods
part, and faith on our part, make not a sufficient title to our right of
inheritance unto blessedness: but that our title by grace and faith requires a
further corroboration from our works according to the law of Moses, such as
Circumcision and difference of meats, which are such servile works, and such
beggarly services unto God, and so far from making us a title to have that
right, that they serve not for a tenure whereby to hold it: but that right must
be held by our filial works of love, as we are the sons and heirs of God,
and as they are prescribed in the Gospel of Christ; which works Evangelicall
are of a more noble nature, and more pleasing to God, then the legal works
under the law, which were but beggarly and servile services.

VERSE. 8.
Text.
But though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Sense.
But though we.] i. e. Though I. Or an Angel from heaven. i. e. an heavenly
Angel. Which we have preached. i. e. Which I have preached.

Reason.
Though formerly the Apostle had sufficiently declared that the revolt of the
Galatians from the Gospel of Christ, was a foul error; and that they who
obtruded another counterfeit gospel upon them, were corrupters of the true
Gospel, and therefore not to be followed: yet here also he further insisteth
upon the same point, showing them what they are to think of any other person
whatsoever, that should presume to preach any doctrine contrary to his, or
different from it.

Comment.
Angels are some celestial, others infernal. Doctrine may be false two ways:
1. Directly: 2. Indirectly. And such are humane Traditions. The doom of false
Doctrine.

BUt though we, or an Angel from heaven.] We. i. e. I Paul; for he speaks only
of or concerning himself, using the plural number for the singular; as
appears in the words in the verse following, as we have said before; for Paul
only was the person who had said the words of this verse. And the force of this
argument is very moving, because the Apostle argues for the truth of his own
doctrine, even against himself. q. d. Not only they who trouble you, and would
enforce a new gospel upon you, are to be wholly rejected; but also I my self
if I should attempt it, am to be repelled as an execrable person. And not only
I, but if an Angel should come to you as an Evangelist or an Apostle, with a
message from Heaven contrary to the doctrine by me planted amongst you, he is
in like manner to be abandoned. The words from heaven, are not to be referred to
the act of preaching, but to the person of the Angel, to whom they are an
attribute, and signify only an heavenly Angel; for there are Angels who in
respect of their residence, are celestial and supernall in the highest Heaven,
and there are Angels, who for their residence are aereall, and infernal; for
in comparison of the highest Heaven, which is most supernall, the Air which
makes the lowest Heaven is infernal. Hence wicked spirits are called Princes
of the Air, and are said to be in Heavenly Places, i. e. in the Air; for the
Air, though in respect of the highest Heaven above it, it be Hell; yet in
respect of the Earth below it, it is Heaven; and consequently the Air in a
different and subalterne respect is both Heaven and Hell. See and compare, Mat.
6.26. and Luke 13.19. and Ephesians. 2.2. and Ephesians. 3.10. and Ephesians. 6.12. and 2.
Pet. 2.4. But to supply the Argument with the greater force, the Apostle
supposes a condition altogether impossible, seeing it could never come to
pass, that either he himself should against himself, or an Angel from
Heaven against him should ever attempt to preach another Gospel.

Should preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached.
The Greek is, (...), i. e. literally, should preach unto you, besides what we
have preached. Hereby is excluded from the Gospel of Christ, all such Doctrine
that is either against his Gospel or besides it; for whatsoever Doctrine is
against it, is also besides it, and more then besides it; and consequently all
such Doctrine is excluded as alien from the Gospel of Christ, which either does
wholly alter or partly subvert the way delivered by Paul for obtaining a true
right, and a right title to the Inheritance of Blessedness. And this is done
either directly, when any thing is taught manifestly contrary to that Doctrine
which is necessary to salvation, as to teach that Jesus is not the Christ, or
that there is no New Covenant: Or indirectly, when any thing not necessary is
proposed and urged as necessary, though it be not contrary to the Gospel of
Christ, but only disparate or diverse from it, as to urge the Ceremonies
either of Moses, or of others, as necessary to salvation; for by this means
the way to salvation is partly changed, and assigned to some by-way, whereto
Christ and his Apostles assigned it not: Yet because at that time the legal
Ceremonies were urged as necessary to salvation, especially by those Christians
which were converted from Judaisme, whose infirmity was tolerated by the rest
of the Apostles, and by Paul himself, who Romans 14. plainly declares, that
their opinion was no prejudice to their salvation: Therefore we must not
affirm, that it was the Apostles mind in this place to pronounce a curse upon
all those, who any manner of way should teach something as necessary to
salvation, besides what he had taught, if they taught it out of mere
ignorance or error; but those only he pronounces accursed, who out of
arrogance, or some by-respect should press as necessary to salvation those
things, which they knew the Apostle had taught to be not necessary.

Does not this Text reach unto the Church of Rome, who urges as necessary to
salvation, the Traditions and Precepts of the Church, as she calls them, which
she acknowledges, not to be comprised in the Doctrine of the Apostles; for
she her self distinguishes them from the Precepts of the Apostles. For if
Paul's Doctrine which contained not those Traditions of the Church, were
sufficient to salvation; with w^^^ authority can those Traditions be urged as
necessary? and by what means shall they who urge them escape the curse here
menaced. But if they allege that their Traditions are not contrary to the
Doctrine of the Apostles, but only additionall; even the concession of this is
enough for their conviction; for in adding to the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
urging their additions as necessary to salvation, they thereby teach besides
the Doctrine of Paul, as much as they did, who unto the faith of Christ would
add the legal Ceremonies, which is the maine point in this Epistle condemned;
because those legal Ceremonies, though they were not contrary and against, yet
were different, and besides those things which Paul affirmed as sufficient to
salvation: But the Galatians by necessitating of their additions must needs
deny them sufficient; and therefore the Churches of Rome join herein with the
Churches of Galatia, that unto the Gospel of Christ they make additions, though
the additions be not the same.

Let him be accursed.] The censure and doom upon the former presumption; that
whosoever shall attempt it, shall become a curse, i. e. an abominable, and
execrable, and devoted thing, which no man may or dare touch. In point of false
Doctrine urged against, or besides the Gospel of Christ; no respect is to be
had to the Dignity or quality of the Person, though he be an Apostle or an
Angel from Heaven; for if such Persons as these may by no means corrupt the
Gospel, what person else shall dare to do it? Whosoever therefore shall
wittingly and purposely with arrogance and pertinacy attempt this corruption
directly or indirectly against, or besides the Gospel, that person cannot
escape the thunder of this curse; but he may escape it, who out of ignorance
or error teaches somewhat, which he thinks consequent to the Doctrine of
the Gospel, though indeed it be repugnant or different from it, if afterward
upon the sight of his error, he forsake it, and submit to the truth; for such
a one is not forthwith to be accursed, but must first be refuted, and
instructed in the truth.

VERSE. 9.
Text.
As we said before, so say I now again: If any man preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that you have received, let him be accursed. Sense.
Then that ye have received.] Viz. from me, who first planted and afterward
confirmed it amongst you.

Reason.
A Repetition of the former sentence to the same sense, yet expressed in words
somewhat more general and full, lest any man should think that the former
clause was too severe, and fell from him rashly or unawares.

VERSE 10.
Text.
For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Sense.
Do I now.] viz. Since I was made an Apostle.

Persuade men?] i. e. Do I teach humane doctrines or the opinions of men? Or
God? Do I not teach divine doctrine proceeding from God? For if I yet. viz.
Since I became the servant of Christ. Pleased men. viz. Against or besides the
pleas^^e of Christ. I should not be the servant. i. e. I would not have been
the servant.

Reason.
An entrance upon the third part of this Chapter, wherein he vindicates the
authority both of his Ministry and Doctrine; and whereby he will conclude,
that such a person is worthy to be accursed, who shall presume to oppose or
corrupt his doctrine, by teaching any thing against it, or by adding somewhat
besides it: because his doctrine was altogether divine; for he was taught it by
God from heaven, and by God from heaven he was commanded to publish it.

Comment.
The word Now. Men put for humane Doctrines, and God for Divine Doctrine. Paul
was no Men-pleaser The particle yet. How far Men may and must be pleased.
and how far not. Ministers are the servants of Christ.

FOR do I now persuade men, or God?] The particle now, and the particle yet,
in the words following, though sometime they be taken for the very instant and
moment of the time present; yet here in this place they must be ampliated or
extended to a greater latitude, to signify such a time present as
comprehends some compass, and includes a certain state and condition of
things, which state as long as it lasts the same, is so long accounted the
time present. See Matt. 3.10. and John 12.31. and Romans 13.11. and 1. Cor.
13.12.13. and 2. Cor. 6.2. In this place therefore the particle now signifies
that space of time, from whence the Apostle being made a Minister of Christ did
begin to preach the Gospel, and yet continued to preach it; for it is opposed
to that former time, when he was a Pharisee, and a vehement maintayner of the
Law. He demands therefore whether now during his Ministry of the Gospel, he
persuade men or God? which he proposes by way of Interrogatory, signifying
thereby, that the matter was so evident to the Galatians, that they must needs
be forced to confess the truth of it; for this Interrogation must be resolved
and construed for two vehement assertions; one a Negation thus; I do not now
persuade men; the other an affirmation repugnant to the former negation thus, I
do now persuade God. The word Men, is here figuratively put for humane
doctrines, or for those opinions whereof men are the Inventors; as we often
use the words Plato and Aristotle for the opinions or writings of Plato and
Aristotle. And in like manner the word God, is put for divine Doctrines, and
for those verities whereof God is the Author and Revealer; so Christ is
sometimes put for the Doctrine of Christ, and the preaching of Christ is put
for the preaching of his Doctrine. See Act. 5.42. and Act. 8.5. and 2 Cor. 4.5.
and Phil. 1.15. q. d. When I was a Pharisee zealous of the Law, I persuaded and
pressed humane Doctrines, as the traditions of our Fathers and other opinions
of men: but now since I was ordained an Apostle and a Minister of Christ, I
dare urge no humane Doctrine: but contrarily, the Doctrine which now I urge is
wholly Divine, whereof God is the Author and Revealer unto me. This Phrase to
persuade men is taken in another sense, 2 Cor. 5.11. for there he affirms that
he persuades men, which here he flatly denies; and the reason is, because
there men are taken for the personal object of his persuasion to whom the
matter which he persuaded was piety: but here Men are put for the real matter
of his persuasion, that the matter which now he persuaded unto men, was not the
Doctrine of men.

Or do I seek to please men.] A reason of his double assertion contained in
his former interrogation; by removing the cause impulsive, which might seem to
move him to persuade humane Doctrines; and that cause must needs be, a desire
to please men and to win their favor, by preaching the Doctrines of men
suitable to men's desires; for what other motive could the Apostle have to
persuade the Doctrines of men, but only a desire to please men; whose favor he
professes here not to seek. q. d. I teach not the Doctrines of men; because I
hunt nor after their favor and good will, by preaching their inventions and
traditions for Gospel.

For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.] A
super-reason, or confirmation of the former reason; by an argument from the
inconvenience, which must necessarily follow, if he did seek to please men;
for that must needs argue him to be the servant of men; and if so, then he
could, or rather would not be the servant of Christ.

The particle yet, does tacitly argue, that formerly while he was a Pharisee
and a servant to the law, and before he was the servant of Christ, he
endeavored to please men, as when he had authority from the high Priests to
make inquisition and to attach the professors of Christian Religion; which
although it were done in zeal to the Jewish Religion, and to the Law of God,
yet can hardly be free and clear from all ambition of pleasing men. The word
please may be taken either for the act and deed of pleasing, or for the will
and desire to please: yet the later sense is the more likely, because he
mentioned before his will and desire in seeking to please men.

The pleasing of men must not here be taken as the will and pleasure of men is
conformable and agreeable to the will and pleasure of God; for when men apply
their knowledge to the truth of God, and their pleasure to the will of God, and
their practice to the Law of God, to submit in all things their pleasure to the
good pleasure of God, or at least endeavor nothing contrary to his Laws; then
in cases wherein men's salvation may be furthered, we may, and must please men;
for he that in due manner pleases and serves such men, does therein please
and serve both God and Christ; for thus Paul elsewhere professes to please
men; that it was his exercise to have always a good conscience void of offense
not only toward God, but also toward men; he admonishes us, that no man
should please himself, but every one his neighbor, alleging for our
imitation the example of Christ, whose way was not to please himself; and the
example of himself, that his manner was to give no offense neither to Jew nor
Gentile, but pleased all men in all things. See Act. 24.16. and Romans 15.1, 2,
3. and 1 Cor. 10.32, 33. But here we must understand pleasing of men, as their
will and pleasure is opposed to the will and pleasure of God* and in that case
our will and endeavor must be to please God, though thereupon all men living
should be displeased; for when men have their will cross to the will of God,
and walk in ways contrary to his Laws, then by pleasing them we must needs
displease him; and therefore says Paul, if I should endeavor to please men,
as they dissent and disagree from Christ, I should not be the servant of
Christ: or rather I would not have been the servant of Christ; for in that way
his service is a condition very unfit for me. q. d. If it were my desire or
endeavor to please men, who are displeasing unto Christ, I would not have
Christ for my Master, but would soon quit my service unto Christ, and have
nothing to do either with professing or teaching the Religion of Christ; for
it had been beter for me to have continued a Jew, and lived in my former state
of a Pharisee; wherein I had a fitter condition, and a way more expedient to
please the people, and gain the good will of men; neither would I have
abandoned that grace and favor, wherein among my own nation, especially the
chiefest persons, I flourished even unto envy; to have exposed my self to the
common hatred of all men; whereof the many miseries and persecutions which I
have since suffered for the cause of Christ, are a testimony abundantly
sufficient.

VERSE 11.
Text.
But I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not
after man. Sense.
I certify you.] The Greek is, I make known unto you.

Is not after man.] i. e. Is not humane, or is no humane invention.

Reason.
A further and fuller prosecution of his former argument concerning the
authority of his Ministry and Gospel, relating the matter from the foundation
or beginning; and alleging that the doctrine which he preached and planted
among them, was no humane invention or tradition; and therefore was neither to
be opposed, nor deserted, nor suspected of falsehood.

Comment.
Paul's Doctrine was not humane.

But I certify you, brethren.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. but I make known
unto you, or declare unto you; for one of these ways the word is constantly
rendered in our last English translation. See Luke 2.15. and John 15.15. and
John 17.26. and Act. 2.28. and Romans 9.22.23. and 1. Cor. 15.1. and Ephesians. 1.9.
and elsewhere. q. d. I declare now and make known unto you concerning the
Gospel which I planted among you, a matter which it seems is yet unknown unto
you; or if you have had some knowledge of it, yet there are some amongst you,
which will not acknowledge it for a certain truth, but either conceal it or
keep it doubtful: now therefore I shall make it certain and clear unto you.
And he calls them Brethren: because although in some points they were revolted
and removed from the sincerity of the Gospel, yet they were not removed from
the compass of his charity.

That the Gospel which was preached of me, is not after man.] The truth or
matter concerning the Gospel, which he would make known unto them; that the
Gospel which he planted among them was no humane doctrine. q. d. As my
Apostleship by the authority whereof I preached the Gospel unto you, was not
humane, for I had my Apostleship neither of men, nor by men: so the Gospel
which I preached by the authority of my Apostleship was no humane Gospel; the
doctrine of it is neither the invention nor tradition of any man; and this I
make known and certify unto you, that you may retain no further scruple of
the matter. For hereof was the doubt among the Galatians, though there was no
just cause for any doubt heerof.

VERSE 12.
Text.
For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ. Sense.
Received it of man.] i. e. Neither received it, neither was I taught it by man.

Of man.] i. e. Of any mortal man.

Taught it but by.] i. e. Taught it otherwise, then by the revelation of Christ.

Reason.
A clear reason of his former assertion, that the Gospel which he preached,
and his knowledge therein, was not humane, or after man; because he neither
received of man, nor was taught it by man.

Comment.
The construction of the words. Paul learned the Gospel not from Men. But
immediately from Christ. By way of Revelation. At what time.

FOR I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it.] The word of man,
interposed here between the two Verbs received and taught, must be referred to
both, and follow both thus: I neither received it, nor was taught it of man.
And the word taught, is but explicative, to specify the general word
received, and restrain it to the Gospel; in reference whereto those two words
make but one sense; for to receive the Gospel, and to be taught the Gospel, is
all one: and in a sense somewhat like to this, Paul requires the Thessalonians,
to hold the Traditions which they had been taught, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. The meaning
of the Apostle in this place, is not simply to say, that he neither received,
nor was taught the Gospel at all: for in the words next following, he
acknowledges and confesses, that he received and was taught it of Christ by
revelation; for that was the maine point, which as he said in the former verse,
he would certify or make known unto the Galatians. But his purpose is to
prove, that his knowledge in the divine Gospel of Christ was not humane; that
he neither received nor was taught his knowledge therein, by any Apostle, nor
by any other mortal man. For although the Gospel which Paul preached, were for
the matter of it divine, as being the same which Peter and the rest of the
Apostles preached: Yet his knowledge therein, for the means whereby he had
it, might by the false Teachers be alleged and pretended to be humane;
which Paul here denies of himself. But he denies it not of Timothy, who
though he preached that Gospel which was divine, yet Timothies knowledge in
that divine Gospel was humane; because he received and was taught his
knowledge therein by Paul who was a mortal man; for Paul both instructed
Timothy in the Gospel, and ordained him a Minister thereof by the imposition of
his hands. See and compare 1. Tim, 4.6.14. and 1. Tim. 6.20. and 2. Tim.
1.6.13.14. and 2. Tim. 3.14. So is it in all the Ministers of the Gospel at
this day; for although the Gospel which they preach be divine, yet their
knowledge therein is humane, because they receive their knowledge by humane
means.

But by the Revelation of Jesus Christ.] A super-reason or confirmation of his
former reason, by an argument drawn from the contrary, that the Gospel which
he preached, he neither received, nor was taught it by man; because he
received and was taught it of Christ by Revelation. And here again Christ is
opposed to man; not that Christ was no way man; but because when he revealed
the Gospel unto Paul, he was not at that time a mortal man, nor at any time a
mere man, but always both God and man. And hereby also he firmly concludes
and proves his principal assertion, that the Gospel which he preached was not
humane, or not after man; for if he received and was taught it by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, then certainly the Gospel so by Christ revealed
unto him, was no humane invention, neither was his knowledge in it by any
humane instruction. q. d. For my knowledge in the Gospel which I preached unto
you; I was no Disciple nor Auditor to any of the Apostles, nor to any other
mortal man, to be taught it, and learn it from man; but my only Master and
Teacher in the Gospel was Jesus Christ himself, who revealed it unto me; and
his Revelation of it unto me, was not after an ordinary manner as he taught
it his Apostles, and the rest of his Disciples, while he conversed upon Earth:
But after an extraordinary and miraculous manner; for he taught it me since
his ascension, and revealed it unto me from Heaven; and this was the ground
why I told you before; that if an Angel from Heaven should preach any other
Gospel unto you, he was to be accursed; because thereby he preaches a
Gospel repugnant to that Gospel, which was revealed by Christ from Heaven.

He uses the word Revelation; because Revelation is an instruction teaching
peculiar and proper to the Gospel, and such an instruction as is also peculiar
and proper to God to be made by him; for although men have and do teach the
Gospel; yet the action of revealing the Gospel is never ascribed unto man, but
only unto God. See Mat. 16.17. and Luke 10.21. and 1. Cor. 2.10. and Ephesians.
3.3. and Phil. 3.15. For the Gospel and the points therein contained are the
sacred mysteries and secrets of God, which of themselves are veiled and covered
from the knowledge of man, who by the course of nature, or by force of his
natural understanding can never attain to any knowledge therein, unless
first they be revealed and discovered by God: Because God, and God only is
the revealer of secrets. Dan. 2.47. The first Teacher of the Gospel who
published the Doctrine of it, was Christ, who because he was God, was
therefore a Revealer of it, and his Instruction was Revelation: But since
Christ's ascension, his Apostles and their Successors have been Teachers
thereof, yet not Revealers; neither is their instruction Revelation, because
Revelation is that instruction which is immediate or proximous from God;
therefore the Instruction in the Gospel which Paul received immediately and
proximously from Christ, who is God, he calls it Revelation. But the time when
Paul had this Revelation from Christ, can not be certainly defined from
Scripture: Yet probable it is, that he had it at the time of his conversion,
when he lay at Damascus in a Trance three days together blind and fasting,
without sight or meat* for when in his astonishment, he demanded of Christ,
what he would have him to do? Christ answered, he must go into Damascus,
and there it should be told him what he must do. Act. 9.6.9. etc. And
probable also it is; that he had this Revelation, at the time of those
Revelations, which he had in his rapture when he was caught up into Paradise,
and heard unspeakeable words; whereof he writes, 2. Cor. 12.1.2.3. because it
is very probable that his trance after his conversion and his rapture for those
Revelations were at one and the same time; for in the sequel of this Chapter
he draws immediate Arguments from his conversion to prove he was taught by
Revelation: But this is certain, that Paul never preached the Gospel of
Christ, until first he was taught it by Christ; and then immediately he
preached it. See afterward in this Chapter, verse. 16.

VERSE. 13.
Text.
For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews Religion, how
that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it. Sense.
Beyond measure.] i. e. Beyond all excess. And wasted it.] i. e. Destroyed it.

Reason.
Another Argument to prove that the Gospel which he preached was not humane,
but divine, drawn from a narration of his conversion from the Jewish Religion
to the Christian; and first he puts them in mind of his carriage in Judaisme,
and of his zeal to the Law while he lived a Pharisee, that from thence they
might collect, that he would by no means ever have forsaken the Ceremonies of
Moses, and the Traditions of his Fathers, unless God or Christ himself had
withdrawn him from them after a miraculous and manifest manner; and further
that in preaching of the Gospel, his present asserting of faith against the
works of the Law, proceeded not from any hatred of the Law, whereto once he
was so wholly addicted, but only from the Authority and command of Christ.

Comment.
Paul's former conversatio^ was not his piety. But his Activity. In persecuting
the Church. and in wasting it, which is a Metaphor taken from War, or from a
cursed Judgment. And argues Paul's former fury, and his excess.

FOR ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jewish Religion.] By
his former conversation in the Jewish Religion, wherein after the most
straitest Sect he lived a Pharisee, he understands not his piety toward God,
in any acts of devotion for the worship and service of God, whereto the
Pharisees above the rest of the Jews, were great Pretenders, especially for
the acts of fasting and praying; for as it appears by the description of their
Devotions recorded in the Gospel, they fasted thrice in the week, they prayed
publicly in the corners of the streets, and they prayed tediously by making
long prayers, although all this were Hypocrisy: Yet Paul by his conversation
in this place has reference to none of these. But he means his activity or
madness (as himself calls it) in being wholly transported with fervency and
zeal to defend the Law and oppose the Gospel, by persecuting and destroying
the Professors thereof, as himself intimates in the words following. For all
the conversation of some men in their Religion, especially of those who
profess themselves the strictest, is only a blind and bloody zeal to
persecute and destroy all Dissenters from them; and the murders they commit by
the fury of this zeal, they account the worship and service of God; as
Christ foretold it unto his Disciples, John 16.2. Of Paul's former conversation
this way, the Galatians must needs hear, either before or at least upon his
planting of the Gospel amongst them; because his persecution was very general,
entering into every house, haling men and women to prison; and because the
dispersion of the Disciples thereupon was very general also; for they that were
scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Word. See Act. 8.3.4. And
because of the fearful accident that fell upon him in his journey to persecute
at Damascus, near whereunto he was stricken to the ground with lightning from
Heaven; the fact whereof was so notorious and public, that the fame of it must
needs spread to the hearing of the Galatians; seeing the confines of Galatia
lay not far remote from the confines of Syria, whereof Damascus was the
chief City.

How that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God.] An instance or
example of his conversation in the Jewish Religion; namely, that beyond measure
he persecuted the Church of God, and beyond measure wasted it. Beyond measure.
i. e. Beyond all excess, even unto extremity; for Beyond measure, is an
express^on too flat and too dry, to utter the sharpness and bloudinesse of
that persecution wherewith Paul once wasted the Church of God; for therein he
exceeded unto all extremity. Into the profession of persecution Paul, as it
seems, had his initiation at the martyrdom of Stephen, with whose blood his
zeal was fleshed, for he was accessory to Stephens death, by consenting
thereto, and by keeping the raiment of them that stoned him. See Acts 7.58. and
Acts 22.20. Of the bloody persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, whereby
all the Saints were thence scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and
Samaria, though the chief Priests were the chief authors, yet Paul was the
chief actor; for he entered not only into every Synagogue, but into every
house, and haling out men and women, committed them to prison. See Acts 8.3.
and Acts 26.11. He solicited the high Priest for authority, and obtained a
commission from him to commit the like outrage in the Synagogues at Damascus,
as he had executed before in those at Jerusalem. See Acts 9.1.2. and Acts 22.5.
and Acts 26.12.

And wasted it.] The degree of his persecution was, that it proceeded unto
wasting of the Church; for that word expresses the extremity of his
persecution, that it advanced and increased not only beyond measure, but beyond
all excess. The Greek (...) is rendered elsewhere in our last English
Translation, destroyed: (See Act. 9.21. and afterward in this cap. ver. 23.)
which expression is too general and flat, coming short of the full sense of
the word: but in this place it is fully and properly translated wasted. For
wasting is a special kind of destruction, executed with fury and excess; not
only upon men's persons, but upon their lands and goods, and properly signifies
a vast destruction. For Wast is a metaphor taken from War, by the fury whereof a
Country is depopulated, the people slain with the sword, the Towns burnt
down by fire, the cattle driven away, and all the goods made a prey: such a
Wast was done upon Jericho, Jos. 6.21.24. Or rather Wast seems to be a
metaphor taken from the Execution of a heavy Judgment upon a cursed person,
who to be made an example unto others, is put to a fearful death, his wife and
children turned out of doors, and his house pulled down to the ground; his
gardens supplanted, his meadows plowed, his trees dug up by the roots, and
all his goods forfeited. Such a wast was by the judgment of God executed upon
the house of Jeroboam, upon the house of Baasha, upon the house of Ahab, and
upon the house of Baal, which was turned into a draught-house. See 1. King.
15.29. and 1. King. 16.3.4. and 1. King. 21.22. and 2. King. 10.27. Such a
Wast, in a manner, Paul labored to bring upon the Church of God, as it may
easily appear from two grounds. 1. From the fury of his mind; for he was
exceeding mad against the Church of God, and his mind was so bloody, that his
very breath was blood, in breathing out threatenings and slaughters against the
Disciples of the Lord. See Act. 9.1. and Act. 26.11. 2. From the excess of his
actions; for he haled men and women out of their houses into prison, he forced
diverse into banishment, persecuting them even unto strange Cities; he punished
the Saints in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and when they
were put to death, he suffraged or gave his voice against them: in a word,
(...) (which word explicates (...)) i. e. he made havocke of the Church of God,
which is all one with wasting it. See Acts 8.3. and Acts 26.10, 11. Hence
plainly appears the fury and madness of blind and bloody zeal, which is the
only cause of persecuting and wasting the Church of Christ.

VERSE 14.
Text.
And profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in mine own nation,
being more exceeding zealous of the traditions of my fathers. Sense.
And profited in the Jews religion.] i. e. I advanced and propagated Judaisme.
My equals. i. e. My contemporaries of the same age.

Reason.
An effect of his former conversation in persecuting and wasting the Church of
God; that by that means he advanced and increased the Jews religion: and the
reason of both, was his zeal to the Jewish traditions.

Comment.
The effect of his persecuting, And the cause of it.

AND profited in the Jews religion above many my equals in mine own nation. ]
He seems not here to speak of his own personal profiting either in the
knowledge or in the observance of Judaisme, as if therein he exceeded his
contemporaries; but of the national advantage he brought unto the Jews in
defending and propagating their religion amongst others, and making Proselites
unto it. For the Greek is (...), i. e. I increased the Jewish religion, or made
it to proceed; for so elsewhere the word is rendered in our last English
Translation. See Luke 2.52. and 2. Tim. 2.16. and 2. Tim. 3.9. And this sense
is very consequent to his persecuting and wasting of the Church of God; for his
persecution and vastation of Christianity, must needs have this effect and
fruit thereto consequent, that by virtue thereof, he advanced and propagated
Judaisme: for those two religions being mainly opposite and contrary, the
decrease of Christianity must needs be the increase of Judaisme; as afterward
the propagation of Christianity was the vastation of Judaisme. q. d. I
propagated and advanced the doctrine, knowledge, and observance of the Jews
religion, by my activity and industry, in defending it against all adversaries,
in gayning diverse Proselites unto it, and in spreading it somewhat among the
Gentiles; and herein I exceeded and surpassed all my contemporaries that were
of my time; not only such as were Proselites reconciled to our Religion from
other Nations; but also such as were Native Jews by descent and birth in mine
own Nation.

Being more exceeding zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers.] The reason why
he persecuted and wasted the Church of God, was, because he was zealous of
the Traditions of his Fathers; and the reason why he increased the Jews
Religion more then any of his contemporaries or equals in time, was, because
he was more exceeding zealous then they. By the Traditions of his Fathers, He
seems to understand the whole body of Ceremonies then in practice among the
Jews, as well the Ceremonies of Moses, as the Traditions of his Ancestors;
whereof some are mentioned by Christ in the Gospel. See Mat. 15.2.6. and Mat.
23.16.18.23.25. q. d. I was an exceeding Zelot above measure, and above many of
my equals, not only for the Ceremonies of Moses instituted by the Law of God;
but also for the Traditions introduced and superadded by our Ancestors, which
by Antiquity of time were confirmed into Customs, and carried the force of
Laws. And the reason why he was exceeding zealous in the Jewish Religion,
was, because he was a Pharisee, not only by profession, in living according
to the Rules of that strict Sect, but also by birth and education; for he was
the son of a Pharisee, and might be bred by his Father in the Traditions of
his Fathers; and the manner of the Pharisees was to be exceeding strict, and
exceeding zealous. See and compare Mat. 23.15. and Act. 23.6. and Act. 26.5.
and Phil. 3.5.6.

VERSE 15.
Text.
But when it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers womb, and called
me by his grace. Sense.
Who separated me.] i. e. Designed or appointed me to the Ministry. From my
Mothers womb.] i. e. During my time in the womb. And called me.] Viz. To the
Ministry to be an Apostle.

Reason.
The means whereby he was converted from his former conversation in the
Jewish Religion, to be an Apostle and a Preacher of the Gospel; whereby he
continues his Argument to prove and conclude his principal assertion, that his
Ministry and his Doctrine in the Gospel, was not humane or after man: but
divine or after God. For says he:

Comment.
The prime cause of Paul's Apostleship. whereto (...) was preordained, while he
was in the womb. In a singular manner, and afterward actually ordained. Paul's
whole Apostleship Divine. Sanctifying put for separating. Paul's calling. The
non-causes of it. The true causes of it.

BUT when it pleased God.] These first words of this verse must have their
coherence with the first words of the next verse following, to reveal his
son in me; thus, But when it pleased God to reveal his son in me; for the
subject or matter of Gods pleasure here mentioned, was the revealing of Christ
unto Paul; which act he says pleased God, because he would declare that the
original or prime cause of all those means whereby he became a Preacher of
the Gospel, was only the good will and pleasure of God, q. d. There was no
other motive, or cause of my Conversion from my former conversation wherein I
persecuted and wasted the Church of God, and of my reduction to the knowledge
of Christ, who was so effectually revealed unto me, that I became a member of
the Church which I persecuted, and a Preacher of the Gospel in it, but only
the good will and good pleasure of God, without any dignity or merit of mine,
and contrary to all dignity and merit in me; for the indignities and demerits
which I had done to his Church were such, and so great, that had he looked upon
my actions and not upon his own pleasure, there could have been no cause why
he should reveal his son to me.

Who separated me from my mothers womb.] A reason of his former words, why the
original cause of all those means whereby he was ordained a Preacher of the
Gospel, was the sole and singular pleasure of God, and no action of Paul's;
namely, because God separated or designed him to the Ministry from his mothers
womb, before he had yet done any action of his own. The words are an
Hebraisme, whereby is signified some excellent and singular benefit of nature
in the composure or temper of the brain and heart, wherewith God endowes some
children from their first conception in the womb, especially those whom he
preordaines, and prepares for some special purpose, whereof in Scripture there
are several examples. For although nature in her ordinary course has diverse
degrees of goodness, yet by the extraordinary hand of God, she may be, and
sometime is infinitely advanced and exalted, when God is pleased to fashion a
child for some singular service, and curiously to work it in the womb. (...).
i. e. during, or from my time in my mothers womb; for the womb is not here
the term of Recesse, from whence the Apostle is said to be separate, as if
the separation were to be understood of his severing from the womb by the way
of his delivery or birth from thence; for then it must have been (...): but his
abode in the womb was the term of Time when, or during which, he was
separated unto the Ministry, or rather decreed or designed to be separated
thereto. But the term of Recesse from whence he was decreed to be separate,
was partly his contemporaries whom he exceeded in the acts of Persecution, and
partly the rest of the Apostles whom he exceeded in suffering Persecution. And
the term of Access whereunto he was separate, was his Ministry or
Apostleship; yet not that simply considered, but his separate and singular
Apostleship, whereby after an extraordinary manner he was singled out from the
rest of the Apostles, to exercise his Ministry apart from theirs, that he
might preach Christ among the heathen, or Gentiles, as he specifies in the next
verse following; for unto those words there, the words here of his separating
and calling must be referred for their coherence, as being the employment and
service whereunto he was separated and called. For unto this separate and
singular Apostleship to preach Christ among the Gentiles, Paul was elected, as
God tells Ananias, whom he sent to heal Paul of his blindness in Damascus.
Acts 9.15. and as Ananias reports it unto Paul when he healed him, Acts
22.13.14. And unto this he was instituted at Jerusalem, when he was in a
trance, praying in the Temple, where God said unto him, Make haste and get thee
quickly out of Jerusalem, for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles.
Act. 22.17.18.21. And unto this he was ordained at Antioch, when unto the
Prophets and Teachers there, as they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy
Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them. Act. 13.2. For here and now, at this time and place, that
Separation was actually ordained or destinated, which from his mothers womb
was pre-ordayned or predestined. Hence Paul styles himself the separate
Apostle unto the Gospel. Romans 1.1. And hence he professes with a deep
asseveration, that he was ordained and appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle,
and a Teacher of the Gentiles. See 1. Tim. 2.7. and 2. Tim. 1.11. where by the
words ordained and appointed, he seems to explicate the word separated. q.d.
Before the time that ever I had done any humane act either of good or evil in
the world; yea before the time that I was borne into the world, while yet I lay
wrapped in my mothers womb, God by his good pleasure and singular favor unto
me, decreed and designed to separate, appoint, or ordain me to a separate and
singular Apostleship, apart from the rest of the Apostles, especially from
Peter, James, and John, whose Province it was to preach Christ among the Jews,
that mine from theirs should be far remote, to preach him among the Gentiles;
whereto afterward he actually called, instituted and ordained me, for the
actual execution of that whereto from my Mothers womb he had separated and
designed me. This he says; to certify and make known unto the Galatians,
that his Apostleshippe was no way humane, that he had neither instruction nor
authority thereto from those that were the chief Apostles, as the false
Teachers among the Galatians had falsely suggested: But the whole frame of his
Apostleshippe was wholly divine, from the good pleasure of God even from his
mothers womb.

And in his expression hereof, he seems to allude to the words of Esaias, who
says of himself; The Lord has called me from the womb, from the bowels of
my Mother has he made mention of my name, Esaias. 49.1. Or to the words of
Jeremy, to whom God says, Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee, and
before thou came forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and I ordained
thee a Prophet unto the Nations, Jer. 1.5. In the words to Jeremy, to sanctify
is the same, that to separate is with Paul; for to sanctify there, is not to
make Jeremy holy and righteous morally, but politically to design and ordain
him to a public Office; for there Jeremy is ordained a Prophet unto the
Nations, and here Paul is separated a Preacher unto the Gentiles. A saying not
much unlike to this of himself, and to those of the Prophets, the Apostle has
of Jacob and Esau, concerning whom God made a singular appointment from their
Mothers womb, while the Children were not yet borne, neither had done any good
or evil, Romans 9.11. But from Gods singular acts upon any of these single
persons from their Mothers womb, to collect an universal appointment upon all
single persons from all eternity, is not consequent by any rule of sound reason.

And called me by his grace.] Called me, viz. to my Apostleship, by
signifying his will to institute me an Apostle to the Gentiles. If we refer
this Calling to the time of his Mothers womb, and make it an adjunct and
concurrent with his separation, as if from his Mothers womb God had both
separated and called him; then the word called cannot signify the act of his
calling, that then he was actually called, but only the Decree of his
calling, that then God designed him to be called afterward; as it seems the
word is taken, Romans 9.11. But there is no cause to the contrary, but that the
word called may here signify the effect of that separation which God made of
him in his Mothers womb, and the time of it fitly referred to those times
wherein he was actually and really called, by the intimation unto him of Gods
will and pleasure, who had elected, instituted, and ordained him to execute the
office of an Apostle to the Gentiles; which intimation was made and confirmed
unto him at several times and places, as at Damascus by Ananias, at Jerusalem
by God himself in a vision, and at Antioch by the Presbytery, as was formerly
noted. And the ground of his Calling to be an Apostle of Christ was no
qualification in himself, whereby he was prepared or fitted to preach Christ:
for he was wholly ignorant of Christ, who now upon his calling was to be
revealed unto him; as it appears by the words next following: Nor no act of
justice in God, whereby God was obliged to recompense any former act done by
Paul; who had done many acts to the contrary, that made him unworthy to be
called an Apostle; for although touching the righteousness which is in the
Law, he was blameless, Phil. 3.6. Yet touching the Gospel, he was not
blameless, but criminates himself for a blasphemer, a persecutor, and
injurious, 1. Tim. 1.13. Nor no act of equity in God, whereby God stood engaged
to his own decree, in separating and designing him to the Apostleship from his
Mothers womb; for that decree being made several years before the act of his
calling, had without all question thereto annexed such conditions as were
suitable to the wisdom and righteousness of God; as particularly this
condition, that before his actual calling he should not render himself
altogether unworthy of so sacred a Function; whereof he made himself unworthy
in a manner, and enough to acquit God of his decree or design; because he was
a blasphemer and a persecutor, and had made himself unworthy altogether, if
he had been a blasphemer wittingly and wilfully against the knowledge and
motion of his conscience; for of such a sin Christ affirms that it shall
never be forgiven, Mat. 12.32. And if such a sin must never be forgiven,
much less must the person polluted with such a sin, be called to a Function
so sacred; for if he were not meet to be called an Apostle, because he
persecuted the Church of God, as himself argues, 1. Cor. 15.9. much less had
he been meet for it, if he had persecuted wittingly and wilfully. But his
calling to his Apostleship was an act of Gods mere grace proceeding from the
good pleasure of God: For as the Decree for his calling when he was separated
from his Mothers womb, came out from the good pleasure of God: So the act of
his calling afterward had the same good pleasure for the ground of it. Or as
Paul terms it elsewhere, it was an act of Gods mercy, and Gods mercy is also
his grace, seeing all mercy is grace; for although he were a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and injurious, yet he obtained mercy, because he did it
ignorantly in unbelief, 1. Tim. 1.13. Whereby he tacitly intimates that he
had not obtained mercy, if he had done it in knowledge and malice. Yet Paul's
ignorance was not the cause of that mercy, but only the condition which
qualified him for it; for the cause of it was, because Christ had a purpose
upon Paul to make him a pattern of his mercy and long-suffering to them which
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting, 1. Tim. 1.16. Paul's title
then to his Apostleship was only grace, and so wholly grace, that very
frequently in his Epistles he not only denominates it from grace, but
nominates and calls it grace. See and compare, Romans 1.5. and Romans 15.15.16. and
1. Cor. 3.10. and Gal. 2.9. and Ephesians. 3.7.8.

VERSE. 16.
Text.
To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen,
immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood. Sense.
In me.] i. e. To me and by me. Among the Heathen.] i. e. The Gentiles.
Immediately I conferred not.] i. e. Then upon my calling I discovered not, or
related not, or reported not, that I was called, and Christ revealed to me,
etc. With flesh and blood.] i. e. to any mortal man.

Reason.
The words show the matter of Gods pleasure toward Paul; namely, to reveal his
son to him, that he might preach him among the Heathen; and consequently
they show the manner of Paul's carriage thereupon, that then for the present he
did not discover, or reveal the matter to any mortal man.

Comment.
God revealed Christ, by the means of Christ, who is the Son of God, and a
Mystery. Christ was revealed to Paul, and by Paul to the Gentiles, whose
Apostle he was chiefly, though sometime he preached to the Jews. Flesh and
blood put for mortal man. Paul discovered not his Apostleship immediately upon
his calling to it, and the reason why he did not.

TO reveal his son in me.] This co-heres with the beginning of the former
verse, thus: When it pleased God to reveal his son in me. i. e. to make the
mystery of his son known unto me; for so elsewhere Paul himself seems to
expound these words here, and particularly the word Reveal. See Ephesians. 3.3. His
son. i. e. Jesus Christ; for this was intimated before, verse. 12. where the
Apostle apologized for the Gospel he preached, that he received it not of man,
neither was taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: and although it
be said there, that Christ revealed the Gospel unto him, and here that God
revealed Christ unto him, and that these two sayings signify distinct actions;
yet both these sayings, and both the actions thereby signified, come to one
effect thus; That God by the means of Christ, revealed Christ and his Gospel
to Paul; or Christ according to the will of God revealed himself and his
Gospel to Paul; for as ver. 1. he had his Apostleship from God by Christ: so
by these two verses it appears, that he had his revelation from God by
Christ. And therefore of this revelation unto Paul, God was the principal
author who appointed it, and Christ was both the Instrument and Matter of it,
so that the issue comes to this, That God by Christ revealed Christ to Paul.
Now Christ is called, and is the son of God, by way of singular eminency, as
the article the declares unto us: because he is so in a most peculiar and
excellent manner, through several degrees of eminency, far beyond all other Men
and Angels, who in some manner and degree are also the sons of God; for the
Saints are the sons of God by their justificatio^ or adoption into that
son-hood, which unto Christ is natural, and whence they are made coheirs with
Christ. And Christ as the son of God is a mystery, or a secret person, the
knowledge of whom is veyled, covered, or hidden from the world; for Christ and
his gospel is called the mystery of God, the mystery of Gods will, and the
mystery which was kept secret since the world began. See Romans 11.25. and Ephesians.
1.9. and Col. 4.3. Hence Christ especially since he was crucified, is said to
be unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness: because
unto them both, he was a mystery veyled and covered from their knowledge. And
this mystery of Christ to be the son of God, was not originally made known by
any natural means, from any mortal man, but was by God himself, and by him
only, first revealed and discovered: because of God alone, it is the
prerogative and property to reveal secrets. And God revealed Christ to be his
son, at several times, to several persons; as unto John the Baptist, who bare
record of Christ, that he was the son of God: for God who sent him to baptize,
said it unto him. John. 1.33.34. and unto the Apostles, by name unto Peter, who
confessed Christ to be the son of the living God; for not flesh and blood, but
God the Father revealed that unto him. Mat. 16.16.17. And unto Paul, to whom
the mystery of Christ was made known by revelation. Ephesians. 3.3.4.5.

In me.] The Greek is (...), which is an Hebraisme, commonly put for unto me.
See 1. Cor. 14.11. where (...), answers to a single dative: but joined here
with the Verb revealed, seems to signify something more then externally unto;
for it intimates that the knowledge of Christ was infused internally into his
soul, by an act immediate, without any mean external; as because our future
glory shall totally penetrate into our whole person, therefore it is said of
it, that it shall be revealed, (...), i. e. into us. Romans 8.18. Yet elsewhere
in the New Testament, the word revealed is expressed with a single dative,
governed from the Verb it self; without any preposition intervening. See Matt.
11.27. and Matt. 16.17. and 1. Cor. 2.10. and Ephesians. 3.5. and Phil. 3.15. The
Syriak Interpreter renders it by me; which sense is very sound, and must needs
follow upon the former, in respect of the end for which Christ was revealed to
Paul; namely, that by Paul he might be preached among the Heathen; as appears
by the words following. q. d. When it pleased God by his special grace, to
call me to the sacred office of an Apostle, I at that time was no way qualified
for the Function of it: for Christ whom I was to Preach, was to me a mere
mystery, and a stumbling block, of whom I was wholly ignorant that he was the
son of God, having not only no true knowledge thereof, but a wicked
misknowledge: for at the very time of my calling, I was persecuting him whom I
was to Preach: but God who called me by his grace, did also by his grace
qualify and enable me; for he clearly enlightened my thick darkness, by
removing the veil of Christ, and revealing the mystery of his son unto me,
infusing the knowledge of him into my soul.

That I might Preach him among the Heathen.] Preach him. i. e. Christ and the
Gospel containing his Doctrine. Among the Heathen. i. e. among the Gentiles;
for so the Greek (...) is for the most part rendered in this Epistle, and so
always in all the rest, excepting only one place; namely, 2 Cor. 11.26. The
end and purpose for which God revealed Christ unto Paul, was this, that Paul
might preach the Doctrine of Christ among the Gentiles. In which words he
describes his peculiar and proper office for the line or circuit of it, that he
was to ^e a separate Apostle, to exercise his Ministry apart from the rest in
preaching the Gospel among the Gentiles. The Jews had already designed unto
them their peculiar Apostles, namely, the twelve whom Christ had chosen and
called before, during his own Ministry here on earth; as we shall see in the
Chapter following. This he therefore mentions, that no man might surmise, he
exercised his Apostleship among the Gentiles by mere chance, or by his own
private motion, or to procure their favor by exempting them from the Law of
Moses, thereby to make them more willing to embrace the Gospel of Christ: but
he did it in obedience to the will and command of God, who from his Mothers
womb had designed him for a separate Apostle, and called him by his grace, and
revealed his son unto him for that very purpose. Hence it appears, that when
Paul preached Christ at Damascus to the Jews in their Synagogues, Act. 9.20.
he did but make as it were an Essay, or preparative to his Ministry; which
three years after his first calling, he fully and wholly undertook, when
because the Jews would not endure his preaching at Jerusalem; therefore Christ
in a vision commanded him speedily to depart thence, and gave him his
Commission for a Preacher to the Gentiles; and this was done then when he was
praying, and in a trance in the Temple at Jerusalem. See Act. 22.17.22.

Immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood.] Flesh and blood is a phrase
in Scripture put for any mortal man, because every man while he remains
under that constitution is in the state of mortality; and in this place Paul
opposes mortal man to God and Christ, his only Masters and Teachers in the
Gospel; for he made the like opposition before in this Chapter, verse. 1.11.12.
The like sense this phrase bears, Mat. 16.17. Where it stands opposed to God
the Father; and the like again, Ephesians. 6.12. Where it is opposed to wicked
spirits, who notwithstanding their wickedness are immortal. I conferred not.
The Greek is (...). i. e. I discovered it not, related or imparted it not to
any mortal man, that I was called to the Gospel, and was to preach it. The
word (...), is no where used in all the New Testament, but only in this
Epistle; and in this but twice, viz. here, and again cap. 2.6. in both which
places, it signifies to discover, relate, or impart some secret to make it
known to some other, who had no knowledge thereof before, with intent either
to ease the Relaters mind, or to consult the Hearers judgment, or to inform
and increase the Hearers knowledge; and in this sense, to this last intent, the
word shall be taken, cap. 2. verse. 6. ^s there shall be showed. For the word
is materially the same with revealed, from which it differs only modally, in
reference to the person making the Relation; for when God is the Relator of the
secret, then in the sense of the Scripture, the Relation is called a
Revelation: But when man is the Relator, it is called an Information,
Communication, or Discovery. And it is the very same with (...), from which it
differs only terminally; for that knowledge which in respect of the Speaker
who utters it, is (...). i. e. expounding; the same in respect of the hearer
who receives it, is (...), or (...), i. e. imparting or communicating; for so
the word (...). is rendered in our last English Translation, cap. 2. verse. 2.
And it is opposed to (...), i. e. to conceal or keep secret; which word is
used of the Virgin Mary, that she concealed or kept secret, pondering in her
heart the things which she heard from, and concerning Christ. See Luke
2.19.51. So in this place, Paul in a manner says the very same thing of
himself in a negative form of speech, that what God had revealed in him
concerning his son, that matter he discovered not or imparted not to any
morta^l man; which is all one with concealing or keeping it in his heart.
Immediately must be referred two ways; first backward to his Revelation, when
Christ was revealed in him, and then forward, to his going into Arabia, whither
he went immediately after his Revelation, before he discovered or related it
to any mortal man, and before he went to Jerusalem to the Apostles. But then
we must mark the time whereto he applies the denial of this discovery;
namely, that at no time between the time of his calling and his going into
Arabia, he discovered the Revelation he had to any mortal man; but
afterward, and in times following, he at diverse times discovered it to diverse
persons; as appears from several passages in his Epistles. The maine sense
is, Paul mentions this his Concealment of his Revelation and calling to preach
the Gospel, not only Historically, but Argumentatively; that by an Argument a
minori, he might firmly prove his principal assertion, that his Gospel was
not humane or taught by man, because he discovered not his calling thereto to
any mortal man, and therefore much less did he consult any man for
instruction therein; and therefore again, much less durst any man attempt to
instruct him, q. d. When God at Damascus had revealed his son in me, and
designed me to preach him among the Gentiles, immediately thereupon, at least
after my baptism there; I went from Damascus into Arabia, to preach him among
the Gentiles, and thence I returned again to Damascus; but during all that
time I discovered not the Revelation to any mortal man that I was called to
the Gospel; much less did I consult or confer with any man for any further
instruction in the knowledge of Christ, or for my proceeding in the exercise of
my Ministry among the Gentiles, as if in any point I were either ignorant or
doubtful; and much less durst any man attempt to instruct me, for no man
knew that I was called to the Gospel, excepting Ananias of Damascus; but all
other men knew that I had authority to bind all that professed it; and all men
must needs imagine that I still continued in the same mind, and therefore all
must needs be afraid, and actually were afraid of me. But for my knowledge in
Christ and his Gospel, I did wholly acquiesce and rest upon God, as abundantly
instructed by his Revelation, and fully satisfied with his Commission, by the
sole virtue whereof I preached the Gospel; before I made any discovery of my
calling to it, otherwise then by my preaching of it.

VERSE 17.
Text.
Neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me: but I
went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Sense.
Went I up.] The Greek is, neither returned I. Apostles before me.] i. e.
Ancienter then I, or before me in time. And returned.] i. e. Retired secretly.

Reason.
An illustration in particular of that whereof he mentioned before in
general; namely, how he disposed of himself immediately after his calling to
the Apostleship.

Comment.
Paul being made an Apostle went not to Jerusalem to consult the Apostles
there: But went into Arabia, and why so? Thence unto Damascus. and why so?

NEither went I up to Jerusalem.] Went I up. The Greek is, (...), i. e.
Neither returned I to Jerusalem; for from Jerusalem he came, when he made
that journey to Damascus, wherein by the way he was converted and called to
his Apostleship; and therefore his not going to Jerusalem at that time must
needs be a not returning thither. And thither he returned not from Damascus
immediately after his calling and baptism there by Ananias; although three
years after that time, he returned to Jerusalem; as will appear in the next
verse following.

To them which were Apostles before me.] At Jerusalem was the Oracle as
formerly of the Law, so then of the Gospel, seated in the Apostles of Christ,
whom Christ before his ascension had personally inspired with his Spirit, and
ordained by his own hand. He denies therefore that he went to the Apostles;
either because his adversaries who magnified them so much for divine men
exempted from the rank of ordinary persons, might also remember that they were
not yet exempted from the appellation of flesh and blood, although they were
qualified with extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost; or because the chief
suspicion against Paul might arise concerning the Apostles, that he to them
made some address, and by them was instructed in the doctrine of the Gospel.
This suspicion therefore Paul cleares by these words, that by this his denial,
no man might affirm that ever he was a Disciple to the Apostles, thereby to
diminish his reputation, especially if in any point his Doctrine seemed
different from theirs, as was the suggestion of his adversaries.

Before me.] i. e. For their time, or standing in the Apostleship; which he
mentions therefore; because from their seniority and Antiquity in their
Apostleship, Paul's adversaries had taken occasion to disparage him, as a
novice, and a puny, or a pupil, to some of the Apostles, who for their
standing in the Ministry were all his Seniors and Ancients. This objection he
refells by declaring, that although the Apostles were all his Seniors, yet he
was Disciple or pupil to none of them; for he never came at them to learn
any thing from them; neither immediately after his calling, nor at any time
afterward; for when afterward he was at Jerusalem with them about the
controversy of circumcision, the chiefest of them who seemed to be somewhat,
in conference added nothing to him, as it is expressed in the next Chapter
following, verse. 6.

But I went into Arabia.] These words as was noted before, must cohere in sense
with the word immediately, in the former verse, for the affirmative of Paul's
first action after his conversion; for the two clauses intervening between
that word and these, are both negatives of what actions he did not, q. d. When
it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, and to give me my charge for
preaching the Gospel among the Gentiles, then after my baptism and a little
refreshment in Damascus to recover my strength, whereof the Lord by my
dejection had deprived me; the first action which I did was this, that
immediately I went into Arabia, where certainly I could find no instructions
for the Gospel, to be gathered from a people uncivil and wild, who were
wholly ignorant of the Gospel, who had never heard any thing of Christ, and who
(excepting some Proselites who came yearly to Jerusalem) were all wholly
devoted to idolatry and superstition. By the adversative particle but, he
plainly declares, that unto his not going to Jerusalem he opposes his going
into Arabia, whereby he seems to prefer Arabia the baseness of the Gentiles,
before Jerusalem the glory of the Jews; that by this intimation he might
either abolish or abate the boasting of his adversaries, who imagined that the
truth of the Gospel was topicall, and calculated only for the Meridian of
Jerusalem; and therefore afterward again Arabia and Jerusalem are compared
together in a matter of higher moment, and are both made equal to stand in the
same rank of baseness and bondage. The end why immediately he went into
Arabia was this, that being made a separate Apostle from the rest, he might
(according to his calling, and the charge laid upon him) preach the Gospel
among the Gentiles or Heathen; and of all the Gentiles they of Arabia were in a
manner most Heathenish. But why he chose to preach the Gospel there, rather
then elsewhere, the reason might be, because Arabia was much remote and quite
contrary to Cilicia, wherein stood the famous Tarsus, where Paul was borne, and
well known, for he was a Citizen of that City; but Arabia was as it were an
Angle of the World, and a Country of obscure and base condition, wherein he
might be latitant in his preaching, and live somewhat secure from the fury of
that persecution, which himself had partly raised, and at that time flamed in
all places round about Jerusalem, from whence the Saints were then all
scattered abroad, except the Apostles who there lay hid; for it was the manner
of Paul, who himself had been a persecutor, to be always subject to
persecution, and yet always to shun it by all the shifts he could make, as
far as he obtained license and warrant from God. This journey of Paul from
Damascus into Arabia is not mentioned by Luke in the Acts of the Apostles; yet
it is not therefore not a truth; but therefore it is a truth, because Paul
mentions it here; for whatsoever is any where mentioned in Scripture is a
truth, and many a truth is no where mentioned, especially in point of History.

And returned again unto Damascus.] I returned. The Greek is (...). i. e. I
was forced or made to return secretly and privately, i. e. in one word, I
retired. For the Verb affected with that Preposition does consignifie both
compulsion and wariness or secrecy, imitating those Conjugations of the
Hebrews, which consignifie passively and causally, in being made to suffer the
doing of something; which the Latins express by compounding the Verb with
fio. And the word though frequently used in Scripture in a vulgar sense, is
originally a military word, borrowed from a Retreat in War; where a Party or
an Army that has marched into some danger or disadvantage is forced to retire
or necessarily and warily to return, for fear they should be enclosed or be
beaten by the enemy. The return then of Paul from Arabia was not voluntary,
free, and open; but necessary, wary, and secret by way of retire. But the cause
that necessitated him to retire from thence, is not expressed in Scripture,
either here or elsewhere: yet the reason might be, because that persecution
which lately began at Jerusalem, and was by him extended to Damascus, might now
be spread into Arabia, and threatened to him who had before threatened it to
others, and who now for fear of it retired from thence; for persecution when
once raised against the Gospel of Christ, though it spare no Professor of the
Truth, yet it aymeth most at the Preachers of it. But why he retired back
again to Damascus, the reason is manifest from the Scripture; because he was
to preach the Gospel there; for after he had rested at Damascus a few days
with the Disciples there, he straitway preached Christ in the Synagogues, that
he was the Son of God, Act. 9 19.20. Hence it appears that in the middle of
that 19. verse (...) the place, where Luke has omitted Paul's journey into
Arabia; which omission may easily be harmonied and supplied by inserting that
journey into that Verse thus: And when he received meat, he was strengthened;
and immediately he went into Arabia, and retired again unto Damascus. Then
was Saul certain days with the Disciples which were at Damascus; and
straightway he preached Christ, etc. And there he preached Christ to all
their amazement that heard him; because he now preached that Truth which
before he persecuted, and preached it there where he most persecuted it, or
most intended to persecute it; for God to show his power upon Paul, and to
comfort those Saints whom Paul had terrified, would make Paul, there build
again the things which there he had destroyed. And there he preached Christ
till he was persecuted thence; for Damascus was a Garison-City, whose gates
were watched day and night, where the Governor minded to apprehend Paul, and
the Jews laid wait to kill him; but by night he was let down by the wall in
a basket, by means whereof he escaped thence. See Act. 9.24.25. and 2. Cor.
11.32. Here was another (...), in departing from Damascus by way of a forced
and secret retire; for although in the whole course of his Apostleship he
traveled more then the rest of the Apostles, yet in the beginning of it, he
never traveled otherwise, then as the storm of persecution blew him, and as
the spirit of God steered him.

VERSE 18.
Text.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter, and abode with
him fifteen days. Sense.
After three years.] viz. From my conversion or calling to my Apostleship.
Went up.] (...). i. e. I returned. To see Peter.] (...). i. e. To visit, or be
acquainted with Peter.

Reason.
A Narrative of his first return to Jerusalem, and the time of his stay, after
his going from thence with authority from the high Priest to persecute the
Saints at Damascus.

Comment.
Paul's return to Jerusalem and the cause of it, and his short stay there.

THen after three years I went up to Jerusalem.] Then. The Grek is (...). i.
e. After that, or afterward; for so the word taken as an adverb of Order, is
rendered elsewhere in our last Translation. See afterward in this cap. ver. 21.
and 1. Cor. 12.28. and 1. Cor. 15.6.7.23.46. and Heb. 7.2. When he was
persecuted from Damascus, the next City whereto he came afterward, was
Jerusalem; from whence he had now been absent for the space of three years.
For the three years must not be computed from his retire out of Arabia unto
Damascus, as if he had preached three years at Damascus; for how could he
possibly preach so long in a City so populous, and so near to Jerusalem, with
such astonishment to all that heard him in then Preaching Christ, whom before
he persecuted? and yet all this while no report of his Conversion should come
to Jerusalem? Now that no certainty thereof came thither, is from hence
evident: because when at the end of three years Paul himself returned to
Jerusalem, his present condition of being an Apostle was so unknown to the
Disciples there, that they believed him not a Disciple; and when he assayed to
join himself with them, they were all afraid of him, as if he had yet
persisted a persecutor; until he was necessitated to procure the courtesy of
Barnabas to introduce him to the Apostles, and to make the report as well of
his conversion to the faith, as of his Preaching Christ at Damascus. See Act.
9.26.27. Hence it appears, 1. That although his Preaching at Damascus were
many days, as Luke expresses the time of it, Act. 9.23. yet it lasted not for
the space of three years; and therefore the three years must be computed from
the time of his conversion, or calling to his Apostleship; or, which comes all
to one, from the time of his journey from Jerusalem toward Damascus, because
his conversion fell out in that journey. 2. That the greatest part of the three
years was spent in Preaching in Arabia; from whence the news of his conversion
came not to Jerusalem; either because the Country of Arabia was somewhat
obscure, and far remote from Jerusalem, or because all commerce and passage
of Letters was stopped by reason of the persecution then reigning about
Jerusalem. I went up. (...). i. e. I returned; which he therefore says,
because Jerusalem was the place of his habitation or ordinary residence, from
whence he set forth with authority to persecute the Saints at Damascus, and now
after three years he returned from thence to Jerusalem. q. d. When I had
already executed my Apostleship for the space of three years, in Preaching the
Gospel for the most part of that time in Arabia, and for some days at
Damascus; and had thereby given sufficient proof both of my Apostleship and of
my knowledge in the mystery of Christ, then after those three years were
expired, because I was persecuout of Damascus, I returned to Jerusalem. Whereby
he necessarily concludes; that he returned not to Jerusalem for any instruction
to preach the Gospel; because for the space of three years he had already
Preached it.

To see Peter.] The Greek is, (...). i. e. to visit Peter: the word is no where
else used in all the New Testament, and properly signifies that kind of seeing,
which by the Optics is termed ^^^ustus. i. e. insight; which is a diligent
and ferious observance of a thing, eying the whole and every part, and marking
all that is to be seen, thereby, to get an exact and perfect knowledge
thereof, as if we meant to write a history of it. The practice of this insight
made upon Cities and Countries, is called Surveying, but done upon persons out
of civil respect, is termed visiting* Yet the visit here given by Paul unto
Peter, was not a visitation by way of authority, but a Salutation by way of
observance or brotherly kindness, to know and be known unto that Apostle who
was of singular authority and eminency, not only in Jerusalem, but in all that
part of the Church which lay within the Jewish pale, and of extraordinary fame
throughout the whole Church. For what could be more comfortable to all the
Disciples of Christ, and more suitable in it self, then that two such great
Apostles of Christ, who were the two principal Doctors, and as it were the two
pillars of the Church, should join their eyes and hands in the mutual
knowledge and acquaintance one of another? The cause therefore of Paul's
departure from Damascus, was his persecution from thence by the Governor, and
the Jews, who insidiated his life; and the cause of his access unto Jerusalem
at that time, was only to give Peter a visit, and to be known unto so great an
Apostle. q. d. The end of my then going to Jerusalem, and personally to Peter,
was not for Instruction to learn any thing of him, but for acquaintance to
visit him, and to be known unto him.

And abode with him fifteen days.] The space of time how long for that time
he abode at Jerusalem, was only a for might: which saying here, although in
the letter it be History, yet in the purpose of the Apostle, it is a Reason to
prove the truth of his former words, that his coming to Jerusalem to see
Peter, was only to see and visit him, because he abode with him but fifteen
days; and further, he thereby also concludes his principal point, that the
Gospel which he preached, was not humane, but divine. q. d. The space of a
for^ight was a time too narrow for m^ learn divine mysteries, by the means of
humane instruction; and therefore my knowledge in the Gospel, whereby I became
a Teacher of the Gentiles, could not be acquisitive to be gained by study or
by the help of man, no not of Peter himself, the most eminent person in the
Church of Christ: but must needs be infusive to be operated in me, only by the
pleasure of God, and to be wrought in my soul by revelation. What the Apostle
did besides at Jerusalem during those fifteen days, namely how he exercised
his Ministry privately, yet boldly, in disputing against the Grecians or
Proselites of Jerusalem, till they went about to kill him, is related by Luke,
Act. 9.28.29. But why the Apostle abode at Jerusalem no longer then fifteen
days, and why he preached not there, publicly to the Jews during that time,
himself gives the reason elsewhere; namely because the Jews of Jerusalem
would not receive his testimony concerning Christ, as Christ in a vision had
revealed it unto him in the Temple at Jerusalem, where during his abode of
fifteen days, he was praying and in a trance; for because of this malignity
in the Jews of Jerusalem, he neither preached nor stayed there, but was
commanded to make haste and get him quickly out of Jerusalem, Act. 22.17.18.

VERSE 19.
Text.
But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords brother. Sense.
The Lords brother.] i. e. Cosin-germane.

Reason.
An answer to a tacit objection, that might be made against his former words
concerning Peter. q. d. If any man shall hereupon object against me, that
although at that time I received no instruction from Peter, yet I might have it
from some other of the Apostles. To this I must further profess for a truth,
that during my abode at Jerusalem those fifteen days, I saw no other of the
Apostles, save James the less our Lords kinseman and cosin-germane; and him I
saw no otherwise, then by way of visit, as I did Peter. James the Brother of
Christ.
This James is called the Lords brother, by an Hebruisme, because he was his
cosin-germane, being the son of Alpheus, alias Cleopas, by his wife Mary, who
was sister to Mary our Lords mother. See and compare, Mat. 10.3. and Mat.
13.55. and Marc. 3.18. and Marc. 15.40. and Luke 6.15. and John 19.25. and Act.
1.13. And this title of being our Lords brother, was given him for distinction,
to notify him from James the son of Zebedee, and brother of John. At that time
of Paul's being at Jerusalem he saw no other of the Apostles but Peter and
James; but at another time, many years afterward being at Jerusalem with
Barnabas and Titus, he mentions John also; as it will appear in the next
Chapter. verse 9.

VERSE 20.
Text.
Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not. Sense.
Which I write unto you.] Supply the sense thus; are true, or certain.

Reason.
A Confirmation of all his former Narrative, by testifying his words upon his
Oath, or rather by his Oath calling God to testify them.

Comment.
A solemn Oath ascertory.

NOw the things which I write unto you.] These words must have the supply of
some predicate or attribute to complete or perfect the sense of them, which
may be thus; the things which I write unto you, are not feigned, but most true
and certain: and the words for their proper antecedent, must be referred to
the words at the beginning of the 15. verse before, But when it pleased God,
etc. for the things whereto he purposes to swear, do include all the things
from thence hitherto; namely, all Gods acts thence mentioned concerning his
conversion and vocation to his Apostleship: and all his own acts and travels
immediately and consequently thereunto.

Behold, before God, I lie not.] A solemn and sacred Oath, to prove the truth
and certainty of the things before written. For because the particulars before
related, in regard they were all matters of fact, could not be proved by force
of reason, nor by the production of witnesses: and because they were matters of
great moment to refell the objections and calumnies which his adversaries had
made against him concerning his Doctrine and authority: and because the
Galatians to whom the things were written, should not surmise them to be a
fiction of invention of his own: and further, because the things were not
unworthy of Gods testimony, that God should be called to witness of them, as
being a party to them all, for they were all either the proper acts of God, or
acts of Paul done by the special command or guidance of God; therefore he
confirms them by taking his solemn Oath upon them, q. d. God who is the
beholder of all our actions, and the hearer of all our sayings, and the supreme
Judge of all our doings, him I invoke and produce as a witness, having at this
time no other testimony, that all the things which I write unto you are most
true and certain, and that I frame no lie in any one particular. A form of
speech not unlike to this he uses elsewhere. See 2 Cor. 11.10.31. and 2 Cor.
12.19. and 1 Timothy 2.7. and Romans 9.1. which speeches, if they be not Oaths, are
asseverations so deep, that they confine upon Oaths. But the adjurations
whereby he charge Timothy to observe the duties of his calling, are Oaths;
whereof see 1 Timothy 5.21. and 2 Timothy 4.1. Hence it appears that in cases of
moment and necessity, an assertory Oath is both lawful and useful.

VERSE 21.
Text.
Afterward I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. Sense.
Syria.] i. e. A Country lying North from Jerusalem.

Cilicia.] i. e. A Country lying North from Syria; so both these are quite
contrary to Arabia, which from Jerusalem lies South.

Reason.
A Resumption and continuation of his former Narrative, concerning his travels
according to the several places successively as he passed.

Comment.
Paul travels to Tarsus, and why so? and his abode there.

AFter his abode at Jerusalem for the space of fifteen days, Partly because of
his danger from the Hellenists, against whom he disputed there; but chiefly in
obedience to the vision of Christ who commanded him away from thence, he
departed from thence and came into Syria. Yet unto Damascus, the chief City of
Syria he returned not, by reason of the danger which not a month before he
incurred and escaped there, from the inquisition of the Governor, who sought
to apprehend him, and from the insidiation of the Jews, who laid wait to kill
him: but he passed through the regions of Syria; that is, through the Shires,
Countries, or Countrey-parts of it; for through the regions of Syria he must
needs pass: because Syria lies between Judea and Cilicia; and in the direct
way from Jerusalem to Tarsus, whither Paul's purpose was to travel, that there
for a time he might reside. And because of the danger wherein he was at
Jerusalem, where he disputed against the Hellenists till they went about to
kill him; therefore from Jerusalem the Brethren conducted him as far as
Cesarea, which stands upon the Confines of Syria; and at Cesarea they took
their leave, dismissing him to pass forward toward Tarsus; as it is attested
by Luke, Act. 9.30. The reason why he traveled to Tarsus was, partly because
Tarsus was his Native City, wherein he was borne, Act. 22.3. But chiefly to
preach the Gospel there and in Cilicia, which was the Country thereto adjacent,
and wherein he planted the Gospel; for upon the difference between Barnabas
and him, he made a visitation through Syria and Cilicia to confirm the
Churches, Act. 15.41. which confirmation does necessarily suppose a former
plantation. At and about Tarsus he made his abode for some good space of time;
for when Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem unto Antioch, and departed from
Antioch on purpose to seek Paul, he sought for him at Tarsus, and there
finding him, brought him from thence back to Antioch, Act. 11.25.26. Thus until
his next journey to Jerusalem with Titus about the Apostles Decrees, the places
of his residence were Antioch and Tarsus, that is, Syria and Sylicia; for
Antioch is a City of Syria, and Tarsus of Cilicia. And hereby he prosecutes
his former Argument to prove the Divinity of his Gospel, that he received it
not from man. q. d. After fifteen days departing from Jerusalem, I diverted
not into any Parts of Judea to consult with any of the Apostles who were then
at liberty, and preached abroad, nor with any other of the believing Jews
inhabiting Judea; but I took my journey directly through Syria, and came to
Tarsus in Cilicia, which are places inhabited by the Gentiles, that according
to my Commission of a separate Apostle, I might preach the Gospel among the
Gentiles.

VERSE. 22.
Text.
And was unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea, which were in Christ.
Sense.
And was.] The Greek is, (...); i. e. For I was. Unknown by face.] i. e.
Personally unknown. Churches of Judea.] Supply; Churches in the Regions of
Judea, Samaria, and Galilee. Which were in Christ.] i. e. Christian Churches in
those Regions.

Reason.
A Reason of his former travel, why he went into the Regions of Syria and
Cilicia; namely, because he was personally unknown unto the Christian
Churches of Judea; whereas in Syria he was somewhat known, for he had
preached at Damascus, the chief City thereof; and in Cilicia he was better
known; because Cilicia was his Native Country; for he was a Cilician and a
Tarsian, born in Cilicia at the famous Tarsus, whereof he was both a Native,
and a Citizen.

Comment.
Paul was yet unknown personally unto the Jews. who were Believers.

AND was unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea.] And was. The Greek is,
(...), i. e. For I was unknown; for the particle (...), is not here
copulative, but causall or rational, to show the cause or reason of what he
said before; and is here put instead of (...), i. e. for, or because, as
elsewhere it is in diverse places, and rendered for in our last English
translation. See Mar. 16.8. and Luke 20.38, and 1. Cor. 8.7. and 1. Cor. 12.24.
and 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Unknown by face. The Greek is, (...), i. e. Unknown by
my person or by my bodily presence; for (...), though primitively it signifies
the face, and consequently the person, because the face is the common mark
whereby the person is vulgarly known; yet here it must be taken in such a
latitude of sense as may also include the presence of the person, as opposed
unto his absence; for the word taken in this sense, is elsewhere rendered
presence in our last English Translation. See Act. 3.13. and Act. 5.41. and 2.
Cor. 10.1. and 1 Thessalonians. 2.17. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. and Heb. 9.24.

Unto the Churches of Judea.] i. e. unto the Churches in the Regions of Judea,
both at Jerusalem and other Countrey-Townes; and Judea must not here be taken
strictly, as sometimes it is, when it stands opposed unto Galilee and Samaria;
but largely as it contayns the whole land of Israel, including Galily and
Samaria, and as Judea is opposed to Syria and Cilicia. For the persecution at
Jerusalem arising upon the dispute of Stephen with the Synagogue of the
strangers there, grew so fearful and bloody, for diverse were put to death, that
the faithful were scattred all abroad not only throughout the Regions of Judea
strictly taken, but of Samaria also. Act. 8.1. And the good providence of God,
by the scattering of the faithful, scattered also the Gospel; for they who
from Jerusalem were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Gospel,
Act. 8.4. Hence Philip, to whom Peter and John soon after adjoined themselves,
planted the Gospel in Samaria, and preached it in many Villages of the
Samaritans, Act. 8.25. And after the baptism of the Eunuch, he preached in all
the Cities of Samaria, till he came to Cesarea, which frontiers upon Syria,
Act. 8.40. As for Galily, the Gospel had her beginning there, and thither it
redounded about this time, with peace and rest from persecution, which was now
fully ceased throughout all the Churches of Judea, Galily, and Samaria, Act.
9.31. Yet Paul departing from Jerusalem, makes not his address to any of the
Churches in the Regions of Judea, Galilee, or Samaria, where he might have
rested with safety and security, for it was now a time of tranquillity from the
tempest of the former persecution: but he proceeds into the Regions of Syria
and Cilicia; because unto the Churches of Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, he was
altogether a stranger, unknown by his bodily and personal presence; neither
the teachers, nor members of those Churches had ever seen his face to his
knowledge. And the reason hereof might be; because in a manner Paul was a
stranger in the Countries of Judea, Samaria, and Galilee: for he was then but
a young man, who was borne at Tarsus, and brought up at Jerusalem, where he had
always lived, till about three years before, during which time he had preached
in Arabia, and at Damascus in Syria.

Which were in Christ.] A note of distinction whereby to discern the Churches
of Christ from the Synagogues of Moses; for heerby he would specify what
Churches of Judea he understood, namely not the Jewish Synagogues, but the
Christian Congregations: because in all the Regions of Judea, Galilee, and
Samaria, the Churches of Christ were intermingled with the Synagogues of the
Jews; for hereby it came to pass that the Christians were subject to so many
persecutions from the Jews, who for their abode were their Contrymen, as
Paul intimates to the Thessalonians, where he expresses the Churches of Judea
with the like note of distinction of being in Christ; 1. These. 2.14. To be in
Christ bears two senses. 1. Generally: and so to be in Christ, is to be a
Christian; and he is a Christian who has taken the new Covenant, whereof
Christ was and is the Mediator: and he has taken that Covenant, who believes
the truth of it, and accepts the grace of it* for in this sense to be in Christ
is taken here, and so the word is opposed to a Jew and a Heathen. 2.
Specially, and so to be in Christ, is to be a real, sincere, and true
Christian, in opposition to the hypocrite, the carnal and false Christian: and
he is a real Christian, who puts on Christ, and lives according to the life of
Christ; who not only believes the verities of the new Covenant, and accepts the
promises of it, but also obeyes the precepts of it, by being a new creature
according to the new Covenant: for thus to do and be, is to be in the spirit,
and to have the spirit of Christ, which if any man have not, he is not in
Christ. See and compare Romans 8.9. and 2. Cor. 5.17. and Gal. 5.24. and 1. John
4.13. The reason of the words in this verse for the History, was showed before
in the context: but the reason for their argument is thus: q. d. I was so far
from learning any point of doctrine, either from the Apostles at Jerusalem, or
from any other Teachers, amongst the Christian Churches of Judea, that they
never saw my face, but my person was wholly unknown unto them; for to my
remembrance I never was in presence with any of them.

VERSE 23.
Text.
But they had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past, now
preaches the faith, which once he destroyed. Sense.
But they.] viz. The Churches of Judea.

Heard only.] Supply. Some men say. That he etc.

The faith.] i. e. The doctrine of Faith, or the Gospel.

Which once.] Greek (...), i. e. In times past.

He destroyed.] Greek, (...), i. e. He wasted.

Reason.
An Illustration of his former saying, or a Limitation of the generality
therein, by specifying in what sense and how far he might be, or said to be
known unto the Churches of Judea.

Comment.
The believing Jews heard of Paul, That from a Persecutor he was become a
Preacher.

BUT they had heard only.] The Greek places the enclusive particle only in
the first place, reading it thus, But only they had heard, viz. men say; for
the words must be supplied with some impersonall or indefinite term, to
perfect up the sense thus: But only they had heard say (or men say) That he
who persecuted us in times past, now preaches the faith; for so it is supplied
in the French Translation. They had heard. The Greek is, (...); i. e. they
were hearing; which is both an Hebraisme and a Grecisme, used here by way of
elegancy to encounter his former words of himself, (...), i. e. I was unknown
to them, but they were hearing of me. Some knowledge therefore the Churches of
Judea had of Paul; yet none by sight or view of his person, for they had not
seen his face; but their knowledge of him was only by report and hearsay; for
they had heard of his actions two ways, whereof the one was extremely
contrary to the other; for first, they had heard that he had persecuted and
wasted the faith; and secondly, they had heard the quite contrary, that now he
preached that faith which formerly he had persecuted and wasted: Yet these two
contrary reports of him were both true; for he had done both; not at one and
the same time, but successively one after the other in times different. Of his
former action they had heard long before, even then when his persecution was in
action; for the deed thereof being done at Jerusalem, the same thereof came
presently to the Churches of Judea, and afterward spread beyond Syria and
Cilicia, even to the Churches of Galatia, who had also heard of it, as he
mentions it unto them before in this Chapter, verse. 13. But of his latter
action in preaching the faith, the Churches of Judea for the space of three
years after he began to preach it, heard not a word, or if they heard any
thing thereof, they beleft it not; for when Paul (after three years of
preaching the Gospel in Arabia and Damascus) came from Damascus into Jerusalem,
neither the Churches of Judea, nor those of Jerusalem had heard of it; for the
faithful at Jerusalem were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
Christian, as was showed before, from Acts 9.26. But upon that return of Paul
to Jerusalem, the Church of Jerusalem first heard of his Preaching the Faith;
and she heard of it by Barnabas who brought Paul to the Apostles, and declared
unto them both his calling and his Preaching, how wonderfully Christ had called
him, and how powerfully he had Preached Christ at Damascus. Act. 9.27. And from
the Church of Jerusalem, the Churches of Judea circumjacent, might easily hear
the report of it.

That he which persecuted us in times past.] These words are related here by
Paul, but are the words spoken by the Churches of Judea, containing the report
they had heard of Paul. Paul before in this Chap. verse. 13. says to the
Galatians that he had persecuted the Church of God: and here he says, that the
Churches of Judea had heard of him, he which persecuted us: yet between his
saying and theirs, there is no difference concerning the object of his
persecution, or the persons by him persecuted, who in his saying and theirs are
still the same: because the Churches of Judea were the Churches of God; for
they were particular Churches of that universal Church, which Paul in
particular places persecuted in times past. And very probable it is, that some
single persons either teachers or Members in those Churches of Judea, were by
Paul actually persecuted, and forced from Jerusalem upon the Martyrdom of
Stephen; because the times past were not long past, for it was but a matter of
three years before. And those Saints which then were not at Jerusalem, were
notwithstanding persecuted in that persecution; for as when one member of the
body suffers, all the members suffer with it: so when any one part of the
Church is persecuted, all the faithful who are the members thereof, and Christ
himself who is the head thereof, is also persecuted; for Christ complained,
that in that very persecution himself was persecuted; see Act. 9.5. Now the
Apostle inculcates the memory of his former persecution into the minds of the
Galatians, thereby to maintain their persuasion of him, that so great a Zelot
for the Law of Moses, as therefore to persecute the Church of Christ, had not
cast off his patronage of the Law, or laid aside his malice against the Gospel,
without just and weighty causes.

Now preaches the Faith, which once he destroyed.] The Faith. i. e. the
Doctrine of faith, or the Gospel of Christ; for so it is recorded of Paul, that
at Damascus he had preached Christ, and in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts
9.20.27. For in Scripture, Faith is often taken for the Motive whereby we
believe, and for the matter which we believe; whether that matter be a single
verity, or the whole body of the Gospel. See Gal. 3.2.5.23. and Ephesians. 4.5
Which once. The Greek is (...). i. e. in times past; for so it was translated
in the words immediately going before, in reference to the persecution; and
seeing here is the same word in the same sense, why should it not here have the
same expression? for where the elegancies in the Language of the holy Ghost may
be fully expressed in our native language, there is no reason we should decline
them. He destroyed. The Greek is, (...). i. e. wasted; for so it was rendered
before in this translation, verse 13. and he wasted the Faith, or the Doctrine
of it, by using all means either by himself, or by his Friends, to withdraw
men from the profession of it, and by laboring to being a great destruction
upon them; for therein consists the nature of wasting, as was showed before.
verse 13. And the words of this verse are serviceable to continue his argument.
q. d. The Christian Churches in Judea knew me not by face, but only by
hearsay: yet they heard nothing how I learned the Gospel, but only that I
taught and preached it.

VERSE 24.
Text.
And they glorified God in me. Sense.
They.] i. e. The Churches of Judea.

In me.] i. e. In my behalf, for me, or by reason of me.

Reason.
A Christian consequent of Devotion in the Churches of Judea to praise God for
his mercy to his Church.

Comment.
AND they glorified God.] The Churches of Judea hearing that Paul preached the
Faith, did thereupon glorify and praise God; for it was an ancient custom
among the people of God to give praise and thanks to God for any extraordinary
work of God. See Mat. 9.8. and Mat. 15.31. and Luke 7.16. and Acts 4.21.
particularly upon the same of a sinners repentance, or of any man's conversion
to the faith, especially if he had been a persecutor of it; because such a
conversion has in it more then ordinary, and is an immediate work of God. And
such was Paul's conversion, wherein the good grace of God was extremely
powerful, by drawing him from one extreme to another; that is, from being a
Persecutor of the Faith, not only to the state of a Believer, but beyond that
state, to become a Preacher of it.

In me.] The Greek is, (...). i. e. in my behalf, by reason or because of
me; for the particle (...), is here put for (...). i. e. because; in which
sense this phrase is an Hebraisme noting any kind of causality, especially
that which is rational; and so it is used elsewhere. See, and compare John
13.31, 32. and John 17.10. and 2. Cor. 12.9. and Ephesians. 3.13. The ground or
reason why the Churches of Judea glorified God, was because of Gods grace to
Paul in converting him to the Faith, and because of Gods grace to his Church,
by Paul's Preaching of the Faith.

The Contents of this First Chapter.
1. Preface. Wherein are contained 1. Author. Paul an Apostle not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. verse 1. 2. Approvers.
All the brethren which are with me. verse 2. 3. Direction. Unto the Churches of
Galatia. verse 2. 4. Salutation. Grace be to you and peace from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ; who gave himself for our sins, that
etc. verse. 3.4. 5. Devotion. To God be glory for ever and ever, Amen. verse. 5.


2. History. Paul marvels, that the Galatians are so soon removed from Christ,
who called them by his grace. verse. 6.

1. Because the Gospel whereto they were removed, was not another, but only
there were some, who troubled them and would pervert the Gospel of Christ.
verse. 7. 2. Because though Paul himself, or an Angel from heaven should preach
any other Gospel, then he had preached to the Galatians, he was to be
accursed. ver. 8.9. 3. Because the matter which he therein persuaded, was not
man but God; against whom, he that shall seek to please men, cannot be the
servant of Christ. ver. 10.
3. History. The Gospel which Paul Preached was not humane, or after man. ver.
11.

1. Because he neither received, nor was taught it by man. ver. 12. 2. Because
he received and was taught it, by the revelation of Jesus Christ. ver. eod. 3.
Because during his former conversation in the Jewish religion, he excessively
persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it. ver. 13. 4. Because he prevayled
for the Jews religion, above many his contemporaries among his own nation,
being more exceedingly zealous for the ceremonies of Moses, and the Jewish
traditions. ver. 14. 5. Because it pleased God, (who designed him a separate
Apostle from his mothers womb, and called him by his grace) to reveal his
son unto him, that he might preach among the Gentiles. ver. 15.16.
4. History. When Paul was called to preach Christ among the Gentiles, he did
not immediately confer with flesh and blood. ver. 16.

1. Because from Damascus where he was called, he went not immediately to
Jerusalem, to them who were Apostles before him. ver. 17. 2. Because immediately
he went from Damascus into Arabia, and from thence returned to Damascus. v.
eod. 3. Because it was three years after he had preached the Gospel, before he
went to Jerusalem to see Peter, with whom he abode but fifteen days, and
there saw no other Apostle, save only James, our Lords brother. ver. 18.19. 4.
Because he would take his oath before God, that these things were true, and
that he lied not. ver. 20. 5. Because from Jerusalem he came into the Regions
of Syria and Cilicia: for unto the Churches of Judea, he was unknown by face,
but only they had heard of him that now he preached the faith, which before he
wasted; and they glorified God for him. ver. 21.22.23.24.
GAL. CHAP. 2.
VERSE 1.
Text.
Then fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem, with Barnabas, and
took Titus with me also. Sense.
Fourteen years after.] Viz. After my conversion.

Again.] i. e. Besides my journey thither, three years after my conversion.

Reason.
A prosecution of his former argument, to prove the Divinity of his Ministry
and Doctrine; because in a solemn Synod or Assembly of the Apostles and Elders
at Jerusalem, whereat himself was present, and wherein were made special Acts
concerning the Ceremonies of the Law, there was nothing added by the Apostles
to the Doctrine which he had taught, nor any act done, that declared his
Doctrine in any one point, either redundant or defective; but rather both his
Ministry and Doctrine received in that Synod a full approbation; whereby he
would infer that he was inferior to none of the Apostles.

Comment.
The term from these years are to be reckoned probably from Paul's
conversion. The eminency of Jerusalem: Paul's several journies thither. 1. To
visit Peter. 2. To carry alms. 3. To call a Synod there concerning
circumcision. This last why mentioned, and why Titus accompanied him.

THen fourteen years after.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. Literally,
fourteen years between, or the space of fourteen interposed; but the
particle (...) is here put for (...), which signifies after, and is truly so
rendered; for so ye have it, Mat. 26.61. (...), i. e. After three days, and
Mar. 2.1. (...), i. e. After some days, and Act. 24.17. (...), i. e. After
many years. But from whence or from what term of time these fourteen years
are to be computed, whether from Paul's first conversion to the faith, or from
his former being at Jerusalem to visit Peter three years after his conversion,
which he mentioned before, cap. 1.18. it appears not from Scripture; neither
is the knowledge thereof any way elementary or serviceable to the point here
prosecuted, or to any other point elsewhere in Scripture hereby to be
illustrated. Yet the greater probability of the two is, that these years are
to be reckoned from Paul's conversion. 1. Because Paul's conversion was a most
memorable action, especially unto Paul, and fit to stand for an epoch unto
him, from whence he had good cause to compute all the acts of his Ministry
during his life; for all epochaes are fixed at a time of some notable
conversion in the World, that from thence in the memory thereof, future times
may afterward be computed. 2. Because the years remaining between this
journey to Jerusalem, and his last thither, when there he was apprehended, and
afterward sent Prisoner to Rome, will be too few, for those many actions and
travells which by Luke are recorded of him; especially if we consider, that of
those few years, he was one and a half at Corinth, and three at Ephesus. See
Act. 18.11. and Act. 20.31. Yet Paul here mentions the space of time to be
fourteen years, least his adversaries should quarrel at his words, whereto
all words of actions iterated and frequented are subject, if by their several
times they be not distinguished; for by this space of fourteen years this
journey to Jerusalem with Barnabas is distinguished from a former journey of his
to Jerusalem with Barnabas, which was before this, and therefore less then
fourteen years from his conversion. See and compare Act. 11.30. and Act.
12.25.

I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas. All traveling toward Jerusalem,
is called ascending or going up; not for any local altitude, as if the City
and Territory about it were a higher ground then other places; but for the
jurall eminency or jurisdiction of the Courts there seated, consisting of
eminent persons; for Jerusalem was the Metrople of all the Jews during the
time of the Law, and of all the Christians, during the plantation of the
Gospel, and the time of the Apostles. Unto Jerusalem Paul after his conversion
made several journies, whereof this here seems the third. 1. His first
journey thither was from Damascus, and therein either he had no company at
all, or none that is named and specified in the Scripture; and his business
was only by way of visit to see Peter; and that journey he mentions in this
Epistle, cap. 1. verse. 18. Because from thence he would have no man gather,
that he went thither to learn from the Apostles that Doctrine, which for the
space of three years he had already preached. 2. His second journey thither
was from Antioch, and therein Barnabas went in company with him; and their
business was to carry thither a collection made in the Church of Antioch for
the relief of the poor in the Churches of Judea, to prevent the misery of the
famine foretold by Agabus, who for that purpose came with other Prophets from
Jerusalem to Antioch. See Act. 11.27.30. and Act. 12.25. From which last place
it appears, that this journey to Jerusalem with alms for the poor, was before
the separation of Paul and Barnabas, for the work of the Ministry made by the
Presbytery at Antioch at the command of the spirit, Act. 13.1.4. But of this
second journey Paul mentions nothing in this Epistle; because therein was no act
done at Jerusalem concerning his present argument to make either for it or
against it; and because his intent was not here to write a journall of all his
journies to Jerusalem in the same order that he traveled them; but only to
mention such as it seems his adversaries objected against him. 3. His third
journey thither was again from Antioch, and therein again Barnabas went in
company with him; and their business was to consult the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem concerning the necessity of circumcision; not that Paul made any
question thereof, but because there was a question thereof made in the Church
of Antioch, where certain men who came from Judea, taught the necessity
thereof unto salvation, Act. 15.1. For this journey seems to be the same with
that, which is related by Luke in that Chapter; where from the Church of
Antioch, Paul and Barnabas with certain others are sent to Jerusalem about
that question; because the particulars mentioned here in this Chapter by Paul,
do suit and agree very fitly with the time and the action mentioned there by
Luke; as that he communicated unto the Apostles the substance or sum of that
Gospel which he preached amongst the Gentiles: That no decree was there made
for the necessity of circumcision to be imposed upon the Gentiles; that he
stoutly opposed such as would have imposed it; that by the rest of the
Apostles, even by the chiefest of them, he was acknowledged for their
co-Apostle and com-Minister in the Gospel; and that by their approbation and
consent he undertook for the time to come the Ministry of the Gospel to
preach it among the Gentiles. This journey then, he therefore mentions in this
Epistle, because by occasion thereof, there passed at Jerusalem those
remarkable Occurrents, that were very argumentative to his purpose, as to
declare that he was no way inferior to any of the Apostles, thereby to
confirm the authority of his Ministry, and to confute the calumnies of his
adversaries.

And took Titus with me also.] Luke in the fifteen of the Acts makes no
mention of Titus by name, that he was sent to Jerusalem at that time with Paul
and Barnabas; for although certain others are there said to be sent with
them: Yet it seems that Titus was none of them that by authority from the
Church of Antioch were sent with Paul; because Paul says here, that he took
Titus with him also. i. e. That into the company of those that were sent from
Antioch, he assumed Titus upon the by over and besides the rest, for a special
purpose. And this his Assumption of Titus he mentions here, because of him he
was to relate afterward, that concerning him, being a person uncircumcised, the
Apostles at Jerusalem gave no command for his Circumcision, when the question
thereof was there debated. q. d. When I went to Jerusalem with Barnabas, to
confer with the Apostles for the debate of the question about Circumcision, I
was so confident of my cause, that I feared not to take Titus with me also, a
man who by nation and birth, was a Gentile, and uncircumcised; and him I
assumed with me, not only as a companion of my journey, but as my
fellow-Minister in preaching of the Gospel, notwithstanding the distaste and
opposition of the adverse party who urged the necessity of Circumcision.

VERSE 2.
Text.
And I went up by revelation and communicated unto them that Gospel which I
preach among the Gentiles; but privately to them which were of reputation, lest
by any means I should run, or had run in vain. Sense.
Communicated.] i. e. Made a relation, or report.

Unto them.] i. e. Unto them of the Church of Jerusalem.

That Gospel.] i. e. The substance or sum of that Gospel.

Privately.] i. e. Apart at a secret meeting.

To them which were of reputation.] i. e. To the chiefest of the Apostles.

Run.] i. e. Continue the course of my Preaching.

In vain.] i. e. Without any fruit.

Reason.
Having before declared the time of this journey to Jerusalem, and the company
who went with him, he now expresses the causes thereof; as the motive, that
it was by a Revelation from God; and the business, that it was to relate unto
the Church of Jerusalem, the sum of that doctrine which he Preached among the
Gentiles.

Comment.
Paul much directed by Divine Revelations, which did sometime second a humane
determination. He reports his Doctrine to the Apostles: Yet privately to the
chief of them. and for what cause.

AND I went up by Revelation.] The maine and special motive inducing Paul to
go to Jerusalem at that time, with those persons, was a particular revelation
or vision from God commanding him thereto; for as by revelation he had his
instructions in the doctrine of the Gospel; so by revelation also he had
particular directions in many cases for the execution of his Ministry. His
departure from Jerusalem after fifteen days abode there to see Peter, was
from a vision, wherein he saw the Lord saying unto him, Make haste and get thee
quickly out of Jerusalem, Act. 22.18. His journey into Macedonia was from a
vision that appeared unto him in the night, Act. 16.9. His appeal to Rome was
from the Lord, who stood by him in the night and encouraged him thereto, that
he might bear witness of Christ at Rome, Act. 23.11. And this journey here
from Antioch to Jerusalem was by revelation: and lest through the abundance of
his visions and revelations he should be exalted above measure, the Lord laid
an affliction upon him, 2. Cor. 12.7. But visions and revelations were not
proper and peculiar to Paul only; for they were communicated and imparted unto
the Apostles in general, and unto some that were not Apostles; as unto Ananias
and Cornelius. See Act. 9.10. and Act. 10.3. Yet Paul's going to Jerusalem by
revelation, is nothing repugnant to his going by the will and decree of the
Church of Antioch, as Luke relates the cause of his going, Act. 15.2. For by
several and diverse motives a man may be induced to one and the same action;
much more when there is a concurrence of Gods will unto man's purpose; and very
credible it is, that when the Church of Antioch had determined that Paul should
go to Jerusalem, then Paul was admonished by a revelation from God, to
undertake that journey, which they had already determined upon him: because
Gods will is sometime subsequent to follow not only man's will, but his act, by
approving and confirming afterward; what man before has willed and acted: for
hence Christ said to his Disciples, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven, Mat. 18.18. Now Paul mentions this Motive of his journey, that he went
it by revelation, thereby to signify that he went then to Jerusalem, chiefly
as a Messenger sent from God; lest his adversaries to diminish the authority of
his Ministry, should suggest to the Galatians, that Paul went that journey as
a mere Messenger and servant to the Church of Antioch.

And communicated unto them that Gospel, which I preach among the Gentiles.]
And communicated: The Greek is (...), i. e. I declared, related, or reported;
for in all the New Testament, the word is used but in one place besides, and
that is by Luke, who says, that Festus (...) i. e. reported Paul's cause unto
King Agrippa: where our last English Translation renders it declared, Act.
25.14. The pronoune them, is here a relative without an antecedent, as the
manner of the Hebrews is sometimes to use it; yet it is referred antecedently,
not to any persons mentioned before expressly, but tacitly as they are couched
in the word Jerusalem: and it is referred subsequently to persons that shall be
mentioned in the next following clause of this verse; namely to them which were
of reputation in Jerusalem. The matter which unto them he related, was not that
whole Gospel wherein at his conversion Christ was revealed unto him: but the
sum of that Gospel, or of that Doctrine, which as part of the whole Gospel he
preached among the Gentiles, particularly to the point of circumcision, and the
rest of the legal ceremonies; namely, he preached that men are justified only
by faith in Christ, without either circumcision or other observances of the
Law, which he no where pressed upon the Gentiles, or mentioned as necessary to
salvation.

But privately to them which were of reputation.] (...). i. e. secretly, apart,
or aside; for so also the word is commonly rendered elsewhere. (...). i. e. to
the principal or chief persons; for among the Greeks (...), are such who are
personages of chief esteem or repute, of whom other men hold a great opinion
for their knowledge, wisdom, and integrity; such among the Apostles were
Peter, James, and John, and whosoever else were principal persons in the
Church of Jerusalem. To the chief persons therefore of that Church, Paul
related the sum of his Doctrine; for they were most concerned in the point,
because they were best able to examine it, and to give their judgment in it.
And with these he first dealt privately at a secret meeting, as in like cases
commonly the manner is, before he communicated the matter to the whole Church of
Jerusalem, to whom the matter was referred, and to whom afterward Paul and
Barnabas publicly delivered it in the Synod. For when in a full audience of
the Synod they two had rendered an account of that Doctrine which they had
preached among the Gentiles, and had declared the miracles and wonders which
God by them had wrought among the Gentiles, presently upon their silence James
gave the sentence, which was approved by the whole Synod, and thereupon the
Decrees were drawn up, to be sent abroad among the Gentiles, as Luke reports
it, Acts 15.12, 13. Against which order of proceeding, this makes nothing, that
here in this Epistle he mentions his conference with the chiefest persons
secretly in the last place; for he might therefore do so, because he would
express the general act of his message before that which therein was
particular, without respect to the order of time. Yet if any man will urge the
contrary, I shall not much stand upon it.

Lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain.] The final cause why he
made this relation of his Doctrine to the Apostles. Not that Paul made any
doubt concerning the certainty of his Doctrine, as if he would acknowledge the
verity and certainty thereof from the approbation of those who were the chief
in reputation; for as we heard before, the verity and certainty of his
Doctrine, was by God himself miraculously revealed unto him, and every where
confirmed by diverse miracles. But he therefore related it, to avoid the
inconvenience of losing his labor q. d. Unless I had thus communicated my
self at Jerusalem to the Apostles, I might have lost all my labor in
preaching of the Gospel; for my adversaries would continually have clamoured
against my Doctrine, that the chiefest of the Apostles thought, and taught
otherwise; by which means they would have subverted their Faith who had beleft
it, and consequently I should have run in vain, losing all the fruit of my
labor in preaching.

VERSE 3.
Text.
But neither Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
circumcised. Sense.
Neither.] i. e. Not indeed.

A Greek.] i. e. A non-Jew or Gentile.

Compelled.] The Greek is, necessitated.

Reason.
The issue of the conference at Jerusalem; that circumcision was not decreed
necessary; neither was Titus a Gentile, necessitated to be circumcised.

Comment.
A Greek, who. Why Titus was not circumcised, and why afterward Timothy was.

BUT neither Titus who was with me, being a Greek.] We may now perceive from
these words, why Paul mentioned Titus before as the companion of his journey to
Jerusalem, and why he took him with him by Revelation; namely, that from his
person he might draw an evident testimony against the necessity of circumcision
upon the Gentiles. The particle neither stands not here for a copulative, but
is put for the single negative, firmly denying, of not indeed. A Greek. i. e.
a non-Jew, or a Gentile; for by the Jew every non-Jew, of what Nation soever is
generally called sometime a Greek, sometime a Gentile, or Heathen. See Romans
1.16. and Romans 2.9. q. d. From the result of the Synod, no not Titus a man of
great repute in the Church of God, and my frequent assistant in the Gospel, who
was then with me at Jerusalem, and present in the Assembly, although by nation
and birth he was not a Jew, but a Gentile, was ordered to be circumcised; no
not although circumcision seemed of great moment in regard of his person, that
he might be a precedent and leading man to the rest of the Gentiles.

Compelled to be circumcised.] Compelled; the Greek is, (...), i. e.
necessitated to be circumcised; for the question was whether circumcision were
necessary to salvation; and to show it not necessary, Titus was not
necessitated to be circumcised. An infallible argument, that the judgment of
the Apostles was, that neither circumcision, nor the rest of the legal
Ceremonies were no way necessary; neither necessary to salvation, as a means
thereto, nor necessary to the Gentiles as a precept upon them. That afterward
Paul circumcised Timothy, as we read Act. 16.3. He was therein wondrous
constant to himself in actions quite contrary one to another; in both which
he made use of his Christian liberty in a lawful manner: For the nature of
liberty is to be unbound or loose, to do an act or not do it at our
pleasure, and not to be compelled or bound to either; and the lawful use of
our liberty in a thing indifferent, is sometime to do it, sometime not,
according as edification or reason requires. Now Paul circumcised Timothy, not
necessarily or constrainedly, but spontaneously or voluntarily, that he might
not offend the Jews, but rather gain upon them, and draw them to the faith by
means of an act in it self indifferent, but then useful in respect of such
persons to such a purpose; but to circumcise Titus he would not be compelled
or necessitated, especially at Jerusalem in a time of dissension, that he might
not offend the Gentiles, by giving a foul scandal to the faithful converted
from Gentilisme, and to the unbelievers among them that were not yet converted;
for if upon the Gentile circumcision were necessitated, would not this danger
and damage necessarily follow, that the believer would soon revolt from the
faith, and the unbeliever would never enter it?

VERSE. 4.
Text.
And that because of false brethren, unawares brought in, who came in privily
to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring
us into bondage. Sense.
And that because.] i. e. Although and because.

False brethren.] i. e. Judaising Christians, who were indeed Jews, but in
show Christians.

Unawares brought in.] Either as intruding themselves, or suborned by others.

To spy out.] Viz. That they might supplant and subvert.

Our liberty.] i. e. our state of filiation, whereby we are free from the Law
of Moses.

Liberty which we have in Christ.] i. e. Christian liberty, wherewith Christ
has made us free.

Into bondage.] i. e. To the servitude of the Law.

Reason.
A reason of the former words, why Titus was not compelled to be circumcised;
namely, because the false brethren who came in as spies to supplant our
Christian liberty, might not bring us into the bondage or servitude of the
legal Ceremonies.

Comment.
False brethren. Their insinuation, and purposes. Liberty, what, Christian
liberty what, and why so called. Another purpose (...) the false Brethren.

AND that because of false brethren.] False brethren. i. e. Judaising
Christians; whom he therefore calls false brethren; because they were
Christians in name and in show, and did indeed believe in Christ; but withal
they were also Jews in heart and indeed; because they observed themselves and
urged upon others, the necessity of circumcision, and the legal Ceremonies.
Who these false brethren were, is in general discovered unto us by Luke, who
declares them to be certain of the Sect of the Pharisees who believed, and
said, it was necessary to circumcise the Gentiles, and to command them to keep
the Law of Moses, Act. 15.5. And Paul elsewhere making a list of the diverse
perils he had escaped, recounts also his perils among such false brethren,
2. Cor. 11.26. And that because. i. e. Although and because; for the Greek
particle (...), has a double force, being partly adversative and partly
causall, to show that Titus was not then circumcised, in opposition to the
false brethren; no not although they urged it, and therefore because they urged
it. q. d. Titus was not circumcised at Jerusalem, although the false brethren
there of the Sect of the Pharisees urged it as necessary, and would have
compelled it; and he was not circumcised therefore, because they urged it as
necessary and would have compelled it: Whence it appears, that otherwise the
circumcision of Titus might have been tolerated, to have gratified others that
were weak: Yet then and there was not permitted, that the liberty and
privilege of the Gospel might be preserved.

Unawares brought in, who came in privily.] Namely into that private Assembly,
where Paul had his private conference with them of the Apostles who were of
reputation, before he communicated his Doctrine publicly in the Synod.
Unawares brought in. The Greek is, (...), i. e. Brought in upon the bye, or
privily brought in; for so elsewhere the word is rendered in our last English
Translation. See 2. Pet. 2.1. And it seems, these false brethren were craftily
suborned, to insinuate themselves secretly, and to get in upon the bye into
that private Assembly, where Paul had his private conference with the Apostles.
Who came in privily. The Greek is, (...), i. e. Came in upon the bye; for
these words are but an explication, or rather a correspondence unto the words
before, Unawares brought in; for the false brethren being suborned, to
insinuate themselves and get in upon the bye into that private Assembly, did
accordingly intrude themselves, and came in upon the bye.

To spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus.] The end of purpose of
their coming in was, to spy and betray our Christian liberty. Our liberty. i.
e. our filiation or liberation, as we are the sons of God, whom God has
adopted to make his Heirs to the Inheritance of Heavenly Blessedness. The
state of a son is a state of liberty; because a son is the adequate and
proper subject, wherein the right of liberty does originally and principally
reside; for filii and liberi are persons who really are all one and the same;
for the same persons which in the family are liberi, and by us called sons,
the very like same in the policy are liberi also, and for distinctions sake are
expressed in English by the word freemen. The nature of liberty is a state of
looseness from evil unto good; the right unto which state does properly
belong to a son; for although a son taken relatively in a vulgar sense, be
one that has a father; yet taken absolutely and in a rural sense, a son is
he that has a right; and liberty expresses the nature of his original and
radical right, that is a looseness from evil unto good; and the good whereto
the son is loose or free, is some inheritance, whether ye consider him
either in the family or the policy. And the person enjoying this state of
liberty, has by virtue thereof a right to the use of his liberty unto certain
acts not arbitrarily or absolutely, but respectively so far as they are
correspondent and suitable unto his state. And this liberty is opposed unto
servitude, as unto a state quite contrary to that of a son; because although
relatively a servant be one that has a Master, yet jurally and in a legal
sense, he is a servant who has no right; and his servitude expresses the
nature of his non-right, that it is a bondage from good unto evil, and the
good from which the servant is bound, is all Inheritance; for all the
Inheritance and goods of his Master discends to his Masters sons, or in case
he have no sons, it passes to some stranger of his kindred, and not to the
servant, though he live in the family. Which we have in Christ Jesus. i. e. our
Christian liberty; for after this manner he describes it afterward, calling it
the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, cap. 5. verse. 1. and this
adjunct he atributes unto it both here and there, to determine and specify,
what kind of liberty he understands; for he speaks not of liberty in general,
but only of that special liberty which is Christian liberty, which we have in
and by Christ Jesus: which is not a carnal liberty of action, to be licentious
and loose from the just and wholesome Laws of man: nor a Mundane liberty of
right, to have the right of a son in some worldly family, or the right of a
freeman in some worldly policy; but it is a spiritual liberty of action, to be
loose from the Laws of Moses, as from circumcision and the rest of the legal
observances, whereto the false Brethren would have necessitated the Gentiles,
and particularly Titus, contrary to the state of their Christian liberty which
they had in Christ; and it is a ccelestiall liberty of right, to have a right
of inheritance to the Kingdom of Heaven, as the adopted sons of God, and
coheirs with Christ to the inheritance of blessedness. And it is called our
Christian liberty, or the liberty we have in Christ Jesus, because Christ is
the Author of it; not only to publish to the world the good will and grace of
God concerning (...) but also to collate the state of it upon all the faithful
who believe in him, and by him as their Mediator covenant with God to be the
sons of God, and because Christ is the Pattern of it; for we are the adoptive
sons and heirs of God, after the image and likeness of Christ who is the
natural son and heir of God; and whatsoever liberty and right Christ the
native son of God has in his Father, the same, or the like rights are
imputed unto us who are the adoptive sons of God, whereby we are made
coheires with Christ unto the inheritance of Christ; and this imputation of
these rights of Christ unto us, shall be afterward called our justification.
The Privileges or particular rights appendant and consequent to our state of
Christian liberty are several and singular: but hereof we shall speak more
fully afterward in the body of this Epistle, cap. 5. verse. 1. because the
Apostle here seems to mention it but in transitu, or occasionally, so far as
it concluceth to his historical narration, which is but introductive to the
rest of the Epistle. The purpose then of the false Brethren in coming in upon
the by to the private meeting where Paul had his conference, was but to act the
part of Spies, to make some discovery upon the state of our Christian liberty
or filiation, to view the condition of is, and to find out by what occasion
they might oppose it, and by what means they might oppress it; for herewith
afterward he charge the false teachers, that they troubled the Galatians,
that they might subvert their Christian liberty. See. cap. 5. verse. 10. and
verse. 12.

That they might bring us into bondage.] A further end of their coming in
subordinate to the former, was to enthrall us; or bring us into bondage. i. e.
subject and necessitate us to the Law of Moses; which subjection he calls a
bondage, because those Laws were servile, and the necessity to their
observance was a grievous servitude; hence afterward he will call those Laws
worldly rudiments, weak and beggarly elements; under which Gods people were in
bondage; and he will term them a yoke of bondage wherewith Gods people were
entangled. ^ee afterward, cap. 4.3. and cap. 4.9. and cap. 4.24. and cap. 5.1.
For the Jews although they were the people of God, yet they were not the
sons of God in a right of plenage or state of liberty: but only the children
of God in a state of pupillage or minority, and were under the Laws of Moses
in a servile condition, as children are under Tutors and governors; which
subjection being nothing different from servitude, is therefore a bondage:
because as was showed before, all servitude is a bondage; for it is quite
contrary to liberty which is a looseness. He says us, as he said before our
liberty, that he might include himself and all other Christians, as well
believing Jews, as Gentiles, of which number was Titus. The purpose then of
the false brethren was to continue upon the Jews and to impose upon the
Gentiles the whole observance of the ceremonial Law, whereof the indifferency
to perform some act of it upon some occasion, is a liberty: but the necessity
of that Law, to be compelled and always bound unto all the precepts of it, is
a bondage.

VERSE. 5.
Text.
To whom we gave place by subjection, ^o not for an hour, that the truth of
the Gospel might continue with you. Sense.
To whom.] i. e. To the false Brethren urging circumcision.

We.] i. e. I and Barnabas.

Gave place.] i. e. Yielded not.

By subjection.] i. e. To be necessitated, and compelled to it.

For an hour.] i. e. For a time, though never so little.

The truth.] i. e. The sincerity, or the Gospel in the sincerity thereof might
continue.

With you.] i. e. The Galatians.

Reason.
The constancy and courage of Paul in opposing the endeavor of the false
brethren for circumcision; namely, he would not yield to them in any thing:
because he would continue the Gospel in the sincerity thereof.

Comment.
How far opposites are to be opposed, and why so? The Truth of the Gospel, It
must be maintained.

TO whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour.] The purpose of the
false brethren in coming in upon the by, to that private meeting, was to spy
out the privileges of Christian liberty, that by some one act at first, and
afterward by degrees they might subvert the whole, and at last wholly bring the
faithful into the servitude or bondage of the Law. And the means whereby they
would effect this, was by urging Circumcision upon Titus, as if they would
require it but only of that person, and only at that time. But their further
intention was, that if they could obtain it upon those terms, then for the
future, they would press for a precedent, that person and that time, whereby
to necessitate Circumcision, and consequently the rest of the legal
ceremonies, upon other persons at other times. Paul therefore and Barnabas
stoutly oppose them in this motion, and by way of subjection to be necessitated
will yield to them in nothing, neither for the person nor for the time. q. d.
Although by way of toleration or sufferance we might have been entreated to
something, yet by way of subjection we would be compelled to nothing: and
although they seemed to urge but the act of circumcision, and that to continue
but for a time; yet we gave no way nor yielded not for the least moment. Hence
it appears that in things indifferent, and in themselves lawful, at some time
to be done, we need not then gratify an opposite party, when some lust her
inconvenience is to be feared* but we must therein have a consideration not
only for the time present, but for the future.

That the truth of the Gospel might continue with you.] The end or purpose of
Parts opposition against the false brethren urging the circumcision of Titus;
namely, to preserve and continue the Gospel in the sincerity and purity thereof
unto all the faithful, and consequently unto the Galatians. The truth.] i. e.
the sincerity or purity; for Truth here is opposed to all that falsehood or
forgery which is done by any adulteration, corruption, depravation,
subornation, or admission of any thing with the Gospel, which unto the nature
of the Gospel is alien or contrary: and in this sense the word is often taken
elsewhere. See Psalm. 51.6. and Esaias 59.14, 15. and 1 Cor. 5.8, and afterward
here in this cap. verse. 14. and cap. 3. verse. 1. Now circumcision and the rest
of the legal ceremonies were so alien and contrary unto the Gospel, that they
did wholly corrupt and falsify the nature of it, nullifying all the efficacy
thereof, and rendering it frustrate, voy^, and of no effect; for if Christians
be circumcised, Christ shall profit them nothing, he shall become of no effect
unto them; for thereby they are fallen from his grace; as Paul will tell the
Galatians afterward, cap. 5. verse. 2, 4. Paul therefore opposed the false
brethren urging the circumcision of Titus, that he might preserve the nature of
the Gospel entire and sincere in the purity thereof, free from all compliance
with the legal ceremonies; that by thus maintaining it first at Jerusalem, he
might so continue it among the Gentiles, until it arrived so unto the
Galatians. For if Paul had given way to the circumcision of Titus at Jerusalem,
would not the false teachers in Galatia have thence afterward drawn an
argument for it, alleging to the contrary of Paul's Doctrine there, that at
Jerusalem by the Apostles themselves, circumcision and the rest of the legal
ceremonies were adjudged necessary to salvation; and thereupon Titus was
compelled to be circumcised? With you. i. e. You the Galatians; or rather with
you Gentiles; for although in those words he speaks only to the Galatians; yet
in them he understands all others of their condition in respect of Religion,
especially the Gentiles, to whom his Ministry was peculiarly ordained, and to
whom the benefit of that action at Jerusalem ^edounded.

VERSE 6.
Text.
But of these who seemed to be somewhat (whatsoever they were, it makes no
matter to me, God accepts no man's person) for they who seemed to be somewhat,
in conference added nothing to me. Sense.
Of these.] Read: From those.

Who seemed to be somewhat.] i. e. Who were the chief persons at Jerusalem.

Whatsoever they were.] viz. In times past, or heertofore.

It makes no matter to me.] i. e. There is no difference from me; or I differ
nothing.

In conference added nothing.] i. e. Discovered no further light or knowledge
in the Gospel to me.

Reason.
Having formerly showed a Difference between him and the false brethren at
Jerusalem, and his superiority above them, in yielding nothing unto them; he
now passes to the chief persons there, showing that between them and him
there was no difference or inequality; and therefore their authority ought not
to be objected against his, much less preferred before it.

Comment.
To be somewhat. The dignity of the Apostles was no disparagement to Paul. who
to the^ was no way inferior. (...). A man's person. Why Paul differed nothing
from the chief Apostles, who unto his doctrine added nothing. but in all
points confirmed it.

BUT of these who seemed to be somewhat.] i. e. Of these who were the chief
Apostles; for these words are but a circumlocution of the chief persons at
Jerusalem: and they are the same in sense with the words mentioned before,
verse 2. which were of reputation: for the Greek of the Original is the same.
Yet by reason of the Infinitive (...), i. e. to be somewhat, which follows
here, they are here translated by the way of a Verb, who seemed to be
somewhat; but the sense returns still unto the same: because to be somewhat,
signifies, to be some eminent and excellent person above other men: for as when
we would debase a man, we commonly say, he is nothing: so contrarily, when we
would extol him, we sometime say, he is somewhat, or some body, i. e. some
extraordinary or singular person. For in this form of speech the Greek
particle (...), does not signify indefinitly and really for some what, or some
thing in general: but eminently and personally for some person extraordinary,
either in deed or in repute: for hence, of Theudas, who made an insurrection,
it is said that he boasted himself, (...); i. e. to be some body, Act. 5.36.
And the like was given out by Simon Magus of himself, Act. 8.9. but hereof see
more afterward, cap. 6. verse. 3. And when Paul says here of the chief
Apostles, that they seemed to be somewhat, his meaning is not, that they seemed
great and eminent persons to others only, and not so to himself also: but he
also himself had the like esteem of them; for afterward in this cap. verse. 9.
he acknowledges them to be pillars of that building whereof Christ is the head
and corner stone. But his meaning is, that he did not acknowledge in those
Apostles; or attribute unto them, things in that sense and manner, which others,
especially his Adversaries boasted of them; and urged against him to disparage
his Doctrine. For his adversaries after whose mind and sense he seems to use
these words, did use and urge them, as if those Apostles were some
extraordinary persons for knowledge and power far above Paul, and that Paul
to them was no body.

Whatsoever they were.] The Greek is, (...). i. e. how great soever they were
sometime, or in times past. In our last English translation, the Greek
particle (...), is not expressed: but should have been expressed, for it is
very significant to complete the sense of the words; and it is expressed in
the Italian, and French translations: so also in our former English translation
compiled at Geneva by our Countrymen, who render the words thus, Whatsoever
they were in times passed. But the parenthesis wherewith the words of this
clause, and of the clause next following are included, seems superfluous and
needless; neither is there any in the French translation: yet if we do (as
we may) admit of a Parenthesis in this verse, then this clause only
(Whatsoever they were in times past) is therewith to be included, and the
clause following is not to be co-included. The words then seem to be an
answer to a tacit objection made to Paul's disparagement; for very probable it
is, that his adversaries with intent to disparage him, had magnified Peter and
the rest of the Apostles; as that they were the Disciples of Christ, had been
conversant with him, and instructed by him; when Paul was but a Pharisee. To
this Paul seems to answer. q. d. Whatsoever or how great soever the Apostles
were formerly in times past, does not necessarily infer my disparity now; for
things are not always the same that formerly they were in times passed.
Although then formerly in times past the Apostles were familiar with Christ,
were instructed by him, and ordained by him; and all this then when I was a
Pharisee; though they were Preachers of the Gospel then when I was a persecutor
of (...) yet all this then, makes no matter now, either to the truth of the
point in question, or to argue that now between their Doctrine and mine, there
is any disagreement, or between their persons and mine any disparity.

It makes no matter to me.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. I differ nothing, or
am nothing different, viz. from those who seemed to be somewhat; for unto
those former words, these here must be referred for the construction and
sense of both, which seems thus, that between them and Paul there was no
difference or disparity in any thing: But then the parenthesis which does
shadow and obscure the sense, must be wholly removed. Howsoever the word (...)
signify in humane Writers among the Greeks, yet in the holy Scriptures it
signifies to differ, viz. in such a manner that one thing is either better or
worse then another; and so it is rendered elsewhere in our last English
Translation. So 1. Cor. 15.41. One Star (...), i. e. differs from another
Star in glory; and so afterward in this Epistle, cap. 4.1. The Heir, as long
as he is a child, (...), i. e. differs nothing from a servant; and so the
French Translation reads it here; and this sense seems to be intended,
though not rightly expressed in our former English Translation made at Geneva.
q. d. Whatsoever, or how great soever the difference or disparity between me
and the chief Apostles has been heretofore in times past; which I confess
was very remarkable, when they were first Apostles to preach the Gospel, and
I a Pharisee to persecute it; but now since the time that God revealed Christ
unto me, and trusted me with the preaching of him unto the Gentiles, there is
no difference or disparity at all between the greatest of them and me, either
in respect of the Doctrine which I preach, or of my knowledge in the Gospel, or
of my dignity in the Apostleship. Not that they now are any thing less then
formerly they were; but that I by Gods grace, am so much greater, that I am now
their equal; for it has pleased God so highly to advance me in the
Ministry, that now they have no advantage above me, that they in any thing
should be my betters, and I their inferior,

God accepts no man's person.] Or, accepts not the person of man. The Greek
word (...), signifies sometime any single person, sometime the face and
presence of man; but here, and in such like forms of speech, it is taken for
those outward qualities of man, which make nothing to the merit of his cause,
or to the point of the matter in question, to argue the truth from any such
qualities; and therefore the French Translation renders these words thus; God
accepts not the outward appearance of man; and the Italian thus; God has no
regard to the quality of any man's person. These words, or the like to this
sense, are somewhat frequent in the New Testament. See Act. 10.34. and Romans
2.11. and Ephesians. 6.9. and Col. 3.25. And they seem to be a special attribute
unto God, in respect of the integrity and equity which he perpetually uses,
not only in the administration of his justice and judgment; but also in the
distribution of his grace and mercy. For God is no way partial to respect men's
dignities or other outward qualities, which conduce nothing to the merit of the
cause or to the point of truth; but God is a most just and equal Judge, who
regards only the genuine and inward truth. And therefore in the debate of true
Doctrine, no argument is to be drawn from men's persons. Hence Paul would
here infer, that between him and the rest of the Apostles there was now no
difference or disparity either for knowledge or authority in the Gospel;
notwithstanding those outward qualities in the Apostles, that formerly in times
past, they were the proper Disciples of Christ, instructed and ordained by him,
seeing God regards no such qualities.

For they who seemed to be somewhat, in conference added nothing to me. A
reason of his former negation; that between the chief Apostles and him there
was no difference or disparity; namely, because the chiefest of them added no
knowledge or power unto him. Added nothing. The Greek is, (...), i. e.
Discovered nothing, or opened no further light or knowledge in the Gospel unto
me, as if therein God had revealed any thing to them more then he had to me;
for to this sense the word was used and rendered before: See cap. 1. verse. 16.
q. d. How great soever the Apostles seemed, to whose judgment the difference
about Circumcision, and the legal Ceremonies were referred; or how mean
soever I seemed who was sent to require their judgment therein; yet in the
Gospel I learned from them no manner of knowledge which before was not revealed
unto me: For when the question was agitated and determined, they altered
nothing in my Doctrine, as if it had been any way erroneous; they added
nothing to my preaching, as if in any point it had been defective, or
insufficient unto salvation.

An Objection: The Apostles in that Synod added several things, as namely
these, abstinence from fornication, from meals offered to Idols, from blood,
and from things strangled, as it plainly appears, Act. 15.29. The Answer.
These things were not then added unto his Doctrine, but his former Doctrine of
these things was then confirmed. For Paul in his preaching did expressly and
constantly forbid fornication, as it may appear in diverse passages of his
Epistles; and particularly required abstinence from things offered unto Idols.
See 1. Cor. 8.1.7. and 1. Cor. 10.20. And in general words he restrained men
from blood and things strangled, in all his Doctrines of avoiding scandalls,
especially in regard of those things, which unto the Jews were abominable, as
was the eating of blood and things strangled, which the Jews abhorred as much
as they did meats offered unto Idols. See Romans 14.13.14. and 1. Cor. 10.23.
and 1. Cor. 11.2.

VERSE 7.
Text.
But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was unto Peter. Sense.
They.] i. e. The chief persons at Jerusalem, who were of reputation, and
seemed to be somewhat.

The Gospel of the uncircumcision.] i. e. The preaching of the Gospel among the
Gentiles.

Was committed.] Greek: was entrusted unto me.

The Gospel of the Circumcision.] i. e. The preaching of the Gospel among the
Jews.

Reason.
A further Illustration of his former negative, that between the chiefest
persons and him, there was no difference nor disparity, by an argument from the
contrary, that there was equality, and so acknowledged by the chiefest
Apostles, who gave him and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, as their
fellow-Apostles: but first he shows the occasion, how that acknowlegement came
to pass; namely, when it appeared that Peter and he had several and equal
Commissions for preaching of the Gospel, the one to the Jews, the other to the
Gentiles.

Comment.
Paul an Apostle chiefly to the Gentiles. but Peter chiefly to the Jews.

BUT contrariwise.] This paricle of Contrariety must be referred backward,
unto these words in the former verse, from these who seemed to be somewhat, I
differ nothing; for that negative of Inequality, shall be proved by the
contrary affirmative of equality; and therefore the same particle must also be
referred forward, by carrying the coherence of it, to these words in the 9.
verse following; they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship. q.
d. The chiefest persons at Jerusalem, even the chiefest of the Apostles, were
so far from putting any difference between their doctrine and mine, or
condemning mine as erroneous, imperfect, or insufficient in any point: and were
so far from making any disparity between their persons and mine, or
preferring themselves before me and Barnabas in reputation and authority, that
contrarily, they acknowledged us for their equals, and assumed us into their
society of the Apostleship, as their copartners and fellow laborers in the
Gospel; and in testimony of that their acknowledgement, they gave us their
right hands upon it.

When they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me.]
The causes or occasions that manifested the equality and fellowship between the
chiefest Apostles and Paul; namely, that the chief persons at Jerusalem saw
his Commission for preaching of the Gospel. The Gospel of the uncircumcision.
i. e. The preaching of the Gospel among the uncircumcised, who were the
Gentiles; for the words Circumcision and Incircumcision are often times put for
the Circumcised and uncircumcised. See Act. 10.45. and Act. 11.2. and Romans
2.26. and Romans 3.30. and Romans 4.9. and Phil. 3.3. Of the Gospel there were not
two several sorts; for the Gospel in it self, was but one for the doctrine of
it: but there were two sorts of people notably different and separate in their
manner of life and conditions, to whom God commanded that the Gospel should be
preached, whereof the one sort was circumcised, and the other uncircumcised.
And although personally some single persons who by birth were Gentiles, became
Proselites to the Jewish religion, and were thereupon circumcised; yet
nationally and in general, those nations of the Gentiles who were not of the
posterity of Abraham, were uncircumcised. But here the word uncircumcision is
not taken actually, but morally, as it is opposed unto Judaisme; and the
uncircumcised are accounted all those who were not of the Jewish religion,
although actually the foreskin of their flesh were circumcised and cut; such as
the Edomites and Ismaelites, unto whom as to uncircumcised for religion, though
circumcised in the flesh, Paul preached the Gospel in Arabia, whither he went
from Damascus immediately after his conversion. Was committed unto me. The Greek
is, (...), i. e. That I was entrusted, or put in trust with the Gospel: for in
our last English Translation that word is rendered sometime committed, sometime
put in trust. See 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. and 1. Tim. 1.11. and Tit. 1.3. The charge of
preaching to the Gentiles who were uncircumcised, was committed or entrusted
unto Paul; who because in this charge he was separate from the rest of the
Apostles, is therefore called the separate Apostle, as has been formerly
noted. Yet this charge to preach to these, was committed unto Paul, not solely;
for Barnabas and others were his fellow laborers in that Province: but unto
Paul it was committed chiefly, as the principal person to conduct the
functions of that Ministry. When they saw. i. e. When the chief persons at
Jerusalem saw or perceived, that this charge was thus committed unto Paul; and
the means whereby they perceived it, was by giving audience to him and
Barnabas, when they two declared in the Synod at Jerusalem, what miracles and
wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. See Act. 15.12.

As the Gospel of the circumcision was to Peter.] The preaching of the Gospel
among the Jews, who were circumcised was committed unto Peter. The charge of
preaching to the Jews was imposed, not upon Peter only, but generally upon
the Apostles at Jerusalem; yet here he names only Peter, because he was the
principal person in that Ministry, and naming him as principal, the rest of
his fellow-laborers in that Ministry are to be understood, as James, John,
and Philip, who planted the Gospel in all the Cities of Samaria. Yet Peter was
not so limited and restrained to the Jews, as to preach to them only, but
chiefly; for he also might preach among the Gentiles, and did so, as appears
by his vision of the sheet, and his preaching thereupon to Cornelius who was a
Gentile; see Act. 10.11. and afterward in this Chapter, verse. 11. We shall
find him at Antioch among the Gentiles. In like manner Paul was not so limited
to the Gentiles, as to preach to them only, but chiefly; for he had also
power and authority given from God to preach among the Jews, who were the
children of Israel. See Act. 9.15. Herein Paul does not only exempt himself
from all subjection unto Peter, but does tacitly equal himself to Peter, and
in a manner prefer himself above him; forasmuch as Paul's Province of preaching
the Gospel to the Gentiles was far the larger of the two; because it was
extended over all the World.

VERSE 8.
Text.
For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
Circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles. Sense.
He.] i. e. God by his spirit and grace.

That wrought effectually in Peter.] i. e. Who enabled Peter to the Apostleship.

Was mighty in me.] i. e. Enabled me.

Reason.
These words are inserted to insinuate another ground or cause of his equality
to the chief Apostles, and of his reception into their fellowship; namely,
that as his Commission was equal to Peter's, so his execution of it, was
equally divine, and equally effectual; for the same God enabled both.

Comment.
Gods efficacy in the Ministry of Peter. and of Paul.

HE that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision.]
He plainly intimates that the agent whom here he understands, is the Almighty
God; for the Verb whereby he expresses the action, does properly imply a
divine Agent. He that wrought effectually in Peter. The Greek is, (...). i.
e. he who enabled Peter, or was effectual in or by Peter: But why it should be
(...) in the dative case without the preposition (...), or (...), as elsewhere
is commonly added to the Verb (...), is not worth the enquiry; for whether we
make Peter the subordinate cause upon whom God was effectual, or the
isntrumental cause by whom God was effectual, it comes all to one sense:
because these are but several expressions of Gods efficacy in Peter's
Ministry. But that God was the supreme Agent or principal efficient in this
efficacy, it appears from the nature of the word (...), which in the sense of
the Scripture, does principally signify that working, whose principal Agent
is outward and Divine, and whose action is inward and potent; and this is
commonly done, when God by his spirit works upon our spirit; by exalting our
spirit to that action, whereto by natural strength it could never attain, and
by blessing the final effect beyond that power which by us was applied to the
means. And this word is also in Scripture opposed meanly to (...), which
signifies to cease or rest from working, by being actually idle, or doing
nothing: But extremely it is opposed to (...), which signifies to defeat, or
disable, by rendering a thing so ineffectuall or impotent, that it remains
deprived of all inward power to produce any outward act. To the Apostleship. i.
e. to the exercise or Function of the Apostleship, and to the efficacy thereof
upon others by his exercise of it; for to both these Peter of himself was
unable, had he not been super-enabled by a divine power. q. d. As the
authority of Peter's Apostleship to preach the Gospel unto the Jews, was
divine, for God had committed that Gospel unto him; so Peter's efficacy in the
execution of his Apostleship, was divine also; for he did not execute by virtue
of his own abilityes and natural parts, but by the special grace of God, who
by his spirit wrought effectually in him for the execution and success of his
Ministry. Now this Divine efficacy whereby God enabled Peter to his
Apostleship, appeared chiefly three ways. 1. By his Preaching, when at one
Sermon of his three thousand persons were converted, Acts 2.41. 2. By his
Miracles, as his restoring of the Cripple, Acts 3.7. his destroying of Ananias
and Sapphira, Acts 5. his healing of Aeneas, and raising of Dorcas, Acts
9.34.40. 3. By his deliverance, when God by his Angel delivered him out of
prison from the hand of Herod, who meant to slay him, Acts 12.6, 7.

The same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.] Was mighty in me. i.e. Enabled
me; for the word in the Original is the same, whereby Gods efficacy was
expressed in Peter. Toward the Gentiles. i. e. To my Apostleship among the
Gentiles; for the word Gentiles is opposed to the word Circumcision in the
former clause of this verse, which there supposed for the Jews. q. d. The
efficacy of my Apostleship was divine also, wrought by the same grace of the
same God, whose spirit was as powerful and as effectual in me as in Peter; so
that between Peter's authority and mine, between his ability and mine, and
between his success among the Jews, and mine among the Gentiles, there is no
difference, or disparity; seeing all are equally divine, and all mere graces
from the same spirit of God. Now this divine efficacy upon Paul to his
Apostleship, consisted chiefly in his travels to preach the Gospel among the
Gentiles, even at the Emperors Court: in his miracles which he wrought for the
confirming of his Doctrine; in his afflictions which he suffered, and in his
deliverances from persecution; in all which particulars he was extraordinarily
supported by Gods gracious assistance, as appears by his history in the Acts
of the Apostles. And here again Paul makes himself equal unto Peter, in
that both their abilities for the exercise of their Ministry proceeded from
the same supernatural and divine power.

VERSE 9.
Text.
And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the
grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of
fellowship, that we should go unto the Heathen, and they unto the
Circumcision. Sense.
Cephas.] i. e. Peter.

The grace.] viz. Of the Apostleship.

Fellowship.] viz. In the Apostleship.

Should go.] i. e. Should exercise our Ministry; in the Greek the Verb is
silenced.

Reason.
Another argument of his equality with the chief Apostles, together with
another ground or cause how it came to be acknowledged; namely, that when they
perceived the grace of his Apostleship, they acknowledged it by giving to him
and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.

Comment.
The chief Apostles then at Jerusalem. and their attribute. their
acknowledgement of Paul and Barnabas, and society, or equality with them. Of
giving the right hand.

AND when James, Cephas, and John.] The names of the chief Apostles then
resident at Jerusalem. James. i. e. James the younger, or the less, whom he
mentioned before, and gave him the attribute of the Lords brother, cap. 1. ver.
19. He names him here in the first place; therefore as it seems, because he
was constantly resident at Jerusalem, and President in the Synod there, for
upon the controversy about Circumcision he gave the sentence. Cephas. i. e.
Peter: who was the brother of Andrew, and whose proper name was Simon; but
Cephas (which in sense is all one with Peter) was his surname: for Cephas is
but the Syriack word, and Peter the Greek word, which in English signify a
Stone; so that Cephas, Peter, and Stone, are three several words in three
several Languages, which signify one and the same thing, the name whereof was
given unto Simon for a surname: for in Scripture it is often declared, that
Peter was the surname of Simon. See Act. 10.5.18.3^. and Act. 11.13. And this
surname of Cephas or Peter, which is by the Evangelist interpreted a stone, was
given unto Simon by Christ, when Christ first beheld him, being presented unto
Christ by his brother Andrew John 1.42. But seeing Paul mentions Simon by the
(...) of Peter, in several passages of this Chapter, both before and after
this verse, why does he here, and here only, call him Cephas? The reason may
be, because he mentions him here jointly with other men whose names were
Syriack as well as that of Cephas; for that is Paul's manner, that when he
speaks of Simon alone by himself, he calls him by his surname of Peter; but
mentioning him among others, he commonly calls him Cephas. See 1. Cor. 1.12.
and 1. Cor. 3.22. and 1. Cor. 9.5. and 1. Cor. 15.5. John, i. e. John the
Apostle, who was one of the twelve, and the beloved Disciple, who is commonly
called the Evangelist, partly to distinguish him from John the Baptist, and
partly because he wrote that Gospel which goes under his name: he also wrote
three Canonical Epistles, and the Book of the Revelation; he was the son
of Zebedee, and Brother of James the Elder, whom Herod put to death, Act. 12.2.
Besides this John, and John the Baptist, there was another John surnamed Mark,
whom Paul and Barnabas took for their Minister, and fell into some dissension
about him, of whom, see Act. 12.25. and Act. 13.5.13. and Act. 15.37.

Who seemed to be Pillars.] Having discovered and specified by name the
persons, of whom before it was said in general, that they were chief men who
were of reputation, and who seemed to be somewhat; he now determines in
particular what they seemed to be; namely, to be pillars, i. e. principal
persons in the Church of God, who of that edifice whereof Christ is the
foundation, were in a manner the maine supporters, whereby the Christian
Religion and the truth thereof was sustained and upheld, against all
persecutors who openly opposed it, and against all false Teachers who secretly
undermined it. For as the Tabernacle and the Temple was supported by pillars:
So the mystical building of Christ, is under Christ, supported by the
Ministers thereof; and as the Church is elsewhere called the pillar of truth,
1. Tim. 3.15. Because therein and therein only the truth of Religion is
preserved; for out of the Church we seek in vain for any true Religion: So
the Ministers are the pillars of the Church, by whose Doctrine and Ministry
the Church is preserved. Yet James, Cephas, and John have here from Paul this
attribute, that they seemed to be pillars, according to the language or speech
of his adversaries, because unto them these Apostles only seemed to be the
only pillars; not that they were not as they seemed, or not that they seemed
not so unto Paul but because they were not the only men that either were, or
seemed so; and because his adversaries who in the points controverted,
dissented from the Apostles, abused their reputation of being pillars, on
purpose to deceive the Galatians, and to debase the reputation of Paul, as if
he were no pillar, or no supporter of the truth.

Perceived the grace that was given unto me.] The grace. viz. of my
Apostleship, or of my being an Apostle unto the Gentiles; for that was the
matter whereof he spoke last before, when he said that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto him; and that God was mighty in him toward
the Gentiles. This his Apostleship he calls a grace, because the office
thereof was conferred upon him from God by Christ, by no other title, then by
the grace of God; as is further employed in the word given: Because all gifts of
what nature soever proceed from the grace and favor of the giver. Paul of
himself was unsufficient for this Function; for he was ignorant of the
Gospel, till such time as it pleased God to reveal Christ unto him; and above
all other men he was unworthy of it, because he was a persecutor of those
persons who sustained it, and of the Church, for whom the office was ordained.
So that unto Paul his office in the Apostleship was free grace, because he no
way desired it, and mere grace because he no way deserved it, and abundant
grace because he deserved the contrary. Hence elsewhere he calls his
Apostleship by the name, not only of grace, but of grace exceeding abundant.
See and compare Romans 1.5. and Romans 15.15. and 1. Tim. 1.14. But he mentions it
here by the name of grace, to continue his Argument for the Divinity of it; for
seeing the Gospel was committed or entrusted unto him, seeing God was mighty in
it toward the Gentiles, and seeing it was a gift unto him proceeding from Gods
graces, therefore certainly it must needs be divine.

They gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship.] They, i. e.
James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, Gave me and Barnabas the
right hands of fellowship, i. e. acknowledged me and Barnabas for their Peers
and equals, for their com-Ministers and fellow-Apostles; and in testimony
thereof gave us their right hands. And these words for their coherence must be
referred backward unto these words at the 7. verse, But contrariwise, q. d.
James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars and were pillars, and by your
false Teachers were pretended to be the only pillars, were so far from
discovering any further light in the Gospel, or from adding any knowledge unto
me therein, as if I had been their Disciple, who had learned something from
them, that contrariwise, even they themselves acknowledged both me and
Barnabas to be pillars also, even their equals and fellows in the
Apostleship, and signed our fellowship under their hands by giving us their
right hands upon it; thereby to testify unto the world, that our authority,
ability, and efficacy for the Ministry of the Gospel was equally divine with
theirs, all proceeding immediately from the grace of God, which unto me was
exceeding abundant. The giving of the right hand was among the Hebrews an
ordinary and solemn form whereby to express equality and fellowship; for by
this form Jehonadab associated himself into the fellowship and company of
Jehu, by giving him his hand, 2. King. 10.15. And thus Tobias was married to
his wife Sara, by the joining of their hands, Tobit. 7.13. For this solemnity
of joining the right hands in marriage is not only ancient, but very proper;
because marriage is the most original and natural society or fellowship of
mankind, which is also called Wedlock, because thereby two persons like two
hands clasped, are so linked and locked together, that they are incorporated
into one body; or as Christ terms it, whereby twain are no more twain but
one flesh, which God has joined together, Mat. 19.6. Which Conjunction is
expressed and signified by the mutual conjoyning of their right hands, a part
of the body for the whole; and the right hand being the principal instrument
of strength and action, does further argue the mutual promise of that mutual
help, which God respected at the Creation, in making the woman a help meet
for the man, Genesis 2.18.

That we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision.] Should
go. In the Greek there is no Verb expressed: but is well supplied in our
last English translation. Should go; for the very same supply is in the
Italian and French translations; although the Syriack and some Latins supply
it somewhat more emphatically thus, should exercise our Apostleship; for this
expresses the action or end of their going, q. d. Upon their hands given us,
this agreement was further concluded between us, that we should exercise the
Ministry of our Apostleships distinctly; I and Barnabas by preaching among the
Gentiles, and they among the Jews. And this order we concluded, not
originally from our selves, but consequently and subordinatly to that former
Ordinance of God, whereby the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto
me, as the Gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter; as it is before, verse. 7.

VERSE. 10.
Text.
Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I also was
forward to do. Sense.
Remember.] viz. To collect alms among the Gentiles.

The poor.] viz. Of the believing Jews in Judea.

Reason.
An exception from his formal universal negation of adding nothing to him at
Jerusalem; excepting only this, that we should remember the poor of Judea.

Comment.
To remember, put for taking care. Ministers must be care full for the poor.

Only they would that we should remember the poor.] They would; In the Greek
there is no Verb expressed, nor none supplied in the French translation: but in
the Italian it is supplied thus, They admonished; which word in our English
apprehension is somewhat too high; for equals and fellows do not admonish,
or at least in this sense; and therefore our English supply is more proper, they
would, or requested.

Remember.] i. e. Be careful, viz. to make provision for the poor, by
collecting alms for them; for to remember is often used both in the Scripture
and in our vulgar speech for being careful; as contrarily to forget is used
for be negligent. The poor. i. e. those poor Christian Jews in Judea, who
believed the Gospel, and were driven into poverty either by the fury of the
persecution there, or by the misery of the famine, against they had formerly
been supplied by a collection at Antioch, brought from thence to Jerusalem by
Paul and Barnabas, as was noted before. q. d. All that which the Apostles at
Jerusalem added there unto me and Barnabas, was only this, (and yet this was
no matter of Doctrine, but of common Charity) that we should be mindful and
careful of the poor among the believing Jews, who lived in Judea, to collect
alms for them among the believing Gentiles; whose duty it was to minister to
the Jews in carnal things, because they were made partakers of their
spiritual things. Romans 15.27. And this was all our message from the Apostles to
the Gentiles, only to collect alms among them, and not to impose any legal
ceremonies on them.

The same which I also was forward to do.] The same which. The Greek is,
(...). The Relative (...) is here redundant according to the manner of the
Hebrews, as it is elsewhere in diverse places. See Mat. 6.4. and Act. 10.38.
and 1. Pet. 2.20. q. d. This care for the poor we willingly undertook and
carefully executed the charge thereof, not failing in any place where we could
make any advantage for a collection in their behalf; as bound to this office
not so much by any obligation laid on us by the Apostles, as by the Law of
Charity. And heereunto there needed no Memento unto me; for I for my part
endeavored it before, and faithfully continued the practice of it afterward.
See Romans 15.25, 26. and 1. Cor. 16, 1. and 2. Cor. 8. per tot. and 2. Cor. 9.
per tot. And I suppose that Barnabas also continued it for his part, though of
him I can aver nothing for certain: because he and I departed one from
another at Antioch, and exercised our Ministry among the Gentiles several
ways, for he went toward Cyprus, and I toward Syria, Act. 15.39.

VERSE 11.
Text.
But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he
was to be blamed. Sense.
Withstood him.] i. e. Reproved him.

To the face.] i. e. Openly in a public audience, and before his face, or in
his presence.

To be blamed.] i. e. To be condemned.

Reason.
Another maine argument to assert his authority and his doctrine to be divine;
for having formerly declared his action at Jerusalem with the Apostles, and
therein showed that he was no way inferior to any of them; but that the
chiefest of them acknowledged him for their equal and fellow-Apostle; he now
relates another action of his at Antioch; where he dealt with Peter as
superior unto him, in reproving him publicly for a matter concerning the
former Ceremonies, and in showing Peter his error therein. Whereby he would
infer that he learned no point of doctrine from Peter, but rather Peter was
instructed by him.

Comment.
Peter at Antioch was opposed by Paul. and justly blamed.

BUT when Peter was come to Antioch.] The time of this history of Peter's
coming to Antioch, has no certainty from the Scripture, that I can find: yet
the greatest probability is, that it was after the Council or Synod at
Jerusalem, concerning the acts whereof Paul has treated hitherto: because this
is most agreeable to Paul's narration in recounting all his actions with the
Apostles; wherein he seems to follow the order and course of time according
whereto they fell out for after the dissolution of the Council at Jerusalem,
Paul and Barnabas immediately returned with Decrees unto Antioch, where for a
time they continued teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, Act. 15.35.
During this their continuance at Antioch, very probable it seems that Peter
might come thither, and then might be the time of the action related here
between him and Paul; because Barnabas who was also carried away with the
dissimulation of Peter and other Jews, was then with Paul at Antioch; after
which time we never find them together; for upon their next departure from
Antioch, which was not long after they finally departed one from another, by
reason of their dissenting about John their Minister, as has been formerly
noted. And although Paul afterward came again to Antioch, and spent some time
there, as appears, Act. 18.22.23. Yet this action with Peter could not be
then, because then Barnabas was not with him.

I withstood him to the face.] Withstood. The Greek is, (...), i. e.
Literally, I resisted or withstood; but the sense is, I reproved; and this
appears partly from the reason in the near words, why he withstood; namely,
Because he was to be blamed.] For to withstand one to be blamed, is to
reprove him; partly from the speech wherewith he withstood him, which at verse.
14. such the form of a Reproof; and partly from the nature of Reproof, for
all Reproof is a verbal resisting or withstanding, but not contrarily; so
that the general word withstood, is here put for the special reproved. To
the face. The Greek is, (...). before his face, face to face, or in his
presence; for one of those ways (...), is elsewhere rendered in our last
English Translation. See Luke 2.31. and Act. 3.13. and Act. 25.16. and 2. Cor.
10.1. Yet this Reproof was not private, in the presence of Peter alone,
between him and Paul alone; but public in the presence also of many others,
as it will appear afterward, verse. 14. Neither was it dissembled or feigned
between them, to cast a fear upon the believing Jews, in seeing Peter thus
reproved, as Jerome pretends it; but it was serious and real with intent to
reprove not only the Jews, but Peter also; for otherwise Paul should have
used one dissimulation wherewith to reprove another; seeing the thing it self
which he reproved was a dissimulation; as afterward it will appear, verse. 13.
q. d. When I was at Jerusalem, Peter reproved not me, either for my Doctrine
or for my Conversation; but when Peter came to Antioch, I reproved him for his
Conversation; and I condemned a carriage of his, not clancularly behind his
back, nor generally in terms indefinite; but particularly and openly even in
his presence to his face. For I was confident of my authority to reprove him,
and of my equity in the cause of it; which otherwise I should never have done
in that manner, had I been conscious to my soul, that in point of the legal
Ceremonies, his judgment was contrary to mine. For then, though his fact had
disliked me, I should not have dared to have reproved him openly to his face,
as knowing that way would avail me nothing, but to make my cause worse, and
render me odious.

Because he was to be blamed.] A reason in general of the former words, why
he reproved Peter before his face; namely, because he was to be blamed. The
Greek is, (...), i. e. Literally he was condemned; for so elsewhere the word
is always rendered in our last English Translation. See 1. John 3.20, 21. For
he that reproves another man, does give as it were a judgment or sentence
against him, which the Greeks call (...), and we Blaming or Condemning. But
really the sense is, not preteritively, that he was blamed before Paul
reproved him, but futurely, he was to be blamed; when Paul did actually
reprove him, then he was worthy of reproof, and deserved to be blamed. For
many time a Greek participle passive of the preter tense is in imitation of
the Hebrews, put for a Noune verbal; which the Latin sometime expresses by
the future in dus; and we in English thus, is or was to be, so (...), which
are saved i. e. which are to be saved, 1. Cor. 1.18. and (...), in them that
perish, i. e. in them that are to perish, 2. Cor. 2.15. and (...). them that
are sanctified, i. e. them that are to be sanctified, Heb. 10.14. and (...),
i. e. to be reserved, 2. Pet. 2.4, So here (...), he was blamed, is rightly
rendered, he was to be blamed. q. d. I reproved Peter, because concerning some
of the legal Ceremonies his carriage was so various and different from it
self, that although in one respect he was to be commended, yet in another he
was to be blamed.

VERSE 12.
Text.
For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but
when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which
were of the Circumcision. Sense.
Certain.] i. e. Believing Jews, who were but weak Christians, and observers
of the legal Ceremonies.

Did eat.] Viz. All manner of meats indifferently.

With the Gentiles.] i. e. With the Christian Gentiles, after their manner, and
in their company, who made no distinction of, meats, as did the Jewish
Christians.

Withdrew and separated himself.] Viz. From eating with them, after their
manner, and in their company.

Fearing them.] i. e. Fearing to offend or grieve them.

Reason.
Of the Circumcision.] i. e. The believing Jews, who yet were observers of
Circumcision.

A more particular reason why he reproved Peter, expressing the fact for which
he was to be blamed; namely, because he knowing that the legal difference
of meats was ceased, yet withdrew himself from eating indifferently all
manner of meats in the company of the Gentiles, and after their manner, and
restrained himself only to the Jewish meats.

Comment.
Peter eats with the believing Gentiles, and afterward withdrew from them.
fearing to offend the believing Jews, who yet co^ceived themselves bound to
the Law.

FOR before that certain came from James.] These were by their birth Jews,
who had been bred up in the Jewish Religion: but by their faith they were
Christians: but as it seems, so lately converted, that they were yet but weak
in the faith, and therefore continued observers of the Jewish ceremonies. These
men came to Antioch from Jerusalem while Peter was at Antioch: but whether they
came thither as Emissaries sent from James, or as voluntaries of their own
accord, either as spies or for other business, it appears not from Scripture:
Yet from James they are said to come, either authoritatively, because they
might have some direction or address from him: or locally, because they came
from the Church at Jerusalem, where James was the President or chief Pastor.

He did eat with the Gentiles.] He did eat. i. e. Peter did freely ear any
manner of meats, though forbidden by the Law of Moses. With the Gentiles; with
the Christian Gentiles, in their company, after their manner, and of their
meats, altogether as they did eat, who observed not the differences of meats,
nor other legal ceremonies. This action of Peter was very commendable; for
although the Jews by their Law esteemed it unlawful to eat of some meats,
supposing themselves thereby polluted, because they were forbidden by the Law
of Moses: yet unto the Christians of all sorts, to whom the Law was now
expired, it was by the Gospel fully allowable to eat of any meat: and
particularly unto Peter it was most warrantable, by reason of his vision of the
great sheet, wherein were all manner of meats, as Beasts, creeping things, and
Fowls, which God had cleansed, commanding him to kill and eat. See Acts
10.11.12.13.

But when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself.] When those
Christian Jews were come from Jerusalem to Antioch; Peter who before did there
eat with the Christian Gentiles, did then privily withdraw and separate
himself from the company, and from the fare of the Christian Gentiles,
carrying himself as a strict observer of the Legal Ceremonies, and
particularly of the differences of meats. This action in Peter was the thing
that was blameable, and for which he was by Paul reproved; for by this fact,
Peter might and did very much blemish the truth and sincerity of the Gospel, by
endangering the liberty thereof; whilst by his overmuch indulgence to the Jews
who were the minor part, he seemed to betray the liberty of the Gospel, and to
give occasion of scruple to the Christian Gentiles who were far the major part,
and far more considerable.

Fearing them of the circumcision.] The occasion of Peter's fact in withdrawing
himself from eating with the Christian Gentiles; namely, because he feared
those Christian Jews of the Circumcision, who came from James and were yet but
weak Christians, and were consequently earnest observers and defenders of the
Legal Ceremony, particularly in the point of meats. And he feared them to
incur their displeasure, or to give them offense by alienating their minds
both from himself, and from the Doctrine of the Gospel; for they might censure
him as a transgressor, and a desertor of the Law, which censure would much
blemish Peter's authority, wherein the Church was much concerned. This purpose
of Peter to comply with the Christian Jews, was not in it self sinful, but
only somewhat improvident: because thereby he too much neglected the edifying
and confirming of those Christian Gentiles with whom he conversed, who were
much the major and more considerable part, whereof somewhat more afterward.
Hence it appears, that by the Decrees passed in the Synod at Jerusalem, the
Christian Jews did not yet understand or conceive themselves disobliged from
the legal Ceremonies; but only that the Gentiles on whom the Law of Moses was
never imposed, were by those Decrees excused from those Ceremonies; (though all
believed not this neither;) for in that Synod the debate was only concerning
the Gentiles and not the Jews; as it plainly appears, Act. 15.10.11.
Although Peter arguing in the Synod that the yoke of the Law was not to be
laid upon the Gentiles, does produce such Arguments, as make no more for the
Gentile then the Jew, or prove the Jew no less loose from the Law then the
Gentile; and the truth it self declares, that unto both people was proposed
the same way to salvation by Christ. Neither was the condition of the Gentile
in this respect, to be better then that of the Jew, to whom the Grace of
Christ was by the promise of God peculiarly engaged; but the condition of the
Gentile had been better, if unto the Jew the observance of the legal
Ceremonies had been necessary to salvation, and not unto the Gentile. But (as
we said) the Christian Jews conceived not themselves to be yet freed from
those Ceremonies, as may easily be gathered from the speech of James to Paul.
Act. 21.20.21.24.25. Peter therefore being a Jew by Nation should have offended
those Christian Jews who came from Jerusalem to Antioch, if they had perceived
him either conversant among the Gentiles, or negligent of the Jewish Ceremonies.

VERSE 13.
Text.
And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, in so much that Barnabas
also was carried away with their dissimulation. Sense.
Other Jews.] Viz. Who lived before at Antioch, and there did eat with the
Gentiles.

With him.] i. e. With Peter.

Carried away.] i. e. Did also withdraw and separate himself from eating with
the Gentiles.

Reason.
An Aggravation of Peter's fact, specifying the offense of it, that it was
Dissimulation, and declaring the Event of it, that it was an ill example unto
others.

Comment.
The dissimulation of Peter, and of the believing Jews, and of Barnabas, how
far excusable.

AND the other Jews dissembled likewise with him.] The other Jews. i. e. Not
those Jews who came from James; for they believed it necessary wholly to
abstain from eating with the Gentiles; and to comply with their infirmity,
Peter had withdrawn himself; they therefore cannot be said to dissemble with
Peter in following his example, though they conformed to his way, whatsoever
their judgment was concerning the Jewish Ceremonies. But by the other Jews,
he understands those Christian Jews, who living at Antioch before, did
usually converse with the Gentiles, eating all manner of meats after the
Gentile-manner; for these seeing Peter withdraw, withdrew likewise, and therein
dissembled with him. Dissembled likewise with him. The Greek is, (...), i. e.
literally, condissembled, or jointly dissembled; but is well rendered, by
dissembled likewise; because the dissimulation was not jointly equal; but
Peter therein was principal, and the other Jews were accessories unto him, by
following his example and dissembling in like manner. And this fact of Peter is
condemned by Paul for D^ssimulation; because Peter, whose judgment was, that
the legal Ceremonies were not to be necessarily obs^rved, did notwithstanding
observe them, and seemed so to do, as if he had judged their observance
necessary: Yet he declared not his judgment that way by any words, but by his
fact (for dissembling is a fault somewhat different from lying) and by the
example of his fact, the other Jews were carried into the same dissimulation.

Insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.] A
further aggravation of this fact from the event of it. q. d. This dissimulation
of Peter and of the other Jewish Christians with him, was like a violent
torrent, that swept all away with it, to follow the like example one after
another, till it also carried away Barnabas, mine own companion, who stood
thoroughly acquainted with my Doctrine, who had traveled with me among the
Gentiles, and had taught them their liberty from those legal Ceremonies, whom
it highly concerned to confirm them in the truth, and not to weaken them by
his example. Hence appears the error of those Writters who in this place
labor excessively to free Peter from all blame; for because Peter was an
Apostle, and had received the Holy Ghost, therefore in matter of truth he was
infallible; but it follows not therefore necessarily, that in matter of fact
he was also unblamable; and this was not an error in judgment, for his
judgment was right, as appears by his delivery of it in the Synod at
Jerusalem; but it was an infirmity in fact, whereinto he fell through
inconsideration; for we read here that he was actually blamed, and the fact
is discovered for which he was blamed, that it was a dissimulation; the
example whereof was of great force to involve others in it. And they who labor
to excuse him herein, do but free Peter to blame Paul; for therein they
overthrow all Paul's argument, whereby in blaming this fact of Peter, he would
vindicate the authority of his Apostleship, against the calumny of his
adversaries; for if Peter were not too blame, then Paul was too blame, in using
this argument.

VERSE. 14.
Text.
But when I saw, that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the
Gospel, I said unto Peter, before them all, If thou being a Jew, live after
the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, Why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live at do the Jews? Sense.
They.] i. e. Peter, Barnabas, and the other Jewish Christians, who dissembled
likewise.

Walked not uprightly.] But dissembled and halted between Jews and Gentiles.

Unto Peter.] i. e. To the principal person in fault.

A Jew.] Viz. By birth, but a Christian by faith.

Live after the manner of the Gentiles.] i. e. Did live so very lately,
using thy liberty of meats.

Why compellest thou?] Viz. By the example of thy fact.

The Gentiles.] i. e. The Gentile-Christians.

The Jews.] i. e. The Jewish-Christians.

Reason.
The form or manner of Peter's reproof, declaring in particular the fault of
his dissembling; namely, that he walked not uprightly according to the
sincerity of the Gospel.

Comment.
Peter's offense or fault, (Legal Ceremonies why abrogated.) censured publicly
and sharply. To Gentilize, (Compulsio^ by Example.) To Judaize, and the danger
thereof. A Digression. Three Parties of Christians. 1. The sincere Christian
his Carriage. Examples of such. 2 The Judaizer his Carriage. Examples of this
Sect, the Cause of it, the Effect of it. 3. The Gentilizer. The diversity of
this Sect, Their carriage. Examples of it. The Cause, and effect of it. Some
agreements between the Judaizers and Gentilizers. 1 Both were Christians, 2
Both erroneous, 3 Both contentious, 4. Both malicious. 5. Both Tares in Gods
field. Yet not to be extirpated.

The carriage of the sincere Christian toward Sectaries. 2. Nor condemn them,
3. Nor offend them, 4 but to love them. Examples of this carriage, and in what
cases it abateth. Judaizers of two sorts. 1 Natively Jews, 2 Natively
Gentiles, who exercised the Ministry, for by-respects, and are bitterly
reproved.

BUT when I saw.] The adversative particle but signifies, that the carriage of
Peter was averse and contrary to the mind of Paul, who addressing himself to
reprove it publicly, does first profess his observance of the fact, that he
saw the fault of it, and saw withal just cause to reprove it. For it had not
been reason, to reprove publicly so great a person as Peter, by way of
hearsay, from the bare suggestion of others; that therefore the reproof might
not seem unreasonable or inconsiderate, he first declares, that he himself
saw the fault, and took special notice of it.

That they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel.] Walked
not uprightly: the Greek is, (...), i. e. literally, footed not uprightly, or
walked not with an upright foot, which he opposes to their dissimulation
mentioned in the former verse; because all dissembling is halting, and all
halting is contrary to walking uprightly. And the sincerity or truth of the
Gospel was the line or level, whereby they were to walk, and according
whereto if they did walk, their walking would be upright. But their
conversation was not conformable to the incorrupt and sincere doctrine of the
Gospel; for they declined from the right path of it, halting, as it were,
between the Law and the Gospel, leaning one while to the necessity of the Law,
and another while to the liberty of the Gospel. The fault therefore by Paul
reproved, was, that Peter's fact might and did prove some hindrance to the
progress of the Gospel; while Peter by his overmuch indulgence to the Jewish
Christians, did endanger the verity and liberty of the Gospel. If an offense
must needs have been given one way or other, safer it had been to have
offended the Jewish Christians there, then to have given those of the Gentiles
an occasion to stumble, and to question that doctrine which hitherto they had
learned; for when we are necessitated between two scandals, the greater is
more to be declined then the less. And besides, it was a thing most
reasonable, that Peter and the rest of the Apostles should at last deal more
freely and openly with the Jewish Christians, in leading them on by degrees to
the sincerity and truth of the Gospel in this particular; especially seeing
formerly the Jewish Christians of Jerusalem, where the offense was most to be
feared, were sufficiently instructed by Peter and James, that the Legal
Ceremonies were not necessary to salvation. For it was Gods good pleasure that
upon his new Covenant, the Ceremonies of the old should cease, to the end that
all Nations both Jews and Gentiles should be confederated under one Covenant,
and be incorporated into one body, whereof Jesus Christ should be the Head;
which could never be done, so long as those Ceremonies were of force; for while
they were in being, men could hardly, or not at all, conceive how that old
Covenant could be antiquated and expired. Besides, wheresoever there remain
most Ceremonies, there is commonly more superstition, then true and sound
Religion: because between Ceremony and Verity there is a kind of antipathy.
This point not being rightly understood, the benefit conferred upon us by
Christ, and the way of the new Covenant in justifying us by faith, can never
be rightly conceived, as may easily be collected from this Epistle. Wherefore
it concerned the rest of the Apostles to afford their assistance unto Paul, who
chiefly labored in this, that at the least the Jewish Christians might not
subduce and separate themselves from conversing and accompanying with their
brethren of the Gentiles; especially seeing Peter had already practiced it
before, and might have continued always to practice it; for to him from Heaven
this point was in special manner revealed; and what grounds soever they were
which induced Peter to eat with Cornelius and his family, the same were still
in force to continue his conversation with the Antiochian Christians, who had
in like manner received the Holy Ghost. Peter therefore should have persisted in
conversing with his brethren of the Gentiles, whatsoever exceptions the Jewish
Christians should take against it: or at least should have first notified his
intention to the Gentile-Christians, that he desired to condescend a little to
the Jewish infirmity; that the Gentiles might not be troubled, if for a time
he abstayned from their company; that he did it not, because he beleft those
Ceremonies necessary to salvation, but only because his brethren of the Jews
were so persuaded. But Peter, as it appears, neglected this caution, and
stoutly dissembled the contrary; for which Paul blamed him before them all.

I said unto Peter before them all.] A circumstance of this reprofe from the
place of it, that it was public. Before them all; the Greek is, (...), i. e.
literally, before all men, or in the presence and audience of all: but in
sense, publicly; for these words are all one with (...), i. e. before men;
which is opposed to secretly or privately. See Mat. 5.16. and Mat. 6.1. and
Mat. 10.33. and Luke 12.8, 9. And he therefore spoke to him before all; because
the knowledge of the matter concerned all; for it concerned the
Gentile-Christians, lest they should be troubled with the fact of Peter, and
thence take occasion of erring; and the Jewish Christians it concerned, lest
they should persist to follow his example; and besides this, the offense was
exemplary and public; and a public offense deserves a public reproof.
See 1. Tim. 5.20. Yet in reprooving Peter thus publicly, Paul offended not
against the order of brotherly reproof, in that he first gave him no private
admonition, because the public danger would not then admit that circumstance.
But he directs his reproof unto Peter only; because he was chiefly in fault;
for he was the author of that dissembling, whereinto others were carried by
his example; and his Reformation being a person of so eminent authority with
all, would soon reduce all the rest.

If thou being a Jew, live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do
the Jews.] The form of the reproof is by way of Interrogation, which
therefore redounds to the sharper reprehension; for in demanding a reason of
his action, why he being a Jew compelled the Gentiles? he seems to tell him,
that he had no reason at all for his action, but rather his action was against
all reason. Yet the Interrogatory of his reproof is but one, and that one so
concise that the language and the argument of it, is contained and couched
under a marvelous brevity. q. d. seeing thou art a Christian Jew, and by virtue
of thy Christianity have relinquished Judaisme, and have hitherto lived after
the liberty of the Gentiles, eating all sorts of meats after their manner, for
so thou did eat, till certain Jews came from James; why art thou now
become so contrary to thy self, as to relapse back again into Judaisme? and
in one fact to commit three offenses? for therein thou dissemblest with thine
own soul, seeing thou have declared thy judgment to the contrary; and
therein thou confirmest the Jewish Christians in their infirmity, for by thy
fact they will be hardened; and therein thou compellest the Gentile-Christians
to Judaize, for thereto they are forced by the example of thy fact and for
fear of thee.

Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?] Why? some read
(...). i. e. how? but it matters not at all what the Interrogation should be;
for although the words be Interrogatory, yet the sense is reprehensory thus,
certainly thou art too blame in compelling, etc. Compellest thou? The Greek
is, (...). i. e. necessitatest, not by way of violence, but by way of example,
whereby thou do occasion and move them, and by thy fact do impose a kind
of necessity upon them to do the like, or at least that for fear of thee and
of thy authority that dare not do otherwise. For he is said to necessitate or
compel, who by force of reason or of example does vehemently persuade or urge
a thing to be done; for in this sense the word (...) is used. See afterward
cap. 6. verse. 12. and Luke 14.23. and Mat. 14.22. and Marc. 6.45. and Act
28.19. and 2 Cor 12.11. The Gentiles to Judaize. i. e. The Christian-Gentiles
to abstain from certain meats after the Jewish manner; seeing neither that
Ceremony nor any other part of the Law of Moses was ever by God imposed on the
Gentiles, for that Law to them was never given nor never binding. q. d. Why
do thou now contrary to thy declared judgment, and to thy former custom,
force the Gentiles to forsake their liberty, and to apply themselves to the
Ceremonies and observances of the Jewish Laws, whereto the Gentiles were never
obliged? this is not only against all equity, but against the liberty of the
Gentiles, and against the freedom of the Gospel. The Law of Moses did not now
bind the Jews, for by the access of the new Testament, the old ceased and
was expired: much less should the Gentiles be compelled to it now being
expired, seeing formerly while it was in force, it never obliged them. But so
great was the authority of Peter, that any notable act of his was in a manner
compulsory, to prescribe and impose upon others, especially when the rest of
the Jewish Christians, and even Barnabas himself followed the example of it.
Neither could all know that Peter herein dissembled; for they might believe
that he did it as moved in conscience, and that now he corrected that error,
whereinto before he somewhat swerved, in love and courtesy to the
Gentile-Christians. Seeing then this fact of Peter might have occasioned great
troubles, seeing it might have disquieted the consciences of many, and have
much hindered the liberty of the Gospel; therefore Paul had great reason to
pluck off the vizard in public, and to discover before all men the person
which Peter had assumed. For necessary it is, that even great Persons, when
their example grows to a public offense, should undergo a public reproof:
yea, the greater they are, and the greater the danger that may arise from their
example, so much the greater should our care be, that their authority which
otherwise is to be maintained for the public good, be not turned to the
public ruin.

Hence for our better understanding of the former four verses and of diverse
passages in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles, we may and must observe,
that in the Church of Christ there then were (and still are, and ever will be)
three sorts of Christians, or three several parties, which agreeing all in the
faith of Christ, differed much among themselves.

1. The sincere Christian, who was entirely and wholly a Christian, believing
in Christ, and walking in Christ, or (as from Paul's words in this verse they
may be described) who believed uprightly, and walked uprightly according to
the truth of the Gospel: edifying their faith, and composing their life,
according to the Doctrines, Precepts, and Rules delivered by Christ and his
Apostles. These labored for the sincerity and purity of the Gospel, to
preserve the truth thereof clean and free from the admixture and leaven of all
Religions and Opinions whatsoever, that thereunto were alien and foreign. These
were inoffensive, peaceable, and quiet, giving no scandal to any party who
differed from them in judgment or practice; not busying their minds with
foolish questions and fruitless disputes to no profit; but exercising
themselves not in the works of the Law, but in the works of their callings,
and in the good works of the Gospel, by doing all Offices and Services of
Love, Charity, Equity, Mercy, Courtesy, and Kindness toward all men, but
especially toward the household of faith, and chiefly one toward another.
These were the children of the Kingdom, the good seed which Christ sowed in
the field of the world; and they were the Wheat among which his Enemy sowed
Tares. Of this sort were the Friends, Landlords, and Companions of Paul, to
whom and from whom in his Epistles he sends salutes; also Aquila, and
Priscilla, and the Church in their house; also the household of Cloe, of
Crispus, Gaius, and Stephanas in the Church of Corinth; also the house of
Onesiphorus, and all those in the Church of Ephesus, whom Paul salutes in these
words, Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity; and also those in the Church of Philippi, to whom he writes thus,
Phil. 1.9.10. And this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, that ye may approve things that are
excellent, that ye may be sincere and without offense, till the day of Christ.

2. The second party of Christians were the Judaizers; for by that name Paul
seems to denote them here, by using the word, (...), i. e. to judaize, or to
live as do the Jews. These in respect of their faith were Christians, but by
their life, they were Jewish; for they did believe in Christ, yet they walked
not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, but lived as did the
Jews. These laboring a compliance between Moses and Christ, did teach and
profess, that the Law and the Gospel, the Old and New Testament were all one
and the same; or at the most, that the latter was but an addition or supplement
to the former; and that there was no coming unto Christ and to the Gospel, but
by passing first through Moses and the Law. These were Operaries and Rituaries,
i. e. so much for the Works and Ceremonies of the Law, that they made Works
the cause conservant to continue justification; and therefore after their faith
and justification in Christ, to the end that they might continue and abide in
that state, they continued in the Works of the Law; as in practicing the use
of Circumcision, in abstaining from diverse meats both of Flesh, Fish, and
Foul, and especially from all meats that had been offered unto Idols; in
observing diverse seasons, of days, months, times and years. And proceeding
yet further, at last they came to this, that they made Works also the cause
procreant of justification, to constitute, create, and begin the state of it;
for therefore they urged their Works, especially Circumcision upon the
Gentiles, as necessary unto salvation.

Of this Sect were they who are mentioned, Acts. 15.1. And certain men which
came down from Judea taught the brethren and said, Except ye be circumcised
after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Certain men, i. e. certain
Judaizers. And they who are mentioned here in this cap. v. 12. For before that
certain came from James. i. e. certain Judaizers. Also they in the Church of
Rome and of Colossa, whom Paul notes in his Epistles to the Romans and
Colossians; and they Phil. 3.2. whom Paul there calls Dogs, evil workers, and
the Concision; and they in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, who were given to
Jewish Fables, to endless Genealogies and strivings about the Law. The Cause of
this their Judaisme was at first, partly their zeal to the Law of Moses,
whereof they acknowledged God himself the Author; partly their envy and hatred
against the Gentiles, that they should be made partakers of Gods grace in
Christ; from which by this means they endeavored to discourage the Gentiles:
But afterward this Judaisme was advanced, partly out of vainglory to insult
over the Gentiles in forcing them to the Laws and Customs of the Jews; and
partly out of policy, that living as did the Jews, they might enjoy the
Privileges of the Jews, and thereby not become liable to that persecution,
which lay upon the sincere Christian. The Effect of this Judaisme was, that the
walking therein was not only an error against the truth of the Gospel, but
also a scandal against the growth of it, a damage and mischief to the
planting and spreading of it; for hereby it came to pass, that the
unbelieving Gentiles were unwilling to receive it, and the believing Gentiles
were ready to desert it.

3. The third party of Christians were the Gentilizers; for so they may be
called; seeing here in this verse Paul denotes them by this phrase, (...), i.
e. to Gentilize, or (as our English Translation renders it) to live after the
manner of the Gentiles. These also in respect of their faith were Christians,
for they believed in Christ; but in respect of their life they were Heathenish,
because they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, but
lived after the manner of the Gentiles. For these laboring a compliance
between Philosophy and Christianity, interserted, mingled, and blended the
Gospel of Christ with Pythagorisme, and Platonisme, with Epicurisme, and
Stoicisme. The several Sectaries or followers hereof, either turning the
grace of God into wantonness, or pretending to exercise their Christian
liberty, were somewhat divided amongst themselves, not only in their Doctrines
and Opinions; but also in their practice and conversation. For some (as the
Pythagorists) abstained from Wine, drinking only water; they abstained from
all kind of flesh, eating only herbs; and they abstained from marriage,
disallowing that state, and holding it good for a man (especially a
Philosopher) not to touch a woman. Others (as the Epicures) were heerto so
contrary, that they would abstain from nothing, not from blood, nor things
strangled, nor any kind of flesh, eating meats offered unto Idols; not from
fornication, nor incest, nor other uncleanness; not from drunkenness at the
Communion, 1. Cor. 11.21. For in eating every one took before other his supper;
and one (the Pythagorist) was hungry, and another (the Epicure) was drunken.
Yet these different sects agreeing all in the faith of Christ, tolerated one
another in other matters, as anciently they had done before their conversion,
that in the maine they might all side against the Judaizer. Wherefore taking
advantage of Paul's doctrine against works and boasting that Paul was their
Apostle, as indeed he was, they became Fiduciaries, and Libertines. i. e. They
were only for faith and liberty; neglecting, despising, and disgracing works,
as no way necessary to salvation, as no cause at all of Justification, neither
procreant to constitute or build the state of it, nor conservant to continue
and maintain it.

Of this sect were they (Romans 14.) who did eat only herbs, and they who did
eat all things. They (1. Cor. 1.) who made divisions and contentions saying, I
am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. They (1. Cor.
5.) who were puffed up in the behalf of the incestuous Corinth; They (1. Cor.
6.) who held fornication lawful; They (1. Cor. 7.) who held marriage unlawful
or unexpedient. They (1. Cor. 8.) who would eat meat offered unto Idols, and
would eat it in the Idols temple; They (1. Cor. 15.) who denied the
Resurrection to come, and they at Ephesus who affirmed that it was already
past; They, Coloss. 2. who spoiled men through Philosophy, beguiling them in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels. In a word, they in general who
are censured and taxed in the General Epistles of James, Peter, John, and
Jude. The Cause of this their Gentilisme, was partly their vainglory in being
gifted men and puffed up with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as the gift of
faith, of knowledge, of tongues, and of prophecy: partly their Sensuality, in
abusing their Christian liberty unto licentiousness and looseness, following
their carnal appetite, and walking after the flesh: partly their Animosity, in
opposing and crossing the Judaizer, whose doctrines and practices, especially
that of Circumcision they detested and abhorred. The Effect of this Gentilisme
was the very same with that of Judaisme; for this walking or living thus after
the manner of the Gentiles, was not only an error against the truth of the
Gospel, but also a scandal against the growth of it, a damage and mischief to
the planting and spreading of it, especially amongst the Jews: for heerupon
the event was, that the unbeleeving Jews were unwilling to receive it, and the
believing Jews were ready to desert it, and by both the name of God and his
doctrine was blasphemed.

Whereupon we are further to observe, that these two last Christian parties,
namely the Judaizers and Gentilizers, agreed in effect. For although between
themselves they were extremely opposite in many opinions and practices touching
Religion, Policy, and Customs, whereby they became bitterly odious one to
another; yet under this opposition, there were many resemblances wherein they
agreed. 1. Both were Christians; for both embraced the faith of Christ; each
acknowledged the grace of the Gospel, each pretended the truth of it, each
endeavored the growth of it, and each had a form of godliness. 2. Both were
erroneous; for each laboring to make a compliance between the Gospel and that
Religion from whence each was converted, they both corrupted, defiled, and
leavened the sincerity of the Gospel; wherein though both were opposite, yet
both were in an error. For opposite parties love to make their opinions
extremely opposite, i. e. not only contradictory, but quite contrary, till both
become equally erroneous. To say in the sense of the Judaizer, that works did
every way justify; and to say in the sense of the Gentilizer, that works did
no way justify, were opinions equally erroneous. In no case to eat of meat
offered unto Idols, and in every place to eat meat offered unto Idols, were
practices equally erroneous. And these two opposite erroneous Parties were the
two Seminaries of all errors and sects in the Church of Christ: for since the
first planting of the Gospel, unto this very day, what error or what sect did
ever trouble and vex the Church, which was not a branch either of Judaisme or
Gentilisme.

3. Both were Contentious; for each laboring to maintain their own error,
and each to obtrude theirs upon the other, they did both (...), i. e. teach
erroneously and corruptly, neither of them consenting to the wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness;
but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof came envy, strife,
raylings, evil surmisings, and perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds,
and destitute of the truth, 1. Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. For their needles Controversies
and foolish questions and doubtful disputations, did commonly conclude and
end, (...), i. e. in vain janglings, and vain bablings, having no other
profit but the subverting of the hearers. Yet in such contentions some of them
were so arrogant or proud, and yet so ignorant or knowing nothing, that (1.
Tim. 1.7.) they desired to be teachers of the Law, understanding neither what
they said, nor whereof they affirmed, i. e. not knowing which was the subject,
and which the predicat of the question.

4. Both were malicious; for each transgressing the Rules of Charity, whose
office is, not to behave it self unseemely, but to bear all things, and to
endure all things, they both walked in the way of scandal, giving mutual
offense, grieving, vexing, and wounding each others conscience. The Judaizer
judged and condemned the Gentilizer for a profane and wicked sinner; and the
Gentilizer despised and scorned the Judaizer for a superstitious and weak
idiot. Whereupon at first they shunned one another company, each separating
themselves, and each excommunicating the other from their Assemblies; but at
last they labored to extirpate and destroy one another. For in after times,
when the Heathenish persecution against the Christians ceased, then these two
opposite Christians fell to persecute one another; and wheresoever either party
prevailed, that condemned the other of Heresy, and the other exclaimed against
that for Tyranny. Thus one toward another, these two opposite parties were
ravening Wolves in sheep clothing.

5. But in respect of the sincere Christian, both were the Tares or the
children of the wicked one, which Satan the Enemy of Christ sowed among the
Wheat in the field of Christ. For as a right faith and a holy life is the seed
and Wheat of Christ: So Errors and Vices in not walking uprightly according
to the truth of the Gospel, how opposite or contrary so ever they be one to
another, are the seed and tares of Satan, which he sows to annoy the Wheat
of Christ. For Tares, or rather, Juray or Darnell, are a vicious grain of a
destructive nature, annoying, cumbring, hindering, and pulling down, not only
one another, but any other Corn among which they grow, but especially Wheat:
So Judaisme and Gentilisme were Errors and Vices sowed by Satan, which
annoyed, cumbred, and hindered not only one another, but also the truth and
sincerity of the Gospel: Yet when the question was moved for the extirpation or
rooting out of the Tares, Christ denies it, and he denies it for the Wheates
sake, Mat. 13.29. Lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the
Wheat with them. For the Tares are rooted into the root of the Wheat, both
having one common root, one and the same Faith, one and the same Head, Christ
Jesus. And the Tares themselves of both sides deny it for their own sakes one
against another: Yet both parties deny it not at one and the same time; but
each party denies it then, when he is deprest and fears to be extirpated.
And again, both parties also affirm it one against another; yet both affirm
it not in one and the same place: But each party affirms it there where he
prevails, and hopes to extirpate the other. By such turnings and windings of
Doctrine the mystery of iniquity works; affirming and denying the same thing
at several times, and varying their tenets as their advantages vary;
professing in words the Rule of Equity, in Doing to others whatsoever they
would that others should do unto them: But denying it in works and doing the
quite contrary. For they find by experience, that the common capacities upon
whom they work, have not judgment enough to discover the mystery of this
iniquity; but are rather children, tossed too and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14.

But thou who art a sincere Christian, and live among these Tares, growing
between them and bordering upon both, must carry thy self toward both,
according to those Rules of Charity, which the Gospel of Christ prescribes. 1.
Not to extirpate either; for, since the planting of the Gospel, this was never
done, neither till the end of the world shall it be done, neither till then
must it be done; lest says Christ, While ye extirpate the Tares, ye root
up also the Wheat with them; and when it is done, the deed is not a work of
men, but of Angels, Mat. 13.40.41. So shall it be in the end of this World;
the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom, all things that offend, and them which do iniquity. True it is, that
every plant which God has not planted, shall be rooted out: but withal it is
also true, that the persons who are to do this, are not men but Angels; and
the time for the doing of it, is not now, but at the end of the world: For till
then, both men and Angels must let them alone, and let both grow together.
Compare Mat. 13.29.30. etc. with Mat. 15.13.14. 2. Not to condemn either; for
seeing both those parties professed the faith of Christ, therefore both also are
the servants of Christ, and Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's
servant? To his own Master he stands or falls: yea he shall be holden
up; for God is able to make him stand. 3. Not to offend either; for in Christ
either is thy brother: and (Romans 14.21.) thou must not be a scandal, whereby
thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak, to fall from that
state wherein he stood; and (1 Cor. 10.32.) thou must give no offense neither
to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Yet when there is
a concurrence of such a counter-necessity, that thou must needs give offense to
one Party, then thou must exercise thy discretion, to offend on that side,
where thy offense may be least offensive. 4. But to love both; exercising
toward both all the offices of Charity, equity, and courtesy; bearing with
both, pleasing both, and edifying both. For (Rom 15.1.) We that are strong
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves: let
every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification; for even
Christ pleased not himself.

For according unto these rules the Apostles carried themselves toward these
two opposite parties, accommodating and applying themselves sometime to the
one, and sometime to the other, as the opportunities of persons, times, and
places required; In patience and meekness instructing those that opposed
themselves; one while with great authority rebuking and reproving them; and
another time with suitable gravity comforting, and commending them. Always
moderating and tempering their speeches and writings with such wisdom and
discretion, that neither of these parties might be lost from the Gospel, but
both retained in the profession of it, and both reduced to the sincerity of it,
and others who had not yet received it, might be gained to the reception of it.
Hear how Paul relates his applications and carriage toward both of them, 1
Cor. 9.19. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto
all, that I might gain the more; unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
might gain the Jews: to them that are under the Law as under the Law, that I
might gain them that are under the Law: to them that are without Law, as
without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I
might gain them that are without Law: to the weak, became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some; and this I do for the Gospels sake. etc. And when he forbids
all scandal or giving offense either to the Jews or to the Gentiles, he
produces an example from himself (1 Cor. 10.33.) even as I please all men in
all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may
be saved.

And under these Applications the Apostles exercised their Christian liberty,
to Circumcise or not Circumcise, to eat or not eat with this or that party,
as occasion served, and as far as they might preserve that liberty without
scandal or giving offense. Yet when they fell upon a necessity of giving
offense to one party, then they offended that way where the offense would be
least, considering all circumstances; and this required such circumspection
that sometime a good man might mistake. For herein was the mistake of Peter at
Antioch, for which Paul withstood him to the face, and for which he was too
blame; for before that certain Jews came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself from the
Gentiles, fearing to give offense to the Jews; not considering that thereby he
gave a greater offense to the Gentiles, as the case then stood at Antioch,
where the Gentiles were the greater number and the weaker Christians; and
therefore in that place the more to be respected, and the less to be offended.
The like mistake was also in the other Jews there, who being sincere
Christians for their Religion, dissembled with Peter; and in Barnabas also who
was carried away with their dissimulation. To be a sincere Christian no way
leavened either with Judaisme or Gentilisme; and to walk without scandal, not
giving offense to either of these Sects; and when there is a necessity of
offense, then to give that which is least; these are three degrees of
difficulty, whereof the last is the highest.

Yet concerning the Judaizers we are further to note, that they in respect of
their nation or birth were of two sorts. For some, and the major part were by
nation, birth, or descent, Jews, who were borne and bred up under the
Ceremonies and works of the Law, but afterward were converted to the faith of
the Gospel. And therefore their Judaizing in walking and living as did the
Jews. i. e. as themselves had lived formerly, deserved for a while some
toleration, connivence and sufferance: because they lived so out of infirmity
or weakness, and in conscience of that Religion, wherein they were borne and
bred. Toward these Paul and the rest of the Apostles observed all those rules
of charity formerly mentioned, no way offending, but by all means gaining
them. Others were by nation, birth, or descent Gentiles, borne and bred up in
Idolatry: yet for their Country they were Contrymen to the Jews, being
borne and bred in those places where the Jews had either full Synagogues or
Oratories; as in Judea and Galilee, in Galatia and Macedonia, in Creet and
Rome: by which means they were well acquainted with the Laws and Customs of
the Jews. These being converted unto the Faith of Christ, did for their life
and walking, side with the Jewish Judaizers, to re^aine the Jewish Ceremonies
and to impose them upon the believing Gentiles coming into Christ. Out of
these some took on them the Ministry of the Gospel, and preaching Christ,
taught withal the necessity of Circumcision, pressing the matter by way of
controversy, declaring themselves manifest adversaries to Paul by opposing his
Doctrine, and disparaging his calling to the Ministry; for they preached
Christ not of good will and sincerity, but out of envy and strife, supposing to
add affliction to his bonds, Phil. 1.15.16.

The cause why these Gentilish Judaizers exercised the Ministry and taught
Judaisme, was not for piety and conscience, as did the Jewish Judaizers; but
partly for policy, that by liveing as did the Jews, they might enjoy those
exemptions and privileges which the Roman Emperors had granted to the Jews,
and consequently that thereby they might escape the cross of Christ, i. e.
avoid those persecutions and inconveniences which followed the sincere
Christians for following Christianity: And partly for their belly, to procure
the better maintenance from the Jewish Judaizers, who thereupon were liberal
and bountiful unto them; for false Teachers easily find by experience that
false Doctrine does bring more profit to the Teacher then to the Hearer.
Against these Gentilish Judaizers, who took upon them to be Teachers, and to
teach for their belly, Paul is very vehement, reproving them with diverse bitter
rebukes. For those of Rome, he calls Make-bates, or causers of Divisions and
Offenses, Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them; for they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the
simple. Those of Macedonia he calls Belly-gods, Phil. 3.19. Brethren, be
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as you have us for an
ensample; for many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things. Those of Creete he calls unruly, and vain talkers, and
deceivers. For there are many unruly, and vain talkers, and deceivers,
especially they of the Circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake. And
those of Galatia, he will here in the next verse call Sinners of the Gentiles.

VERSE 15.
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.

Sense.
Jews by nature.] i. e. Originally and natively, by Nation and birth.

And not sinners of the Gentiles.] i. e. And who never were idolatrous or
sinful Gentiles, as were once the Judaizing false Teachers in Galatia.

Reason.
These words may have such a connection with the former, as if Paul seemed to
continue his speech unto Peter, until the 17. verse following, or as some
think, until the end of this Chapter; for at the beginning of the third
Chapter, he manifestly addresseth his speech to the Galatians. And it may well
be, that by Paul in his discourse with Peter, (not for the instruction of
Peter, who was before sufficiently informed in the matter, but) for the
instruction of those hearers who stood by, these or the like words were spoken
to Peter; and were afterward here inserted, because they were very pregnant
and pertinent to his purpose. But whether the words be continued to Peter or
directed to the Galatians rather, yet this coherence is manifest, that Paul
having sufficiently vindicated the authority of his Apostleship against the
obloquies of his adversaries, that it was neither humane nor no way inferior
to the chiefest Apostles, does here enter upon the principal subject of this
Epistle concerning Justification, the Doctrine and verity whereof he also
vindicates from those Errors, wherewith the Judaizing false Teachers among the
Galatians had corrupted it.

Comment.
Jewish advantages twofold. 1. Jurall, 2 Legal. Persons became Jews 2 ways.
1 Natively, by birth. 2. Factively by favor, these were called Proselites, and
initiated by Circumcision. Gentiles of two sorts: 1. Worshippers, whereof some
Examples. 2 Idolaters, called Sinners. whereof Examples, The sum of the Comment.
A Digression.

The word Sinner signifies three ways: whereof examples. 2. Morally, for the
improbous. Whereof Examples in the Old Testament, and in the New. 3. Jurally,
for the Calamitous. who really is but a quasi sinner, (Sin put for the Effect
of sin) or a Sinner passively, or Putatively. The Calamitous, of four sorts.
1. The Oppressed, 2 The Blemished. as the Bastard, the Alien. and the
Bondslave. 3 The distresed, as Job, and Lazarus. 4 The Tainted, as the children
of the Ninevites, of the Gibeonites, of Saul, of Gehazi, and all the Children
of Adam, whose Judgment was hereditary.

Three observations on the three former sorts of sinners. 2. For the Gentiles,
3. For the Jews.

WE who are Jews by nature.] This whole verse being in it self incomplete
and suspensive, must for the due construction of it, be carried forward and
referred to these words in the next verse, Even we have believed in Jesus
Christ. For between this verse and those words, the principal Assertion of
this Epistle is interserted; namely That, A man is not justified by the works
of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. The Jews above all other Nations
in the world, had certain prerogatives or advantages, from whence (besides
their descent from Judah, the chief tribe of Israel) they were also
denominated Jews; and these advantages were of two sorts. 1. Jural, in respect
of their Rights and Privileges, as they were the true Israel, and peculiar
people of God, with whom God had Covenanted for the Blessing promised to
Abraham; for unto them that Blessing principally belonged, because thereto they
by Covenant had the original Right. For hence the Jews are called the
children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. They are called the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with Abraham, that in his seed all
the kindreds of the Earth should be blessed, Act. 3.25. Unto them first God
raised up Christ, and sent him to bless them, in turning away every one of
them from their iniquities, Act. 3.26. They are called the Israelites, to whom
pertayneth the adoption, and the glory and the Covenants, and the giving of the
Law, and the service of God, and the promises, Romans 9.4.

2. Legal; in respect of their laws and Ordinances, which were all divine,
constituted and enacted by God himself; not only concerning Religion and Piety
for the worship and service of God, but for Justice and Judgment to be
observed between man and man. For hence the Jew is said to Rest in the Law,
and to make his boast of God, to know his will and to be instructed out of his
law; to be a Guide to the Blind, and a Light to them in Darkness; to be an
instructor of the foolish, and a teacher of babes, Romans 2.17, 18. Hence is the
distinction of him who is a Jew outwardly in the letter, from him who is a Jew
inwardly in the spirit, Romans 2.28, 29. Hence the Jew is said, to have this
advantage, that Unto them were committed the oracles of God, Romans 3.1, 2. And
hence in the verse before, to Judaize, or to live as do the Jews, was taken
for the legal manner of their life. But by the way, we must carefully observe,
that in respect of time, God settled upon the Jews their Rights long before he
imposed on them their Laws; for the promise of those Rights was made to
Abraham, before their first and great Law of Circumcision; and the rest of
their Laws, for the body of them, as they were delivered by the hand of Moses,
were given above 400 years after the Promise made to Abraham. See and compare
Genesis 12.2. and Genesis 15.5, 6. and Genesis 17.10. and Act. 7.5, 6, 7, 8. and Romans
4.10, 11. and Gal. 3.17.

The persons called Jews who enjoyed these Prerogatives of Rights and Laws,
were of two sorts. 1. Some were Jews natively, by nature, nation, or birth,
who lineally descended from Jacob, and of what Tribe soever they were, yet from
the Tribe of Judah, which was the Tribe Royal, were called Jews. Thus the
Galileans, though they were not all of the tribe of Judah, but of other tribes,
were Jews by nature, and Luke 7.3. are called Jews. So Sceva, Act. 19.14. who
was one of the chief Priests, and therefore of the tribe of Levi, is called a
Jew. And Paul himself, Acts 22.3. who was of the tribe of Benjamin, and borne
at Tarsus in Cilicia, calls himself a Jew. 2. Others were Jews factively, by
naturalization, denization, or ascription, who descending from parents that
were not Jews by nature, but Gentiles, were by favor and grace, admitted to
be partakers of the Rights, Laws and Religion of the Jews, as incorporated,
planted and grafted into the Jewish Nation; whereto they were initiated by
Circumcision. Hence the Jews by nature are called The natural branches of the
good olive tree, whereinto the cions of the wild olive tree ( i. e. of the
Gentiles) are grafted contrary to nature, Romans 11.21, 24. And these factive or
endenized Jews are commonly called Proselites; as Mat. 23.15. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye compass sea and land to make one
proselite. i. e. a factive or endenized Jew. And Acts 2.10. Strangers of Rome,
Jews and proselites. i. e. Jews native and Jews factive. And Acts 13.43. Now
when the Congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselites
followed Paul and Barnabas. i. e. Jews native and factive. Yet in one place
they are called, Those under the Law. 1. Cor. 9.20. Unto the Jews I became as
a Jew, that I might gain the Jews: to them that are under the Law, as under
the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law. i. e. the proselites
or Jews factive. For the Proselite being initiated by Circumcision, became
thereby a pertaker of all the Jewish Rights, and also a subject to be under all
their Laws. Hence says the Apostle, Gal. 5.3. I testify again to every man
that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law. Such a Proselite
or Jew factive was Uriah the Hittite, and Araunah the Iebusite, and Nicholas
the Deacon, Acts 6.5. who was a Proselite of Antioch; for these three and
diverse others, were by Nation and nature Gentiles; but by favor and
Circumcision, Jews. Now Paul, in this verse, uses the phrase Jews by nature,
partly to distinguish them from Proselites, who were Jews by favor: and
partly to oppose them unto Idolaters, who as it follows in the next words,
were Sinners of the Gentiles.

And not sinners of the Gentiles.] The Gentiles in opposition to the Jews were
in like manner of two sorts. 1. Some were Worshippers; who forsaking the way of
Idolatry, did worship the God of Israel, and thereupon were admitted to
sacrifice at the Temple, and to assemble at the Synagogues, where they heard
the Lectures of the Law and the Prophets. These were commonly called Strangers
within the gates, upright in heart, fearers of God, and devout men. Yet because
they were not and would not be Circumcised, they retained the name of Gentiles,
and by the Law were accounted unclean Persons; and therefore no Jew would eat
or converse with them, neither might they come into the inner Court of the
Temple, but must worship in the outward Court, which was therefore called the
Court of the Gentiles. Such a Worshipper was Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5.17.
who professed that henceforth he would offer neither burnt-offerings nor
Sacrifice unto other gods, but only unto the Lord. Such the Centurion of
Capernaum, of whom the Jews there gave this Testimony, Luke 7.5. He loves
our Nation, and he has built us a Synagogue. Such the Eunuch of Ethiopia, Acts
8.27. Who came to Jerusalem for to worship. Such Cornelius the Captain at
Cesarea, Acts 10.2. Who was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always. Such a
Gentile was the father of Timothy though his Mother were a Jewesse, Acts 16.1.
And such was Lydia the Purple-seller, who heard Paul Preach in the Oratory of
Philippi, and (Acts 16.14.) is called a Worshipper of God. Such were those
devout men out of every Nation under Heaven, (Acts 2.5.) who during the feast
of Pentecost were dwelling (or abiding for the present) at Jerusalem. And those
of Antioch in Pisidia, who hearing Paul preach in the Synagogue there, (Acts
13.42.) besought that those words might be Preached to them the next Sabbath
day. And that great multitude of Thessalonica, who belonged unto the Synagogue
of the Jews there, and (Acts 17.4.) are called devout Greeks.

2. Others of the Gentiles were Idolaters who worshipped Images, and served the
false Gods of the Nation where they lived, and casting off all fear of the
true God, followed the sway of their fleshly lusts. These to distinguish them
from the former Gentiles who were Worshippers, are here called Sinners of the
Gentiles; and in some places by way of eminency, simply Sinners; for so our
Savior calls them (Mat. 26.45.) The Son of man is betrayed into the hands
of Sinners. i. e. into the hands of the Idolatrous Gentiles. True it is that
all the Gentiles of what sort soever, are called (...). i. e. the Lawless, or
those without the Law; as 1 Cor. 9.21.; To them that are without the Law, as
without the Law, that I might gain them that are without the Law. i. e. the
Gentiles, who both transgressed and opposed the Law. Yet the Gentiles were not
equally lawless, or without the Law; for the Idolaters who transgressed and
opposed the whole Law, both the Commandments in the two tables of the Law, and
the Ceremonies in the Book of the Law, were more lawless and more without the
Law, then the Worshippers who transgressed and opposed only one part of the
Law; namely, the Ceremonies, but observed the ten Commandments in the two
tables of the Law. And all the Gentiles are called (...). i. e. Sinners; as in
several passages of the Evangelists where they are joined with Publicans. See
one for all, Luke 15.1. Then drew near unto him all the Publicans and Sinners
for to hear him. i. e. Publicans and Gentiles. Yet all the Gentiles were not
equally Sinners; for the Idolaters who crucified Christ, and transgressed the
Commandments, and opposed the Ceremonies, were more Sinners then the
Worshippers who heard Christ, and observed the Commandments, and opposed only
the Ceremonies, whereto they would never submit, neither before nor after
Christ. Such Idolatrous Gentiles were generally all other Nations far and
near living round about the Jews, and some living among them, as the
Samaritans, and many towns in Galilee, which Mat. 4.15. was therefore called
Galilee of the Gentiles. All these idolatrous Gentiles were so abominable and
odious unto the Jews, that Paul in contempt and disdain does here tacitly
call the false teachers of Galatia, Sinners of the Gentiles, i. e. Idolaters.
Because although they were now by faith Christians, and by sect Iudaizers, yet
by birth they were Idolaters; for unto Christians they were not converted from
being Jews, but from being Gentiles, and from that sinful sort of Gentiles,
who were not worshippers but Idolaters. For in saying, We who are Jews by
nature and not sinners of the Gentiles, he sufficiently insinuates, that those
Iudaizers were once such sinners, and therefore were once men of the basest and
lewdest life in the world, as persons most distant and remote from the Jews by
nature, who by the prerogative of their birth accounted themselves in the
highest degree of all those who worshipped God, to be a holy Nation, and the
Saints of the Lord.

The sense of the whole verse is q. d. We who are Jews in the best and
fullest manner, both in respect of our Nation as we are the seed of Abraham;
Jews in respect of our Rights which God has settled upon us, and Jews in
respect of our Laws which God has prescribed us for Religion and Justice; we
who have these advantages by the best title, even by Nature and Birthright, as
we are borne to those Rights and under those Laws; we who were never sinful
Gentiles, borne and bred up in Idolatry, as were the Judaizing false Teachers,
and therefore have better means then they, to know by what means a man is
justified. Even we have been forced to forsake all these advantages, even the
works of our Law, and the ways of our Religion, to fly unto the faith of
Christ for our justification, that by faith in him we may attain to that
Blessedness, which was promised to our Father Abraham. No reason is there then
that the Gentiles, who heretofore were always aliens and strangers to God and
our Laws, but now by Gods grace manifested in the Gospel are admitted unto
Christ, and endenized into the Kingdom of Heaven, being made fellow-citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God, should thereupon be constrained
to the works of our Law, and to the ways of our Religion, considering that
those works and ways were unto justification so unavailable and so
unprofitable, that we our selves have utterly forsaken them; for how can those
things advantage them which unto us were no benefit?

But in the word Sinners there is yet couched a further emphasis, whereby the
Apostle would prepare and lay a ground for his future Doctrine in the next
verse concerning Justification; whereof a Sinner is the proper subject, and the
only person capable of that blessing. That therefore we may be the better
provided to understand what Justification is, and what is the Justification of
a Sinner, we must observe that in the Scriptures the word Sinner, and his
Synonyma's or equivalents bear three several senses, viz. a legal, a moral,
and a jurall sense, according to the three general and notable words, Lex, Mos
and Jus. 1. The word sinner signifies legally, quoad leges, for one who is a
transgressour, in not doing that right which he should and ought to do, by
the Rules of the Laws, Statutes, and Justice. For he that does not right
according to the Rules of Law and Justice, he is unrighteous, and a person
unrighteous is a sinner. And the fact which does constitute or make a man thus
a legal sinner to be a transgressor, is some unlawful act of his done by him
against the Law. Such sinners were our first Parents, who by transgressing
against the Law of Paradise, were of mankind the first sinners by whom sin
entered into the world. Such a Sinner was David, who in the case of Uriah
transgressed the Laws against murder and adultety. Such a Sinner was Jeroboam
who made Israel to sin; and such was all Israel who did sin by
transgressing the Law against worshipping of Images. Such a Sinner was the
woman, Luke 7.37. Who washed the feet of Christ with her tears, and wiped
them with the hair of her head, and kissed them and anointed them with
ointment; For she was an Adulteress. Such a Sinner was the other woman, John
8.3. Who was taken in adultery in the very act, and was thereupon brought unto
Christ to be censured. And such were the Sinners of the Gentiles mentioned
before.

2. It signifies Morally, quoad mores, for one who is Improbous, in not doing
that right which he might, should, and ought to do by the Rules of Morality,
Equity, Decency, Charity, and Mercy. For he that does not right according to
the Rules of Equity, Decency, and Mercy, he is unrighteous, and the person
unrighteous is a Sinner. And the fact which does constitute or make a man to
become a sinner morally or improbous, is not an act of his, that is unlawful
in respect of any Law; for the act may be lawful, and yet sinful enough to
denominate him a sinner: But it is an act that is not honest and fair in
respect of Equity and Decency. Such a Sinner was Cham, Genesis 9.22. Who seeing
his Fathers nakedness, told his two brethren without: This act of his was a
sin, for it was punished with a heavy curse of perpetual slavery: Yet this
was not a sin legally against any Law or Statute then being in force, which
forbad that act; but it was a sin morally, against the Rule of good Manners,
Equity, and Charity, for a son to be so improbous, unnatural, and unkind,
as to blab of his fathers fault, which he should have concealed. Such Sinners
were they, 1. Sam. 10.27. Who despised Saul, and brought him no Presents. This
act of theirs was a sin; for at the beginning of the verse., the offenders
are called the children of Belial: Yet this was no sin legally, nor an act
unlawful against any Law of Moses; but a moral sin of improbity, against
the Rule of Morality, Equity, and Decency, for Subjects to despise their King,
and upon his Election to bring him no Presents. Such a Sinner was Nabal, 1.
Sam. 25.10. Who said, who is David, and who is the son of Jesse? There be
many servants now a days that break away every man from his Master; Shall I
then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my
Shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? This saying
was a sin; for (verse. 14.) one of Nabals own servants censureth it for
railing; and afterward (verse. 17.) he censureth his Master in these words; He
is such a man of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him. Yet this sin of
Nabal, was no legal sin against any Law of Moses: But a moral sin of
improbity, against equity and good manners; that a man of a great estate should
be so unmanerly, unthankefull, and unkind, as to deny a little provision to
David and his followers, who unto him had been so good, as to be a defense to
him and his goods.

Come we down somewhat lower to an example or two of this improbity from the
New Testament. Such an improbous Sinner was the wicked servant (Mat. 18.28.)
who when his Lord had forgiven him a debt of ten thousand talents, would
neither forgive nor forbear his fellow servants, who owed him only an hundred
pence: but arrested and imprisoned him for it. This act was a sin; for his
Lord thereupon was so wrath, that revoking his former pardon of the debt, he
delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
Yet this was no legal sin against any Law: because the act in it self was
very lawful; for the Law allows every Creditor to demand and sue for his
debt: but it was a moral sin against morality, equity, and Charity, for him
to whom his Lord had forgiven a debt of ten thousand talents, to exact from his
fellow servants a matter of an hundred pence. Such a Sinner was Dives, (Luke
16.19.) who was clothed in purple, and fared sumptuously every day; letting
Lazarus lie at his gate full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crummes
that fell from the table. This prodigality upon himself, and parcimony toward
the poor, was a sin not legal, but moral, against the rules of equity,
Charity, and mercy. Such Sinners were the Priest and the Levite, (Luke 10.31.)
who seeing a man lie in the way, stripped, wounded, and half dead, passed by
on the other side. This passage of theirs was no legal sin against any Law,
but a moral sin against the rules of equity, humanity, courtesy, charity,
and mercy. Lastly, such sinners will the damned be found at the last day, when
the final Indictment shall run against them in this form, (Mat. 25.42.) I
was an hungered and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink;
I was a stranger and ye took me not in; naked and ye clothed me not, sick and
in prison and ye visited me not. Certainly these negligences are sins; for
the parties are cursed and punished with this final Judgment to eternal
damnation: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his angels. Yet they are not sins legally against the Law of Moses:
but morally against the rules of equity, charity, and mercy.

3. The word Sinner, signifies jurally: quoad jura, for one who is Calamitous;
who either has no Right at all, or not that right which he should have, or not
that which he might have had: but is either deprived or debarred from some
right privilege or capacity, which by Law or favor is allowed unto others: and
is predestined, prejudicated, decreed, and doomed to be, and abide in the
state and condition of an offendour, and thereby to suffer that misery of
loss, pain, and shame, which is commonly inflicted as a punishment upon
offenders. Yet unto the Calamitous the misery which he suffers is not a
punishment, but only an affliction: because no man is to be punished for
having no right, or for quitting his right, much less for losing it, if the
loss be none of his fault, but against his will. Now according to the common
rule and practice of denominations, he that has no right, or not his due
right, but misseth and fails of his right, may be called unrighteous; and
must be so called, till we can find or make some other appellative, that
will fit him better; and a person in this sense unrighteous is accordingly in
Scripture called a Sinner. And the fact which does constitute or make a man
thus a Jurall Sinner to be calamitous, woeful, and wretched, is no act of his
own; but either the act of some Adversary, who unjustly and without cause
charge upon that sin whereof he is not guilty; or the act of some Law or
of some Curse which burdeneth him for that sin, whereof some other person is
guilty; whereby the calamitous who is innocent and guiltless; is forced to
suffer affliction or misery, as if in himself he were a Delinquent and guilty.

Yet the Calamitous (as he stands distinguished from the transgressor and the
improbous) should in strictness of speech be called rather a quasi-sinner,
then a Sinner; because he is not a Sinner properly but quasily, i. e. he has
manifest differences to clear him from the proper nature of a Sinner, and yet
has resemblances enough to draw upon him the name of a Sinner. For properly
and usually the word sin does signify tha^ evil act which is an offense
either against Law or Equity; and so the Transgressor and the improbous are
both offenders, and both properly sinners. But many times that word is taken
improperly and figuratively by a Metonymy frequent in Scripture and in ordinary
discourse; and so it signifies, not the evil act of sin, but that evil
effect or consequent which follows the act of sin, and is commonly made the
punishment of sin, as shame; pain, loss, or any other Affliction, Calamity,
Misery, or Trouble, especially Death, which is man's final suffering, and his
last enemy. As Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if
thou do not well, i. e. If thou do any act of sin; sin lies at the
door, i. e. the effect of sin which is punishment and misery is ready to
attach thee. And Genesis 19.15. Arise, take thy Wife and thy two Daughters, which
are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the City, i. e. in the
destruction or punishment of the City. And Genesis 31.39. That which was torn of
Beasts, I brought it not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; where the Hebrew
word is Achtenah, i. e. I sinned for it, q. d. I suffered for it, as if the
sin or fault had been mine. And Levit. 22.9. They shall therefore keep mine
Ordinances, lest they bear sin for it, i. e. lest they suffer death for it;
as appears by the words following, which are but the sense of these, and dye
therefore. And Levit. 24.15. Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his sin,
i. e. He shall surely be put to death; For so the words are explicated in the
next verse. And Romans 5.12. And so Death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned, i. e. For that in Adam all dyed, as afterward among the examples of the
Calamitous shall be more amply declared. And Romans 5.19. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, i. e. Were made mortal and necessitated
to dye; for the Greek is, (...), i. e. Constituted, ordained, or appointed
sinners or mortal; for in other places of our last Translation so many ways
that Verb is Englished, and heereto other vulgar Translations agree; for the
Italian has it constituted sinners, and the French rendered sinners. But then
by Sinners we must understand mortal, or made to dye: because men are not
constituted, ordained, or appointed to sin, as sin is properly taken; but
that men are constituted, ordained, or appointed to dye, appears by many
Testimonies of Scripture.

And generally where we read the phrase of bearing sin and iniquity; there
sin must not be taken for the act of sin, but for the effect of it, which
is punishment or affliction; because properly, not the act of sin, but the
punishment of it, is the thing that is to be borne. And universally
wheresoever sin is joined with forgiveness, or with any other word to that
sense, there sin is put for punishment; because the thing to be pardoned or
forgiven, is not properly the act of sin, but the punishment or affliction
which is the effect or consequent of sin. Again the Calamitous is not a
Sinner actively, by committing any act of sin against Law or Equity, as were
the two former Offenders who were properly sinners: But he is a Sinner
passively, by suffering that shame, pain, or loss, which is commonly
inflicted as a punishment on such as are sinners properly. Lastly, he is not a
sinner really in whom sin is inherent, for then it must needs follow, that
he is properly and actively a Sinner: But he is a Sinner putatively; because
he is accounted or reputed a sinner, and having done no act of a sinner is put
into the state and condition of a sinner, to be handled after the image and
likeness of a transgressour, by suffering Afflictions like to those
Afflictions which are denounced and executed as Judgments and Punishments upon
transgressors; as the Beasts which the Law declared unclean were not in
themselves unclean really and inherently, but imaginarily and putatively. Thus
the Jurall sinner is but a quasi-sinner, because he is so improperly, i. e.
effectually, passively, and putatively. And of these Jurall sinners, or
Calamitous persons, there are four sorts.

1. The Opressed, who unjustly against Law and Justice, yet under color of Law
and Justice are calumniated, criminated, condemned and executed as sinners and
transgressors. Thus after David's death, in case Adonijah had prevailed,
Bathsheba and Solomon should have been sinners, 1. King. 1.21. Otherwise it
shall come to pass, when my Lord the King shall sleep with his Fathers, that
I and my son Solomon shall be counted Offenders. Where the Hebrew has it,
shall be sinners; as the Margin advertiseth: But Naboth de facto was made a
sinner, for he really was not a blasphemer: Yet by the Letters of Jezabel he
was predestined, ordained, and appointed to be a blasphemer, 1. King. 21.9.
And she wrote in the Letters, saying, Proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth on high
among the People, and set two men sons of Belial before him, to bear
witness against him, saying, Thou did blaspheame God and the King; and then
carry him out and stone him that he may dye. And in dangerous times, when the
wicked watch for iniquity, a word may make a man a sinner, Esaias. 29.21. All
that watch for iniquity are cut off, that make a man an offender for a word,
and lay a snare for him that reproves. And (with all Religious reverence be
it written) such a sinner was Jesus Christ; who although he were true God and
true man, the truest and justest man that ever lived, one who never did any
sin, nor spoke any guile; Yet he was made a sinner, and suffered as a
transgressour, Esaias. 53.12. He poured out his soul unto death, and was
numbered with the transgressors, i. e. He who really was no transgressour, was
made a quasi-transgressour, and suffered among transgressors. And Romans 8.3.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, i. e. His son who
really was not sinful, was made quasi-sinfull, and suffered after the
likeness and manner of one really sinful. And 2. Cor. 5.21. For he has made
him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, i. e. He who really was no sinner,
him God made a quasi-sinner, to suffer for us on the Cross as a real sinner;
for sin in the abstract is here put for sinner in the concret. And Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us, i. e. He who really was not cursed, was made quasi-cursed, in hanging on
the Cross, as one really cursed.

2. The blemished; who justly according to the law of Nations, are disabled and
debarred from the common rights and privileges of man, to abide in that state
and condition, which is usually made a punishment for offenders. In this rank
is a Bastard; who being no real transgressour against the Law, is by an act of
the Law made a quasi-transgressour; whereby he is debarred from the right of
his birth, forfeyting that inheritance or portion, which by common course
belongs to children, as their birthright. For the poor Bastard is
predestined, prejudicated, decreed, and doomed for a sinner before he is
borne, before he has done any good or evil, before he has stirred in his
mothers womb, and before his mother has conceived him. And whenever he is
to be conceived, he shall be conceived a sinner: because his conception being
unlawful and sinful, does ipso facto, render his parents actual
transgressors, or sinners legally, and himself a quasi transgressour or
sinner jurally, to lose his birthright when he is borne. And by the Law of
God, the Bastard lost not only his right of Birth, but his right of Assembly to
him and his heirs for ever; for he and they successively stood as persons
excommunicate and debarred from entrance into the Congregation of the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 23.2. A Bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord; even
to his tenth generation shall he not enter: i. e. he and his posterity shall
never enter; for the tenth generation passes for a perpetuity, as the next
verse interprets it.

Such a Sinner is an Alien, forreiner, or stranger, inhabiting a Country
wherein he is disabled and debarred from the rights and privileges of
inheritances, assemblies, societies, and other common benefits of the Laws
municipall, which the natives of the Land enjoy; and consequently he lives in a
state and condition, which is usually inflicted on sinners as a punishment for
sin. So the Romans, Greeks, and other Nations, sojourning in Judea, were by the
Jews accounted and called sinners: because they were aliens and strangers, who
had no right to the lands and inheritances of that Country, not to the
assemblies, congregations, and ceremonies of Moses, which by the Law were
appropriated and entayled to the Nation of the Jews, and to such Proselites as
were endenized or made free of their Nation. For in this jurall sense, the word
Sinner is frequently taken in the Evangelists, especially where it stands
subjoyned with Publicans. See Mat. 9.10. and Mat. 11.19. and Marc. 2.15, 16.
and Luke 5.30. and Luke 15.1. And lastly, such a Sinner is a Villain. i. e. a
bond-slave borne; who is no actual transgressour against any Law; yet by the
Law of Nations is made a quasi-transgressour; being wholly depersonated and
degraded from the common condition of an humane person, and depressed into the
state, as it were, of a beast, to live as an odious and detestable creature,
subject to all manner of injuries, and excluded from all kind of benefit, having
no humane right at all. No right of inheritance to enjoy any estate; no right
of authority to bear any office; no right of suffrage to make any election; no
right of assembly to consult of business; no right of testimony to bear
witness; nor right of Testament to make a Will. And by the Law of God, the
Gibeonites were cursed into an hereditary bondage to be slaves and drudges for
ever about the Temple of the Lord, Jos. 9.23. Now therefore ye are cursed, and
there shall none of you be freed, from being bondmen and hewers of wood, and
dramers of water for the house of my God.

3. The Distressed; who justly according to the secret will of God are
afflicted with some permanent misery. Of these our Savior gives us two or
three several short lists; one Mat. 11.5. as the Blind, the Lame, the Leapers,
the Dease, and the Dead. Another Luke 4.18. as the Poor, the brokenhearted,
the captive, the blind, and the bruised. A third, Mat. 25.35. as the Hungry,
the thirsty, the stranger, the naked, the sick, and the prisoner. All which and
the like, are by the Lawyers termed Personae miserabiles, i. e. miserable
persons: because being in misery, they are the proper objects of mercy and
pity: and because they are the proper subjects of for a Testament ad pias
causas, i. e. a Will made for charitable and godly uses, for the relief of
miserable and pitious creatures, to whom mercy and pity does properly belong.
Yet in the eye and judgment of the world, these kind of persons are generally
censured for trangressours; and are indeed quasi-transgressours: because they
are afflicted with such miseries, as are many times made the Judgment of God
upon transgressors. In this rank Job was a sinner; for he was miserably
afflicted in his goods, in his children, and in his body, as if he had been a
foul transgressour: yet really he was not a transgressour; for Job. 1.8. the
Lord gave him this testimony, that There was (...) like him in the earth, a
perfect and an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil. It was
therefore the error of Jobs friends, to argue his transgression from his
affliction because although transgression be a cause of affliction, yet is
neither the perpetual, nor total, nor sole cause thereof: but there are other
good causes besides transgression, why God lays affliction upon this or that
person, though from men those causes be concealed. For they flow from the
secret will of God, and sometimes from his good will. Thus was Lazarus a
sinner; for he was sorely distressed and afflicted, being a beggar laid at the
rich man's gate full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crammes that fell
from the rich man's table; moreover the dogs came and licked his sores, Luke
16.20. Yet it seems he was not a transgressour; for when he dyed, he was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And thus was the blind man a
sinner, John 9.1. for he was afflicted and distressed, being blind from his
birth; and withal so poor that he sat and begged. Yet neither he nor his
Parents were transgressors; for in that point Christ expressly cleeres them all:
but he was made a quasi-transgressor or a quasi-sinner, that the works of God
should be made manifest in him.

4. The Tainted, who justly according to the declared Will of God, are made
Heirs to their Fathers misery: Who derive from their Father, not only that
nature wherein he was created, but also that distress and misery wherewith
he was afflicted; who are necessitated, or at least not exempted from that
state and condition of misery, which by reason of some sin their Father
incurred: But either by the curse of God, or by the course of nature, those
forfeits, damages and losses, which fell upon the Father are made hereditary to
descend upon the Children. This kind of Calamity by Attainder, is by the Sages
of the Common Law called Corruption of blood; when a man's Crime is so corrupt
and foul, that the Attainder or Judgment against it does corrupt and spoil
not only the offenders person, but his blood, i. e. his children and kindred;
for upon them that Attainder has three notable effects. 1. It debars them from
being Heirs to his estate; for he forfeits all his Lands and Goods; and that
forfeit is entailed on his Children. 2. It depriveth them from partaking of any
dignity which he had; as if he before he were noble, he and all his
children are thereby made ignoble and base. 3. It staineth them so deeply,
that regularly it cannot be salved or removed by the ordinary course of grace
or mercy, but requires some extraordinary remedy, as here in England by
authority of Parliament. For this Corruption of blood must be understood in a
sense only Jurall or Judicial; and not in a physical, natural or carnal
sense; because the humor of blood which runs in the veins of an offender,
and of his children is physically and naturally as incorrupt, and as sound
after the Attainder as before; for upon the humors and spirits the Attainder of
it self works no alteration, unless accidentally in this or that person at
the hearing of the Sentence, or apprehension of Death.

In this rank, the children of Ninevy should have been sinners, whereof six
score thousand that could not discern between their right hand and their
left, should have been destroyed in the destruction of the City, had not their
Parents repented at the preaching of Jonah. But the Children of Achan were de
facto made such sinners, Jos. 7.24. For by reason of Achans Sacrilege, His
Sons, and his Daughters, and his Oxen, and his Asses, and his Sheep, and his
Tent, and all that he had, were stoned with stones, and afterward burnt with
fire. So here the Children of the Gibeonites, Jos. 9.27. Who for the deceit of
their Parents, were made hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
Congregation, and for the Alter of the Lord, even unto this day. So were the
seven sons of Saul, 2. Sam. 21.9. Who for their Fathers cruelty against the
Gibeonites, where at the suite of the Gibeonites, hanged in the hill before the
Lord. And so were also the sons of Gehazi, if he had any, 2. King. 5.27. Who
for their Fathers impudency in bribing and lying were made the Heirs of his
Leprosy; for the leprosy of Naaman shall cleave unto Gehazi, and unto his
seed for ever.

And in this rank are all the sons of Adam; who for his disobedience are
made the Heirs of his mortality; for by his sin death entered upon him, and
by him upon all his children; for they in him were all tainted, Romans 5.12. By
one man sin entered into the World, and Death by sin; and so Death passed
upon all men, for that (or in whom) all have sinned, i. e. for that in him all
dyed; for of the word sinned in this place, that in effect is the sense. Or to
speak a little nearer to the letter of the word, it will be thus; for that in
him all quasi-sinned; not actively, by transgressing in his transgression; but
passively by being prejudicated in his Judgment, (...), for in his one doom
all were condemned, and all cast into the state of transgressors, to suffer
misery and death like unto that, which was inflicted on him as a judgment for
his transgression. For, for the tense, none of the Verbes in that verse are of
the Preterperfectense, but all are aorists or indefinite; and accordingly the
two first are rendered indefinitely, Sin entered, and Death passed, not Sin
has entered, and Death has; and therefore the Translation had been more
suitable, if the last Verb also had not been rendered preterperfectly, all have
sinned, but indifinitely thus, all sinned. And for the sense, these words, In
whom all sinned, signify in effect the same thing with these, ver. 15. Through
the offense of one many be dead, or many dyed; and with these words, verse. 16.
The judgment was by one to condemnation, and with these, verse. 17. By one man's
offense death reigned by one; and with these, verse. 18. By the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation; and with these, verse. 19. By one
man's disobedience many were made sinners; and with these, 1. Cor. 15.22. In
Adam all dye. All which sayings amount to no more but this, That by the sin
of Adam, he and all his children were made mortal; as by the sin of the
Gibeonites, they and all their Children were made bondslaves; and by the sin
of Gehazi, he and all his Children were made lepers.

For the Judgment given upon Adam for his offense, was Banishment from
Paradise, a Curse upon the ground for his sake, a Miserable and painful Life,
and at last an everlasting Death. And this judgment was not personal only,
to determine the effect of it upon Adam only, and pass no further then his
person; but it was also real and hereditary to him and his Heirs for ever:
First, falling upon him, and then descending to them. For as by his offense his
Innocence was corrupted: So by this Judgment upon him his Posterity was
corrupted; or as a common Lawyer would express it, By his Attainder, his blood
was corrupted, i. e. First, none of his Children shall be Heirs to that
immortality and blessedness which he once enjoyed in Paradise; for that was
forfeited and extinguished. Secondly, all his Children shall be blemished,
distressed, and tainted to inherit that Banishment, Malediction, Misery, and
Mortality which he incurred. Thirdly, this Corruption shall not be remedied
or salved, by any ordinary mercy of God; but by the extraordinary Mystery of
Jesus Christ. Thus the Calamitous, who are jurall or quasi-sinners, are of
four sorts, viz. the oppressed, the blemished, the distressed, and the tainted.

If we compare together the three first sort of sinners, viz. the
Transgressor, the Improbous, and the Calamitous, we may observe. 1. That the
difference between them is not essential and necessary, but accidental and
contingent; for they are not so opposite and contrary, as that when the word is
taken in some one sense, all the rest should be excluded. But they are only
diverse. i. e. so different that one sense may be without the other, and yet so
complyant and consistent, that they may all concur and meet in the same word.
For the word Sinner does carry sometime only one of those senses, sometime
two, and sometime all three; and when the senses are plural, sometime they are
equal, sometime one above the rest is more eminent; so that one and the same
person may be at the same time a transgressor, improbous, and calamitous. 2.
That the Gentiles generally were sinners all these three ways; for they were
sinners legally and morally, being transgressors and improbous, Romans 1.29.
Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity,
whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, despitefull, proud, boasters, inventers
of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding,
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmercifull. And
they were sinners jurally; for they were calamitous, blemished with the state
of ignorance, and of enmity to God, Ephesians. 2.12. Being aliens from the common
Wealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope,
and without God in the world. 3. That in the sight of God the Jews generally
were as great sinners as the Gentiles, both legally and morally, in respect of
transgressions and improbities. For of the Jews the Apostle testifies, Romans
3.9. that they were in no wise better then the Gentiles; for he had proved both
Jews and Gentiles, that they were all under sin. Yet jurally, the Jews were
not such sinners, nor so calamitous as the Gentiles: because they were not such
aliens and strangers from God, as were the Gentiles: but had many jurall
rights, privileges and prerogatives as the true Israel and peculiar people of
God; as was showed before in the former clause of this verse. Yet the Right
which the Jew had in God, was but a puerile and servile right, to be the
children of God in the condition of servants, in a state of nonage and wardship
under the Law. From which state Christ came to emancipate and deliver them,
that he might advance and invest them into a filial right of being the sons
of God in a perfect plenage and fullness of years, as shall be more fully
explicated in this Epistle, cap. 4. ver. 2.3. Thus men are sinners three
several ways; for most men generally are transgressors and improbous; and all
men universally are calamitous, for in Adams attainder all were tainted.
Wherefore this last way Man as he is Man is a sinner, and this Sinner is the
Man, who in the next verse shall be justified by the faith of Jesus Christ;
for so it there follows.

VERSE. 16.
Text.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. Sense.
A man is justified.] i. e. Made jurally righteous, to have a present right and
claim to the Legacies and future blessings promised and devised in Gods last
Will and Testament.

Not by the works of the Law.] His title to that right and claim is not by any
works done in observance of the Law; nor by any effect or work of the Law in
consideration of his works.

But by the faith of Jesus Christ.] i. e. His title to that right and claim is
by his Acceptance of those Legacies and promises: and by his acceptance of
Jesus Christ for the son and heir of God, and for the Executor of Gods last
Will and Testament.

For by the works.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. because by the works.

No flesh.] i. e. No mortal man.

Be justified.] i. e. Be declared upright, in respect of the Law.

Reason.
Here the Apostle enters upon the principal doctrine of this Epistle; and to
the end that he might the more distinctly and clearly assert the verity
thereof, from those errors wherewith the Judaizing false teachers among the
Galatians had corrupted it, he delivers it bibartitely in two assertions. 1. A
Negative, that A man is not justified by the works of the Law. 2. An
Affirmative, that A man is justified by the faith of Jesus Christ. And
therefore for the fuller understanding of this excellent Doctrine, which
declares the introduction and initiation of a man into Christ, and discovers
withal wonderful comforts to the soul of a Christian, I shall somewhat
enlarge my self, and distinctly explicate, what is meant by Justifying, what
by The works of the Law, and what by Faith in Jesus Christ. Wherein, though in
my expressions I shall somewhat vary from the current of Expositors, yet far
shall I be from that unprofitable and beggarly work of Confutation, which
spends it self in a destructive way, by cavelling at opinions, or disgracing
the writings of worthy men. But I shall travail only in the way of
edification, to raise, confirm, and illustrate those instructions, whereto the
holy Scripture shall be the foundation.

Comment.
Justified is a derivative from the word Just or Righteous, which signifies
three ways. 1. Legally, for the upright, whereof examples. 2. Morally; for the
kind man, whereof examples, and accordingly the word righteousness signifies
kindness in the Old Testament, and in the New. The Hebrew Zedakah, The Greek,
(...), and (...). The legally and morally Righteous compared in 4 points. 1. In
their Conjunctio^, in their subordination, in their Dignity, 4. in their
opposite. 3 Jurally, for an Owner, or an Heir, or a Promissary. Such was
Abraham, who is therefore called the Righteous man. Such were the Israelites and
are so called; and so were the Proselytes. The Owner compared with the Kind
man. Righteous signifies like Gracious. A Recollection. Justified, signifies
made Just or righteous, in 3 significations. and in two consignifications. 1.
Declaratively, by pronouncing a man upright, and by pronouncing a man kind; 2.
Efficiently, either Procreantly, or Conservantly. Neither excluding necessarily
the declarative sense. Paul and James easily reconciled. Jurall justifying
illustrated from words of four sorts. 1. Of Circumstance, 2. Of Contrariety,
3. Of Affinity, 4. Of Attribute. and Co-heires, Citizens, and Freemen.
Justifying put for Freeing. Justifying is a Court-word, and a Chancery word,
and a word Testamentary, for the sense of it. Man is a sinner jurally. legally
and morally. God is righteous jurally and Morally his kindnesses to Man, and
their conveyance by Testament, which is a will ad pias causas. in most ample
manner. The Nature of Justifying exemplified in Abraham, in Rahab, in the Jews,
and Gentiles. The Names of it, as, adopting, infranchising, reconciling,
ingrafting, ingratiating, infeoffing, seating, allying, inabling, translating,
forgiving, redeeming. The matter of it is a Right of state, two spiritual
states, one of bondage. another of freedom, which is the state of grace. The
state whereto we are justified, or rather exalted. The state from which we are
justified. Justification makes in us a change only jurall. The Privileges
incident to that state, exemplified in the Patriarks. The degree of our right
to the Privileges, exemplified in the Israelites, in David, in a Legatary. The
Manner of Justifying is factive, exemplified in Moses, Uriah, and Araunah, And
that fact is testamentary. A recollection.

KNowing that a man is justified.] First therefore for the meaning of
Justified; whereof I intend not in the first place so much the definition,
(though that shall follow) as the signification, for the right and true English
of it, according to the Language wherein I write; because the word Justified is
a Latinisme. The Greek word in the original is (...), which properly signifies
made righteous: for the Apostle, Romans 5.19. expresses that word by these two,
(...), i. e. constituted, or made righteous, as our English Translation renders
them, whereto other Vulgar translations unanimously; for the Italian has it,
constituted just, and the French, rendered just. Seeing then the verb (...), is
a derivative from the nown (...); regularly therefore the verb ought to
partake of those senses which are to be found in the primitive (...), whereof
the English is Just or righteous. Which word carries in Scripture several
senses; and these (as it is the attribute of a person) are principally three;
viz. a legal, a moral, and a jural sense. For as the word Sinner, in the verse
before had several senses, so the word Just or righteous, being contrary to
Sinner, must needs therefore have several senses also, and they severally
contrary to those of Sinner: yet where the word is taken chiefly in one of
these senses, the rest are not always excluded, but some one sense is
principal, and the other accessory.

1. The word Just or righteous, is taken legally quoad leges; for one who is
upright according to the Laws, by doing right to all, and giving every man his
due by the Laws in being; sometime rendering that evil which by Law is due to
a man, but always that good which is due unto him. And all men ought to be
legally righteous, especially Judges and Rulers, whose uprightnes in other men's
causes must be exactly legal; for the Law is the Rule whereby they must give
Sentence and execute Judgment, declining neither to the right hand, nor to the
left, whether it concern the good or the evil of the party whose cause is
handled; for that which no way declines to neither hand, is properly said to be
upright. To render evil for evil, private men are not bound, but now under
the Gospel are wholly bound from it: yet not so neither, but that Masters of
Families may reprove and correct their children and servants, as the Law of
reason shall require: because Masters of Families in respect of their Families
are petty-Judges and petty-Rulers to judge and Rule uprightly by the law of
reason.

Thus the word Righteous is taken, Exodus 23.7. the innocent, (Vezaddik) and
righteous slay thou not. and righteous. i. e. upright, or legally righteous.
And 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men must be (Zaddik, (...).) just. i. e.
legally righteous, or upright. And Esaias 26.7. The way (Lazaddik) of the Just is
uprightness. i. e. of the upright is uprightness. And it is said of John the
Baptist, Marc. 6.20. that Herod feared him, knowing that he was ((...).) a just
man. i. e. an upright man; and of Zacharias and Elizabeth it is said, Luke 1.6.
They were both ((...),) righteous before God. (i.e. upright.) walking in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless; and Romans 2.13. Not the
hearers of the Law are ((...).) just before God. i. e. upright before God. And
as in the concrete, the righteous is put for the upright: so in the abstract,
the word righteousness is put for uprightness. Thus says Jacob, Genesis 30.33.
So shall (Zidkathi) my righteousness answer for me. i. e. my uprightness.
And so Deuteronomy. 9.5. Not for thy righteousness. i. e. not for thy uprightness.
And Psalm. 45.7. thou love (Zedek) righteousness. i. e. uprightness. And
Prove. 16.8. Better is a little (Bezedakah) with righteousness. i. e. with
uprightness. And Esaias. 5.7. and he looked (Lizdakah) for righteousness, and
behold a cry. i. e. he looked for uprightness. And Acts 17.31. He has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the World ((...),) in
righteousness. i. e. in uprightness. And 1 John 3.7. He that does ((...).)
righteousness is righteous. i. e. he that deals in uprightnes is upright. And
in this sense the word righteous is opposed to the legal sinner, who because
he walks not according to the Law, but transgresses it, is therefore unjust,
and unrighteous.

2. The word Righteous signifies morally, quoad mores; for one who is kind and
courteous, liberal, and bounteous, by doing acts of benefit and mercy; who is
not only ruled by the Law to give every man his due by Law, but in many cases
is overruled by his love, to give men more then their due, more good and less
evil, then by the Law is due unto them; whose manner is to confer and convey
rights unto men, by bestowing benefits and doing kindnesses, by giving favors
and forgiving trespasses. For he who out of his love, bestows some benefit,
favor, or kindness upon me, does thereby create in me a right, interest, or
claim unto the thing bestowed; and consequently is thence rightly denominated
a righteous man; for if he be a righteous man, who is upright and deals with
me according to that right or claim which by Law I had before: much more is he
righteous and properly so called, who by conferring some benefit or gift upon
me, does create some right or claim which before by Law I had not; and he that
forgives my trespass, does against the right of the Law give me a right of
Release from that penalty, which he by the Law might have exacted from me. Now
as all men ought to be legally righteous. i. e. upright according to the Law:
so ought all men to be morally righteous, i. e. kind and courteous according to
good manners; for no man upon earth is so indigent or poor, as not to be able
some way or other to do a kindness, as at least to forgive a trespass: Yet
eminently this virtue is required from persons of ability, and principally from
Princes, whose Power and Offices lead them to give and forgive in many cases,
partly beyond the Law, and partly against it.

So the word righteous is taken, Psalm. 37.2. The wicked borrows and pays
not again, (Vezaddik, (...)) But the righteous shows mercy, and gives, i.
e. the kind and liberal man forgiveeth and gives; and Proverb. 21.26. The
slothful coveteth greedily all the day long, (Vezaddik, (...)) but the
righteous gives and spares, i. e. the kind and liberal man; and Mat. 1.19.
Joseph the Spouse of the blessed Virgin is styled (...), a just man; Then
Joseph her Husband being a just man, i. e. a just or righteous man morally in
being kind and courteous: because he was not only upright in accustoming to
do that which was right according to the Law, but also exceeded the rule of
the Law, in being kind and courteous; an example of which kindness he showed
to his Wife, in resolving to put her away privily, when by the Law he might
justly have questioned her openly. And Luke 23.50. Joseph of Arimathea is
styled (...), a good man and a just, i. e. kind and courteous: Because he was
not only upright in not consenting to the sentence of the Sanedrim, when they
condemned Christ: But also further, was so kind and courteous, that he begged
a kindness to bestow a kindness; for he begged the dead body of Christ to
bestow upon it an honorable burial, by wrapping it in linen, and laying it
in his own Sepulcher. And Act. 10.22. Cornelius the Captain is called (...),
a just man, i. e. a kind and courteous man; for he was not only upright in
fearing God; but also toward men he was kind and courteous, liberal and
bounteous in giving much Alms unto the Poor, as in the same Chapter is
specified at the second verse.

Furthermore, as in the concrete, the righteous is put for the kind man: so
also in the abstract, the word righteousness is many times in Scripture put
for kindness; As 1 Samuel 12.7. Samuel speaks thus unto the people, Now
therefore stand still that I may reason with you before the Lord (eth col
zedakoth) of all the righteousnesses of the Lord, which he did to you and to
your Fathers. i. e. of all the kindnesses which he did to you and to your
Fathers; where our last English translation in the margin renders it benefits;
and Psalm. 24.4. He that has clean hands, etc. shall receive the blessing
from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation, i. e. He
shall receive kindness from God; and Psalm. 112.9. He has dispersed, he
has given to the poor, (Zidkatho) his righteousness endures for ever, i. e.
his kindness and bounty shall be always commemorated. And Esaias. 60.17. I
will also make thy Officers peace, and thy exactors (Zedakah) righteousness,
i. e. They who used exaction upon thee shall do thee kindness; for unto
exaction which takes more then is due, kindness which gives more then is due,
is extremely contrary. And Mich. 6.5. That ye may know (Zidkoth) the
righteousness of the Lord, i. e. the kindnesses of the Lord, for the word is
of the plural number. And Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God
((...)) and his righteousness, i. e. his kindness, favor, and mercy. And
Romans 1.17. For therein ((...)) the righteousness of God, i. e. the kindness
of God, is revealed from faith to faith; for so the righteousness of God must
here signify, because in the verse following it is opposed to the wrath of
God, the contrary whereof must be his kindness. And Romans 3.21. But now
((...)) the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, i. e. the
kindness of God is manifested; for Gods righteousness without the Law, must
needs be his kindness; in which sense also the word is often repeated in
the following verses, 21.25.26. For the Apostle in other of his Epistles
speaking to the same purpose, does express the very same thing by the word
(...), which our English Translations render kindness; as Ephesians. 2.7. That in
the Ages to come he might show the riches of his grace in his kindness
toward us through Jesus Chrisi; now that of God which unto the Romans he
called Revealing, manifesting and declaring of Gods righteousness, here he
terms, Showing of his kindness. And Tit. 3.4. But after that the kindness
and love of God our Savior toward man appeared; kindness appeared here, is
the very same with righteousness revealed and manifested before. And again,
2. Cor. 9.10. Now he that ministers seed to the sower, etc. increase the
fruits ((...)) of your righteousness, i. e. of your kindness in contributing
and ministering to the poor Saints of Jerusalem. Hence also that Chest of the
Temple at Jerusalem, which stood in the Treasury, whereinto the people cast
that money, which they offered for the necessities and services of the Temple,
was by the Jews called (Cuphah Schel Zedakah) the Chest of righteousness, i.
e. of kindness; because it contained that money which was contributed by the
voluntary kindness, courtesy, or bounty of the people.

Moreover that we may be no way imagined to enforce or obtrude this sense of
kindness upon the word righteousness, it is yet further observable, that the
Hebrew word Zedakah, which ordinarily signifies righteousness, is in several
passages of the Old Testament rendered by the Septuagint, (...), which properly
signifies kindness. See (or consult the Learned for) these passages, Deuteronomy.
6.25. and Deuteronomy. 24.13. and Psalm. 24.5. and Psalm. 33.5. and Psalm. 103.6. and
especially, Dan. 4.27. And the Hebrew word Chesed, which properly signifies
kindness, is always by the Septuagint rendered (...), which properly
signifies mercy: But where the Hebrew has Chesed, and the Septuagint (...),
there our last English Translation does render it two ways indifferently,
sometime mercy, sometime kindness, and loving kindness. But the Greek word
(...), though it properly signify kindness, yet wheresoever it is used in
the New Testament, (and used it is there not infrequently, yet only by Matthew
and Luke) is perpetually in our last English Translation rendered Alms; but in
the Old Testament where it is also frequently mentioned, it is never rendered
Alms; for there the word Alms is never read; and the word Alms is not the
Native English, but the Grecisme of it, to signify that act or gift, which
proceeds from kindness; for between these three words, Mercy, Kindness,
and Alms, there is so near an affinity that either may well be put for the
other; seeing Mercy is that inward affection, which exercising it self
outwardly in the acts and deeds of Alms, does produce the habit and virtue of
Kindness; from which afterward proceed the moral acts and deeds of Alms;
for those acts are properly moral, not which produce the habit, but which the
habit does produce: Because they proceed from such a person whose manner it is
to use such acts, and to use them frequently.

Hence by the way it may appear, that about these words, Mat. 6.1. Take heed
that you do not your alms before men, there needs no great dispute, what
should in the Original be the word for alms, whether (...) or (...); partly
because it is far the more probable, that the right Original was (...), for
the most ancient Manuscripts have it so, and apparent it is that so it was read
by the Syriake and Arabic Interpreters; so by the most Ancient Greek Fathers;
so by almost all the Latin; so translated by the Vulgar Latin; and so by Beza
a learned and diligent Interpreter: And partly because (...) and (...), being
joined with (...), are unto a Greek ear so concurrent in sense, that they are
but two words to signify one and the same action, either word being a gloss
to explicate the other: For unto the Oriental or Eastern Greeks living in
Asia (after whose language the New Testament is written) the word (...), was
very usual and familiar to signify that kindness whose acts are Alms: But
unto the Western Greeks living in Europe, that word in that sense was
somewhat strange, and was better expressed by (...), the sense whereof was unto
them better known. And very probable it is (as Grotius well conjectures) that
the word (...), was first adjoined in the Margin, and was afterward translated
into the Text to exclude the other. But of the word Zedakah (which St. Matthew
there follows) the Syriake Interpreter notes thus on the place; It is worth
our observation (says he) that the word Zedakah, which among the Hebrews,
Caldyes, and Syrians, signifies Righteousness, does also signify Alms.

And we may further observe, that the Greek phrase in the New Testament (...),
which properly signifies to do a kindness, which is eminently done in doing
of alms, is but an expression of the Hebrew phrase frequent in the Old
Testament, (gnasoth zedakah) which in our last English is rendered, sometime to
do justice, sometime to do righteousness, viz. in a moral sense as justice
and righteousness signify kindness. For an instance or two hereof, see (or
consult the learned for) these places, Psalm. 15.2. and Psalm. 99.4. and Psalm.
106.3. and Proverbs 21.3. and Esaias 32.17. and Esaias 56.1. and Esaias 58.2. and
Jerem. 9.24. and Jerem. 22.3. and Jer. 33.15. And the Greek phrase (...),
expresses this of the Hebrew, Gnasoth chesed, frequent in the Old Testament,
which in our last English is rendered to show mercy: See Psalm. 18.50. and Psalm.
109.16. Now to do kindness, and to show mercy, are all one Really, and differ
only verbally: because the doing of kindness is a showing of mercy; for mercy
is that inward affection, which is showed outwardly by the deeds of kindness.

Thus we have showed two senses of (...). i. e. of the just or righteous man;
first the legal, for the upright or innocent man; and then the moral for the
kind or courteous man; and consequently for the abstract, that justice, or
righteousness does signify both uprightnes and kindness. If now we compare these
two senses one with another, we may observe four things. 1. That very
frequently in Scripture, they are coupled and joined in one sentence, not
always under these names, but under words equivalent bearing these senses; the
places are too numerous for us to make instance: yea that solemn Oath, which
Princes at their Coronation do ordinarily take, to do Justice and Mercy,
contains nothing else but uprightnes and kindness in the senses premised; for
Justice and Mercy are not natively English, but Latinismes. 2. That these two
Virtues are not opposite or diverse, but subordinate and graduall, the latter
being a degree or access unto the former, and always supposing it, and
affected with it, at least in the concrete; for every kind man is also, or
should be upright, but every upright man is not necessarily kind; for kindness
is uprightnes and somewhat more: because true kindness does all the good offices
which are due by Law, and many more besides which by Law are not due. For of
Nabal we may say that he was legally righteous or upright, to give every man
his due: but that he was morally righteous or kind to bestow a courtesy, we
cannot say; for he is branded to be such a man of Belial, so unkind and
churlish that a man could not speak to him; and he reviled David instead of
relieving him, 1 Samuel 25.17. Of himself Paul says, that for legal
righteousness or uprightnes which was by the Law, he was blameles. Phil. 3.6.
but from moral righteousness or kindness he was so remote, that he was like a
mad man against the Saints, to persecute, imprison, and put them to death, as
he confesses of himself, Acts 26.10. 3. That of these two virtues the latter
is far more excellent then the former, and always preferred before it; for
uprightnes is a low and servile righteousness: but kindness is high and noble,
the supreme and sovereign righteousness in the best and highest degree; and is
therefore in the Gospel called perfection; for Christian perfection consists
not in being sinles, but in deeds of kindenes: because uprightnes and kindness
being the two maine degrees of righteousness, he that has only the first
degree in being only upright, he is imperfect; he therefore that has both
degrees in being both upright and kind, he in the phrase of the Scripture is
called perfect; for though in each degree singly he may be, and is very
imperfect, or peccant, yet for having both and joining both together he is
accounted perfect. Kindness in God is Gods perfect righteousness, whereby God
is most glorified, and wherein God himself does most glory: yea, Gods kindness
is called his glory, Romans 3.21. For all have sinned and come short of the glory
of God. i. e. stand in need of the kindness of God; for seeing the words of
this verse are a reason of those in the former; therefore the glory of God here,
must needs be referred to the righteousness of God there, which as was
formerly showed does signify the kindness of God. And kindness in man is man's
perfect righteousness; for in this kind man has no other perfection, if he have
this; but his kindness is a virtue so lovely and obliging beyond uprightnes,
that for a kind man's sake some even dare to dye. Romans 5.7. For scarcely for a
righteous (i. e. an upright) man will one dye: yet peradventure for a good (i.
e. a kind) man some would even dare to dye. 4. That the person wherein these
two righteousnesses of uprightnes and kindness do concur and meet together, is
quite opposite and contrary to the legal sinner mentioned in the verse before;
who is a transgressour against the Law, and therefore cannot be upright; and
being not upright, he can never be truly kind; for he who is not upright
toward me to give me that which is my due by Law, will much less be kind
toward me, to give me more then by Law is my due.

3. In the third and last sense, the word Just or Righteous does signify
jurally quoad jura, for one who is a Proprietary or Owner, and has a right,
claim, or interest, either in general as a Communer or Freeman, in some
Kingdom or Commonwealth; or in particular who has some Freehold or Estate of
his own in his own right; whether his right be a right in possession, by
enjoying the present use and fruit of his estate, or whether it be a right in
capacity by way of interest or claim to some future estate, whereof the
present possession lies yet in another. Such a right of capacity or expectance
have the Heirs and Legataries instituted in a Will or Testament, unto the
estate and goods of the Testator, during the Testators life; for although the
Testators estate be his own both for the property and present possession
during his life: yet also during his life, the Heir by virtue of his
nomination in the Will, has a present right or claim to the future possession
of it. The like right, claim, or interest, is imputed, given, or conveyed in
every promise; for thereby the promissary has a present right to the thing
granted, although the present possession remain still in the promiser, till
such time as the promise be performed. Such a right of capacity by a present
interest or claim had Abraham, during his life to the Land of Canaan, whereof
by virtue of Gods promise and Covenant he was made heir; for says Paul, Romans
4.13. The promise was that Abraham should be heir of the world. i. e. Of the
whole Land of Canaan: but Abraham during his life never had the possession of
that inheritance; for says Stephen, Act. 7.5. God gave Abraham no inheritance
in Canaan, no not so much as to set his foot on; i. e. no inheritance in
possession.

The man then who has a jus or right, whether in possession or but in
capacity, is in Scripture called a Just or Righteous man; for so Abraham is
called the righteous man, Esaias 41.2. Who called up the righteous man from the
East. i. e. The man who had the original and primitive right, from whence you
derive all that right and interest which you claim to the Land of Canaan,
which was first given to Abraham, whom I exalted and raised to the inheritance
of that estate, by calling him thereto out of the East, to follow me, he not
knowing whither, as the footman follows the step of his master, to give him
the lands of the Nations before him. Yet this sense here of Abraham's being
jurally righteous, does not exclude the other two senses; for he was righteous
every way, both legally, morally, and jurally; but here in this place, the
jurall is chiefly respected. So the Israelites who were the heirs of Abraham,
are in many places of Scripture called the Righteous; partly in respect of
aliens or strangers, especially of those who living amongst them, were debarred
from the Passover and other holy things, and commonly had no right in their
Lands or Laws, but were only under their protection and jurisdiction; from
whence they were called foreigners and strangers within their gates. See Exodus
12.43.45. and Exodus 20.10. and Exodus 29.33. and Exodus 30.33. and Levit.
22.10.13. and Numb. 1.51. Partly they were called the Righteous, in respect of
Canaan, to the Lands whereof they had a right in possession, as the Owners and
Freeholders of it; for the inheritances thereof were divided by lot among their
tribes; but chiefly they were so called in respect of God, in whom by Covenant
they had a right of alliance, that he on his part should be their Lord and
God, and they on their part should be his people and peculiar, to have, hold
and enjoy their estates in fee from him.

For that in these jurall respects the Israelites are called the Righteous, it
may appear from diverse testimonies of Scripture; as Psalm. 69.28. Let them be
blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written (vegnim zaddikim)
with the righteous. i. e. with the Israelites, who have the rights of
inheritances in the Land, as the Owners and Freeholders of it: for among the
Israelites and other Nations, the names not of the legally or morally
righteous, but of the jurally righteous, are written in books, and entered
into Records in respect of their Inheritances and Privileges. And Psalm. 72.7.
In his days shall (Zaddik) the righteous flourish, i. e. literally, in the
days of Solomon the Israelites who are the right Heirs and Owners of the Land
shall abound in peace: But mystically the words refer unto Christ, and to the
Believers in him. And Psalm. 92.12. (Zaddik) The righteous shall flourish like a
Palm Tree, i. e. The Israelite shall so flourish; for in the Margin of that
place there is a reference quoted to a parallel place, Hos. 14.5. Where the
Prophet mentioning the like blessing does instead of the Righteous, put the
word Israel, I will be as the dew unto Israel; he shall grow or blossom as
the Lilly. And Psalm. 118.20. This gate of the Lord into which (Zaddikim) the
righteous shall enter, i. e. The Israelite shall enter, who has the right of
entrance; for strangers had no right to enter within the gate of the Lord, i.
e. of the Temple, but remained in the outward Court of the Gentiles. And Psalm.
125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot (hazard dikim) of the
righteous, i. e. The stranger shall not continue his Dominion and Possession
over the Inheritance of the Israelite, to whom the right of the Land was
allotted. And Esaias. 26.2. Open ye the gates that (goi Zaddik) the righteous
Nation, who keeps the truth may enter in, i. e. The Nation who is the right
Inhabitant and Owner of the Land, though for a time they were exiled and fled,
because they would not change their Religion, but would keep the truth. And
Esaias. 60.21. Thy people also shall be all (Zaddikim) righteous, they shall
inherit the Land for ever, i. e. Thy people, even all of them who have any
right of Inheritance in Judea shall return from their Captivity in Babylon,
and shall henceforth enjoy their estates for ever, without any more Captivity.
In all which passages the jurall sense of the word righteous is chiefly
respected, although the other two senses may be also included.

And under the word righteous in this jurall sense are comprehended, not only
the Native Israelites who descended from Jacob, but also those factive
Israelites, who by Nation or Birth being Aliens became of the Jewish Religion,
professing it by the Ceremony of Circumcision, and were thereupon by the
Septuagint called Proselytes, but by the Rabbis (gerei Zedek) advenae
justitiae, i. e. strangers of right: Because they had a right, interest and
claim to the Rights, Laws, Ceremonies, and Privileges of the Native
Israelites, and in many particulars the very same Rights with the Natives. For
the Proselyte had the same right for the Ceremonies, as in eating the
Passover, Exodus 12.19.48.49. and in keeping the Fast of Expiation, Levit.
16.29. and in offering of Sacrifices, Numb. 15.14.15.16. and in the use of the
holy water, Numb. 19.10. The Proselite had the same right for Judicature, For
one manner of Law must be for the Stranger and for the Native, Levit. 24.22.
and one manner of Judgment, Deuteronomy. 1.16. and one manner of punishment, Numb.
15.30. And he had the same right for Privileges, the very same immunity from
oppression, Levit. 19.33.34. and the same Relief in case of Poverty, Levit.
25.35.36. and the same benefit of Sanctuary, Numb. 35.15. Thus in the Land of
Canaan, the Native Israelite and the Proselyte are called the Righteous; and so
here in England a Subsidy-man, who is an Owner, and enjoyes an Estate in Lands
or Goods to a certain yearly, is in the Writts of our Common Law styled homo
probus and legalis, which we can scarce English properly without the word Just
or Righteous in this jurall sense, or some other word thereto equivalent. And
as the concrete words Just or Righteous do concretely signify a proprietary
or owner: So the abstract words of the Hebrew Zedakah in the Old Testament, and
of the Greek (...), which in our Translations are rendered Justice and
Righteousness, do many times signify the Latin word Jus, whereof the
English is a Right, Interest, or Claim, as shall be more largely declared in
the last verse of this Chapter upon these words, For if righteousness come by
the Law.

Compare we now the Proprietary or Owner who is a just or righteous man
jurally, with the kind or bounteous who is a just or righteous morally, and we
may observe 3 things. 1. That the Owner and his property is a necessary effect,
and consequent flowing from the kind man and his kindness; for he who out of
his kindness bestows a thing upon me, does thereby transfer his property and
right thereto from himself, and imputes or conveyeth the right and property
thereof unto me, whereby necessarily I am made and become the true proprietary
or Owner thereof. 2. That the Owner who is jurally just or righteous, is
mainely opposed to the jurall sinner, which (as was showed in the verse before)
signifies a stranger, who either absolutely has no right at all, or none
respectively to this or that thing in particular; when therefore a stranger who
before had no right to a thing, attaines some right or claim thereto, then he
becomes just and righteous in a jurall sense. 3. That the word Righteous
carries a variety of sense not much unlike to the word Gracious; for as the
word Gracious does signify sometime actively, for one who does show grace and
favor, in which sense it is a frequent attribute of God in the Scripture, and
so a Prince is Gracious to his favorite; and sometime passively, for one to
whom grace and favor is showed; so the Princes favorite is Gracious with his
Prince; and in this sense the word Gracious is taken, Jer. 22.23. How gracious
shall thou be when pangs come upon thee. i. e. no grace nor favor shall be
showed thee in thy distress: so the word Righteous is taken, sometime
actively, for him who is legally upright by doing right to all, and for him who
is morally kind, by doing kindnesses in granting and giving some right,
interest, and claim; and sometime passively for him to whom a kindness is done,
to whom some right, interest or claim is given or granted, and who, because he
has such a right, is therefore in Scripture called Just or Righteous. Thus the
Greek word (...), whereof the English is Just or righteous, does in Scripture
signify in all three ways. 1. Legally quoad leges, for one who is upright,
faciendo, by doing right. 2. Morally, quoad mores, for one who is kind,
donande, by giving a right. 3. Jurally, quoad jura, for one who is an Owner,
habendo, by having a right: Yet in that one word in one and the same sentence,
there may concur or be employed, sometime two of those senses, sometime all
three, as the circumstances may require a less or more general acception
thereof; for one and the same person at the same time may be a man upright,
kind, and an Owner.

Come we now to the Greek Verb (...), which is a derivative from the Nowne
(...), and to the Latin Verb Justifico, which is a figurative compounded of
Justus and facio, and then the true genuine English of the Latinisme justified,
will be this, viz. to be made just or righteous, and because the Nowne Just
or righteous, has three senses (as was formerly showed) therefore consequently
the Verb justified being thence derived, must regularly signify three ways:
Viz. 1. To be made upright. 2. To be made kind. 3. To be made an Owner. And
because the word made does express unto us the form of the third Conjugation
Hiphil and Hophal in the Hebrew, which regularly consignifies making; therefore
from that causall Conjugation we must observe, that in the phrase of the Old
Testament, and so likewise from the New, where it imitates the Old (as here it
does) such Making may and must be understood, sometime Declaratively only,
sometime Efficiently, and sometime both ways. For these consignifications
modifying the principal sense of the Verb, do vary it into different and
several senses: Yet so, as that in some case they may concur; for a man may
at once be declaratively pronounced righteous, and efficiently made so: and in
some case again they may be severed; for a man may be declaratively pronounced
righteous, when he is not efficiently made so: and contrarily, he may be
efficiently made so, when declaratively he is not so pronounced. For the
declaring of a thing is not necessarily efficient to make the being of it, as
if it had no being before; but it causes that being to appear which before
appeared not; by making that manifest and clear which was in being before, but
the being was so obscure or doubtful that it was in question; and after that
being is duly declared, it admits of no proof to the contrary. Wherefore the
verb justified (besides the 3 principal senses which it derives from the nowne
Just or righteous) does in Scripture consignifie chiefly 2 ways, viz.
Declaratively only, and Efficiently, whether the effect be declared or not.

1. Declarative only, by pronouncing a person just or righteous; and so it
derives from the nown 2 senses. 1. A Legal, and so he is justified who is
declared or pronounced upright, to have done that which is just or right, not
to have offended against the Law, nor to have done that wrong wherewith he is
charged. Hence Exodus 23.7. the Lord professes of himself, (lo azdick) I will
not justify the wicked, i. e. I will not declare the wicked to be upright or
innocent. And Deuteronomy. 25.1. If there be a controversy between men, and they come
into judgment that the Judges may judge them, (vehizdik eth hazaddik) then
they shall justify the righteous, i. e. they shall declare him upright, who is
upright legally. And Romans 2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just before
God, but the doers of the Law ((...)) shall be justified. i. e. the hearers
only of the Law are not upright before God, but the doers of the Law (if there
be any such) shall be declared upright. And here, in the last clause of the
verse in hand; for by the works of the Law shall no flesh ((...)) be justified.
i. e. no flesh shall be declared upright. See Job 33.32. and Psalm. 51.4. and
Prove. 17.15. and Esaias 5.23. and Esaias 43.9. and Mat. 11.19. and Mat. 12.37. and
Luke 10.29. and Luke 16.15. In all which places the verb Justify does not
consignifie efficiently, or any way causally, to make him upright who before
was not upright, either by infusing into him a new uprightnes, which was no
where existent before, or by imputing unto him that uprightnes which was before
existent in another: but it consignifies only declaratively in pronouncing him
upright, who was upright before, and had the quality of uprightnes inherent in
him. 2. It declares the Moral sense; and so he is justified, who is declared
kind, bounteous, and gracious; that he not only does right in giving every
man his due: but also does more then right, in giving men more then their due,
by bestowing Gifts, Graces, and benefits upon them. Hence Luke 7.29. And all
the people that heard him, and the Publicans ((...)) justified God, being
baptized with the Baptism of John. i. e. the people and the Publicans declared
God to be kind, Gracious, and bounteous in that counsel of his will, which the
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected, as it appears by the verse following: and this
kindness, bounty, and Grace of God they declared by their deed, in being
baptized with the Baptism of John: and the end why they declared Gods kindness,
was, that thereby they might glorify God; for he that declares or sets forth
Gods kindness by showing the goodness and greatness thereof, does in effect praise
and glorify God. And 1 Timothy 3.16. God was manifest in the flesh, (...), was
justified in the spirit. i. e. was declared kind, bounteous, and Gracious, by
reason of the various gifts and wondrous works, proceeding from his holy
spirit. And here as before, the verb Justify does not consignifie efficiently,
or any way causally, to infuse, or impute kindness to him who was not kind
before: but only declaratively, to manifest that kindness which was before in
being.

2. The verb Justified consignifies Efficiently, by effecting or making a man
just or righteous; and then it derives from the nowne the jurall sense of it;
and so he is justified or rather jurified, who is efficiently made an Owner, or
an Heir in respect of some right, interest, or claim imputed, conveyed, or
settled upon him, whether the effect be declared or not declared; and this
Jurall justifying is effected or made by the two maine degrees of efficiency.
1. Procreantly, and so he is justified, or rather jurified, who is made to have
a right; when a right, claim, or interest, which he had not before, is
created, constituted, imputed, or ordained unto him; for by this efficiency his
Right is first made to initiate, commence or begin unto him: so the word is
taken Esaias 45.25. in the Lord all the seed of Israel (Jizdeku) shall be
justified. i. e. all the Faithful who are the spiritual seed of the true
Israel, shall be procreantly jurified, or made to have a right, interest, or
claim, in the Lord, that he is their God; and thereof they shall not boast in
themselves, but shall glory in him. And Esaias 53.11. By his knowledge, my
righteous servant (jizdik) shall justify many. i. e. Christ who shall be
upright in executing my will, and obedient even to the condition of a servant,
shall by the knowledge or Doctrine by him taught, make many to have a right,
interest, and claim in God, as his sons and heirs to everlasting life; for
Paul expressing the sense of this place, does instead of the words, shall
justify many, use these, many shall be made righteous, Romans 5.19. By the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous, i. e. Many shall be jurally
justified, or made to have a right in God, which before they had not; for the
word made here, does not signify Declaratively, but Efficiently: Because the
Original is, (...). which properly signifies constituted, ordained, or
appointed; and in some places of our last English Translation is so rendered.
See Act. 6.3. and Tit. 1.5. and Heb. 5.1. And Romans 3.24. ((...)) being
justified freely by his grace, i. e. procreantly, jurified, or made to have our
right in God, without any deserts, any works, or any suit on our part, but
only by grace on Gods part, him thereto especially moving. And Roman. 4.2. if
Abraham ((...)) were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, i. e. if
Abraham were procreately or initially jurified, or made to have his right of
inheritance to the Kingdom of Canaan by the title of his works, he may well
boast of them; for certainly they must be mighty works that could entitle
him to a Kingdom, or make him to be the Heir of the World, as Paul phraseth
it afterward, ver. 13. And to instance in the first clause of the present Text,
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, i. e. Procreantly
jurified, or made to have a right, to be constituted or initiated by the
works of the Law.

2. Conservantly, and so he is justified or rather jurified, who is made to
hold his right; when that right which he was made to have before, is
afterward, and moreover preserved, continued, and maintained unto him; for by
this efficiency his right is made to subsist, and remain according to the
former creation or constitution of it; and consequently is kept from
escheating, reverting, revoking, forfeiting, or otherwise losing; for in vain
a man is made to have a right, if he be not also made to hold it. In this
sense the word is taken, James 2.21. Was not Abraham our Father ((...))
justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar? i. e.
That right of Inheritance to the Land of Canaan, which Abraham was first made
to have by his faith (or which was created, constituted, imputed, or initiated
unto him upon his faith) was it not afterward held, continued, preserved, and
maintained by his works in offering up his son? And again, verse. 24. Ye see
how that by works a man ((...)) is justified, and not by faith only, i. e.
that right unto salvation which a man is first made to have by his faith, is
held or continued by his works; for though his faith only without works does
first create, constitute, and commence that right in making him to have it: yet
faith only without works does not preserve, continue, and maintain that
right, in making him to hold it: and though his works have no efficiency
procreant in making him to have that right: yet they have an efficiency
conservant, in making him to hold it. And again, verse. 25. Was not Rabah the
harlot ((...),) justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and
sent them out another way? i. e. the right to be saved at the sack of Jericho,
which was first created, constituted, and imputed unto Rahab by her faith in
God; was it not afterward preserved, continued, and held by her works in
receiving the messengers and dismissing them another way?

Yet this jurall efficiency of the Verb justified, does not necessarily exclude
the declarative sense, but is so compliant and consistent therewith, that it
does advance and further it. For if the right which is made us be declared, it
becomes thereby the more manifest before men, and consequently the less
questionable; and therefore in all the places formerly quoted out of James, the
Verb justified, may and does carry a declarative sense; yet not principally,
but secondarily and accessorily; for that our right should be conserved and
continued unto us, is of absolute necessity to salvation; because otherwise we
cannot be saved: but that it should be declared and manifested (otherwise then
Gods Will and Testament declares it) we find no such necessity in Scripture.
And certainly our works do declare our right, yet not assertorily to
pronounce it, for works cannot do so: but illatively and consequently to
argue or infer it by the means of our faith; for works by declaring our
faith, do consequently declare that right which by our faith we are made to
have. For faith being an inward thought of the heart, lies of it self covered
and concealed, until by some outward means it be declared or manifested: and
the proper means for that act, are not words, (for a man may easily say he
has faith;) but works, for works are the proper evidence which show it.
Hence says the Apostle, Jam. 2.18. Show me thy faith without thy works. i. e.
Declare or manifest unto me thy faith which is without works, not by thy
words, in bidding the poor, Depart in peace: but by thy works, in giving them
those things which are needful to the body, as it is in the former verse
before; but show it by thy works thou can not; because it is solitary alone
and without works, as thou say it may be and is. Works then justify not
only efficiently to conserve our right, but declaratively also to manifest it,
by declaring that faith, whereby we are made to have it.

See here a solid and easy way to clear that seeming contradiction, which
some have conceyved between Paul and James in the point of Justification; for
although both these Apostles have the same word justified, and both use it in a
jurall sense, and both in a consignification of efficiency, yet apparent it is,
that both understand not the same kind of efficiency. For Paul understands that
efficiency which is procreant, in making us first to have a right by creating,
producing, and constituting of it; which kind of efficiency is proper wholly
and only to faith, but no way to works, which are altogether excluded from it.
But James understands that efficiency which is conservant, in making us
afterward to hold our right by preserving, continuing, and maintayning it unto
us; which kind of efficiency is proper to works, yet not wholly and only so, as
to exclude faith, for faith is also conservant of that right which it first
created, if faith it self be conserved: but faith cannot conserve it self
without works, because by works faith lives and breaths, but without works
is frustrate and dead, as the body is without breath. Works therefore being
efficient to conserve our faith, must consequently needs be efficient to
conserve that right, which by the efficiency of our faith was created unto us;
for though faith alone be efficient to create our right, yet faith alone is
not sufficient to conserve or declare it without the co-efficiency of works.
Wherefore works are not only a sign of our right to declare it, but also a
cause to conserve it; because they are a cause to conserve our faith, which
without them would be dead.

And this jurall sense of the Verb Justified, may be further illustrated and
confirmed from diverse other words, which carry a jurall construction, and are
referred to Justifying; which words for better order may be distributed into
four sorts. 1. Words of Circumstance, whereof some do create or constitue a
Right or Interest; as Grace, Gift, Goodwill, Will and Testament, Covenant and
Promise; all which are jurall words signifying the principal motives and
causes of our Justification: some do confirm or assure a Right, as Seal and
Earnest; for the holy Spirit is said to be the Seal and Earnest of that
Inheritance, whereto we are justified: and some other words do specify a
Right constituted and assured, as Liberty, Freedom, Communion, Fellowship,
Inheritance, and Peculiar; all which and many more are the results and effects
of our Justification.

2. Words of Contrariety, which are opposite to Justifying; as Injurying and
Condemning: for the two Greek words (...) and (...), which signify Injurying
and Condemning, are both contrary and opposite to (...), which is Justifying;
As therefore he who is Injuried, is against Law made to lose some right which
he had before, and which by Law was due unto him: and as he who is Condemned,
is according to Law made to lose some right which he had before, and which by
Law he was to lose: for all Condemnation effects on the condemned either the
abolition or the abatement of some right which the party had before, either in
deed or in pretense; so contrarily, he who is justified, is beyond or above Law
made to have some right which before he had not, and which by Law was not due
unto him. And as Condemnation is the Imputation of a present sin to a future
punishment, so Justification is the Imputation of a present right to a future
blessing: for although Justifyng and Condemning, be opposite and contrary one
to another, yet they agree in this, that both are under one and the same genus
which is Imputation. Seeing then Injurying and Condemning are jurall words,
therefore so is Justifying; because it is opposite and contrary to them both.

3. Words of Affinity or nearenesse, which are subordinate to justifying and
comprehended under it; as Naturalizing, Legitimating, Manumising, Redeeming,
Pardoning, Adopting, and such like; all which are several kinds or sorts of
justifying, which is the genus to them all. For Naturalizing is the Justifying
of an Alien, by imputing or giving the right of a Native to him that was borne
in a foreign Country. Legitimating is the Justifying of a Bastard by
imputing or giving the right of Birth to him that was born misbegotten.
Manumising or Infranchising is the Justifying of a Villain or Bondsman, by
imputing or giveing the right of freedom to him that was borne a Slave.
Redeeming is the Justifying of a Captive by giving the right of Liberty to him
who before was a Prisoner to his Enemy. Pardoning is the Justifying of an
Offender, by imputing or giving the right of impunity to him who stands by Law
condemned. Adopting is the Justifying of a Stranger by imputing or giving the
right of a Son and Heir to him who was borne in another Family. Any one of
these acts severally is justifying, and all of them concurring jointly, (for
concur they may upon one and the same person) are no more; saving that then the
justifying is exceeding gracious; for when an Alien, a Bastard, a Bondslave,
and a Captive, and so much worse beside, as to be a Malefactor, is made an
Heir to some Kingdom; such a Justifying, in regard it passes from one
extreme to another, is extremely gracious; and so gracious is our
Justification by Christ, as to an observant Reader will afterward appear.

4. Words of Attribute, whereby the justified are in Scripture styled and
called; as Sons and Heirs of God, Gal. 4.7. Wherefore thou art no more a
Servant but a Son, and if a Son, then an Heir of God through Christ.
Co-heires or joynt-heires with Christ. Romans 8.16.17. The spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of God; and if
Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joynt-heires with Christ.
Fellow-citizens and Domestics of God, Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore ye are no
more Strangers and Forraigners, but Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
Household of God. The Lords Freemen, 1. Cor. 7.22. For he that is called in the
Lord, being a servant is the Lords Freeman. Which last Attribute of Freeman, is
a general word including all the former, for Citizens, Sons and Heirs are
but several sorts and ranks of Freemen; and it is a word so jurall, that the
state of Liberty or Freedom is the Primitive, Original, or Fundamental
Right, whereon all other Rights and Privileges are raised, and without which
none can subsist; for a Bondsman during his bondage has no right at all,
neither can he have any, till first he be infranchised or made free; seeing
all the right he has before, is only a crooked right, to accept or refuse
freedom; for a will to refuse freedom was by the Law of God allowed to a
Bondsman, who otherwise has no freedom of will, Exodus 21.5. If the servant
shall plainly say I love my Master, my Wife, and my Children, I will not go
out free, then his Master shall bring him to the Judges, etc. And the word
Freeman is so intimate genuine and proper unto Justified, that those 2 words
are reciprocal and adequate to denote the same person; for Freeman is the
proper name whereby a person justified is called; and a person justified is the
proper essence or difference which defines a Freeman, seeing a Freeman is a
person justified, or made to have some right; for hereby he is absolutely
opposed to a bo^dman, who absolutely is not justified, or has no right at all;
and hereby he is respectively opposed to an Alien, a Forraigner or Stranger,
who locally is not justified, or has no right in this or that place, as none
in such a Kingdom, such a City, or such a Family. Hence in the Scripture, the
word Justified is sometime put for freed, as Act. 13.39. and by Christ all that
believe are justified (i. e. freed) from all things from which ye could not
be justified (i. e. freed) by the Law of Moses; and sometime it is translated
by the word freed, as Romans 6.7. He that is dead, is freed from sin, where
the Margin shows that the Original word is justified.

From all those former jurall words thus referred to Justifying, it plainly
appears, that Justifying is not only a jurall, but also a curiall or
Court-word: Yet not borrowed from a Court criminal, or any other Civil Court
of Justice or Law, where the suite is contentious, and the sentence a
judgment, in which jus dicitur, i. e. in which that right which was in being
before, is declared to be, according to the letter or meaning of the Law; as
here in England is done in the Courts of the Kings Bench, and of the Common
Pleas, where the Judges represent the King for his Justice. But Justifying (in
the sense of the Apostle) is rather proper to a Court of favor or grace, where
the suite is voluntary, and the sentence is a Decree, in which jus fit and
datur, i. e. in which that right which was not in being before, is made to be,
according to the kindness, favor, goodwill, and grace of the Prince; wherein
the iniquities and rigours of the Law are rectified, pardons for offenses are
granted; Patents and Charters for the Rights of Honors, Profits, and
Privileges are issued; as here in England is done in the Courts of Requests,
and the Chancery, where the persons President represent the King for his Mercy
and Grace; and therefore are not called Judges, as that word is properly
signified by Judex: But to avoid the rough sense of the word Judges, they are
called by other names. In effect therefore Justifying is a right Chancery-word,
whereby not only our sins are cancelled, crossed out, and blotted; but our
Patent for blessedness is granted and sealed.

But if we may borrow a little light from the Civil Law, or from those Courts
wherein Wills and Testaments receive their Debates and Probates, we shall
easily perceive that Justification is a Testamentary word. Yet not for the
letter of it; for we find it not expressly used in Testaments: But for the
sense of it, which is the very same or very near with the Testamentary word of
Institution. Not as Institution is distinguished from Substitution: But as it
is opposed to Exheridation or disinheriting; and signifies indifferently either
for the ordaining of an Heir, or for the devising of a Legacy. In which ample
signification, Instituting is co-incident or equivalent with Justifying: Both
words carrying a sense either really the same, or rationally consequent each to
other. For whosoever in a Testament is Instituted as an Heir or a Legatary,
that person is Justified, or made to have a right to that Inheritance or
Legacy, which is therein conveyed or devised unto him. And whosoever in a
Testament is Justified unto any Inheritance or Legacy, that person is thereto
Instituted. And the co-incidence or resemblance between these two words is the
more proper: Partly because Justification is a most gracious act, proceeding
from the mere favor and free grace of God; without any previous Petition,
Motion or Request made by the party Justified: As commonly Institutions are
made in Wills and Testaments, which are, or should be acts of mere favor and
grace. But chiefly, because Justification is also a Testamentary act of God,
arising from his Will and Testament, wherein all Believers are Instituted
Heirs to the Inheritance of everlasting life, i. e. wherein they are Justified.

Having hitherto showed the meaning of the word, let us now gather nearer
toward the nature of the thing, to specify more particularly what Right that
is we are made to have, according to the purpose of the Apostle here, in
saying that a man is justified. Man is jurally a Sinner and ungodly, i. e. a
Calamitous person who is unto God an Alien and a Stranger, who by his birth
here on earth has no right to the Kingdom of Heaven: For if a Native of
England by his birth here, can claim no Inheritance in France, nor in any
other Kingdom on earth; much less can a Native of earth claim any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. And man is legally and morally a Sinner
and ungodly, i. e. He is unto God a Transgressour, an Offendour, and a
Malefactor; and by reason of sin, man is a Bondsman and a Captive, held a
Prisoner in the Grave, under Death, and under Satan, who has the Dominion and
power of Death; for because of sin, man is not only debarred from Heaven,
but condemned to that earth from whence he was taken; even the uprightest man
on earth can never be found upright, if God enter into judgment with him, to
take the examination of his life, and mark what is done amiss.

Contrarily, God is jurally Just or righteous, i. e. he is a Lord and Owner;
for he is the universal and supreme Lord and Owner of all the whole World,
over all Owners, Lords, and Kings, having the Sovereign Dominion and
Possession both of Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all things else; for the whole
World, and all the Creatures thereof are the works of his hands; and every
workman, especially if he work upon his own materials, is the Lord and
Owner of his own works. Unto God therefore do belong, not only the things
that may be no man's, and the things that may be any man's, but also the very
things that are each man's, as the Lands, Goods, and Chattells which each man
possesses. For although God has given the Earth to the Children of men, and
some men in respect of others are great Lords and rich Owners: Yet all men even
the greatest Kings, in respect of God are but mean Lords, and petty Owners, or
rather Tenants at will, who have but a precarious use of earthly things, the
supreme seigniory and property whereof does rest in God, who still retains to
himself an absolute and full power to dispose of all things at his pleasure,
by giving and taking them away at his will. See and compare Deuteronomy. 10.14. and
Job. 1.21. and Psalm. 24.1. and Psalm. 115.16. and Hos. 2.8.9. and 1. Cor. 10.26.
And God is morally Just or Righteous, i. e. He is kind, free, and bounteous;
for he is universally and supreamly kind, free, and bounteous to bestow in
abundance his blessings upon all Creatures, but chiefly upon man in a
surpassing manner above all the rest. Hence the Scripture is very serious and
copious in setting forth Gods kindness; for she magnifies it with the
Attributes of great kindness, Joel. 2.13. and Jonah. 4.2. of loving
kindness, Esaias. 63.7. and Jer. 31.3. and Hos. 2.19. and in the Psalms above
20. places; of merciful kindness, Psalm. 117.2. and Psalm. 119.76. of
mavelous kindness, Psalm. 17.7. and Psalm. 31.21. and of everlasting
kindness, Esaias. 54.8. She extolls it with the praises of being Gods title,
that he is the God of kindness, Nehem. 9.17. and of being Gods exercise,
that he makes it his delight, Jer. 9.24.

And the kindnesses which God bestows upon man (for the acts of kind persons
are also called kindnesses) are divine blessings beseeming the goodness and
greatness of God, as a right of heavenly freedom, a right of Alliance with God,
and a right of inheritance in his kingdom. For God is so free, that his will
is, to make man free of heaven, by giving him a right of divine freedom, as a
Denizen, or Citizen of the Kingdom of Heaven. See John 8.32, 36. and Romans
6.22. and Romans 8.2. and 1 Cor. 7.22. and Ephesians. 2.19. and Heb. 8.10. And God is
so kind, as to make man his Kinsman, by giving him a right of divine alliance,
in making him his Son, and becoming a father to him, which makes not a remote
and distant alliance, but the nearest and best degree of kindred. See John
1.12. and Romans 8.14. and 2 Cor. 6.18. and Phil. 2.15. and Gal. 4.5. and 1 John
3.1, 2. So fatherly kind, as to make man his heir, by giving him a right of
inheritance in Heaven, where God has provided for him many Manors and
Mansions, so goodly and so glorious, that the Manors and Mansions on earth are
but the figures and shadows of those in Heaven; for God who has feared man
here upon earth will hereafter most gloriously settle him in Heaven, whereof he
has already made him the Heir, by giving him a present right to the future
possession of it; for this kind of right makes the nature of an Heir. See
Mat. 5.3. and Mat. 25.34. and John 14.2. and Romans 8.17. and Gal. 4.7. and
Ephesians. 1.3. and Ephesians. 2.6. and Tit. 3.7. and James ^.5. and 1 Pet. 1.4.

But for the better conveyance and settling of these Heavenly kindnesses, God
frames his Will into a Testament, wherein more blessings are devised and
bequeathed unto man by way of gifts and Legacyes; for hence the holy Scriptures
both New and Old, are called Gods Testaments; though at the first making
neither of them were written, but were nuncupative: because God at first
declared his will by the word of his mouth; for hence the same Testaments are
called the word of God; but his Will being afterward written, became the
Scriptures. And God by publishing of his Testament, reveals the Gifts and
Legacies thereof into promises; (for Gods promises are but his Gifts and
Legacyes declared) he covenants with man for the performance of those Promises;
and confirms his Covenant, that it may be irrevocable. Now the proper virtue
and effect of Testaments, Promises, and Covenants, especially being once
confirmed, is to constitute, ordain, impute, and convey unto the persons
concerned, rights, interests, and claymes to the things therein specified. And
the rights and claymes constituted, ordained, and conveyed in Gods Testament,
are no less precious then the inheritances of Heaven, whereto man is
instituted Heir; for although among men here on earth, some Lands and
inheritances cannot be disposed by Will and Testament: yet all the inheritances
of Heaven are deviseable by the Will and Testament of God. And Gods Testament
argues Gods mavelous loving kindness; for can a man possibly show greater love
and kindness, then first to give away all his estate, and at last to confirm
that gift, give up his life? all which is done in the making of a Will; because
a Will is a Deed which makes away all, and yet it self is not fully made, at
least not made of force, until the death of the maker.

And Gods Testament for the purpose of it, is a Will ad pias causas. i. e. for
godly and charitable uses, wherein Gods goods are all distributed for the
relief of impotent, poor, and needy wretches; for all the parties instituted
in Gods Testament, are miserable persons, such as are the blind and lame, the
deaf and dumb, the dead and buried; such as are strangers unto God, as
aliens, bondslaves, captives and prisoners unto Satan; such as are Sinners
against him, as offenders and malefactors. For hence the publishing of Gods
last Will and Testament is called by Christ, Luke 4.18. preaching of the Gospel
to the poor, sending to heal the brokenhearted, preaching deliverance to the
captives, recovering of sight to the blind, setting at liberty them that are
bruised. And this again does magnify Gods marveylous loving kindness: for
can a Testament show greater love and kindness, then when it is all for
charitable uses?

And the better to qualify these miserable persons, and to enable them for the
possession of these blessings, Gods will is yet further, to perform all acts
thereto conducing; as to Illuminate and instruct them in heavenly knowledge,
that they may know God to be their gracious Father, to Regenerate and sanctify
them by writing his divine Law in their hearts, that they may carry themselves
as the sons of God; to Expiate, pardon, and forgive all their sins in general,
past, present, and to come; to Redeem from the grave, their dead and vile
bodies, transforming them into heavenly and glorious bodies; and lastly, to
Glorify them, at their entrance into their Lords joy, where they shall be
partakers of his divine nature, and the freeholders of eternal blessedness.
For such clauses there are in Gods will. See Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. and Phil. 3.21.
and 2. Pet. 1.4.

Hence the nature of Justifying may easily appear. For when unto a Sinner and
a stranger, God by his Will and Testament devises or imputes a present right
to a future blessing, then God justifies the ungodly; and when a Sinner has
that right, then a man is justified. And therefore actively and factively all
the gifts and Legacies of Gods Will, and all the promises of God do justify:
because it is the nature of a Legacy and of a promise to impute a present right
to some future benefit or blessing. And therefore again passively and
effectually, all the free men of Gods kingdom, and all the sons and heirs
of God are justified: because it is the nature of a freeman, of a son, and of
an heir, to have a present right to a future estate. When unto Abraham who at
first was a sinner and a stranger, God by his Will and Testament devised these
earthly blessings; That he should have an heir from his own body, and should
have the Kingdom of Canaan for his inheritance; Gods will was that Abraham
should have a present right to those blessings, and when effectually Abraham
had that right, then was he justified. When unto Rahab, who was an harlot and a
stranger, God by the same Will imputed a present right to her future safety,
and consequently to make her free in Israel, then was Rahab justified. When
unto the Jews who were sinners, God by his last Will and Testament, which is
his new Covenant, devised and ordained the kingdom of Heaven, and those
heavenly blessings whereof the Earthly kingdom of Canaan and her blessings were
but figures and shadows; as their exemption from the Law, the Privilege and
benefit of Repentance, the Renovation of their minds, the Remission of their
sins, the Resurrection of their bodies, and the Inheritance of everlasting life
in the kingdom of Heaven; Gods Will was to give them a present right to those
blessings; and those Jews who effectually had that right, they were justified.
And when the Gentiles who were both sinners and strangers, were by the same
Will made fellow-citizens with the Saints, fellow-heyres, fellow members and
partakers of Gods promise in Christ, to have the same right unto the same
blessings with the believing Jews, then were the Gentiles justified.

The Names of Justifying or other words whereby in Scripture this is expressed,
are too many to be mentioned here: yet for the better understanding of the
thing, we may take notice of some which intimate either the causes, effects,
affections, or resemblances of it. 1. Therefore it is called adopting or making
Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to
become (or be made) the sons of God. i. e. he justified them, by giving them
the right or privilege of Sons; for so the word power is explained in the
margin. 2. Manumising, infranchising, or making free; John 8.36. If the Son
shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. i. e. if the Son shall justify
you, by giving you the right of freedom, the Kingdom of Heaven, ye shall have
that real and true freedom, whereof your earthly freedom is but a figure or
shadow. 3. Reconciling, or attoneing with God; Romans 5.10. For if when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God. i. e. justified, by way of amity or
alliance to be made the friends and Sons of God; and at the next verse
following, By whom we have now received the atonement; i. e. by whom we have
now been justified; for in the original the word is (...) in both these
verses, but is rendered in the 10. reconciled, and in the 11. atonement. 4.
Inoculating or grafting, Romans 11.24, If thou were cut out of the Olive tree,
which is wild by nature, and were grafted contrary to nature into a good Olive
tree. i. e. if contrary to nature thou were justified; for as the Cions or
Graft has a right of life and maintenance to partake of the root and sap of
that stock whereinto it is inoculated: so the justified are made joynt-heyres
with Christ, to have the same rights with Christ, into whom they are
incorporated. 5. Ingratiating or making accepted; Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherein ((...),) he has made us accepted in the
beloved. i. e. has justified and graced us, by giving us a right in Christ,
who is the beloved of God. 6. Infeoffing, or estating; Ephesians. 1.11. In whom
also ((...),) we have obtained an inheritance, or have been infeoffed. i. e.
by whom we are justified to have that inheritance whereto God had
predestined, instituted, or ordained us in his will and testament. 7. Seating
or placing in Heaven; Ephesians. 2.6. And has raised us up together, and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. i. e. has justified us, by
making us co-heires with Christ, by Christ, and giving us a present right to a
future seat or possession in Heaven, where Christ is already seated; for in
this life we do not actually sit in heavenly places: but in this life we are
made to have a present right, for our future sitting there. 8. Allying or
making nigh unto God; Ephesians. 2.13. Ye who sometimes were far off, are made
nigh by the blood of Christ. i. e. ye who were sometimes strangers unto God,
are now justified, and made to have an alliance with God, amounting in a manner
to a consanguinity, and as effectual as a nearenesse by blood; yet not by your
blood, but by the blood of Christ. 9. Inabling, or making meet; Col. 1.12.
Which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. i. e. has justified us, to make us fellow-heires, and fellow commoners
with the Saints. 10. Translating; in the next verse following; Who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son. i. e. and has justified us, by changing our state
or condition from being bondslaves and captives in the Kingdom of Satan, to be
made Owners and Freeholders in the Kingdom of Christ. 11. Pardoning, or
forgiving; Col. 2.13. And you being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision
of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all
trespasses. i. e. having justified you, by giving you a right of impunity or
pardon, whereby ye are released from the punishment of all your sins. 12.
Ransoming, or Redeeming; Revel. 5.9. For thou wast slain, and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood. i. e. have justified us, by delivering us from the bondage
and slavery of Satan, and by asserting us into a spiritual freedom and a
divine alliance with God.

The Matter of Justifying or the Right which thereby a man is made to have, is
a Right of State, which is a permanent and stable condition wherein his person
stands, remains, and rests; and this State is as it were the standerd,
base, or ground to all the rest of man's future rights, privileges, and
benefits, which unto this state are incident and subsequent, to be raised and
built thereon. For as in many Kingdoms of the world, so in the Kingdom of
God, men's persons are made to stand and rest under several states and
conditions, whereof the most remarkable are the two states of spiritual
bondage and of spiritual freedom, which being in themselves contrary, draw
after them contrary consequents and accidents. Spiritual bondage is a
restraint, pressure, closeness, or fastness of the spirit, whereby a man
stands tied from good unto evil, debarred from having the good that he would
and should have, is hindered from doing the good that he would and should do,
is constrained to do the evil that he would not and should not do, is a
drudge to the pleasure of sin, is a slave to the motions of his lust, and a
Captive under the power of Satan. This is a state of wrath, a low, base,
terrene, and miserable condition; a condition far beneath the proper nature
and quality of man; a condition that has no right or interest to any
spiritual benefit, nor while it lasts is capable of any; a condition charged
and laden with so many burdens and miseries thereto incident and consequent,
that in point of Law the Bondsman is reputed a dead man. Contrarily, spiritual
freedom is a gallantry, braven, fluency, cleernesse, or looseness of the
spirit, whereby a man is enlarged from evil unto good, is advanced to have
that good which he would and should have; is enabled to do that good which
he would and should do; is restrained from doing that evil whereto Satan
may tempt him; is licensed to live according to his own will, or rather
according to a better will then his own; namely, according to the good will
and pleasure of God, whose will he makes his own will by conforming his own
unto it, and whose service he finds to be no servitude but perfect freedom;
is acquitted and discharged from the burdens and penalties of the Law, to rest
and remain under the friendship, favor, grace, and love of God, to be
enlightened, guided, moved, strengthened and cheered by the holy spirit of God.
This is a state of grace, an high, noble, divine and blessed condition; a
condition transcending far above the proper nature and quality of man; a
condition honored and enriched with many other Rights, Privileges and
Benefits, thereto consequent, incident, and annexed; whereof the first
concurrent with it is a degree of spiritual freedom, viz. a divine alliance
to be the Son and Heir of God.

The state whereto a man is Justified, is this condition of spiritual freedom
and alliance, to be the freed man and friend of God, to be the Son and
Heir of God. Hence Abraham being justified was called the friend of God, Jam.
2.23. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, and
he was called the friend of God, i. e. Abraham's faith did justify him or was
imputed unto him for a right of Freedom, Amity, or Alliance with God, to be
made and called Gods friend. And Christ tells his Disciples, that they were and
should be called his friends, John 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you; henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant
knows not what his Lord does: But I have called you friends, for all things
that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. And the Apostle
tells all Believers that by being justified, they are made the Heirs of God,
Tit. 3.7. That being justified by his grace, we should be made Heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. For Justifying is the altering or
changing of man's spiritual state or condition, whereby he acquires a new
state much different from that wherein he stood before: Yet this change is not
made downward to abate and lessen it into the state of spiritual bondage, but
upward to advance and raise it unto spiritual Freedom, Amity, and Alliance
with God. Hence Justification is quite opposite and contrary to that
Condemnation which the Civilians call Capitis diminutio, i. e. a lessening of
the head, by debasing and changing the state or condition of a man from the
better to the worse, to make him an Alien or a Bondsman, who before was a
Citizen or Freeman; for anciently the word head did signify jurally for the
state or condition of a man: Because a man's state or condition is the
beginning, fountain or head, from whence all his other rights are either
derived or obstructed. And because of this contrariety to Capitis diminutio,
Justification may be fitly termed Capitis exaltatio, i. e. a raising or
lifting up the head; for to that sense the phrase of lifting up the head is
used in the Old Testament, Genesis 40. verse. 20. And it came to pass the third
day which was Pharoahs birthday, that he made a Feast unto all his servants,
and he lifted up the head of the chief Butler, and of the chief Baker among
his servants, i. e. He raised their condition by giving them their freedom,
and releasing them from their former imprisonment. And 2. King. 25.27. And it
came to pass that Evilmerodach King of Babylon, in the year that he began to
reign, did lift up the head of Jehoiachin King of Judah out of prison, i. e.
Did give him his freedom from his imprisonment. The state from whence a man is
justified is the base condition of spiritual bondage, and the miseries thereto
consequent; for that state is the terminus a quo, or term of recesse from
whence Justifying commenceth, and from whence a man is thereby delivered; and
the state of freedom is the terminus ad quem, or the term of access,
whereto Justifying exalts, and wherein a man is thereby invested and seated.
And although man's deliverance from bondage does in order of nature precede his
investiture into freedom: Yet I first mentioned the last because the last is
first in the order of our method, and first in order of dignity, as being the
more worthy and more noble condition. Hence it appears that Justifying does
work an alteration or change in a man; for it changes his state or condition:
Yet it appears also that this change is only jurall, whereby he is exalted
or raised from a low and base condition, to rest in a noble and divine state;
for such a jurall change and no other there is in a person naturalized,
legitimated, infranchised, redeemed, pardoned and adopted; in all which being
several sorts of Justifying, there is a change, yet that change is only
jurall, by a change of condition. As for any moral alteration or change upon
the affections or manners of man, that is not the proper work of
Justification, but of Sanctification: Yet the grace and blessing of
Justification in changeing the state and condition of man, does strongly oblige
and bind him to the works of sanctity or holiness in making a moral change
upon his affections and manners by destroying sin and the lusts thereof; as
the Apostle will seriously press it in this Chapter, verse. 18.

The Privileges incident and consequent unto this state of divine freedom and
alliance, are all the residue of the Legacies or precious Promises devised in
Gods Testament; whereof the most future and most final are the Remission of
sins, the Resurrection of the body, and Life everlasting, with all the glory
and joys thereto annexed: all which three are in a manner either one and the
same blessing, or blessings, so consequent one to another, that the former must
necessarily be antecedent to the latter. For there can be no Life everlasting,
unless the Resurrection of the body antecede; and the Resurrection cannot be,
unless the Remission of sins antecede. But when by the Remission of sins,
eternal death (which is the punishment thereof) is extinguished, then the
Resurrection of the body must needs follow; and upon the Resurrection from
eternal death, Life everlasting must needs follow. For the heirs of God
dying on earth, how shall they enter their heavenly inheritance, unless they
be again raised to life? and dying for sin, how shall they be raised, unless
the sin be remitted for which they die? As therefore the state of Sovereignty
draws unto it, the rights and dues of tribute, custom, fear, and honor,
Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: so the
state of supreme alliance does draw unto it, the privileges and blessings of
Forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the body, and Life everlasting. For
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob have a right, interest, or claim, unto the
Resurrection, and consequently unto Life everlasting; and their right,
interest, or claim thereto, is by virtue of their state or condition of
freedom and alliance unto God, that God is their God, i. e. their benefactor
or patron, and they the beneficiaries or friends of God; for long after their
death, God acknowledged this their state of alliance unto him, in saying unto
Moses Exodus 3.6. I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And from this their alliance unto God, Christ
proves their Resurrection, and not only theirs, but of the dead in general,
Luke 20.38. because God is not a God of the dead, i. e. he neither is nor can
be a benefactor to give a blessing to the dead, who while they rest in the
state of death, are not capable of any benefit: but he is a God of the living.
i. e. The persons to whom God is a benefactor to give them his blessing, must
be living, or being dead, must be raised to life, that thereby they may be
capable to receive his blessing; for unto him all live. i. e. all the dead in
God, by virtue of their state of alliance unto him (which state dies not by
their dying) have a present right to a future life, whereto God being their
benefactor, is able and willing to raise them.

The Degree of man's Right to these future Privileges is a right of
Institution. If we consider man's state of freedom and alliance with God, man
therein has now a right in possession, to become seized of that state, ipso
facto, and to enjoy it actually in this life; for in this life a man justified
is actually the freed-man and friend the son and heir of God. But if we
consider the future privileges consequent to this state, as the Remission of
sins, the Resurrection of the body, and Life everlasting; man unto these has
not a right in possession; for until the day of Judgment no man's sins are
actually forgiven, no man's body is actually raised, no man's person is actually
possessed of life everlasting. But unto these future blessings man in this life
has a right of Institution. i. e. he has a present right to the future
possession of them, and a present right to petition for that future possession,
to claim and make suit for it. Such a degree of right had the Israelites
during their bondage in Egypt, unto the Land of Canaan, whereof then they were
not in possession: yet then they had a present right to the future possession
of it; whereto God by his promise unto Abraham had instituted or ordained them.
Such a degree of right had David after his anointing by Samuel, during the life
of Saul, unto the kingdom of Israel, whereof then he was not in possession;
yet then he had a present right to the future possession of it, whereto God by
his anointing had instituted and ordained him. Such a degree of right have the
faithful during their mortal life, unto the Remission of their sins, the
Resurrection of their bodies, and the Life everlasting; of which blessings they
are not now in possession, yet now they have a present right to the future
possession of them; because thereto God by his Will and Testament has
predestined, instituted, or ordained them. And such a degree of right has a
legatary to his Legacy, when the Testament is once confirmed and come to be of
force; but a possessory and complete right he has not, until the Executor
make delivery or payment of the Legacy, which being not done in due time, the
Legatary by his right of Institution may bring his action and sue for it. For
Testaments, Promises, and Covenants have two different effects according to the
two differences of time present and future; their present effect is an
Institution to a right, and their future effect is a possession of the thing:
So their whole effect conjoined is, to institute or ordain a present right to
some future possession.

The manner how a man has this state, is factively, i. e. he is made to have
it. This state of divine franchise and alliance with God, man has it not
natively, i. e. not by virtue of his birth; for he is not borne free nor borne
the Son of God; but is borne an Alien to the Kingdom of Heaven, and a
stranger to the Family of God; for man who is borne on earth, and borne the
Son of man, how should he by virtue of his birth become free of Heaven, and
be the Son and Heir of God? When by his birth in one Kingdom on earth, he
can claim no right in another. But the Verb Justified being a compound of
Justus and facio, does intimate unto man, not only his seizure of having this
state, but also the manner how he has it, namely, factively, by the fact or
deed of God, by whom he is made to have this right of state, by whom he is
translated from the state of an Alien and of a Stranger to be made the friend
and son of God. For hence we are said, (...), i. e. to be made the sons
of God, John 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become
(or be made) the sons of God; and to be made free, John 8.36. If the son
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, and to be made accepted,
Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us
accepted in the beloved, and made to sit in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6. And
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places, and
made nigh, Ephesians. 2.13. Ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, and made meet, Col. 1.10. Which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. So Moses was the son of
Pharoahs Daughter, not natively, for she bred him not in her womb; but
factively, for she found him by the Rivers brinke floating in a boat of
bulrushes, and made him her son. So Uriah the Husband of Bathsheba was an
Israelite, not natively; for by Nation he was an Hittite, but factively, in
being made an Israelite: So Araunah was natively a Jebusite, but factively an
Israelite; and so every Proselite became free of Israel factively, to be made
free. And this fact of God in making man to have this state, the Scripture
calls Justifying, which though it much resemble the fact of Adoption, yet in
the sense of Paul, is far more ample, more noble, and more gracious: Because
Justifying is extended to more acts then adopting; for it includes pardoning,
redeeming, naturalizing, legitimating, infranchising, and adopting. And this
justifying fact of God is a Testamentary act, whereby this state is
predestined, ordained, or devised unto man, in the Will and Testament of God.
For we are made the sons of God by his Will, John 1.13. Which were borne,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God,
i. e. Men are not borne the sons of God by flesh and blood, nor made his
sons by the Will and Testament of man, but are made so by the Will and
Testament of God. And we are adopted by his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. Having
predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will, i. e. of his Will and Testament;
whereto the like saying follows afterward in the same Chapter, verse. 13. And
we are begotten by his Will, James 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us with
the word of truth, i. e. by his own Will and Testament.

Thus having premised the Meaning of the word Justified, that it signifies the
conveying of a present right to man; that the Matter of that Right is a right
of state or permanent condition wherein man rests; that the quality of that
state is a spiritual franchise or alliance to become the friend, son and heir
of God; that the privileges incident to that alliance are the future Remission
of his sins, the Resurrection of his body, and Life everlasting; that the
degree of his right to these privileges, is a right of Institution, or a
present right to the future possession of them; that the Manner how man has
this state is factively, by a testamentary act of God. We come now to the Means
whereby man has this state; or to that fact of man whereby the fact of God is
effected, or to the Title whereby man receives and enters this state: for on
man's part there is required an Act, as the Means or Title for his reception of
this state; and concerning this Means or Title was all the controversy between
Paul and the false teachers of Galatia, against whom he lays down this
Negative, that It is not by the works of the Law, as it follows in the next
words.

Text.
Not by the works of the Law. The wrong title to the former state. The
particle By argues a Cause or Means. The Nature of a Title. exemplified in
Lysias, and in Paul, and of special consideration. 3. Maine heads of the Law:
3. Judgments. Two other heads of the Law. It was Gods Testament, and his
Covenant. Works, mean good works. Man works, and the Law works, in
Condemning, and Justifying conservantly, but not procreantly, neither do man's
works so. The Law has two senses: 1. The History or letter of it, which was
well understood, and so the Promises were terrene. the Precepts were childish,
as their Moralities, and much more their Ceremonies. The works were servile.
2. The mystery or spirit of it, which was not fully understood; And so the
Promises were heavenly, the Precepts were virile and manly. The works to be
Cordial, Liberal, and Perfect. No works justify Procreantly, to the heavenly
promises, nor to the earthly.

The wrong or false title of man to his spiritual right of franchise and
alliance with God, that he has not that state by the works of the Law. For in
any right whatsoever, whether it be a Right of state, of power, of honor, or
of profit, a man must have a special regard to his Title, especially in a
Right of this moment, which is divine, and concerns everlasting blessedness.
The particle By does imply a Means, and thereby does intimate unto man, that
unless on his part some Means be used, or some Act done for his reception of
this spiritual and divine state, the testamentary acts of God in
predestinating or instituting him thereto, may become ineffectuall; as
ineffectuall they must needs become, unto all who despise, refuse, or reject
that state; as manifest it is that too many have done, both of Jews and
Gentiles; for all testamentary acts do leave unto the party instituted, a
liberty to accept or refuse the Legacy therein devised to him: because a
Testament carries not the force of a Law, to constrayne, and much less of
fate to necessitate; but passes in the form of grace, to offer and tender the
good will of the Testator. And the Means here understood, is the means
acquisitive, or cause procreant, whereby a right is first acquired, initiated,
commenced, entered and had; which means or cause is commonly called a Title.

For a Title is that cause or formality, whereby a man's right is declared or
proved to be true and just; whereby it is assured unto the party that has it,
and is defended against any that shall impugn it, or lay a claim to
dispossess the possessor of it. For in case another man should make a doubt of
my right whatsoever it be, or question me whether I have and hold it justly; if
thereupon I shall allege unto him the Means acquisitive or cause procreant,
whereby I first acquired, entered, and had that my right, as that I had it by my
Birth in inheriting it, or by my Work in earning it, or by my Money in buying
it, or by my Acceptance in receiving the gift of it, then such means or cause
being justly approoved, is my Title, whereby I have that right, and whereby I
defend my having of it. Lysias the Colonel and Governor of the Temple at
Jerusalem, had a right of freedom to the City of Rome, and his title to that
state was by his money: for says he, Act. 22.28. with a great sum obtained I
this freedom. And Paul his prisoner had the same right of freedom to the very
same City; but Paul's right came not to him by the same title; for when Lysias
made a doubt of Paul's freedom and questioned him about it, Paul in the defense
of his right, alleged his title, that it was by Birth, and said, I was free
borne. In man's Justification therefore, we are to consider his title, whereby
he has his right of spiritual State in his divine franchise and alliance with
God; whereby procreantly and acquisitively the reception of that state is
initiated, commenced, or begun in him. But that his title is not by Birth, was
proved before, in the Manner how man has this state, namely not natively, in
being borne in it, but factively, in being made to have it; and that fact on
Gods part was Gods testamentary act, in Predestinating or devising it unto man.
It remains therefore that man's title on man's part, must be by some act of
his own, whereof the Apostle determines here, that it is not by the works of
the Law.

The Law was the whole body of those orders and rules for life, which God by
the means of Moses inacted in the Wilderness, for the people of Israel,
containing three maine heads. 1. Promises of diverse blessings which God freely
conferred upon that Nation, as his own peculiar people. 2. Precepts of diverse
duties which the people on their part were to perform, in respect of those
promises; of which precepts some were Moralities containing duties natural
(whereto the light of nature binds) toward God and man, as the ten
Commandments of the Decalogue, and others of their nature: others were
Ceremonies imposing duties positive, which had little ground in nature, but
only in Gods pleasure; of these the principal was Circumcision, which though
it were long before inacted in the time of Abraham, yet because after long
disuse, it was again revived by Moses, is called by Christ a Law of Moses,
Joh. 7.23. 3. Judgments of diverse curses, penalties, and punishments, which in
respect of those precepts were to be inflicted on the transgressors of them.
The word Law therefore is in respect of these three heads variously taken:
sometime strictly for some one of them singly; sometime largely for two of them
together; sometime amply for all three; and sometime extraordinarily, either
for the five Books of Moses, or for all the Historical Books of the old
Testament, as they are opposed to the Psalms and the Prophets. But among these
varieties, which of the senses ought to be taken in this or that place of
Scripture, must be collected from the words annexed. In this place here it
seems to signify strictly for that head which contains the precepts; yet
with some reflection also upon the promises. Another distribution of the Law is
into the Tables of the Law, containing the Decalogue or ten Commandments,
which were kept in the Arc: and into the book of the Law comprising all the
residue, which was kept by the High Priest.

Yet this Law, in respect of the promises therein conveyed, was also the
Testament of God; partly because those promises were works of his kindness
conferred upon the Israelites by way of legacies or blessings; but chiefly
because (according to the nature of a Testament) they were a just sentence of
Gods will touching what he would have done after death: yet not after his own
death, because God is necessarily immortal and ever-living, but after the
death of some other creature, who being mortal should die in his stead, to
confirm and establish his Will, because all Testaments are established by
death. And although among men that establishment be always made by the death
of the Testator, yet Gods Testament being a divine Will, had therefore this
prerogative, that it might be established by the death of some other in his
stead; and thereupon it was actually established by the death and blood of
Calves and Goats, sprinkled on the Book of the Law and on the people. Compare
Exodus 24.5.6.7.8. with Heb. 9.19.20. In which respect, the Law has not only
the definition, but also the appellation of a Testament; for hence 2. Cor.
3.14. it is called the old Testament: and Heb. 9.18. the first Testament.
Again, the Law in respect of the other two heads, viz. of the Precepts and the
Judgments, was also the Covenant of God: because unto Gods Will for the
observance of those precepts and judgments, there was an agreement of the
peoples will to observe them; for to this purpose they profess their
agreement, Exodus 19.8. All that the Lord has spoken, we will do. And again,
Exodus 24.7. All that the Lord has said, will we do and be obedient. And an
agreement of Wills upon a just cause, makes up the nature of a Covenant. Yet
the Law has also the name of Gods Covenant most frequently in Scripture; and
the Arc which kept the Tables of the Law, is commonly called the Arc of the
Covenant; and the Book of the Law kept by the Priest is also called the Book
of the Covenant. For this old and first Testament and Covenant of the Law, was
but the crayon or first draught of Gods Will, to stand in force awhile until
the time of Reformation by his New and last Testament; which for a distinction
from the Old is named the Gospel; and the Old, to distinguish it from the New,
is called the Law.

By works we are to understand good works; because evil works are not
works of the Law, but against the Law. And good works taken generally and
absolutely by themselves, are of a larger extent then works of the Law,
whereunto works are here restrained. For before the Law of Moses was inacted,
those of the Patriarks, who walked in a continual obedience of God, doing all
those duties which by the light of nature, or by divine Revelation, they knew
would be acceptable and pleasing to him, had good works, as had Abel, Enoch,
and Noah. And now since that Law is expired, they who neglecting the Ceremonies
thereof, walk according to the Precepts of the Gospel, persevering in the
duties thereof, have good works and may be rich in good works. The works
therefore of the Law do implye two sorts of works flowing from two several
Agents, which working reciprocally one upon another, are both here excluded
from Justifying or making free. One sort is all works, or legal acts of man,
done by man in obedience to the Precepts of the Law: The other sort is all
works or legitimate acts of the Law, done by the Promises of the Law in
recompense of man's obedience to the Precepts. For as man has his works upon
the Law to transgress or obey it: So reciprocally the Law has her works and
effects upon man to condemn or justify him; because the Law is not only a
rule whereby man works, but is also a kind of Ruler and Actor to work upon
man according to his works. When therefore the work of man is sin, a work
contrary to the Precept of the Law, then the work of the Law is to Condemn,
and punish him for his work; hence says Paul, Romans 4.15. The Law works
wrath, i. e. It is a work or effect of the Law to punish the work of sin.
And when the work of man is uprightness, a work according to the Precept of
the Law, then the work of the Law is to Justify him conservantly, by
continuing and maintaining that right of freedom unto him which he had
before; hence says the Law, Levit. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes
and my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them, i. e. He shall
thereby continue and prolong his life, which he enjoyed before, secure from
any violent death to be inflicted by those Statutes and Judgments; and
again, Ezech. 18.9. He that has walked in my Statutes, and has kept my
Judgments to deal truly, he is just, he shall surely live, i. e. He is
thereby upright, and by his uprightnes he shall continue, maintain, and
prolong his life, which he had before on earth. But when again the work of
man is uprightness according to the Precepts of Law, then for sound Doctrine,
we must lay down this Negative, It is not the work of the Law to justify
man procreantly, to create, constitute, or make unto him any new right which
he had not before, to be acquired, initiated, and had by title of his
uprightness; or weighing the works in the other skale, let them be referred
unto man, and then though the Negative vary in words, yet the truth will be
the same; It is not the work or effect of man's legal works to justify man
procreantly; to create unto him the right of divine freedom by the title of
his uprightness. Thus we have the meaning of the Apostles Negative concerning
Justification by the works of the Law; but he writing to the Believing Jews,
who knew the Law, and were well acquainted with the terms and phrases of
those times, seems very concise in his expressions, sparing and couching his
words as his manner is, that unto them he might not seem tedious, though
thereby unto us of these times he becomes in many points obscure.

But for our further and clearer understanding of the Apostles Negative, that a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, we are to observe, that of the
Law there is made in Scripture a two fold sense; I say not, a two fold sense of
every part of the Scripture, but of that part which is here called the Law;
whereat we are the less to marvel, because in a manner there is the like
difference of sense in the Laws that are made by man; for the remedy whereof,
in all well ordered States the Courts of Equity are erected. The first sense of
Gods Law is the History, saying, writing, or as Paul calls it (Romans 2.29. and
Romans 7.6. and 2. Cor. 3.6.) the letter of the Law; according to the proper
signification and vulgar acception of those words and clauses, wherewith the
Law was first published, spoken or written. This sense of the letter was from
the very beginning of the Law intelligible unto all the Israelites of ordinary
discretion, apprehended of all and acknowledged of all throughout all the
passages of the Law; excepting only those ambiguities and doubts which fell
out afterward in point of practice, wherein the Priest or the Judge was to
pronounce or declare that sense which they conceived. For in vain are those
Laws, which carry not with them a literal sense; because when that sense is
not understood by the people, on whom such Laws are imposed, the Laws
themselves can neither be approved nor obeyed.

According to this sense of the letter, the Promises of the Law were for
terrene and temporal blessings, consisting of a long and happy life, abounding
with plenty of all earthly things, resting under the peculiar protection of God
in peace and safety, secured from the violences and injuries either of a
Foreign Enemy, or of a Domestic War; as any man may easily perceive, who
shall consult, Levit. cap. 26. and Deuteronomy. cap. 28. and shall thence consider the
large Declarations there expressed concerning the Legal Promises: Yea the
Original Promises made unto Abraham long before the time of the Law, were for
the letter of them terrene and carnal; namely, the donation of the Land of
Canaan, for an Inheritance to him and his Heirs for ever, and a legitimate
issue of his own body that should multiply into a Nation to possess it.
Contrarily, the Judgments, Penalties, or Curses of the Law were for the
letter, quite contrary to the former blessings; for their ordinary Penalties to
be executed by the Ruler upon Offenders, were either a violent and untimely
death, by hanging, burning, stoning, etc. or corporal Corrections by Rods
and Whippes; but their extraordinary Judgments inflicted on them by the hand
of God, when the Rulers hand was corrupt or remiss, were all the miserable
calamities of a wretched life, by War, Famine, Plague, and Diseases, with
diverse other distresses, which crossed the happiness of this life, as it
plainly appears in the two forecited Chapters.

The Precepts of the Law for the letter were terrene and carnal commandments,
proportioned to the nature of the Promises, so fitted and suited to the
rudeness and childishness of the Nation, that they did not much exceed the
quality of humane Laws; and therefore afterward in this Epistle (cap. 4. verse.
3.9.) they will be called beggarly rudiments and elements of the world. Their
Moralities or moral Precepts of the Decalogue were the least and lowest
commandments, that are to be found in the Law of Nature, or rather were
restraints from acts unnatural, ordained for men, not of any good, but of a
bad and lewd condition; for the tables of the Law were either bars from
impiety, to keep men from being Atheists, Idolaters, perjurious and profane;
or they were bridles from inhumanity to curb men from being disobedient to
Parents, from being Murderers and Adulterers, from being Thieves, Liars and
Deceivers; hence it is said, 1. Tim. 1.9. The Law is not made for a righteous
man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for
unholy and profane, for murderers of Fathers, and murderers of Mothers, for
manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind,
for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, etc. Yea their general or
capital Moralities, of Loving God with all their heart, and of loving their
neighbor as themselves; which were the great Commandments of their Law, are
to be taken in a construction accommodate and agreeable to the special
Precepts of the Decalogue; for those two generals contain in them no more,
then all these specialls jointly together. Their Ceremonies were odious
Institutes or Statutes positive, so numerous, chargeable and troublesome, that
they were like yokes on their necks, and burdens on their shoulders, and are in
Scripture so called; for they were all carnal Ordinances or Laws upon the
flesh, serving either for carnal distinction to difference them from other
Nations, or for carnal oblations in sacrificing the flesh and blood of Beasts,
or for carnal purifications in washing their own flesh, and their clothes;
Insomuch that the Priests of the Law though their Function were glorious, yet
compared to the Ministers of the Gospel, whose Function is more glorious,
seemed but a kind of Butchers, Cooks, and Laundresses.

Lastly, the works of the Law done in duty to the Precepts thereof, were for
the Letter, external and servile by a kind of eye-service, performed out of
fear under the spirit of bondage. Yea the best of their works, as their
Moralityes were not really works, but properly not-workes; as not to have many
gods, not to worship images, not to be forsworn, not to work on the Sabbath,
not to murder, not steal, not lie, not defraud; for all these and the like
were mere Innocencies or abstinencies from wickedness, which make but a
negative and beggarly holiness. As for any positive holiness they had little
or none; for their Priests and Levites, who went for the holiest persons
amongst them, until afterward the Pharisees by an Hypocritical holiness
exceeded them in the opinion of the people, were acquainted with no works of
kindness or mercy, though they met with a man in extreme distress by thieves,
stripped, wounded, and half dead; as Christ discovers them in the parable of
the good Samaritan, Luke 10.30. etc. And yet their works, how poor soever had
a large abatement or allowance, not only of all errors and frailties, but of
some wilful trespasses, for which God in his mercy granted the legal favors
of Expiation, by certain Sin Offerings and trespas-Offerings, which remitted
only temporal penalties, and mitigated besides the rigor of the Law in
exacting of those works.

The second sense of the Law, is the mystery, mind, meaning or as Paul calls
it, Romans 2.29. and Romans 7.6. and 2. Cor. 3.6. the spirit of the Law, according
to the tacit intent, true meaning and purpose of the Lawgiver for times and
things future, above, and beyond the common construction, which the words and
clauses of the Law afford. This mystical sense for the spirit of the Law, was
not understood, at least not plainly and fully, by the people of Israel to whom
the Law was given; neither could it be understood of any, unless God revealed
it from Heaven in a way extraordinary, as privately was done in some measure
unto some special persons: but publicly it was never revealed, until it was
Preached and published by Christ, who was the first that did away the veil of
the Law, and brought to light that true sense and mind of the Law, whereof the
former sense, which even unto this day, 2. Cor. 3.15. is a veil upon the heart
of the Jew, was a figure and a shadow in foreshewing some representment of
those things which should have a future existence under the new covenant, which
is little else but the new and true sense of the old.

For according to this sense of the spirit, the Promises of the Law were to be
Celestial and eternal blessings in the Kingdom of Heaven, whereof the
principal and final is a divine holiness like that of the Angels, pure and
perfect without any spot or stain of sin; and the accessories to that blessed
state in Heaven, are eternal life, eternal rest, eternal joy, and eternal
glory, in the eternal company of eternal persons. The judgments, penalties,
or curses of the Law for the spirit of it, were to be infernal and eternal
death, with all the losses and miseries thereto incident, quite contrary to the
former blessings. The Precepts of the Law for the spirit of it, were to be all
Moralities; for the legal moralities and all the ceremonies (excepting only
those which were especial figures of Christ) were to be refined and exalted
into the evangelicall moralities of poorness of spirit, pureness of heart,
mourning, meekness, hunger and thirst after righteousness, mercifulnes,
peaceablenes, and gladness under persecution; for none of all these are Counsels
or advises left unto man's choice to be done or not done: but all of them are
Precepts or commands enjoined by Christ, who thereupon assures heavenly
blessedness, Mat. 5.3. And unto all these, the general or capital morality is
the new Commandment of Love, refined also and exalted above and beyond the
legal love, yea above and beyond that love which moves and works by the Law
of nature, as to love mine enemies, to bless them that curse me, to benefit
them that hate me, to pray for them that despite me and persecute me, to lay
down my life for my Brother, and therefore much more for my heavenly Father,
whenever a just cause shall require it.

Lastly, the works of the Law for the spirit of it, were to be Cordial,
wrought inwardly in and upon my heart, by Circumcising of my heart, by
Sacrificing of my heart, by Expiating of my heart, in cutting, killing, and
cleansing away the lusts, motions, and affections of sin. And the works were
to be Liberal, done in the free and noble way of love, answerable to that love
and kindness which appears in God, in condescending to this divine alliance of
being my heavenly Father, and of promising me an heavenly Inheritance; and
answerable to that love and duty which is due from me who am made the son of
God, and his heir to eternal blessedness. And finally, the works were to be
Perfect, so exact and complete as to perform an universal and perpetual
obedience to every precept, not transgressing any one at any time: so sinlesse
and blameless that none of them should need any pardon or forgiveness: so
upright and holy in the sight of God, as to merit and deserve those divine and
heavenly blessings as their proper and due wages.

The full meaning therefore of the Apostles Negative in this verse, is this, A
man is not justified by any works whatsoever, no not by the spiritual works
of the Law. i. e. his Moralities, or moral works by poorenes of spirit,
meekenes, pureness of heart, meeknes, mercifulnes, etc. being measured by the
spiritual sense of Gods Law, are not cordial, liberal, and perfect enough to
make him a title whereby to acquire and have a true right of divine alliance
with God, and of the heavenly Inheritance consequent to that state. This
Negative the Apostle proves in this Chapter by three several arguments, which
are not to be here anticipated, but shall be specified in their due places; in
all which he mentions works with restraint of them to the Law, but his
arguments hold against works in general; and in his Epistle to the Romans he
handles the very same Doctrine of works in general without any restraint of
them to the Law, proving it there by the same arguments alleged here: yet
because there he produces two arguments which here are omitted, I shall
therefore mention those two, and but only mention them. One is Romans 3.27. and
the same is also alleged, Ephesians. 2.9. If man's title or cause procreant whereby
he acquireth, or has a right of divine alliance and inheritance with God, come
by his own works, then all boasting on man's part cannot be excluded; for man
does naturally boast of his works, particularly of such works whereby he
acquires some great alliance and inheritance, especially of such as would make
him a divine alliance to be the son and heir of God. The other is Romans 4.4. If
man's title etc. be by his works, then by the Law of equity, heavenly
blessedness becomes a debt, and is due unto him as his wages, which he has
earned by his work. Now these two respects, that man should be able either to
boast of his blessedness, or to earne it, are both derogatory to the love,
grace, mercy, and kindness of God; for where is Gods grace and his kindness, when
either I can boast of my earnings, or he is drawn to pay his debt?

But concerning the literal works of the Law, there may hereupon be inferred
these two consequences. 1. That the literal works of the Law are no title
whereby a man is justified procreantly or acquisitively to the spiritual
promises thereof. For if the spiritual works which are far more sublime and
more pleasing to God, make man no title to the spiritual promises, as was
proved before, much less can the literal works do it, which are far
less. 2. That the literal works of the Law were no title whereby the
Israelites were acquisitively justified to the temporal promises thereof. For
when God gave them the Land of Canaan to possess it, he utterly disclaymes
their works and their uprightnes from being any title whereby they acquired
their right of possession; Deuteronomy. 9.5. Not for thy righteousness, or for the
uprightness of thy heart do thou go to possess their Land: but for the
wickedness of these Nations the Lord thy God does drive them out before thee,
and that he may perform the word which the Lord swear unto thy fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The right therefore which the Israelites had to
enter that Land proceeded not from their works, but descended from that right
which was before in their fathers. Nay Abraham himself to whom God gave the
original right to that Land, and by whose right the Israelites possessed it,
had not his title to that right by virtue of the literal work of
Circumcision; for manifest it is he had that right before his Circumcision,
Romans 4.11. and he received the sign of Circumcision as a seal of the
righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised. i. e. As a
seal of the right or title which he had by faith; for faith is the right title
whereby a man is justified, as will appear in the words following.

Text.
But by the faith. The right title to the former state. to be understood
Exclusively. The particle (...). Faith needs not be defined, Neither can it be
defined, Yet it may be designed a ways: 1 An high esteem of God is faith,
exemplified in the Ninevites, and the Devils. 2. An acceptance of Gods promise
is faith, Explicated, (the Nature of Gods Promise and of his Precept) and
illustrated 3 ways. 1 From the common definition of it. 2 From the Concurre^ce
of it to a Promise: 3. From Examples in the Old Testament, and in the New.
Faith is a Passive act, of Receiveing, and Embracing, in an easy and noble
manner: Yet faith has mighty effects, yet only jurally, and of grace, and they
are chiefly 4. 1 It enters Gods Covenant of grace. that why so called: and how
it differs from that of works. 2 It assures Gods promise, for the possession of
it, against all difficulties, exemplified in Abraham. Amen, what it signifies.
3 (...) oblige^^ ^oth parties, 1. God, who binds himself by his Promise, and
by his Oath. 2. The Faithful who is bound by his Acceptance, which makes a
Contract, and by his Baptism. 4. It justifies the faithful, as his Title,
exemplified in the Old Testament, and in the New. The faithful are heirs of
God.

The second assertion for the Affirmative, touching the doctrine of
Justification, wherein is declared the true and right title whereby a man is
justified. i. e. whereby procreantly and acquisitively he is made to have a
right of divine alliance to be the son and heir of God; namely, that this
title is by Faith: because faith is the cause efficient, procreant, or means
acquisitive; whereby the right of this state is first acquired, initiated,
commenced or had; for what person soever, whatsoever act, or whatsoever thing
is either a cause or a means of man's Justifying, by such person, act, or
thing, a man is said to be justified; and because faith is that act of man,
therefore a man is justified by faith. And this Affirmative amounts to an
Exclusive, That a man is justified by faith only: to exclude and debar from
Justifying all those acts of man which before were called the works of the
Law, unto which faith is here opposed. For although the Schoolmen in their
Arguments call Faith a Work, and from thence would infer, that a man
justified by faith, is consequently justified by works; yet the Apostle in his
arguments will not endure that faith should be a work; but makes them as
contrary in Divinity, though both be acts of man, as fire and water are in
Philosophy, though both be elements of the world. Which (God continuing his
light unto us) shall be further made evident in our following Exposition of
this clause.

The particle But has in the Greek, (...), which is commonly a word of
excepting, and signifies unless; and thereupon to that sense, it is generally
rendered by the Romish Translators; as if the meaning of the Apostle were, that
A man is not justified by the works of the Law, unless to such works he
add his faith in Christ. But this cannot be the meaning in this place, for
two reasons. 1. Because the Apostle argues against this assertion, and
produces several reasons to overthrow it; all which were inconclusive by
admitting of that meaning. 2. Because such a sense would have made no
controversy between Paul and the false Teachers of Galatia, whom he here
opposes, but would have been very pleasing unto them, and have sided with
their opinion. For they maintained not, that a man should forsake his faith in
Christ; but that unto his works of the Law he should add his faith in Christ,
and be justified by virtue of both together jointly. Wherefore the Greek
particle (...), does not in this place signify exceptively, but adversatively,
and is put for (...), which signifies But; as it does in many other passages of
the New Testament, and is so translated. See Mat. 12.4. and John 5.19. and 1.
Cor. 7.17. and Revel. 9.4. In all which plaplaces and more, the Greek (...),
does signify, and is Englished But.

There is no more necessity of defining Faith, which unto man's Right of
alliance with God is his right title, then there was before of defining works,
which were the wrong title. For man's Justification is commonly in Scripture
referred disjunctively to one of these three titles, that it is either by
Birth, or by Works, or by Faith; and the Scripture does clearly disclaim the
two former titles by Birth and Works, to infer the latter by Faith. The
title by Birth is disclaimed, Romans 9.6.7.8. For they are not all Israel which
are of Israel, neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all
children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, i. e. They which are the
children of the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of
the Promise are counted for the seed. And the title by Works is excluded,
Romans 3.19.20. Now we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to
them who are under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World
may become guilty before God; therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall
no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin.
And therefore according to that right reasoning which is framed in a
disjunction, the conclusion must needs infer the remaining title by faith;
for so the Apostle concludes, Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by faith. As therefore there needs no definition to open the nature
of Birth and Works, because those things are sufficiently known of
themselves, and therefore all Writers pass them over undefined: So there
needs no definition to declare the nature of Faith. Because Faith is either
manifest enough of it self, or sufficiently poynted out by the
contradistinction of it, as it stands opposed to Birth and Works; for things
contradistinct and opposite are, or should be equally known.

Neither is there possibility, to give an entire and true definition of Faith;
because Faith is a thing so indefinite and so general, that it has no genus
which will comprehend it; and it is a thing so notable and so well known, that
there are not other words more known, whereby to express and teach the nature
of it. They therefore who define Faith to be a Confidence in God, are peccant
against the nature of a definition two ways. 1. Because Confidence is a word
more obscure then Faith, and therefore cannot teach the knowledge of it; for
he that knows not what Faith is, will never be made to know it, by telling
him that it is a Confidence; because the word Confidence is more unknown unto
him, and leaves him more to seek, then the word Faith does. 2. Because
Confidence is a word more narrow; for all Confidence is Faith, but all Faith is
not Confidence; seeing Confidence is but one kind of Faith, or rather a degree
of it; the like defect may be found in the word Affiance. Other definitions of
faith commonly exhibited by Divines, are either so wide that they will not
justify at all, or else so narrow that they will justify only under the
Gospel. Yet because divine faith is an act so acceptable to God, and so
desirable to be understood, I shall sutably to our present purpose (declining
all definitions and other significations of the word which in diverse learned
Writers are sufficiently laid out) propose two Notions, designs, or cases
thereof; one in general as it magnifies God, the other more particular as it
justifies man: Both which added together, may serve as signs and marks to
breed a competent and comfortable knowledge thereof.

1. The first notion is this: An high esteem of Gods existence, greatness and
goodness, is Faith in God. For Believing is opposed to Dispising; as therefore
when we have a base and low esteem of the weakness and badnesse of any
person, we are said to despise him: So contrarily when we have a rich and
high esteem of that greatness and goodness which we conceive in any person,
then we have faith in him; and when God is the person whom we so esteem,
then we have faith in God. But although such a faith be acceptable and
pleasing unto God, because it is agreeable to his will and to the truth, that
he should be esteemed as he is: Yet this kind of faith is not Justifying to
acquire any right unto the believer; because it is general and common to
persons justified, and to some not justified; in whom this faith is only
servile to breed in them fear and trembling. Such a faith was in the people of
Nineveh; for at the preaching of Jonah, that within forty days Nineveh should
be overthrown, the people (Jon. 3.5.) believed God, i. e. They had such an
high esteem of Gods greatness and goodness, of his power and justice therein
included, that he could and would execute the judgment threatened against
them; and this faith bred in them a fear of God, and that fear bred a Fast,
whereby they declared their Repentance. And such a faith is in the Devils, Jam.
2.19. The Devils also believe and tremble, i. e. They have an high esteem of
the greatness of Gods Power, and the goodness of his Justice, that he can
and will execute his vengeance upon them for their Rebellion; and this their
faith is only servile, for it breeds in them fear, and makes them to tremble.

2. The second notion of faith is this: An acceptance of Gods promise, is
Faith. The difference between Gods Promise and his Precept, will clearly
teach us the nature of faith and works; and consequently the true difference
between them. The right to a thing and the possession thereof are distinct
respects that may be transferred either jointly, both at once, at the same
time, as is done in a Donation; or they may be transferred severally one after
another, by conveying the right at one time, and respiting the delivery of
possession till another, as is done in a Promise. Gods Promise therefore is his
declared Will to impute unto thee a present right, to the future possession of
some blessing. For God in his Promise wills unto thee two distinct things. 1.
That thy right to the blessing should be in present. 2. That thy possession of
that blessing should be future. And then according heereto, he requires from
thee two distinct acts of thy will in corresponding and consenting to his. 1.
Thy Acceptance, or taking of the present right to the blessing. 2. An
Expectance or trusting to the future possession of it. I say, God requires thy
acceptance; because Gods promissory will is not compulsory to will and command
thy acceptance, by necessitating or binding thee thereto; for in so thinking,
thou destroyest the nature of Gods promise, by turning it into a Precept,
whereof the effect is compulsory and binding. But Gods promise is only
Invitatory to will and require thy acceptance, by calling, moving, and drawing
thee thereto, in using all the gracious and proper means conducing to that
end: Yet leaving thee free at thine own choice, either to accept or refuse it.
A refusal or Rejecting of Gods Promise is Unbelief; an Acceptance or taking
of the present right to the blessing promised, is Faith; and an Expectance or
trusting to the future possession of the blessing, is Hope; for Faith and Hope
are the acts of man's will, answerable and agreeable to the will of Gods
promise. Contrarily, Gods Precept is his declared Will to impose upon thee a
present bond to the future observance of some duty. And herein Gods Will is,
that thy bond to this duty should be present, and thy observance of the duty
should be future from thence forward. But Gods Preceptory Will is not
Invitatory to will and require thy observance, or to leave thee free at thine
own choice either to observe or transgress it; for in thinking so, thou
destroyest Gods Precept, whose nature it is to will and command thy observance,
by laying upon thee a necessity thereof; yet that necessity is not fatal, but
legal. A transgression of Gods Precept, is sin; an observance thereof, is
works; and when the works are cordial and liberal, done heartily and freely
with all the heart and all the soul, then the works are Love. For works and
love are acts of man's will answerable to the will of Gods Precept; and
therefore are different from faith and hope, which answer to the will of his
promise: because his promise and his Precept are Wills different and opposite.

This last notion of faith may be further illustrated from three grounds. 1.
From the common definition of Faith, That faith is an assent to every revealed
word of God; which kind of faith is so large and wide, that it may as well
condemn as justify: yet it will serve to enlighten our notion. For Gods
Precepts are his revealed word: but these because they proceed from his holiness
and uprightnes, are but hard words, and so hard, that when they were spoken
from Mount Sinai, the Israelites could not endure to hear them, but entreated
that they might hear no more of them. See Exodus 20.19. and Deuteronomy. 18.16. and
Heb. 12.19, 20. And Gods Judgments are his revealed word: but these because
they come from his wrath and anger, are but ill words, and far worse then the
former, for they are cursed and fearful words; see the Curses of them at
large, Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. But Gods promise is his revealed word also; and
this word because it proceeds from his love and kindness, is his good word; for
so it is called, 1 Kings 8.56. There has not failed one word of all his good
promise; where for good promise the Hebrew has good word; and Jerem. 29.10. I
will visit you, and perform my good word unto you. i. e. my promise for your
return from captivity. If therefore an Assent to the words of Gods precepts
and judgments which are hard and ill words, be Faith, as indeed it is; though
in effect it prove but a sorrowful and woeful faith, which can justify no
man, but may convict all of sin, and condemn many to death; for it is that
faith wherewith the Devils believe and tremble: much more an Acceptance of Gods
promise which is his good word, is faith; because Acceptance is more then
Assent, and more then Consent; for it is an act subsequent unto a Consent,
whereby a Consent is seconded and ratified. As plainly appears in most
contracts, and particularly in that of Marriage; where after the mutual
Consent of the parties to have each other, there follows a mutual Acceptance
in taking each other. Hence it is manifest, that over and besides all other
sorts of Faith, there are three sorts answerable to the word of Gods Will; viz.
a promissory, a preceptory, and a judicatory faith; (for so let us call them
till we find fitter appellations) because the promises, precepts, and
judgments of God, are the words of his Will.

2. From the Concurrence of faith to a promise. The acts about a promise are
chiefly three; namely, the Making, the Accepting, and the Performing of it;
unto all which from the first to the last, faith must needs concur in a
manner as a Soul, wherewith the promise is animated and lives, and without
which it expires and dies, becoming frustrate and void. For the Making of a
promise is a giving of faith; so the best Canonists and Casuists define a
promise, though we for thy better understanding defined it otherwise. And the
Performing of a Promise is a keeping of faith, which is commonly called
Faithfulness, for hence God is called faithful: because when he has been
gracious to give his faith by making a promise, he will be faithful to keep
his faith by performing it. And therefore the Accepting of a promise (which
intercedeth between the making and performing) is a taking of faith; for when
the thing given is faith, then the thing taken must needs be the same, and
therefore faith also. And if the performance of a promise does denominate him
faithful who makes it, as in all good Writers and in common speech it does:
much more does the Acceptance of the promise denominate him faithful who takes
it: because the faith of the taker does naturally precede the faithfulness of
the giver, as acceptance naturally precedes performance. But if Gods Promise
have any effect at all, and be not frustrated by a refusal, that effect in
thee must needs be faith; for seeing Gods Promise is a Declaration of his Will
to devise unto thee a present right to the future possession of some blessing;
this Declaration coming from God, does or should work in thee a ground to
hope for that future blessing; and a ground of things hoped for, is faith, as
the Apostle notifies it; Heb. 11.1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped
for. i. e. a ground for hope is faith. And because the blessing is future,
therefore it is not seen; for things future are not seen: yet Gods declaration
of the futurity thereof does, or should produce in thee an evidence or
knowledge of it, and an evidence or knowledge of things not seen, is faith; as
the Apostle again designs it in the former verse.

3. From the Examples of Faith. In the Old Testament, Genesis 15.4.5. God promised
unto Abraham a Son and Heir of his own body, and a numerous Posterity, as
the Stars of Heaven, i. e. God declared unto Abraham his will to give him a
present right to that future blessing; and in the verse following, Abraham
believed in the Lord, i. e. He accepted of Gods Promise in taking it; and this
taking was seconded with trusting to it; for by his acceptance, he had a good
ground to hope for a son, and an evidence for a son not yet seen; which
ground and evidence is faith or belief: But the act which caused that ground
and evidence was his Acceptance or taking the Promise. God by the message of
Moses promised unto the Israelites in Egypt a deliverance from their bondage,
and an entrance into Canaan, and (Exodus 4.31.) the people believed, i. e. They
accepted of this promise by taking it, and their taking caused their trusting
to it, i. e. Their faith caused their hope of it; and to express their
thankfulness for it, They bowed their heads and worshipped. In the New
Testament, God by the message of Jesus Christ has made unto thee most precious
promises; (for hence that Testament is called the Gospel, i. e. The good
message or word of God) as the promise of present freedom or alliance with
him, to be his son jurally by having a present right of inheritance; the
promise of present sanctity to regenerate thee with his spirit, to be his
Son morally, by leading a holy life, and the promise of future privileges
and blessings, to be his son gloriously in the final state of blessedness;
as the future forgiveness of thy sins, the future resurrection of thy body,
and thy future life everlasting; for God by Christ has declared his will to
impute unto thee a present right to all these blessings. Is now thy will
answerable and agreeable to Gods will, to correspond and consent to him
herein? And further, do thou actually accept of these promises, to take God
at his word? Then thou have faith and do believe. For although these
blessings be not seen, yet by thy accepting the promises of them, thou have a
good evidence for them, and a good ground for thy hope of them; and such
evidence and ground is faith and belief. And though thou dye before thou
possess all these blessings, as certainly thou shall and must either dye or
be changed before thou can enter the possession of all: Yet thou dyest in
faith, because, Heb. 11.13. Thou have seen them a far off, and wast
persuaded of them, and have embraced them; for by these reasons the Apostle
proves that the Patriarchs dyed in faith, though they had not received the
promises, i. e. Not the possession of the blessings promised.

Hence it appears that Faith is a passion; for although it be an act of the
will, yet it is not an act active, which consists in working or doing any
thing; but an act passive or act of sufferance in receiving and embracing that
state or condition, wherein the love and kindness of God would put thee; or
which is all one, in not refusing or rejecting the good will and pleasure of
God toward thee. And therefore in Scripture Faith is expressed by these two
passive words of Receiving and Embracing; as Receiving the word, Luke 8.13.
They on the Rock are they, which when they hear, receive the word with joy, i.
e. Believe or accept the word of Gods promise; as it plainly appears by the
words immediately following, wherein the Verb receive is changed into believe,
which for a while believe, and Receiving Christ, John 1.12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name; where we see in like manner that the former Verb
received, is interpreted by the latter to signify believing; and Embracing the
promises, Heb. 11.13. And were persuaded of the promises, and embraced them, i.
e. believed them; for that act which naturally follows persuasion, is
Belief. And by these two passive words of Receiving and Embracing, Faith is
opposed to the two contrary words of Refusing and Rejecting, which will not be
passive, and therefore signify Unbelief; as Refusing Christ, Heb. 12.25. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks, i. e. See that ye believe him; for not
refusing is receiving, and receiving is believing; and Rejecting Christ, John.
12.48. He that rejects me and receives not my words, i. e. He that
believes not in me; for of the former words the latter are an Exposition. And
Rejecting Gods Counsel, Luke 7.30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the
counsel of God, i. e. They would not believe or receive Gods promise, which is
his divine and heavenly counsel. Thou see hereby that in making faith, all
the action lies on Gods part, in declaring his promise, and persuading thy
acceptance: Be thou only Gods Patient to suffer his action and operation upon
thee, and the act of faith is done. For the passion or sufferance on thy part
is neither painful nor shameful, but most easy, gentle, and noble; for it
consists only in accepting, receiving, or embracing his kindness toward
thee, or at least in not refusing or rejecting it. So that all thy act of faith
seems but this; what Gods good will would have to be firm, do but thou
affirm; or unto his promise say but Amen, i. e. So be it; for Amen is the
Hebrew word for Faith; or unto the word of his promise, set but thy Fiat, fiat
quod dicitur, i. e. Let his word be done; for from this Fiat is framed the
Latin word Fides, and it may be also the English word Faith, by transposing
the Vowells and asperating the last Consonant; which the License of Etymology
will well allow and does commonly practice. Yet among Latin Authors the
Latin word Fides is commonly taken actively, for fidelity or faithfulness in
performing faith given.

But although this promissory faith be a passion or sufferance for the essence
of it, yet for the efficacy, it is or ought to be so strongly effectual, that
in and upon the faithful it produces mighty effects, events, and issues; as
does appear in a long list of Believers, Hebr. 11. and will appear in this
Chapter, ver. 18. For a true and lively faith is somewhat like the affections
of the mind, or like the diseases of the body, both which are passions, and
yet have powerful and violent operations. Yet unto both these, faith is unlike
herein, that her effects flow not from her necessarily and naturally ex natura
rei, according to the course of nature; but jurally and arbitrarily ex
instituto Dei, according to the ordinance and appointment of God. And although
de facto, some of her effects do not actually follow, yet de jure and ex
debito, according to the course of right and duty, they always ought to
follow; for where they follow not, that faith to that effect is ineffectuall,
frustrate, void and dead. There is between faith and sin this contrariety,
that as Faith is the acceptance of Gods promise, so Sin is a repugnance to his
precept; and therefore the effects of faith have a contrary resemblance to the
effects of sin. Sin has in it less entity then to be a passion, because every
sin is a privation, and most sins are mere omissions: yet such are the effects
of sin, that from thence follow all the stirs and troubles on earth; as the
privates miseries of distresses, imprisonments, banishments, and fearful
executions, and the public calamities of war, famine, and pestilence; for
too manifest it is, that sin has strength enough to produce all these effects,
yet sin has not this strength from her self, but from the Law, 1. Cor. 15.56.
The strength of sin is the Law. So of faith, (though it be a passion) such are
the effects, that from thence follow all the favors and blessings of heaven;
as the Justification of thy person, the Regeneration of thy mind, the
Remission of thy sins, the Resurrection of thy body, and thy Life everlasting.
For manifest it is from Scripture, that faith has strength enough to produce
all these effects: yet faith has not this strength from her self as she is an
act of man, but from the grace of God, who to the praise of the glory of his
grace, is gracious and favorable unto faith, by honoring it in that high
degree, as to attribute, assign or impute unto it these strong and mighty
effects. Whereof preparatively to our present purpose, I shall mention those,
which flowing immediately from the essence of it, do yet further illustrate
the notion of it, and they are chiefly four.

1. The first effect of this promissory faith is, To enter Gods covenant of
grace. For Gods promise before the access of thy faith to accept it, is in
respect of thee but a sponsion or single act of his will on his part to devise
unto thee a present right to the future possession of his blessings. But by the
access of faith on thy part to accept it, his promise is advanced and formed
into a Covenant with thee in particular, whereinto thou entrest by the act of
thy faith. Because thy faith is an act of thy will to accept and take that
present right, which his will is to grant and give thee; and consequently by
means of thy faith thy will is agreeable to his will touching one and the same
thing to be had: and agreement of wills between several parties for the
having of one and the same thing, makes up the entire nature of a Covenant, and
consequently makes up thy entrance thereinto. And the covenant entered by means
of this faith is the covenant of Grace; which is so called, because the ground
thereof is Gods grace, which moves him to this act of kindness, in making or
passing his promise unto man: and because the matter thereof is merely
gracious, consisting of those favors, benefits, and blessings conferred upon
man, which are not due to man by any Law. In the Old Testament Genesis 15. God
covenants with Abraham by way of promise, that God on his part would be unto
Abraham a shield, and an exceeding great reward, that he would give him a son
and heir of his own body: and Abraham thereupon enters covenant with God, that
he on his part did believe in the Lord, i. e. did accept, receive, and embrace
those promises; here was a Covenant of Grace, because the ground of it was
Gods grace, and the matter very gracious. In the New Testament, Heb. 8.10. God
covenants with thee by way of promise, that he on his part will put his Laws
into thy mind and write them in thy heart, that he will be a God unto thee, and
take thee for one of his people, that he will teach thee to know him in respect
of his greatness, goodness, and kindness toward thee, that he will be merciful to
thy unrighteousness, not only to forgive, but also to forget thy sins and
iniquities. If thou on thy part accept these promises by thy faith, thou
thereby entrest Gods Covenant, and the Covenant thou entrest is the Covenant of
Grace, because the ground of it is Gods grace, and the matter of it very
gracious. Contrarily, the Covenant made with God by means of a Preceptory
faith is the Covenant of works: because the ground thereof is man's duty, as he
is the work or creature of God, owing all allegiance, obedience, and
observance unto his Lord and Maker: and because the matter thereof is
laborious, consisting of those works, Offices, and services, which by Gods Law
are due from man to God. In the Old Testament (Genesis 17.1.10.) God covenants
with Abraham by way of Precept, that Abraham on his part should walk before
the Lord and be perfect, upright, or sincere, and that every male child in
Abraham's family should be Circumcised; here was a Covenant of works, because
the ground of it was Abraham's duty, and the matter somewhat laborious for works
to be done. Again in the New Testament (Mat. 5.3.) God covenants with thee by
way of Precept, that thou on thy part shall be poor in spirit, shall mourn,
shall be meek, shall hunger and thirst after righteousness, shall be
merciful, shall be pure in heart, shall be a Peacemaker, shall suffer
persecution for righteousness sake. Here again is a Covenant of works,
because the ground of it is thy duty, and the matter somewhat laborious. In a
word, every promise of God is a Covenant of grace, every Precept of God a
Covenant of works, every judgment of God a Covenant of Curses, and every
voluntary sin of man is an involuntary Covenant to suffer those curses.

2. The second effect is, to assure Gods promise. The promise of God, though in
respect of his will on his part, it be firm, sure, and fast: yet in respect of
any right or benefit thence accruing to thee, it is neither firm, sure, nor
fact, before thy faith or acceptance of it: but by virtue of thy faith or
acceptance it is made stable, firm, and sure. Because that promise which Gods
will is, should be stable, firm, and sure, is by thy faith actually
established, affirmed, and assured; for, as was showed before, thy faith does
advance and form Gods promise into a Covenant; and a Covenant is an agreement
so stable, firm, and sure, that the parties agreed cannot repent, revoke,
recede, or go back. And if a Consent of the parties to be married, does make
the marriage sure, (for upon their consent we use to say they are sure
together,) much more does thy acceptance of Gods promise make thy alliance to
him stable, firm, and sure. And this faith does assure, not only thy present
alliance, but also the future possession of all those blessings which unto this
alliance are appendent and consequent, as the Regeneration or sanctification of
thy mind, the Remission of thy sins, the Resurrection of thy body, and thy
Life everlasting. And unto this assurance, this faith is quickened and
strengthened by the first notion of faith, which is a high esteem of Gods
goodness and greatness, that what the goodness of his will was pleased to promise,
that the greatness of his power is able to perform. For this estimatory Faith
by giving unto God the glory of his goodness and greatness, does nourish and feed
up thy promissory faith into an assurance of a strong and full persuasion of
Gods performance; though unto thy self thou seem never so poor and dead a
Creature. For notwithstanding all the difficulties, and casualties in the world
that may seem to disturb Gods performance; notwithstanding thy ignorance in
many points of Religion that may seem to hinder it; notwithstanding thy sins
of error and frailty that may seem to cross it; notwithstanding thy death
and dissolution in the grave that may seem to bury it: Yet after all these,
God remains constant, firm and sure, both willing and able to perform his
promise, and will actually perform it unto thee. And of this assurance thou
have a precedent in Abraham's faith, which notwithstanding the deadness of his
own body, and of Sarahs Womb, was so firm, sure, and strong, that he was
sure of a son, because he considered not the deadness of his body, but the
goodness of Gods will, and the greatness of his power, Romans 4.19. And being
not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was
about 100. year old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb; he staggered
not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving
glory to God; and being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was
able also to peforme. Hence Amen the Hebrew word for faith does also signify
verity, constancy, firmness, and surenesse: Because it is the nature of faith
to be true, constant, firm, and sure; not only formally for the quality of
it, as it is opposed to falsehood, doubting, staggering, and wavering; but also
effectively for the virtue of it, because it makes the promises of God to be
stable, constant, true, firm, and sure; which otherwise, and without it, will
prove frustrate and void, to be of no force or effect to him who diffides
them. And this Assurance of Gods promise is an effect so peculiar to thy faith,
that not works but faith is ordained for thy title, to this very end and
purpose, that the promise might be sure unto thee, Romans 4.16. Therefore it is
of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to
all the seed.

3. The third effect is, to oblige both parties. God at the first was not
obliged to make any promise, but was altogether free, either to make or
forbear it; and having made it, he is not obliged to perform it, until it
be accepted; for a promise not accepted, is not at all obligatory; or when it
is accepted by some, he is not obliged to perform it to others, till they
have accepted it for themselves: But when his promise is accepted by faith,
there results from thence a double or mutual obligation upon both parties,
whereby each is bound to the other, and therefore neither can recede or go
back; whereby each becomes debtor to the other, and therefore also each is
creditor to the other. Because as was showed before, by faith thou entrest the
Covenant of Gods grace, and that Covenant is a contract of alliance, wherein
God is allied unto thee as a Father, and thou unto him as a Son and Heir;
and contracts breed not a single obligation upon one of the parties only, but
a double and mutual obligation upon both parties, whereby each is reciprocally
bound to the other. As we see in the contract of Marriage, which is the ground
of all natural and legitimate alliance by blood, the man is thereby bound to
perform unto his Wife all the offices and duties of a Husband, and
reciprocally the woman is bound to all the offices and duties of a Wife; for
hence Marriage is called Wedlock, because it locks and binds the parties
wedded. And all Alliances are also Contracts; because an alliance is alligatio
partium, i. e. a binding or tying of parties together each to other.

One obligation resulting from thy faith is upon God, who therein becomes thy
gracious debtor, to owe thee all the blessings, which he was pleased to
promise; and thereupon does oblige and bind himself to the performance;
particularly to perform unto thee, all the offices of a kind, loving and
gracious Father, according to thy divine alliance with him, which is the
fundamental and leading promise. Because (as we showed before) an effect of
thy faith is to assure Gods promise by making it firm and sure; which
certainly is then made firm and sure, when God is obliged to perform it, and
enters bond for thy security. And God the more abundantly to corroborate this
bond of his promise, does bind it over again with the bond of his Oath, that
by two immutable and irrevocable things thou might have a strong assurance.
For thus God bound himself to Abraham, by making a promise to him, and by
swearing the performance of it, and because he could swear by none greater,
he swear by himself, and said (Genesis 22.16.) By my self have I sworn, says
the Lord, for because thou have done this thing, etc, that in blessing I will
bless thee. And after the space of 400. years, God acknowledged this bond,
for when he gave the Israelites possession in the Land of Canaan, he
therefore did it, that he might perform his Promise and his Oath made unto
their Fathers, Deuteronomy. 9.5. The Lord thy God does drive these Nations out from
before thee, that he may perform the word which the Lord swear unto thy
Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For if by the Rule of Piety all persons are
bound to perform their Promises and Oaths, which they swear in the name of
God: Much more is the most holy God obliged to perform his Promise and Oath,
which he swears by himself in his own name. See here the force and power
of faith, which though for the essence it be a passion or sufferance, yet for
the efficacy is so strong and mighty, that it is able to bind Almighty God.
Almighty God whose liberty and freedom is so transcendent, that he is bound
by no Law, for all his Laws are bonds upon the Creature, and not upon
himself, is pleased notwithstanding to be bound by thy faith. Search now and
peruse all the conveyances, evidences, and assurances, and see if any man
living have a better right, interest, or claim to any estate on earth, whereof
he stands not yet possessed, then the faithful have for the future possession
of their heavenly inheritance; for which they have Assurance from God himself
by his double bond; the bond of his Promise, and the bond of his Oath.

The other Obligation arising from faith, is a bond upon the faithful; who
therein becomes a debtor unto God, to owe unto him all those offices, duties,
and services, which are due unto God by the equity and piety of faith. For by
thy acceptance of Gods promise, thou art consequently thereupon obliged and
bound, to perform all the conditions of the promise; or if there be no
conditions expressed (the contrary whereof is most manifest) yet by virtue of
thy faith thou standst bound to perform all those conditions which are
necessarily employed, and all other things which natural equity and piety
require to be done. Because (as was before showed) by thy promissory faith
thou do enter Gods Covenant of grace; and that Covenant is a contract bonae
fidei, i. e. of special confidence and trust, because it is perfected by thy
sole consent and acceptance; and therefore it binds the parties contracting to
perform each to other, not only those things which are therein plainly
expressed in words, but also all things else which according to the rule of
natural equity are due and to be done. And because the Covenant of grace is a
contract of alliance, whereby God becomes thy Father, and thou his Son and
Heir; if therefore there were no written Law of God in the World to specific
or lay down thy respects unto him: Yet by the natural Law of piety and
equity, thou stand obliged and bound to perform unto thy heavenly Father
all those offices, duties, and services which are due from a Son and Heir.
And the more abundantly to corroborate thy bond to these duties, thou do
bind it over again with the bond of Baptism, whereby thou take thy death
upon it, drowning thy self under the water, and rising again to a new life,
to perform the duties of thy new alliance; for Baptism is not only a sign
of grace received, but of a death whereinto thou art buried, and of a bond for
newness of life; Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. If then thy faith
oblige thee not to the duties of a son, it will disoblige God from the
blessings of a Father, and he may disinherit thee for thy disobedience.

4. The fourth effect is, To justify a man; which effect will declare the
Affirmative of the Apostles assertion, that a man is justified by faith. i. e.
Faith is the Means or cause mediall whereby a man is made jurally righteous,
to have the right of a spiritual and divine state, a state of freedom to the
kingdom of Heaven, and a state of alliance unto God, to be the present son and
heir of God, having a present right to the future possession of all the
blessings annexed to that alliance; a present right to the present Regeneration
of his mind, a present right to the future Remission of his sins, the
Resurrection of his body, and Life everlasting. Because Gods promise is his
declared will to give thee a present right to the future possession of some
blessing; and thy faith is an Acceptance of his promise, and therefore it is a
taking of the right given, and therefore also it is an having of the right
taken; and he that has a present right to the future possession of some
blessing, he is justified; for as was formerly showed, this makes the nature of
Justifying. And this faith is thy title whereby this Right is transferred,
imputed, conveyed, or passed unto thee, and whereby on thy part it is first
acquired, commenced, entered, or had. For if that Act which the Civilians call
Consent, be a good title, whereby rights, interests, and claymes are
transferred, conveyed, and passed in all Covenants and Contracts; for all are
made by Consent; some indeed require somewhat more, as reality of things, or
formality of words: but Consent is a requisite necessary to all. Much more is
that act which the Scripture calls Faith, a good title to that Right or
interest which is conveyed and passed in Gods Covenant: because Faith is not
only a Consent or declared agreement for the future taking of this Right: but
it is moreover an actual acceptance by a present taking, receiving, and
embracing of it.

In the Old Testament, Genesis 15.4. God promised to Abraham a son and heir of
his own body; and Abraham believed. i. e. he accepted the promise; and he
counted it to him for righteousness. i. e. God justified Abraham, by imputing,
conveying, or passing unto him a present right to the future possession of a
son; and unto that right Abraham's faith was the title, for immediately
thereupon his right to a son was in present, although the possession was not
until twenty years after; for about so long after was Isaac borne, who was
therefore called the son of the promise. At the same time also God justified
Abraham to a present right for the inheritance of Canaan: But the possession
was not delivered to his Heirs, till about four hundred years after. In the
New Testament, 2. Cor. 6.18. God promises unto thee, that he will be a
Father unto thee, and that thou shall be his Son and Daughter. Do thou on
thy part believe this? i. e. Do thou accept this promise, by an actual
taking, receiving, and embracing this divine and sacred alliance with God? then
God counts it unto thee for righteousness. i. e. he justifies thee, by
imputing, conveying, or passing unto thee a present right of alliance to be
his son and heir; and consequently a present right to all the future blessings
incident to the state of this alliance. Hence the faithful are called and
styled, Romans 8.17. Heirs of God, and joint-heires with Christ. And Gal. 3.29.
Heirs according to the promise. And Gal. 4.7. Heirs of God through Christ.
And Hebr. 1.14. Heirs of salvation. And Hebr. 6.17. Heirs of the promise. And
Jam. 2.5. Heirs of the kingdom which God has promised to them that love him.
Why are they called and styled Heirs? The reason is, because they are
justified. i. e. Because they have a present right to the future possession of
blessedness; for an heir is a person who has a present right to the future
possession of some estate. So that to be justified by faith, and to be made
heir of God, are things either all one in effect, or the latter is but the
property or consequent of the former; as the Apostle intimates it, Tit. 3.7.
That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life.

Text.
Of Jesus Christ. Faith restrained unto Christ. what it is. The subject of it
negatively, and affirmatively. 4. Reasons why faith is restrained unto Christ.
1. Christ is the Conveyer of it. Gods promise immediate, and mediat. Faith
immediate, and mediat, whereof the Necessity, and some Examples. 2. Christ is
the Author or Worker of it, in declaring Gods last Will, and in Proving of it,
by his Witnesses, by his Miracles, by his Holiness, by his death and by his
Resurrection. (The Jewish incredulity.) For Christ is the Executor of it. 3.
Faith in Christ nominateth us in Gods last Will, wherein all Believers are
instituted, and all unbelievers are disinherited, and none preterited. Gods
Will a Testament, ad pias causas, whereof Christ is the Precedent, for
Alliance, and Inheritance, and we are ad instar Christi. exemplified. 4. Christ
does justify by it, yet not principally, but ministerially, in respect of God,
by confirming Gods Will. and by Performing it, for Christ is the Executor of
it, on whom all Believers depend. Recollectio^.

A limitation or restriction of Justifying faith unto Christ. For as in the
former clause, works were restrained to the Law, so here faith is limited
unto Christ, and consequently the faith of Christ whereby a man is justified,
is opposed to the works of the Law, whereby a man is not justified. For that
faith whereby a man has a present right to the benefits and blessings of the
New Testament must be the faith of Jesus Christ, i. e. in Jesus Christ. Because
Christ is not the subject of this faith here, who does believe: but the object
of it, in whom we believe. A like phrase of speech we have, Marc. 11.22. where
the Translation is faith in God, but the Original is faith of God, as is noted
in the margin. So again, Act. 3.16. the Original is, through faith of his
name: but the Translation rightly expresses it in his name. For faith in
reference unto Christ, is in the New Testament varied by these fowr particles,
of, in, through and toward Christ; which although sometime they may seem to
argue different respects, yet generally they signify the same faith referred
in the same respect unto the same person.

If an high esteem of Gods existence, goodness, and greatness, be faith in
God, then an high esteem of Jesus for his existence, goodness, and
greatness, that he is the Christ, i. e. that divine and sacred person who is
God, the son of God, anointed for the mediator of the New Testament, is faith
in Jesus Christ. And if an acceptance of Gods promises, be faith in God, then
an acceptance of them by the means or from the hand of Jesus Christ, is faith
in Jesus Christ. A justifying faith under the Gospel, is not made up by any one
of these degrees single or alone, but must be completed and exalted to both
these degrees; for both these notions must concur to perfect the faith of
Jesus Christ. 1. There must be an high esteem of the person of Jesus, that he
is the Christ; for to this end was the Gospel written, John 20.31. That men
might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God. 2. There must be an
actual acceptance of the promises from Jesus Christ; for, Hebr. 9.15. For this
cause he is the mediator of the New Testament, etc. That they which are
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. There is in the
Devils an estimatory faith of Christ; for they have acknowledged and confessed
of Christ, that he is the holy one of God, and the son of God. See Marc. 1.24.
and Marc. 3.11. And in them there is a preceptory faith of Christ; for they
yield to his authority, and when he commanded them out of the possessed, they
obeyed his command. Marc. 1.26.27. And there is in them a juducatory faith in
Christ; for they believe he is their Judge, who has power to condemn and
torment them, and they submit unto his sentence; only they petition him to stay
the execution, and not torment them before the time. Compare Mat. 8.29. and
Luke 8.28. But in them there is no promissory faith, either in God or in
Christ; not that they want will to accept Gods promises, but that they want
promises to accept; for the promises of the Gospel are not ordained or made to
them: because they are not to be justified to have a present right to any
future blessing, but are already condemned to have a present doom to a future
curse, Mat. 25.41. in everlasting fire prepared for them. And Jude 6. they now
lie in everlasting chains until the day of their execution. But the right
subject of a promissory faith in Christ is man; because the promises of the
Gospel, i. e. the Legacies of Gods last Will and Testament are predestined,
devised, or bequeathed unto man; and therefore man is the person who is to be
justified to have a present right unto those future blessings, and this right
man has and acquires by the title of his faith in Jesus Christ. And his faith
is restrained unto Jesus Christ, not to exclude his faith in God, for all faith
in Jesus Christ, is also faith in God: but partly to distinguish it from all
other faith in God, as from the faith of the Patriarcks which was immediate;
and from the faith of the Jews which was mediate by the means of Moses; and
partly to determinate it upon Christ as the only Means or Mediator of it, unto
whom under the Gospel faith is restrained for four reasons.

1. Because Christ is the Conveyer of it through whom we believe in God. For
that our faith may meet with God aright, it must pass unto him in the same
way whereby his promises are conveyed unto us. And Gods promises come unto man
two ways; one is immediately, when God himself does by himself declare his
promises; so God immediately by himself declared his promise unto Noah, for
the saving of him and all his Family in the Arc from the flood, Genesis 6.18. and
such an immediate promise God gave by himself unto Abraham, for a Son and
Heir of his own body, Genesis 15.4. The other way is mediatly, when God declares
the will of his promise by the means of a Mediator or Messenger, whom God
employeth on purpose to deliver it. Such was Gods promise to the Israelites for
their deliverance out of Egypt, wherein Moses was employed as the Mediator or
Messenger to deliver it, Exodus 3.16. Such was Gods promise to David by the
message of Nathan, for the establishing of the Kingdom of Israel upon the
seed of David, 2. Sam. 7.4. Such was his promise to the Jews by the message
of the Prophet Jeremy for their return from Captivity, Jer. 29.10. Such was
Gods promise to Zacharias by the message of the Angel Gabriel, that his Wife
Elizabeth should bear him a son, Luke 1.13. And such are all Gods promises
specified in the Gospel unto man by the message of Jesus Christ; whose
Ministry is more excellent then any of the former, because, Heb. 8.6. He is
the Mediator of a better Covenant established upon better promises.

Now our faith in God must go Gods way; for when his promise is immediate by
himself, our faith in him must be immediate, as was the faith of Noah and
Abraham. But when Gods promise is mediate by the means of a Mediator or
Messenger, our faith in God must be mediate, to believe in God by or through
his Mediator or Messenger; for by or through the Messenger, our faith is
conveyed and arriveth at God; as by or through the Messenger, Gods promise is
conveyed and arriveth at us. For faith in Gods Messenger is faith in God who
sent him; as our Savior plainly delivers it, John. 13.20. He that receiveeth
whomsoever I send, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me, i. e. believes in him that sent me. And contrarily, diffiding
or despising of Gods Messenger, is diffiding or despising of God himself; as
Christ in another Evangelist tells his Disciples, Luke 10.16. He that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me, i. e. diffideth or not believes him that sent me. For want of this
mediate faith to believe in God by the means of his Messenger, God threatens a
fearful judgment upon the Jews, Jer. 29.18. To persecute them with the
sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence; and to deliver them to be
removed to all the Kingdoms of the Earth, to be a curse and an astonishment,
and a hissing, and a reproach among all Nations; because they have not
hearkened to my words, says the Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants
the Prophets, rising up early and sending them, but ye would not hear, i. e.
ye would not believe. And for want of the like faith Zacharias was for a time
stricken dumb, Luke 1.20. because he believed not the words of the Angel
Gabriel, who was a Messenger from God unto him.

Such a mediate faith in God had the Israelites, who believed in Moses; by and
through whom their faith was conveyed and arrived at God. For Moses was the
Messenger from God, and the Mediator of Gods Testament and Covenant with them.
It was Gods will that the people should believe him; for therefore he was to
work Miracle after Miracle before them, Ex. 4.8. and it was Gods work, that
they did believe in Moses; for therefore the Lord said unto him, Exodus 19.9.
Lo, I come to thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak
with thee, and believe thee for ever; where the Original has it, believe in
thee, though the nicety of Translators spare to express it. For Christ
testifies of the Jews, John. 5.45. That they trusted in Moses. Yet this faith
of theirs in Moses was not terminated in Moses, but in God; for God was the end
in whom this faith rested, and Moses was the Mean through whom it passed. And
all faith under the Gospel is a mediate faith; for although it be terminated
in God to settle and rest in him, as in the final object or last end of it:
Yet it mediateth in Christ as the Means by and through whom it is carried and
conveyed unto God. For, 2. Cor. 3.4. The trust we have to Godward, is through
Christ, and Ephesians. 2.18. Through him both Jews and Gentiles have an access by
one spirit unto the Father, and 1. Pet. 1.21. By Christ we do believe in God,
that our faith and hope in Christ might be faith and hope in God. Hence Christ
says, that our faith in him is not faith in him, John 12.44. He that
believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me, i. e. He
believes not on me ultimately and finally, but his faith is carried through
and beyond me, to determine and end finally in him that sent me.

2. It is called the faith of Christ, because Christ is the Author or Beginner
of it, who works it in us, who by his publishing and preaching of Gods
promises, does invite, call, and draw us to that acceptance of them which is
our faith. For some may peradventure say, how shall a man know, whether the
promises of the Gospel come from God, and whether the beetle Will and Testament
of God; seeing many things are imposed on the World for the will of God, which
either are not his will, or are not sufficiently declared and proved to be his
will? Unto this query, the answer is, That Christ has abundantly made full
faith unto the World, both of his person, that he was the Son of God, and of
his Message, that it was the Will and Testament of God, and consequently on his
part does sufficiently work in us that faith, whereby we accept the Legacies
or Promises therein contained and devised unto us. And Christ was the Founder
or Beginner of this faith, who first made it unto the World. For that faith
which is wrought in us by reading those Evangelists and Apostles who have
written the Gospel, or by hearing those Ministers who preach the Gospel, is but
a derivation and propagation of that faith, which was originally and
primitively taught by Christ. From whom the Apostles and all the Ministers of
the Gospel since succeeding, have their Commission and Authority to teach it;
and unto whom they are Witnesses to attest that truth which was first testified
by Christ, as the first person that made faith of it. And Christ has made
faith of Gods last Will and Testament, by two Acts.

1. By Declaring Gods Will. The last Will and Testament of God was decreed or
determined long since, even from the foundation of the World: But during many
Ages and Generations it was but a Mystery; namely, a Will sealed up, concealed
and kept secret. For hence it is called Gods secret Will, the purpose and
counsel of his Will; and hence the Apostle calls it, Col. 1.26. The Mystery
which has been hidden from Ages and from Generations. Known it was in
general that there was such a Will, for the Being of it was witnessed by the
Law and by the Prophets: Yet the contents of it in particular were not known.
But in the last Age of the World, God nuncupated his Will unto Christ, by
expressing unto him particularly the decree, purpose or counsel thereof, which
in former Ages had been so long concealed. And Christ by special Commission
from his Father sent into the World, revealed, published, declared, and made
known that Will, to work in us our faith of it. For first he made it known
unto his Apostles, John 15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father, have
I made known unto you. And again, John 17.8. I have given unto them the words
which thou gave me, and they have received them; and have known surely,
that I came out from thee; and they have believed that thou did send me. And
afterward he commanded his Apostles to make the same Will known to all
Nations for the obedience of faith, Romans 16.25. Now to him that is of power to
establish you, according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the Revelation of the Mystery, which was kept secret since the
World began: but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures, and by the
Prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to
all Nations for the obedience of faith. And again, Ephesians. 1.9. Having made
known unto us the Mystery of his Will, according to his good pleasure, which
he has purposed in himself.

2. The second Act whereby Christ makes faith of Gods Will, is by Proving it;
for as he was the Publisher of that Will to declare the matter of it: So he
was the Probator to certify the verity of it, that it was the true, whole, and
last Will of God. All which he has proved so fully, that never any Will in
the World, whether Will of man, or the first Will of God, had such a probation;
for thereof Christ has made faith five ways.

1. By his Witnesses. For he had the Testimony of John Baptist, who (John
1.6.7.) was sent from God, and came for a witness to bear witness of the
Light, that all men through him might believe. And John witnessed of him, John
1.29. that he was the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the World.
And hereof John was not an eare-witnesse, who heard it from others, but an
eyewitness, who (John 1.31.) saw the spirit descending from Heaven like a
Dove, and it abode upon him. And Christ had the Testimony of God the Father,
who by a voice from Heaven witnessed of him at his Baptism, saying, Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And his Father witnessed of
him again at his transfiguration on the Mount, saying, Mat. 17.5. This is my
beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. Hence says Christ,
John. 5.36. I have greater witness then that of John; for the Father himself,
who has sent me, has borne witness of me. Now if we receive the witness
of men for the proof of men's Wills and Testaments, as commonly we do, much
greater is the witness of God for the proof of Gods Will. And if at the mouth
of two or three witnesses every word shall be established: Much more shall a
Will be established, when one of the Witnesses is God himself. Hence says
the Apostle, 1. John 5.10. He that believes not God herein, has made him a
Liar, because he believes not the Record, that God gave of his Son.

2. By his Miracles. The signs and wonders which Christ wrought, were not bare
signs but full proofs to make faith, that his message was from God. For he
rebuked the winds and the Sea from a great tempest into a great calm; he
cast out Devils from the possessed, and they obeyed his command; he cured the
sick of diseases incurable; and he raised the dead who had lain in the grave.
Now if two or three miracles of Moses made faith of his message, as they did,
for, Exodus 4.30. When he did them in the sight of the people, the people
believed: much more the many mavelous and mighty works of Christ are of
power to produce faith in Christ. Because they were so incomparable, that by
the confession of multitudes, Mat. 9.33. the like had never been seen in
Israel. And because they were so available to beget faith and belief, that,
Mat. 11.21. had they been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long
ago in sackcloth and ashes: or, had they been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day. Hence Christ to make the fuller faith of his message,
appeals from his words unto his works; for, says he, John 5.36. The works
which the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear
witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And again, John 10.37. If I
do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I do, though ye
believe not me, believe the works, that ye may know and believe that the Father
is in me, and I in him. Hence also in Scripture, miracles are called Signs,
because they are good proofs of that truth, for which they are wrought, and
do naturally beget the belief of it; for every sign is a proof of that
which it signifies.

3. By his Holiness. Christ was a person so holy, that one of his ordinary
titles wherewith he is styled in Scripture, is to be called The Holy one. See
Act. 2.27. and Act. 3.14. and 1. John 2.20. And that unclean spirit who knew
of no holiness in himself, did openly acknowledge the holiness of Christ,
Marc. 1.24. I know who thou art, the Holy one of God. His Birth was holy; for
at his conception the Angel Gabriel tells the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.35. The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee; therefore that Holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called
the son of God. His Life was holy; for through all the whole course of it, he
was so innocent, and so sinlesse, that, 2. Cor. 5.21. he knew no sin. And Heb.
4.15. he was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. And 1.
Pet. 2.22. He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. His Death was
holy; for he repined not at the sentence though most unjust; he complained not
at the execution, though most painful; but Act. 8.32. He was led as a sheep
to the slaughter, and like a (...) dumb before his shearer, so opened he not
his mouth. But he bare all with an holy silence, 1. Pet. 2.23. Who when he was
reviled; reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. Now Holiness is a quality of mighty
force to gain faith and belief to the words of a person endued with that
virtue; for who would not believe the repent of that person whose holiness is
so eminent, that in all his life he never sinned? will such a person forge a
Will, or frame a deceit, or maintain an untruth, and father it upon God?
certainly it is impossible that one and the same person should be (...) holy,
and yet false.

4. By his Death. Christ took his death upon it, that his message was from
God. For when he openly acknowledged himself the son of God, that saying was
made the blasphe^y whereat the high Priest rent his cloths; and it was made the
crime for which he was adjudged to die, and consequently was the cause for
which he suffered the shameful and painful death of the Cross. See Mat.
26.63, 64, 65, 66. and John ^9.7. Yet neither the shame, nor the pain of his
death, could force him to renounce that saying, but he persisted in it to his
last gasp; and then crying with a loud voice, and commending his spirit unto
God, he called him his Father, and gave up the ghost. Luke ^^.46. Had not that
saying of calling God his Father been most certainly true, the shame of the
Cross, and the pains of his sufferings, would have forced him to forbear it
at that time, as a saying too insolent and wholly vain, which in that ca^e
could advantage him nothing. But for our sakes it was, this he would not
forbear it: because he would make full faith of it, by making it in effect
his last words, and witnessing the truth of it with his blood. For as that
saying caused his death, so his death caused the faith of it; because among men
there As no greater proof to make faith of a truth, then when the person who
averres it, does take his death upon it. And the death of Christ seconded with
some miracles at it, was to this purpose so effectual, that presently at his
giving up the ghost, it bred the faith of this truth in the minds of many, yea
in some of his Executioners; and the Centurion openly confessed it upon the
place, saying, Mat. 27.54. Truly this was the son of God.

5. By his Resurrection. The Resurrection of Christ from the dead, was such a
strong proof of his mission from God, that it confirmed all the former
proofs. Not that those former were not sufficient, but because his
Resurrection was a special proof which Christ had singled out to take away
the scandal of his death; that notwithstanding the Jews would take away his
life, yet he could and would take it again, in rising from the grave the third
day. For when first the faithless Jews demanded a sign of his authority, he
proposed his Resurrection to oppose the scandal of his destruction, Joh. 2.19.
Destroy, says he, this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. And when
he foretold his Disciples of his Passion, he always comforted their minds
against it by foretelling also his Resurrection; Mat. 16.21. and Mat. 17.23. If
therefore according to these Predictions his Resurrection had not followed,
then by default thereof, his doctrine and his miracles had been discredited
and diffided. The Resurrection therefore of Christ, declared him to be the
son of God, Romans 1.4. and declared to be the son of God with power,
according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. It
prooved him to be the Judge of the world; which because to the world it seems
incredible, therefore God has made faith of it by raising him from the dead,
Act. 17.31. Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has
given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. This
giving assurance here, is making faith; for so is the Original, and so the
vulgar Italian renders it; and it is almost so in the margin of our last
English Translation, for there it is offered faith: yet the sense comes all to
one, because all giving assurance is making faith. And the Resurrection of
Christ was of such force to make faith, that the Apostles, who were to spread
faith, made it the form of their ordination, ordayning Matthias to be an
Apostle under this form, Act. 1.22. To be a witness with them of Christ's
Resurrection. And they made it the sum of their preaching; for when they
began to preach that Jesus was the Christ, their maine argument was, that God
had raised him from the dead. See Act. 2. and Act. 3. and Act. 4. and Act. 5.
and Act. 13. For this is the very life of faith, 1. Cor. 15.17. For if Christ
be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. And it is the
very heart of saving faith; for, Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy
mouth, that Jesus is the Lord, and shall believe in thy heart, that God raised
him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Shall we not believe one risen from
the dead? Surely the damned are not so unbeleeving; for they seem to believe,
that one risen from the dead, is the fittest person to gain faith and belief.
Hence Dives requested Abraham to send Lazarus to his five brethren living; for
he supposed, that if one should come to them from the dead, they would be more
persuaded by him, then by Moses and all the Prophets. Luke 16.30.

Can now the unbelieving Jew believe any thing in the World, that he has not
seen? Can he believe that Abraham was his Father, by whom he had a right to the
Kingdom of Canaan? And can he not believe that Jesus is the Christ, by whom he
has a right to the Kingdom of Heaven? Can he believe that Moses was the man
of God, by whom God gave his Law? And can he not believe that Jesus is the son
of God, by whom God gives his grace? Has he any grounds to believe in Moses?
And has he not far greater and stronger for his faith in Jesus Christ? for
besides the grounds and arguments for faith in Christ, which hitherto we have
mentioned, Christ had also the Testimonies of Moses, and the Prophets, which
were sufficient to make faith of him, and by the indication of John the Baptist
actually did make it in the first of his Disciples; for say they, John 1.45. We
have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write. But the
Incredulous Jew gives not full credit to his own Creed; he boasts of Moses,
and glories in his writings, and yet he believes not the writings of Moses;
for if he did, he would also believe in Jesus Christ, John. 5.46. For had ye
believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me.

The Reason why Christ does declare and prove the last Will and Testament of
God, is because Christ is the Executor of it. Seeing that Gods Will is a
Testament, therefore it must needs have an Executor, i. e. a person in the
place or stead of God to perform the mind and will of God. Because the
nominating or appoynting of an Executor, is the very essence of a Testament,
which alone does make a Will to become a Testament, and without which no Will
either is or can be rightly termed a Testament; for by the best Lawyers a
Testament is defined to be a Will, wherein an Executor is nominated. Now the
Executor of Gods last Will and Testament is Jesus Christ, who is a person in
the place and stead of God, to execute and perform the will of God. For hence
says Christ, John 6.38. I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own Will,
but the Will of him that sent me, and the Will here mentioned is Gods last
Will and Testament; for in the next following verses he expresses one clause
of that will, containing the blessed Legacies of the Resurrection from the
dead, and Everlasting life, devised or bequeathed to every believer in Christ.
And again the Apostle says, Heb. 7.22. Jesus was made a Surety of a better
Testament, i. e. In effect the Executor of a better Testament; for although
every Surety be not an Executor: Yet the surety of a Testament is the very
same with an Executor; because the Executor of a Will stands bound for the
Testator, to pay all his Debts, Gifts, and Legacies, as the Surety in a bond
stands bound for the principal Debtor. And again Christ professes, that he
came into the World on purpose, to be the Executor of Gods last Will and
Testament, Heb. 10.9. Then said he, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God; for by
Gods will here is meant his last Will and Testament, even that will; whereby
he took away the first Will, that he might establish the second, as plainly
appears by the rest of the words in that verse. Now it is the office of the
Executor to declare and prove the Will and Testament of the Testator. Seeing
then Christ is the Executor of Gods last Will and Testament, therefore he
declared and proved it, to make faith thereof unto us.

3. It is called faith in Christ: Because faith in Christ is the Title, or
appellation whereby men are nominated in Gods last Will and Testament. If Gods
Will contain Promises, Legacies, and Gifts, as most certainly it does, then
the persons to whom those Legacies and Gifts are predestined or devised must
be really, truly, and certainly nominated; for otherwise neither can the
Executor duly perform those Legacies, neither can the Legataries know how to
claim them. It must therefore follow, that in Gods last Will and Testament men
are really, truly, and certainly nominated: Yet not by their proper names,
nor by their sirnames; but by names appellative or common. For they who are
predestined or instituted in Gods will, are therein predestined or
instituted, by the appellative or common names of the Faithful in Christ, of
Believers in Christ, of Receivers of Christ, or such like words equivalent to
these; as John 3.16. Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. and John 6.47. He that believes in me has everlasting life.
And Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and
thy house. And Romans 3.26. That God might be just, and the Justifier of him that
believes on Jesus. And Romans 10.9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. And 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto
you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life. When therefore any man can really, truly, and certainly be
denominated from the appellative or common name of a Believer in Christ, or of
having faith in Christ; the Promises, Legacies, and Gifts of God, are thereby
as firm and sure unto him, as if he had been nominated in Gods Will by his
single or proper name. In like manner, men are reprobated or disinherited in
Gods Will, not by their proper or single names: but by the appellative or
common names of unbelievers in Christ, and of Carnal Livers, and such like
names to these; as John 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned already,
because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
Again, John 3.36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the
wrath of God abides on him. And John 8.24. If ye believe not that I (...) he,
ye shall dye in your sins. Again, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye
shall dye. Again, Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which
are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And again Ephesians. 5.5. For this
ye know, that no Whoremonger, or unclean person, nor covetous man who is an
idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Hence it
appears, that in Gods last Will and Testament, there is no Preterition of any
man, because all men are either Believers, or Unbeleevers; and seeing all
Believers are by name instituted, and all Unbeleevers by name disinherited,
therefore none are preterited or omitted.

The reason why in Gods last Will and Testament, men are nominated by
appellative or common names, is, because (as was before specified) Gods last
Will is a Testament ad pias causas, i. e. for godly uses. For in such Wills and
Testaments, because the Legataries are so numerous, that they cannot all be
personally and particularly nominated by their proper or single names, therefore
is not only necessary, but sufficient and valid, to nominate them in general
by some name appellative or common to them all; as to the Poor of such a
Town, or to the Prisoners of such a Goal. For thereby every poor Person of
that Town, and every Prisoner of that Goal, is truly named in that Will; not
by his single or proper name, but by such a name appellative or common, as does
sufficiently certify and design him out. And such an appellative nomination
is valid and good to convey and settle upon him a right to the Legacy devised
unto him; which every poor Person of that Town, may justly claim by the
title of his poverty; and every Prisoner of that Goal by the title of his
imprisonment. Seeing then Gods last Will is a most gracious and pious Testament
ad causas pientissimas, wherein the inheritance of heaven is predestined or
devised to numerous multitudes of all Nations; therefore the Legataries are
therein nominated, not by their single or proper names, but by the appellative
or common names of Believers in Christ. By virtue of which nomination, every
true Christian is certainly and truly named in Gods Will, and has a true
claim to the blessed inheritance therein devised unto him.

And the reason why in Gods Will men are nominated by the title of faith in
Christ, or of Believers in Christ, is, because Christ is the hypotipe,
Precedent, or Pattern, according to whose right a man is justified or made to
have a right. For Christ has the original right of alliance with God, to be
the only begotten son of God, John 1.14. And we beheld his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten son of the father, full of grace and truth. And he has
the original right of Inheritance, to be the universal heir of God, Heb.
1.2. In these last days God has spoken unto us by his son, whom he has
appointed heir of all things. And he is not the heir in hope only, to have a
present right to a future possession, but he is also the Inheritour, who has
already the actual and real possession of his inheritance to be fully and
finally seated therein; Ephesians. 1.20. God has set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places far above all principality and power. These rights of
Christ are the precedent, image, or pattern, according whereto the Believers in
Christ are instituted and nominated in Gods last Will and Testament; for
therein the very same or the like rights are predestined, devised, or
bequeathed unto them; Namely a right of Alliance with God, to become the Sons
of God; John 1.12. as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. And 1 John 3.1. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God. And also a right of Inheritance, to be the heirs of God, Gal.
4.7. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a Son; and if a Son, then an
Heir of God through Christ. And Tit. 3.7. That being justified by his grace,
we should be made Heirs, according to the hope of eternal life. And believers
by being the Heirs of God are consequently joynt-heires or co-heires with
Christ; Romans 8.17. And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
joynt-heires with Christ. i. e. persons who have the same or the like right
with Christ unto the same inheritance; for joynt-heires are they who unto the
same inheritance have the same, or the like right. As therefore the right of
Abraham was the original, precedent, or pattern of that right which the
Israelite had to the kingdom of Canaan: because that kingdom was originally
given to him, with a conveyance to him and his seed. So is the Right of Christ
the original pattern of that right, which the Believer has to the kingdom of
Heaven: because that kingdom was originally given unto Christ, to him and his
seed. And as the Israelite became by his birth the seed of Abraham, to claim
the like right with him: so the Believer becomes by his faith the seed of
Christ, to claim the like inheritance with Christ, Gal. 3.26. For ye are all
the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: as the Israelites were the
children of God by birth from Abraham; for the spiritual seed by Christ is
also the spiritual seed of Abraham; Gal. 3.29. If ye be Christ's, then are
ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.

4. It is called faith in Christ: Because Christ is the Person, who by our
faith does justify us. For seeing man is the person who passively is
justified; therefore there must be some person, who actively does justify
him. And the principal person who does justify man, or gives him a present
right to future blessedness, is God the Father. Hence says the Apostle, Romans
8.33. It is God that justifies; and again, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foresaw
that God would justify the Heathen through faith; and again, Romans 3.30. It is
one God which shall justify the Circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision
through faith. For to this end it is, why God declares his righteousness or
kindness, Romans 3.26. That he might be Just, and the Justifier of him which
believes in Jesus. The reason why God is the principal person in justifying
man, is because the promises whereto man is justified, come from God, as the
Author and Maker of them, who has predestined, devised, or bequeathed them
unto man; for hence they are called Gods Promises, 1. Cor. 1.20. All the
Promises of God are in Christ yea, and in him Amen. And they are said to be
Gods act before the world began, Tit. 1.2. God that cannot lie, promised us
eternal life, before the world began. And the Testament wherein these promises
are predestined or devised unto us, is the Will and Testament of God; for we
are made the sons of God, not by Birth, but by Will: Yet not by man's Will,
but by Gods Will, John 1.13. Which were born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

But the Ministerial Person who does justify us, is Christ. For he also by
our faith in him, does give us our present right to our future blessedness.
Hence says the Prophet, Esaias. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many; and answerably heereunto the Apostle says, Romans 5.19.
By the obedience of Christ shall many be made righteous, i. e. many shall be
justified. And Acts 13.39. By Christ, all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified, by the Law of Moses; and
according to the Apostles mind in this Epistle, we may truly add the opposite
term of Justification, and affirm, that by Christ all that believe are
justified unto all things, unto which they could not be justified by the Law
of Moses. For hear what Christ himself says, John 3.36. He that believes
on the Son has everlasting life, i. e. is justified unto everlasting life;
for a Believer upon the act of his belief has not everlasting life actually,
but jurally, i. e. he has a present right to the future possession of it,
which is the nature of Justifying, and hear how his beloved Disciple seconds
that saying, 1. John. 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, i. e. has a
present right to the future possession of it, or (which is all one) is
justified unto it. And again, John 1.12. As many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the Sons of God, i. e. Christ did justify them, by
adopting them, or by giving them a present right to become the sons of God; for
all adopting is Justifying, but not contrarily; because adoption is but one
kind and the noblest kind of Justification.

Yet this act of Christ in Justifying us, is but ministerial unto God; for God
is the Author or principal person in our Justifying; and Christ is the
Mediator or Minister by, or through whom God does justify us. Unto us our
Justifying is free, because we use no means for it: But God uses a means
for it, and that means is through Christ, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by
his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And eternal life is
the gift of God; but that gift is handed unto us, through Jesus Christ, Romans
6.23. but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. The
Promises whereto we are justified, show the exceeding riches of Gods grace and
kindness: But his grace and kindness toward us is through Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 2.7. That in the Ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of
his grace, in his kindness toward us through Jesus Christ. And God has
appointed us to obtain salvation; but we must obtain it through our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to
obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. Hence Christ says of his Doctrine,
John 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, i. e. The Doctrine
he taught was his Fathers, principally for the framing of it, and his
Ministerially for the teaching of it. And he says of his Actions, John 6.38.
I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me, i. e. The will he did was principally his Fathers, because it was
his Fathers command; but Ministerially it was his will, because he was to
execute it. And he says of himself, Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister. And the Apostle says of him, Romans 15.8.
Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the truth
of God. Hence also his Mediatorship of the New Testament is called his
Ministry, Heb. 8.6. But now has he obtained a more excellent Ministry, by
how much also he is the Mediator of a better Testament established upon
better Promises.

And the Ministerial Acts whereby Christ does justify us, are chiefly two.
1. By confirming Gods Will and Testament; thereby to establish and settle upon
us our present right or interest to the Legacies or Promises thereof. Upon the
act of our faith in accepting the promises, our present right to the blessings
promised becomes firm and sure; for it is the nature of faith to put a fiat to
the promises accepted by making them firm and sure. But in a matter of such
moment as is an inheritance to Heaven, it is fit that something more should be
done on the promisers part, to make the promise thereof more firm and more
sure, by confirming and assuring it. For a Promise may by the Promiser be
revoked and voyded, until by him it be confirmed: But being once by him
confirmed, it becomes irrevocable and unchangeable; because his act of
Confirmation does defeat and extinguish in him all power to revoke it. And
those promises which in a Will or Testament are framed into Legacies,
whatsoever the faith of the Legatary be to accept them, are of no force at
all, until the Testament be confirmed; for until a confirmation of it, it is
always in the power of the Testator to alter it at his pleasure. Now the
person who makes this confirmation of Gods Testament, and of the promises
therein devised, is Jesus Christ; for of him the Prophet foretells it, Dan.
9.27. And he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week; or in the
beginning of his last Week. And the Apostle testifies, Romans 15.8. That Jesus
Christ was a Minister for the truth of God on purpose, to confirm the promises
made unto the Fathers. And the Means whereby Christ confirms Gods Will and
Testament, is by his death; because all wills and testaments are confirmed by
death, as at the last verse of this Chapter shall more largely be declared.

The second act whereby Christ is ministerial to God in our Justifying, that
it may take effect in us, is the Performance of Gods Will and Testament, and of
the promises therein contained; by delivering or giving us possession of that
future blessedness, which by virtue of Gods promise is devised unto us, and
whereto by faith we have a present right or interest. For as God by the Means
of Christ, does confirm his Testament and promises; so by the same Christ he
performs them; and we from Christ must expect them, by placing in him all our
hope and trust for this performance. For after the devise or grant of a
promise, there remain on the promisers part no more acts to be done, but only
these two, namely to Confirm his promise, and to Perform it. And by this
latter act, all promises are finished, to have their final and last effect;
for the verity or truth of the promiser, which is concealed and may be doubted
in the grant of the promise, does clearly and fully appear in the performance.
Unless therefore there be a full performance of Gods promise, by a future
delivery and possession of that inheritance, whereto by faith we have now a
present right, then both God fails of his truth, and we of our right. For
when a promise is conveyed unto me in the best and surest manner, by being
devised or bequeathed unto me by way of Legacy or Gift in a Will, and the Will
be also confirmed: Yet if it be not performed, what benefit have I by a
promise so devised? Now the person who performs the promises of Gods last Will
and Testament, is Jesus Christ; for by and through him all the promises of God
have the verity and truth of their performance, 2. Cor. 1.20. For all the
promises of God, in him are yea, and in him Amen, i. e. are performed and
fullfilled by Christ, who thereby does perfect the verity and truth of them,
Yea Christ was raised from the dead, that he might be enabled with full power
to perform the promises of our Justifying, Romans 4.25. And was raised again
for our Justification, i. e. to perform the promises whereto we are
justified; for as he was delivered unto death to Confirm the promises: So he
was raised again to perform them.

The Reason why Christ does Perform Gods last Will and Testament, and the
Promises or Legacies therein contained, is because (as was before showed)
Christ is the Executor thereof. It is the office of the Executor to execute or
perform the will of the Testator; for as it is his office to declare the
nature of the will, and to Prove the verity of it: So his final office
(whereto the former are but mediall) is to Perform the Legacies of it.
Otherwise the Faithful who are the Legataries in Gods Will and Testament, and
who therein are Co-heires with the Executor, have no means nor hope to attain
and possess the precious Legacies therein devised and bequeathed unto them.
Because although they have their right and claim by the good will and gift of
the Testator: Yet of themselves they have no ability to take or seize upon
their Legacies. For what ability have the Dead to raise themselves from the
dust of their corruption and rottenness unto celestial and glorious bodies,
whereby to ascend into Heaven, and take possession of that Kingdom? Or what
ability have the Living to transform or change their bodies earthly and
mortal into bodies heavenly and immortal? Or suppose, that the Legatary has
ability to take his Legacy of himself, as in humane wills he many times has:
Yet regularly he has no authority to do it; for if he do, he does in many
cases forfeit it. The course therefore of the Legatary is to address himself
unto the Executor, to whom he must make suit for the Legacy, that in due
manner he may receive the possession of it, from him who is to deliver it,
according to the will and mind of the Testator. Partly because the Executor
being the Mediator, or mediall person between the Testator and the Legatary,
must first be possessed of the Testators estate, that thereby he may be enabled
to deliver the Legacies thence issuing; and partly because a Legacy (according
to the definition and nature of it) is a gift left by the Testator, to be
delivered or performed by the Executor. Seeing then Christ is the Executor of
Gods last Will and Testament, therefore his Office it is to execute and
perform it, by delivering unto the Faithful the possession of those blessed
Legacies, whereto by virtue of Gods Will they are justified. Thus Christ is the
Beginner of our faith, by working in us our acceptance of Gods Promises: and he
is the Finisher of our faith, by performing unto us the Promises which we have
accepted; for hence he is called (Hebr. 12.2.) the Athour and Finisher of our
faith.

Text.
Even we have believed in Jesus Christ. Reason.
An Inference from the former assertion. Because a man is justified, not by the
works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, therefore we who are Jews
by nature or native Jews, knowing the verity and certainty hereof, have
believed in Jesus Christ; for these words are to be referred unto the 15. verse
before, as was there noted. We who before the coming of Christ did believe in
God; for before the coming of Christ, we were the peculiar people of God, to
whom appertained the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving
of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises; even we have relinquished
all these carnal Privileges, and have accounted them but loss, that we might
gain the promises and privileges which come by Christ. For because Gods
former Will and Testament, whereof Moses was the Mediator, is now expired; and
that God is pleased to declare a new Testament, whereof Jesus Christ is the
Mediator; therefore now even we have relinquished the former Testament, and
have adhered to the latter, by accepting the promises of it, and by receiving
Christ for the mediator of it; now placing all our faith and hope in God, by
and through Jesus Christ. For it is great reason, we should now adhere to that
Will and Testament of God, which God now appoints to stand in force.

Justifying is the effect of faith. but not of works. The Reason of it, From a
testimony of Scripture. The Proposition of the Reason, the Assumption. and the
Conclusion. much pressed by the Judaizing Christians for 2 Inconveniences.

That we might be justified by the faith of Christ.] The final cause, end, or
effect of our belief or faith in Christ, namely our Justification; that we
might have a present right to those future blessings which are promised,
devised, and bequeathed unto us in Gods last Will and Testament. For if it be
true, as it is, that faith is the Means of our Justification; then also this
truth must needs follow, that Justification is the end of our says; seeing we
believe to this end, that by means of our faith we might be justified. And
because of that Will and Testament wherein we are Justified, Christ is the
Mediator, by whose means we have our present right to those blessings, and
by whose means we shall enjoy the future possession of them; therefore our
faith is limited and restrained unto Christ. 1. Because Christ is the Conveyer
of our faith, by and through whom we believe in God. 2. Because Christ is the
Author or Beginner of our Faith, by declaring the contents of Gods Will and
Testament, and by proving the verity of it, by his Witnesses, his Miracles, his
Holiness, his Death and Resurrection. 3. Because faith in Christ is the Title or
appellation, whereby we are instituted or nominated in Gods last Will and
Testament, which is a Testament, ad pias causas, wherein Christ is the
Precedent or Pattern according to whose right we are made to have our right,
in being made co-heires with him. 4. Because Christ is the Person who by our
faith does Ministerially justify us, by Confirming unto us Gods last Will and
Testament; and by performing unto us the promises thereof; for of Gods last
Will Christ is the whole and sole Executor, to publish, prove, and perform it.

And not by the works of the Law.] Seeing the title whereby we are justified,
is our faith in Christ; therefore all title by the works of the Law, is hereby
excluded; for where two titles unto any right are incompatible, and cannot
stand together, he that claymeth by the one, must necessarily relinquish the
other. No works therefore of the Law (in what sense soever we take it, whether
in the literal sense as it was delivered by Moses and understood by the
Israelites; or in the spiritual sense, as it was declared by Christ, and is
now understood by the faithful) are of that efficacy and virtue to make us a
true title whereby to acquire and have a true right and claym unto heavenly
blessedness. And consequently seeing the final cause or end of our faith in
Christ is to be justified, therefore a further end of our faith in Christ
subordinate unto the former, is no longer to rest in the literal works of the
Law, but wholly to relinquish it, as an act of God which now unto us is expired
and dead; for so the Apostle would be here understood, as appears by his
reasoning at the 19. verse next following. And seeing God by Christ has
declared and published his new Will and Testament of the Gospel; therefore
hereby his former Will of the Law, though for the time of it very good and
useful, is utterly infringed, cancelled, and void.

For by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. The particle (...),
in the Greek which is here rendered For, being a Conjunction causall, does
plainly show, that the truth of this clause is the cause or reason of that
truth which was delivered in some former clause. For the principal Doctrine of
this whole epistle concerns the title, whereby a man is justified; which for
the clearer evidence thereof, the Apostle delivers bipartitely in two several
assertions. Whereof the first is a Negative, that A man is not justified by the
works of the Law; and the second an Affirmative, that He is justified by the
faith of Jesus Christ. These being thus proposed, his next business is to
produce arguments or reasons for the confirmation and proof of these two
several assertions: but first he begins with the first, which is the Negative,
that A man is not justified by the works of the Law. And this Negative he
proves in the following verses of this chapter by three several arguments or
reasons, whereof the first is contained in this clause: For by the works of
the Law shall no flesh be justified.

No flesh.] i. e. No living man, whose life is mortal. For to call man flesh,
is an Hebraisme, to put man in mind of his mortality; because seeing he is
framed of flesh and blood, which are materials but weak and frail, therefore
he must needs decay and dye. Be justified. i. e. be declared upright. No
mortal man, whose life is tried by the Law, shall by his work in observance
thereof, be found so complete and perfect, as to be pronounced upright and
sinlesse. For his works shall never appear so cordial, so liberal, and so
perfect, as to have performed an universal and perpetual obedience to every
Precept of the Law in every sense thereof, without transgressing any one at any
time. Formerly it has been showed, that the word Justified has in the
Scripture several senses; the Apostle therefore having in the former parts of
this verse taken this word in a jurall sense, for the imputing or conveying of
a right, interest, or claim, does now in this last clause take the same word in
a legal sense, for declaring or pronouncing upright, innocent, or sinlesse.
For when a word does bear several senses, and the Apostle has expressed it
in some one sense, he loves for the greater elegancy, to repeat the same word
again in another sense, if the matter will admit it, as here it will and
does; for otherwise we fail of the Apostles intent, and lose all the force of
his argument. If therefore in this last clause of the verse, the word Justified
be taken in the very same sense which it carried in the first clause; then is
this last clause but a bare repetition of the first, and no confirmation of it
at all. For of this assertion, that A man is not justified by the works of the
Law; how can this be a reason or proof, For by the works of the Law no flesh
shall be justified, if in both clauses the word justified carry one and the
same sense? But if the sense be varied as we have glossed it, then will this
latter clause be a pregnant proof of the former, and consequently it will
excellently suit with the scope and mind of the Apostle. And the Greek
particle (...), which elsewhere is constantly rendered Because, does both
require and enforce this sense.

And that this Proof or reason may carry the greater authority for the
confirmation of his former Negative, he seems to ground it on a testimony of
Scripture, and to produce it from Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with
thy servant, i. e. Do not arraigne me before thy Tribunal or Seat of
Judgment, to try my works by the rigor of the Law, and then to handle me
according to my deserts; For in thy sight shall no man living be justified, i.
e. Because if thou in thine own person or before thy self shall take the
cognizance of any man's works, to examine them thoroughly by the rule of thy
Law, and to give sentence upon him according to his works, no man living can
by thy mouth be declared or pronounced upright or innocent. So that Paul has
in a manner explained the sense of David's saying, in adding these words, by the
works of the Law. The reason therefore whereby the Apostle argues here,
seems to run thus. If a man will be jurally justified by the works of the
Law, i. e. If he will claim from God a present right to the future
Inheritance of Heaven by the title of his works; then God entering into
judgment with him, and in the sight or knowledge of God, he must by his
works be legally justified, i. e. He must be declared or pronounced upright
and innocent, never to have been an offender against any Law of God. For
supposing but not granting, that it is an effect or work of the Law, to
Justify a man jurally, i. e. To give him a present right to the future
Inheritance of Heaven: Yet certainly the Law cannot produce this effect, but
only in those, who by the works of the Law are legally justified, i. e. Are
declared upright and innocent in the sight and knowledge of God. For if in the
sight of God a man be found an offender or peccant against any one Law of God,
then in that case the effect or work of the Law upon him, is to Condemn him,
by imputing unto him a present guilt of a future punishment; which is an effect
quite contrary to that of jurall Justifying, which imputes a present right to a
future blessing. For says the Apostle, Romans 4.15. The Law works wrath, i. e.
It is an effect or work of the Law, to bring the punishment of death upon
every transgressour of it; though he offend but in some one point of it, as it
is expressed, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all, i. e. He that offends against one single Law,
whereof the penalty is death, is in as bad a case, as if he had offended
against all; for by the breach of that one Law he is guilty of death; and of
more punishment he could not be guilty, if he had been guilty of breaking
all the rest: Because death is a final punishment, beyond which there is no
other.

But (to come now to the Assumption) though before men at their seats of
Judgment, in their sight and knowledge of the cause, some man may be and has
been legally justified, i. e. declared upright and innocent; for in this sense
Paul testifies of himself, Phil. 3.6. that touching the righteousness which
is in the Law he was blameless; not that he was blameless in the sight and
knowledge of God; but in the knowledge of men, and of his own conscience, in
that neither himself, nor any other man could justly lay any legal blame unto
him: and in this sense God himself testifies of Job, Job. 1.8. that he was a
perfect and an upright man: yet Gods testimony of Job must not be so
understood, as if Job were perfect and upright in the sight and knowledge of
God; for that sense Job himself does afterward disclaim: but God saw and knew
Job to be perfect and upright in the sight and knowledge of men, in that no man
could charge him with the breach of any Law; and the like sense is to be
conceived of Zacharias and Elizabeth, of whom it is reported, Luke 1.6. that
they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless. Yet before God, at his seat of Judgment, or
upon his sight and knowledge of the cause, no man living (except Jesus Christ)
ever was, or ever shall be Legally justified, i. e. declared and pronounced
perfect and upright, to be a man sinlesse, and blameless, no way peccant
against any Law of God. For by the sentence of God delivered in the Scriptures,
all men living of what Nation or Religion soever, are declared sinners against
his law and guilty of death. For such are the Gentiles declared, who had not
the law, but in doing by nature the things contained in the law, were a law
unto themselves: and such are the Jews declared, who rested in the law and
made their boast of God. See Romans cap. 1. and cap. 2. per totum. Yea the Jews
are declared in no wise better then the Gentiles, but of both it is proved,
that they were all under sin, Romans 3.9. And the end of that declaration is, to
stop all mouths, and to find all the world guilty, Romans 3.19. that every mouth
might be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God: and the
reason of that guiltiness is, because all have sinned, Romans 3.23. For all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God. But the final or last end of that
Declaration is, that man's right to the inheritance of Heaven should come by
promise and gift, and his title to that right should be by faith of Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3.22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.

Therefore (to add the Conclusion) no man living shall be jurally justified,
i. e. Shall have a present right to the future estate of blessedness, by the
title of his works. The sum of the Apostles argument is briefly thus: If a
man have a right to everlasting life by the title of his works, then he must
by his works in the sight of God be declared upright: But no man living can
by his works in the sight of God be declared upright: Therefore no man living
can have a right to everlasting life by the title of his works. This is the
debility of man's works, if we consider them as a title whereby he acquires
and has that right: But if we consider them as a tenure whereby he preserves
and holds his right, then they may and must be of some efficacy, as will appear
afterward in this Chapter at the 18. verse.

VERSE. 17.
Text.
But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are
found sinners, is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid. Sense.
Found sinners.] i. e. Found continuers in sin.

Is therefore Christ.] i. e. Himself and his Doctrine?

The Minister of sin.] i. e. One that gives occasion and license unto sin,
even unto impiety and wickedness.

Reason.
These words are, and well enough may be translated interrogatively: But (as I
conceive) they are rather to be understood illatively, thus. But if while we
seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found sinners, then it
will necessarily follow, that therefore Christ is the Minister of sin.
Justification by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for
against that Doctrine some men did or might argue thus. Ye that are Jews by
nature seek to be justified, i. e. ye seek a state of divine liberty or
freedom, whereby ye have a present right to the future possession of heavenly
blessedness, whereof one particular is, the Pardon of all your sins past,
present, and to come. And ye seek this right by the title of your faith in
Christ, i. e. By your high esteem of him for the son of God, and by your
acceptance of those promises wherein he gives this divine state. And ye make
this faith your sole and only title, excluding all works of the Law from any
concurrence therewith. But while ye have this present right to blessedness,
and seek the future possession of it by faith only, whereby ye are certain
and assured of it; then hence it will follow, that in the mean time ye may
continue in sinfullnesse, living in all kind of licentiousness, as the sinners
of the Gentiles lived before their access unto Christ. And it seems ye make
account to live thus; because ye speak so much against the Law, which would
bridle ye from sin, and because ye disclaim the works thereof from being
any part of the title, whereby ye acquire this right, restraining your title
to faith only. And in case you do live thus by continuing your life in
sinfullnesse; it will thence further follow, that Christ who gave you this
liberty did thereby give you a license to sin, and consequently did open a
door and minister an occasion to all wickedness. For the word Sin in this
place must be understood, not generally for any small degree of sin, by way
of error or frailty (for in such sins the faithful do, and cannot but
continue in this life;) but specially and eminently for a high degree and
constant course of wickedness and lewdness, as Perjuries, Murders,
Adulteries, Thefts, etc. from which sort of sins all that are truly
faithful, may and must abstain in this life.

This Objection against Justification by faith only, without works, was much
pressed, and frequently urged; as may appear by the mention of it in this
place; and by these words, Romans 6.2. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? and by these, Romans 6.15. Shall we sin, because we are not under the
Law, but under grace? and by several passages in the first Epistle of John
cap. 3. where consider verse 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The parties who urged this
objection were not unbelievers, who refused and rejected the faith of Christ:
but over-believers, who received the faith of Christ, and moreover retained the
Law of Moses; I mean those Judaizing Christians, who in their zeal unto Gods
Law labored for a compliance between Moses and Christ, excluding neither, but
retaining both. For they supposing that the Gospel of Christ was but an
addition or superstruction unto the Law of Moses, did confidently teach, that
the works of the Law were the entrance and the way unto faith in Christ; and
consequently they urged the works thereof, principally Circumcision to be
retained by the believing Jews, and to be imposed upon the believing
Gentiles, as things necessary to Justification, and salvation; as it appears
Acts 15.1. And these Judaizers did by virtue of this objection spread their
false Doctrine against Justification by faith only, in the Churches of Judea,
of Syria, of Galatia, and of Italy; for in the Epistle to the Romans we find
the Apostle copiously refelling this objection; and we find the like in the
general Epistle of St. John. The Matter of this objection contains two
inconvenient or absurd Consequences, which the urgers thereof conceived would
necessarily follow upon the Doctrine of Justification by faith only without
works. 1. That then Believers would take occasion to continue in all kind of
sin and licenciousnes. 2. That thereupon Christ would become the occasioner
and minister unto all sin and licenciousnesse. By which two Consequences they
would conclude, that the Doctrine of Justification by faith only, without
works, was ungodly: because that Doctrine whatsoever it be, must needs be
ungodly, from whence there will necessarily follow ungodly consequences.

A general Answer.

God forbid.] A general answer unto the former objection, plainly denying the
necessity of the Consequences therein pretended; that in the way of true
reason, they cannot be necessarily deduced from the Doctrine of Justification
by faith only without works. And this denial is not a bare and naked
negation, which only rejects the former objection: but it is a negation
vested with a word of abomination; for it is expressed by a phrase which
consignifies a high degree both of disdaining and abhorring the objection as a
profane and wicked discourse: because the ungodly Consequences therein
mentioned cannot be rationally collected from the former Doctrine of
Justification. The Greek is (...). i. e. never be it so; which word is a form
of Supplication or prayer unto God against some future and fearful evil,
that God would divert and cross the access of it. For it is equivalent to the
Hebrew Chalilah, and to the Greek (...), which are the expressions of a mind
highly disdaining and abominating. And it is opposed to the Hebrew Amen. i. e.
so be it, and to the Greek (...). i. e. God grant it; which contrarily are
forms of Application, and benediction, that God would approve and confirm
with his fiat some present, or future good, the blessing whereof we earnestly
wish and desire.

VERSE 18.
Text.
For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor. Sense.
Build again.] Viz. By my acts of sin and lewdness of life.

The things.] i. e. The state of sin and misery wherein I stood, before I was
justified.

Which I destroyed.] i. e. Which state of sin, I exstinguished, upon my
Justification by faith, whereby a new state was created unto me.

I make my self a transgressor.] i. e. I become a very sinful sinner, who
after pardon relapseth: and it is not Christ who makes me so, but I make my
self so.

Reason.
An Answer particularly, the Phrase of it by way of Proverb, the Frame of it by
way of Personation. the Scope of it.

The particle For does teach us, that these words contain a Reason, why he so
disdainfully denied the consequences, pretended in the former objection,
carrying withal particular Answers to those two particular Consequences. To
the first consequence, that Men justified by faith of Christ only, would
continue in all kind of sinfulness; he Answers, Men must not build again by
acts of sin, that state of sin, which by their Justification they destroyed;
for in so doing they become transgressors. To the second consequence, that
Thereupon Christ would become the minister unto sin, he Answers; In case men
justified become transgressors; it is not Christ who makes them so, by
ministering of grace; but they make themselves so, by abusing the grace which he
has ministered.

The Phrase of this Answer, By building again things destroyed, seems to be a
Proverb; which argues in a man, not only a pure levity of doing, undoing,
and re-doing of the same thing, but a levity seasoned with much folly; when a
man is at great charges and takes much pains, to compass a matter which makes
his condition a great deal the worse. For building is an action very painful
and chargeable; and when the edifice is sin and transgression, the matter is so
much the worse. The Frame of this Answer is disposed by way of Prosopopy or
Personation, wherein by a sudden change of the person from the third to the
first, the Apostle translates the subject of the point in debate, and
attributes it unto himself. Because the matter being somewhat odious and
offensive, he would qualify and temper it by the modesty of his discourse, by
speaking that in his own person and of himself, which was true of every
Christian; especially of a Jew by nature, or of a native Jew, wh^ (...) lived
under the Law of Moses, and had deserted it to embrace the Gospel of Christ.
For the Apostle himself was such a person, and the objection it self was made
against such. And this elegant modesty of Personation in changing the person of
his discourse was with Paul so familiar, that he would attribute unto himself,
sometime really that person which indeed he was, as here he does, continuing
so to the end of this Chapter: and sometime verbally by way of fiction, that
person which indeed he was not; as he does Romans 7.7. through a great part of
that Chapter; where in his own person he speaks of a man under the Law and
adhering thereto; which then was not his condition. But in the last verse of
that Chapter and Chap. 8.2. he changes again, and in his own person speaks
of himself according to that condition wherein he then was.

The Scope or purpose of this Answer is this, that By virtue of my
Justification I may and must mortify and destroy in my self the acts and
lusts of sin. For this work although it be not the title whereby I acquire and
have my Justification, or that Divine alliance with God whereto I am Justified:
yet it is the tenure whereby I preserve and hold it. This work if I neglect, I
forfeit the state of my Divine alliance, and lose the benefit of my
Justification. For by my continuance in the acts of sin, I become a most
sinful sinner, in abusing the pardon and grace of God in building again my
state in sin, and in binding my self over to eternal death. And the guilt of
this my sinfulnes lies wholly upon my self, and not upon Christ who justified
me; and therefore Christ cannot be called the minister of my sin, or any way
the occasion thereof. But if upon my relapse into sin, and my continuance
therein, Christ should notwithstanding continue my state of justification,
keep up my divine alliance with him, and at last, give me eternal life, then
indeed he might be accounted the minister of sin. We may hereupon easily
collect, that in this Answer is comprised and couched in a manner, the sum of
the whole sixth chapter to the Romans. For the very same objection urged here in
the former verse, is discussed and dissolved there, in a discourse more
diffusive and ample. For in respect of the maine Argument, this Epistle to the
Galatians is of that to the Romans a kind of Breviat; as by the collation of
many passages in both may plainly appear.

Comment.
My justificatio^ destroys my state of sin, and how far: But relapse into sin
destroys my Justification, and how far: and makes me a foul sinner,
(Transgressor is opposed to the Justified.) yet Christ is no cause of it, but I
my self am the cause of it, by two defaults. 1 By my unfaithfulnes in not
performing my promise. 2. By my unthankfulnes, in not loveing and honoring God
for his kindness. 4 Consequences. 1 Jusification is mutable, not necessarily,
but contingently. because it is conditional. from the very nature of it: Yet
every sin destroys it not, because it is a state of grace. 2. Justification
requires a tenure. The Nature of a Tenure, and the Necessity of it: 3. That
Tenure is good works, which justify conservantly. as James affirms, and
Proves by Reasons, By Similies, and Examples: Yet not excluding God nor Faith.
Works not only declare justification, but Conserve it efficiently. Why faith is
pressed by Paul? and why works by James? Both easily reconciled; For both
teach consequently, and both temperately. by the rule of Charity. 4. Good
works are acts of Love. The tenure under the Law. That under the Gospel Is
works of Grace, which are Acts of Love, super-legall, and super-naturall. and
Justify conserva^tly, which is testified, and exemplified, and justify
finally.

FOR if I build again, the things which I destroyed.] The state wherein I
stood before my Justification, was a state of sin, a base, low, and terrene
state of spiritual bondage, whereby I was a stranger to God, a slave to sin,
and the son of death. For I was not only Calamitous, or a quasi-sinner,
tainted by the attainder of Adam: But I was a transgressour against the rules
of Gods written Law; and I was improbous, and many ways peccant against the
rules of equity and morality. But upon my Justification my state of sin was
destroyed and extinguished. For my Justification does erect and build unto me
a state quite contrary to the former, namely, a state of Right, which makes me
jurally righteous, to have a divine right, a high, noble and heavenly state of
divine liberty and alliance, whereby I am made a Freeman of Heaven, in the best
and highest degree, to be the Son and Heir of God. When a Slave is
infranchised, his state of slavery is thereby extinguished: So when a Sinner is
justified his state of sin is thereby actually destroyed; because these two
states are so contrary and inconsistent, that in one and the same person, at
one and the same time, they cannot both subsist.

Yet upon my Justification, the passions, motions, or lusts of my sin are not
destroyed in facto esse; for I find in my soul that they still remain and
struggle in me, and by some of them I am sometime worsted. And yet again even
these motions and lusts are also destroyed in fieri, i. e. They are in a good
course, and in a ready way to be actual destroyed; for their dominion and
power is already destroyed; so that they cannot (as formerly they did)
over-master and compel me to the acts of sin. And the work of their
destruction in fieri is designed unto me, as my service to righteousness unto
holiness. For unto this work Christ who justified me by my faith, does
thereby oblige me; and unto this work Christ who sanctified me by his
spirit, does thereto enable me.

But after my Justification, if through the subtilty of Satan, or through the
pravity of mine own soul, I shall suffer my self to be persuaded, that
either there is no bond upon me, or no power in me to perform this work of
mortifying and destroying the passions, motions, and lusts of my sin, and
thereupon shall either neglect this work, or fall to a work quite contrary in
serving the passions, motions, and lusts of my sin, unto the acts of sin;
not acts of ignorance and infirmity, but of Malignity or wickedness (for these
three kinds or degrees of sin must always be noted and discerned;) Then by
my sinful acts I destroy my state of Justification; which although by good
works I could never build, yet by evil works I may destroy; for by them I
dedignifie and make my self unworthy of it. Yet by them I destroy it not for
the seed and root of it; for this shall always remain a truth, that I had
once a divine liberty and alliance, whereby I was a Freeman of Heaven, and the
Son of God; and possibly before I dye, I may recover this state again. But by
sinful acts I destroy this state for the fruit, benefit and privileges of it:
for during that condition I shall never enjoy that future estate of blessedness,
whereto I had once a present right; nor shall I ever possess that inheritance
whereto I was once a co-heyre with Christ. For my faith which was lively and
effectual to procure my present right to blessedness, does by my evil works
become dead, void, and of no effect to the future possession of it. Hence the
Apostle asks me, 1 Cor. 6.9. if I know not this, that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God; and he charge me to Be not deceived; neither
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor idolaters, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And the same
Apostle has told me, Gal. 5.21. that they who do the works of the flesh,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And this I know, Ephesians. 5.5. that no
whoremonger nor unclean person, nor covetous man who is an Idolater, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God: let no man deceive me with
vain words etc. And by my sinful acts I destroy not only my state of Right,
but moreover by them I build again my state of sin; for one sinful act added
to another does at last build a habit of sin, as one stone upon another does
build an habitation. Or one single act alone without any more, if the sin be
heinous and foul, is enough to cast me into the state of sin.

I make my self a transgressor.] By building again my state of sin, I become
a transgressor. i. e. an exceeding sinful sinner, and a treble offender
against God; by sinning first against his written Law, and then against the
rules of equity, and thirdly against the grace of his mercy, by a wilful
relapse into that state of sin, which he had graciously pardoned. For the word
Transgressor is not here taken simply for one who commits some one act of sin
against the Law: but for one who after pardon relapseth into sin, and thereby
draws upon himself the guilt of his sin, and binds himself over to the
punishment of it, without all hope of remedy by the ordinary course of Gods
mercy. For the transgressor here is opposed not only to the Just, who is
legally and morally righteous, but also to the justified, who is jurally
righteous. Am I not by this relapse a revolter from God, and a traitor to him,
when after my amity, and alliance with him, I desert him and side with his
enemy, defrauding God of his services to bestow them upon Satan? And am I not a
felon to my self, to rob my self of all my right to eternal life, and cast
away my self to eternal death? For does not the Law of Nations teach me,
that by such facts as these, any estate becomes forfeit? and does not the light
of Reason teach me, that if my Tenure fail, my estate must needs escheat? And
does not the sacred Scripture teach me, that my last state in sin is worth then
the first? For does she not plainly tell me, Hebr. 10.26. that If I sin
wilfully after that I have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains
no more sacrifice for sin: but a certain fearful looking far of Judgment
and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries? And again, 2 Pet.
2.21. that it had been better for me, not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after I have known it; to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto me? Does she not clearly declare this unto me by the horrid and
loathsome comparisons of a house haunted with an unclean spirit, who being
cast out, and readmitted, does re-enter with seven other spirits more wicked
than himself? Luke 11.24. Of a Dog licking up his vomit again; and of a Some,
that after washing, walloweth in the mire. 2. Pet. 2.22.

Yet Christ who justified me, is no minister to my sin by justifying me;
neither is it he that makes me a transgressor. For the right of Impunity or
forgivenes of sins, which is one of the Privileges whereto Christ justified
me, gives me no license to sin. As in the family, the right of Impunity which
the son has above the servant, not to be ejected or punished for every fault,
as the servant may, does give the son this Privilege in faults only, such as
are ignorances and infirmities: but excuses him not in crimes, such as are
malignities, wickednesses, and wilful misdemeanors. But if the son will abuse
his Privilege of Impunity, and shall thereupon run into presumptuous and
wilful offenses: can we charge the Father as the Minister to his sin, that
he makes his son a transgressor? Was ever any Father, who duly corrected his
son (though he punished him not) mentioned in such a case as this? The like may
be said of a Malefactor, who after pardon relapseth into the same or the like
crime, whereby his offense is highly aggravated; can we charge his relapse
upon the Prince, who in mercy granted the pardon to him? Or when a bondslave,
whom his Lord has infranchised, shall afterward sell himself for a slave; can
any man in reason charge his latter slavery upon his first Lord, who set him at
liberty?

It is not Christ then who makes me a Transgressour; for my transgression is
wholly against his will; against the will of his Precepts, wherein he forbids
it, and against the will of his Judgments, wherein he threatens it with
eternal death. And my transgression is wholly against his deeds; for in
Justifying me by faith, he has strongly obliged me against it; and in
sanctifying me by his holy spirit, he has sufficiently enabled me against
it. What greater provision can Christ possibly make against my transgression?
What greater obligation from it, could he lay upon me, then the menace of
eternal death in case I commit sin; and the promise of eternal life in case
I refrain and destroy it in me? What greater ability in this life can I have
to refrain and destroy it, then the Power of his holy spirit always resident
in me to inlighten, strengthen, assist, and succor me against it? But on the
contrary, if upon my continuance in sin, Christ should promise to continue
unto me my right of inheritance to blessedness, and accordingly should
afterward settle me in the possession of it; then certainly he makes me a
transgressour; and may thereupon be justly accounted, not only the Minister
of my sin, but also the rewarder of it. It is therefore no other but my
self, who by reason of some default predominant in me, do wilfully on my
part make my self a transgressor; and that default seems twofold.

1. My unfaithfulness; not that I have no faith; for then I could not be
justified; or that my faith wants truth, for a faith not true is all one with
none. Or that my faith wants strength; for it is engaged and obliged by Gods
infinite kindness in giving me a right to eternal blessedness: And it is
assisted and enabled by Gods holy spirit wherewith he sanctifies,
enlightneth, and strengthens me to perform the works, duties, and services
suitable to my faith, and worthy of that divine alliance and inheritance,
whereto God by my faith has admitted me. For what greater strength more can
possibly be added to my faith, then such an infinite engagement, and such a
powerful assistance? But my true and strong faith wants life and efficacy; or
rather I want will enough to give it life and efficacy. Yet I have will enough
to give it life and efficacy passively, to Accept those Promises and Legacies
of Gods Will and Testament, whereto I am justified. But I will not give it life
and efficacy actively, to Perform those Precepts and Conditions of Gods Will
and Testament, whereto I am sanctified, that it may become a faith working by
love. Hereby it comes to pass, that my true and strong faith comes not to be
a lively, active, working and effectual faith: But remains a dead, idle,
lazy, and slothful faith; and this deadness, idleness, laziness, and
slothfulness of my faith, is the unfaithfulnes of it.

For God promises unto me a present right of divine alliance and inheritance
to be his Son and Heir to eternal blessedness; and I by faith Accept this
promise, and am thereupon actually in that divine state of a Son and Heir to
God. This Acceptance is my passive or taking faith; and by this acceptance I
do again on my part repromise unto God, that I will perform the works,
duties, offices, and services of a Son and Heir, to love, honor, and obey
my heavenly Father. This promise I certainly make, though really I neither
mention it in words, nor mentally conceive it in my heart; for my act in
accepting that right does naturally and jurally according to the nature and
equity of the thing, make this promise for me, though my tongue and heart be
never so silent. And the state of a Son and Heir wherein I stand, does
naturally engage and oblige me, not only to make this promise, but also to
perform it. For he that accepts of any beneficiary state or condition, does
ipso facto, thereby promise to perform the works, duties, offices, and
services unto that state appertaining and incident. For the nature and equity
of his Acceptance does make this promise for him, though it be neither
expressed nor minded; and the Law of nature and equity does oblige him to
perform it, though there be no written Law to enforce it. Seeing experience
teaches me, that there are promises, obligations, and engagements, as well
natural as civil, and as well tacit as express. Now, if my faith be not
lively and active to perform that promise of love, honor, and obedience,
which I on my part have made to God; or if my faith be so dead, idle, lazy, and
slothful, that she will not, or does not perform it; this nonperformance of
my promise to God, is the unfaithfulness of my faith; and this unfaithfulness
is one default, by reason whereof I come to make my self a transgressor against
my Justification.

2. The second default is my Unthankfulness, or rather my Ungraciousnesse,
which is but the Latinisme of unthankfulness; saving that in my apprehension
of the word, it notes an aggravation, and sounds a high degree of
unthankfulness. Especially if I consider the greatness of the Blessing which
I have received, and the greatness of the person from whom I received it; for
to prove unthankful to God for his grace, what can this be else, but extreme
ungraciousnesse? God has given me a state of divine alliance and inheritance
to be his son and heir to eternal blessedness. And this state he has
given me most freely, out of his mere love and grace, without any desert of
mine, without any desire of mine, without any motion by me made, or any act by
me done, saving my faith to accept it. What an infinite blessing is here,
improoved and exalted with infinite kindness? for what greater blessing could
God confer upon me? and how could he confer this with greater kindness?

Certainly this blessing accompanied with such kindness deserves my thanks;
and those not only verbal, to give God good words, by acknowledging this
blessing, and singing praises to his Name, but real thanks by the works,
duties, offices and services of a son, to love and honor my heavenly Father,
who has so much loved and honored me. For what less thanks then these can I
return? Seeing I have nothing else worthy of him; nor nothing at all but what
was his before, and came from him. Yea, even my works of loving and honoring
him, proceed from him; for he by loving and honoring me, has begotten those
works in me, and deserved them from me; he has obliged me to them, and
enabled me from them. Should an earthly Prince give, or but promise me some
temporal estate, incomparably short of Gods kindness, what duties, offices,
and services, would I deny to such a Prince, thereby to express my
thankfulness to him? If therefore to the King of Heaven who has so much loved
and honored me, as to make me his son and heir, I will not or do not
perform the duties, offices, and services of a son, to love, honor and obey
him with all my heart, and all my soul, this nonperformance is extreme
unthankefulnes; and this unthankfulnes or rather ungratiousnes is another
default whereby I come to make my self a transgressor against my
Justification. Hence there appear unto me these 4 following verities.

1. My state of Justification is mutable.] It is in it self a state firm,
stable, and permanent; and the firmness thereof is not only durable, but may
and should be perpetual. Yet the firmness thereof is casual, and may be not
perpetual; for during my natural life, and before I dye, it may be defeated,
and destroyed. I say not, it must be defeated and destroyed; for the mutability
thereof is not necessary; as is the mortality of my body, which God has
created from the dust, and has decreed that unto dust it shall return. But
the mutability thereof is possible; for manifest it is, that it may be not
defeated and not destroyed: because God has given me the state of a son and
heir by way of perpetuity for ever, to continue not only for my life, but
after death. When I am dead and dissolved into dust, God still remains my
Father and my God; for he acknowledges himself the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, who are long since dead. And from the Dead he will raise me at the
last day, to put me in possession of that inheritance, whereto I am now an
heir. For as Marriages, so also Alliances are states not temporary for term
of years, but of perpetuity for ever. Hence in the family, the son differs
from the servant several ways, whereof this is one, that the servant has no
right of perpetuity there, but the son has; for, says Christ, John 8.35. The
servant abides not in the house for ever. i. e. has not a right to abide for
ever; but the son abides for ever. i. e. has a right of perpetuity to abide
there for ever.

And again on the other side, it is as manifest, that my state of
Justification may be defeated and destroyed: Because this latter possibility
is necessarily consequent unto the former; for if it be a truth that my state
may be not destroyed; then and therefore this also shall be true, that it may
be destroyed. Otherwise how can I build again my first state of sinfulness,
which once I had destroyed? How can I make my self a transgressour against my
Justification? How can I have a first and a last estate, which are both evil,
and the last worse then the first? But I find by good History, and by sad
experience, that states of perpetuity have been defeated and destroyed. That
many a man who has had an estate in fee simple, to him and his Heirs for ever,
and yet by making himself a transgressour against his Lord, has forfeited
that estate. That many a woman who was married for life, till death should
depart her husband and her; and yet by making her self a transgressour against
her husband, has been divorced and lost her dower. That many a son who was
Heir apparent to his Fathers estate; and yet by making himself a
transgressour against his Father has been disinherited. And that the like is
possible concerning my state, the Scriptures teach me three ways. 1. By
serious Exhortations to take heed of making my self a transgressour. See John
5.14. and Romans 11.20. and 1. Cor. 10.12. and 1. Tim. 1.19. and Heb. 3.12. and
1. Pet. 2.11. 2. By lively Demonstrations of my danger, in case I make my self
so. See Mat. 12.43.44. and Heb. 6.4. and Heb. 10.26.27. and 2. Pet. 2.20. 3. By
several Examples of persons who have made themselves so; as Aaron, David,
Solomon, the whole Kingdom of Israel, and the Nation of the Jews. Which
Examples do necessarily conclude, that my transgression is possible, and my
Justification mutable: Because of a thing impossible, it is impossible there
should be any example.

Gods donation of my present right to be his Son and Heir is absolute
without any condition or preceding act on my part, except my faith to accept
it. But my future possession of that Inheritance, whereto I have now a present
right is conditional; and that condition runs upon my good behavior, modo
been me gesserim, that I behave and carry my self as becomes the son and
Heir of God; for this Condition is sufficiently expressed in Gods last Will
and Testament. Or supposing, but not granting, that in Gods Testament there is
no mention of any such condition: Yet such a Condition must be understood;
because the very nature and equity of the thing requires it; and the state of a
Son and Heir wherein I stand, does necessarily draw this duty with it, and
so bind me to it, that for nonperformance thereof my state may be
destroyed. Yet every trespass will not de facto destroy it: because God will
forgive me a thousand faults; for he that commands me to forgive my brother
(offending against me and repenting) 70. times a day; he certainly being my
Father will upon my repentance, forgive me more times in all my days. And
upon this condition he commands me to pray unto him for the forgiveness of
my trespasses, and in case* I forgive other men theirs against me, he
promises me the forgiveness of mine. For because I am his son, therefore I
am not under his Law, but under his grace, i. e. God will not deal rigorously
and strictly with me to reject, or to punish me for every trespass like a
slave who is under the Law and pleasure of his Lord; but he will use me
mercifully and kindly to correct me in measure, or to forgive me like a
son, who is under the love and grace of his Father. Yet his forgiveness must
not license and move me to offend, but must restrain me from it, and move
me to fear him. Hence, Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with God; not to
this end that he may be offended, but to this, that he may be feared; for
the more kind any Father is, the more should the son fear to offend:
Because the greater is his trespass in case he offend. And as a kind Father
is grieved to disinherit his incorrigible son: So when my transgression
becomes presumptuous and incorrigible, my heavenly Father is grieved to
reprobate me and decrees it not but in his wrath. For thus he dealt with the
Israelites, Psalm. 95.10. Forty years long was I grieved with this Generation,
and said, it is a people that do err in their hearts, and they have not
known my ways; unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into
my rest.

2. My Justification requires a tenure. For because the state of it, is mutable
and defeaseable; therefore it requires a tenure whereby I may continue, preserve
and hold it. As my state had a cause procreant, or means acquisitive, which
was the title, whereby I acquired, initiated, and had the right of it: So also
it further needs a cause conservant, or means retentive, whereby the right
already acquired, entered, and had, is continued, preserved, and held; which
cause conservant, or means retentive, is commonly called a Tenure. Now a
Tenure is some act of reality or formality, whereby a state or any other right
is declared and manifested to abide, remain, and rest in that person, who by a
good title acquired, and has it. And the tenure whereby I hold a state or
other right, is generally some use whereto I apply it, and consequently some
utility or profit from that use, accrewing either unto my self, or to some
other: being many times a means or act different from the former means or
act, which was my title. Paul had the state or condition of an Apostle, and a
right of power to the office of the Ministry; and his title to that state and
right was his Reception thereof from Christ who collated it upon him, as he
fully declared in the first Chapter of this Epistle. But the Tenure whereby he
held that state, was the Preaching of the Gospel; for to this use he must
apply his Ministry: Because says he, 1. Cor. 9.16. A necessity is laid upon
me, yea woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. So the Tenures whereby
most estates in Lands are held here in England, are some services either
certain or uncertain; as Serjeanty, Escuage, and Socage, which either are, or
may be termed Court-service, War-service, and Plough-service.

Now because states and other rights are in this life transitory and
defeasable, to come and go, to be had and lost; therefore when I have a state,
I must use the means to hold it, least I lose it. For in vain I use the
means of a title whereby to constitute and have my state of Justification, If
I use not also the means of a tenure, whereby to continue and hold it. And in
vain I continue and hold it, if I make not also some benefit of it; for that
state is to no purpose, from whence arises no benefit. In my Justification
therefore I am to consider both these means; viz. not only the means
procreant or title whereby my state is constituted, acquired, or had: but also
the means conservant or Tenure, whereby my state is continued, preserved, or
held. Because I am truly said to be justified, as well by the tenure whereby I
continue and hold this state, as by my title whereby I acquire and have it. For
all states whatsoever, not only jurall but natural, of all creatures
whatsoever, whose existence has any duration, do necessarily require a cause
conservant, means retentive or tenure, whereby they may be continued or
preserved to abide and remain in being; for otherwise their state would not be
permanent at all, but actually transient and suddenly pass away. Yea the Earth
it self whose state above all other elements is most firm and stable; and the
whole world, whereof God is the sole cause procreant who created and
established it for ever, should he cease to be thereof the cause conservant,
would suddenly in a moment run to ruin. Much more is such a tenure
necessary to my Justification, which is my state of alliance unto God: Because
this state above all others is to me most precious, and consequently the loss
of it, becomes most grievous.

3. The Tenure whereby I am justified, is works. I am not afraid to express
this verity in these words, because the phrase Justified by works, is the
express saying of the Holy Ghost. For, Jam. 2.24. This Assertion, that A man
is justified by works, and not by faith alone, is the language and word of
God, as well as this, that A man is not justified by the works of the Law, but
by the faith of Jesus Christ. For the Scripture delivers both these
assertions, mentioning neither of them obviously as it were in transitu: But
handling both equally, purposely, and by way of doctrine; for she proposes
both, and presses both, insisteth upon both, confirms both by several
arguments, and illustrating both by Similies and examples. And therefore I
cannot use such partiality, to be so earnest for either, as thereby to be
against the other: but I must maintain them both, and maintain both for
current doctrine to be duly taught in the Church of God. Because both in their
due senses are infallibly true, and of great consequence, as well to magnify
Gods grace, as to edify his Church. But I must allow unto both their proper
senses and due distinctions; for if I side with the assertion of Paul, and cast
off James with a distinction; or side with James, and cast off Paul with a
distinction; then I do not rightly divide the word of truth: But I rather make
that right-downe division, which Paul himself condemns, 1. Cor. 1.12. I am
of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.

As therefore my faith is the Title whereby I am justified, viz. procreatively
and acquisitively, i. e. Whereby my Justification is created, produced, and
constituted to have the original existence and beginning; or whereby my state
of divine alliance and inheritance to be the Son and Heir of God, is
acquired, commenced, and initiated. So my works are the Tenure whereby I am
justified, viz. conservantly and retentively, i. e. Whereby my Justification is
continued, preserved, and maintained, to abide, subsist and remain in that
existence, which originally it had by faith; or whereby my state of divine
alliance and inheritance is prolonged for my final continuance to be the
Son and Heir of God; until such time as I possess and enjoy that
inheritance in heaven, whereto I am now the heir and have a present right. For
that the verb Justify (as also many others of the like nature) does
consignifie these two kinds of efficiency, namely procreant and conservant,
has been formerly showed. And by works I understand good and holy works;
for if the works which unjustifie me, by building again the state of sin
which I destroyed, are evil and sinful; then the works which sub-justifie or
support my state of justification must needs be good and holy. For seeing my
Justification, which procures unto me a divine alliance to be the son and
heir of God, is a state of sanctity and holiness; what can be more suitable,
convenient, and comely, then that a holy state should be preserved by holy
works?

In this sense James affirms, that A man is justified by works and not by
faith alone. Which assertion he prooves three several ways. 1. By two
reasons, whereof one is, Because faith without works is dead. i. e. the act of
faith in justifying is frustrate, void, and of no effect: as a Bill, Bond, or
other writing whereto there is no hand nor seal. For a man justified by faith,
if his faith be not seconded by works to continue and maintain his
Justification, he shall never possess and enjoy that heavenly inheritance,
whereto he was by faith justified; and his faith falling of this effect, is
therefore void or dead. The other reason is, Because faith working with works,
is by works made perfect. i. e. faith alone by it self is a thing imperfect
and ineffectuall; for in Justifying, it does but commence, begin, and enter the
state of Justification, and consequently it creates but an imperfect and weak
right; namely, a right of Institution, and Expectation, a right of a son and
heir, a right of interest, claim, and hope, a right escheatable and
defeasable that may possibly be destroyed. But faith seconded, accompanied,
and animated with works, is by works made effectual to continue, consummate,
and (...) the state of Justification into the state and assurance of salvation;
and consequently to procure a perfect plenary and full right, namely a right of
possession and fruition, a right of peace, rest, and quiet, an inheritance
executed and seized, subject unto no defea^ance, relapse, or other casualty; or
as the Apostle calls it, 1 Pet 1.4. an inheritance uncorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not (...) reserved in Heaven for us.

Secondly, he proves it by two Similyes or comparisons; (...) of one is, that
Faith alone without works is like the Devils Faith; for they have a kind of
faith, whereby they believe the existence and unity of God. And their faith is
alone without works; namely without good and holy works: but they are not
without evil and wicked works; and their faith with evil works has this
evil work upon them, that it makes them to tremble. The other Simily is, that
faith alone without works is like the body without breath; for as the body
without breath is dead: so faith without works is dead also.

Thirdly, he proves it by two Examples; One of Abraham; Was not Abraham our
father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar?
i. e. The Justification of Abraham constituted long before by his faith,
whereby was imputed unto him a right of alliance and amity to be and be
called the friend of God; was it not afterward continued by his work in
offering his son? for was not that work wrought by his faith? and was not his
faith and the Scripture mentioning it, fulfilled by that work? The other
example is of Rahab; Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by
works, when she had received the Messengers and had sent them out another way?
i. e. The Justification of Rahab constituted long before by her faith, whereby
she became a Proselyte and an Israelite, in believing that the God of Israel
was God in Heaven above and in earth beneath: was it not afterward continued by
her work in Receiving the Messengers? For was not that work wrought by her
faith? and at the sack of Jericho was not she and her family preserved by that
work, and thereby continued Proselites unto Gods People? Now from these
Examples and Similies of James, but especially from his two reasons, it
evidently follows, that works do justify in the sense alleged, namely
conservantly. For because Faith without works is dead, and working with works
is by works made perfect or effectual; therefore works do preserve and
continue the life, perfection and efficacy of Faith; and consequently they
preserve and continue the state of Justification, which is the effect of faith;
and whatsoever does preserve and continue Justification, that does Justify.

True it is, that Neither faith nor works are the principal and prime
efficients of my Justifying; because God is the personal, principal, and
prime efficient, who makes me to have my right, and who makes me to hold it:
but faith and works are the real, mediall, or mean efficients on my part.
For God wills and ordayneth that faith should be my title whereby I acquire
and have this right; and that works should be my tenure whereby to continue
and hold it. From my title I wholly exclude my works; allowing them neither
efficiency to justify, nor presence in my person at my Justifying. For faith
alone without any efficiency or any presence of works within me, does make me
to have this right. Because when I am to be justified, I have not within me
any works at all, that any way qualify me, or can be truly said to be
resident in me. For manifest it is, that I am then in the state and condition
of a sinner; if not legally of a transgressor against the Law, yet morally of
one somewhat improbous, who was many ways peccant in the rules of morality;
equity, decency, and mercy; and jurally of one calamitous, who must suffer and
die like a sinner; for the proper subject of Justification is a sinner.

But from my Tenure I exclude not faith, but include and suppose it, adding and
adjoining my works unto it. Because in my Justification faith has a double
efficiency; first a procreant to constitute it, and secondly a conservant to
continue it. Yet that degree of conservancy which flows from faith, is so
imperfect, that unless it be perfected by the access of works, faith alone is
not able to conserve it self; for without works she is dead. Yet from my
Tenure I exclude the solitariness both of my faith and of my works; for
neither faith alone without works, nor works alone without faith; but both
concurring and joined together; viz. faith conducting and cooperating with
works, and works accompanying and seconding faith do justify me
conservantly as my Tenure, making me to continue and hold that state of divine
alliance which faith alone did create and constitute. And herein I give the
preeminence to faith; for I say not thus, Works with faith, but thus, Faith
with works does make up my Tenure; faith as the principal, and works as
accessories thereto, to animate, enable, and render faith effectual unto that
effect, which alone without works it can not perform. Because faith without
works is imperfect and dead, but working with works is by works made perfect
and effectual.

And true it is, that Works do also justify declaratively; because they
declare, manifest, and show that faith which does justify efficiently; and
which alone without works is efficient procreantly; and which being alone
without works can not be declared. For words will not serve the turn to
declare the existence of faith, but this service must be done by works. And
therefore the existence of that faith which is solitary, alone, and without
works, can by no means be sufficiently declared. Hence says the Apostle,
Jam. 2.18. Show me thy faith without thy works. Show me, if thou can, (or
thou can not show me) that faith of thine which is without works, or which
is solitary or alone by it self; for by thy words, in saying thou have faith,
it is not sufficiently showed; and by thy works it cannot possibly be showed,
because (as thou acknowledgest) it is a solitary faith, which is alone by it
self destitute of works. And I will show thee my faith by my works. i. e.
But I will show thee my operary faith which works with works; for I will and
do declare it by my works, because I acknowledge that my faith is seconded
and accompanied with works.

Now because faith is declared or showed by works, therefore works are a Sign
of faith; and consequently they are a Sign of Justification to declare and
show the state of it: because faith is a cause whereof Justification is the
effect, and whatsoever is a Sign of the cause, is also a Sign of the effect.
Yet this is not all, and the whole influence, which works have unto
Justification, that they are a Sign of faith to declare it. But moreover,
works are a cause of faith to effect it; yet not a cause procreant to
constitute and produce it, but a cause conservant to continue and maintain it.
For Jam. 2.26. As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works
is dead also. Now the Spirit whereby the body respireth and breaths is a
cause of the body, yet not a cause procreant to give the body life and being,
but a cause conservant to continue and maintain the life and being of it. And
consequently works are also a cause conservant of that Justification whereof
faith is a cause wholly procreant, and partly conservant; and to conserve
Justification is to justify.

For seeing that unto many words I willingly allow several senses, not only
modall but real, I cannot with equity deny the like courtesy unto the Verb
Justified, for the honor of those two great Apostles, Paul and James, who were
planters of the Gospel and pillars of the Church: especially when I consider
the several parties with whom they had to deal. For Paul by his assertion
opposes the Judaizers (who as was formerly showed upon the 14. verse of this
Chapter) were Operaries and Rituaries, standing so much for the works and
Ceremonies of the Law, that they made works the sole and whole efficient cause
of Justification; both the cause conservant to continue and maintain the state
of it, and also the cause procreant to constitute and produce the being of it.
And therefore against the Infirmity of these, Paul in his Epistles to the
Romans, Galatians and elsewhere, stoutly maintains this doctrine, that A man
is not justified by the works of the Law, but by faith only. Wherein according
to the quickness and shortness of his speech, he intends these two points.
1. That no works at all are the cause procreant to constitute and build man's
Justification, as was largely explicated, verse 16.2. That no works of the Law
are a cause conservant to continue and maintain man's Justification, as shall
be discovered in the next verity. For in these two points the Judaizers held
the contrary, as it plainly appears, partly by their practice, and partly by
his arguments against them.

But James in his assertion opposes the Gentilizers, who were a party quite
contrary to the former, and in opposition of them were Fiduciaries and
Libertines, standing only for faith and liberty, neglecting, despising, and
disgracing all manner of works, as no cause at all of Justification, neither
procreant to constitute or build the state of it, nor conservant to continue
and maintain it; as before was intimated after the 14. verse. And therefore
against the vanity of these, James maintaynes this doctrine, that A man is
justified by works, and not by faith only. Wherein his meaning is, (as it was
well enough understood of the Gentilizers) that good works ^ot of the Law but
of Grace, love and kindness) were necessary both to faith and Justification,
as causes conservant to continue and maintain both, until Justification be
consummated, determined, and finished into salvation; for without such works,
faith is dead, but with and by them is made perfect. Allowing therefore unto the
word Justified, being a Verb efficient or factive, these two senses, of
efficiency procreant and conservant; and thereupon affirming, that Faith only
without works does justify procreantly to constitute the state of
Justification: But faith with works and by works does justify conservantly
to continue that state. Then it will plainly appear concerning Paul and James,
that neither of their doctrines is a paradoxe, that neither is to other
repugnant; but each with the other is consistent, and both are conducent to the
verity and sanctity of Christianity. Nay more, the doctrine of James is to that
of Paul a necessary consequent, borrowing from Paul those principles whereby it
is both raised and proved.

For because, as Paul teaches, my faith only without works does procreate or
build my Justification; and because evil works destroy the state of it, and
build again my state of sin, therefore it must needs follow, as Saint James
teaches, that good works do continue and maintain the state of it. For
although they do not procreate or build that state, yet they preserve and
uphold it, from that destruction and ruin, which evil works would bring upon
it. Again, because, as Paul teaches, my continuance in sin is the cause
corrumpent and destruent to decay and destroy my Justification, which is to
unjustifie me; therefore, as James teaches, my continuance in good works is
the cause conservant and restituent to preserve the state and to restore the
decays of it. For in case I should fall, my faith alone cannot restore me:
but if I recover, my faith working by works of Repentance, must be the means
of my Recovery. Besides, because, as Paul teaches, 1. Cor. 13.2. Though I have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am
nothing: Therefore as James teaches, faith without works is dead: because the
acts of charity are good works, and of all other the greatest. Lastly, because
as Paul teaches, Gal. 5.6. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love: Therefore as James
teaches, Faith working with works, is by works made perfect, that it may
finally avail in Jesus Christ.

Thus James in his doctrine and in his reasons thereof secondeth Paul, not
differing from him in sense and truth, but only in words and terms; and for
that verbal difference there was a just occasion. For Paul being an Apostle to
the Gentiles, tempereth his doctrine with such words and terms, that he
might give no offense, either to the unbelieving Gentiles, who thereupon would
continue in their unbelief: or to the believing Gentiles, who thereupon might
recede from their belief. For he made it his rule, not to offend any party,
but to please all, seeking to save as many as he could, laboring to plant the
Gospel, and to increase the Church of God as much as might be. And James being
an Apostle to the Jews, and writing to the twelve dispersed Tribes, does
correspondently carry himself with the like temper, that he likewise might
give no offense, either to the unbelieving Jew or to the believing Judaizer.

Yet let no Christian presume to censure this temperate carriage with
temporizing; seeing herein these two great Apostles practiced the great rule
of Charity, which is, To walk without scandal or giving of offense;
especially to parties opposite, but rather to please both. A rule by Paul both
taught and practiced, as appears, 1 Cor 10.32. Give no offense neither to the
Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: even as I please all men
in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they
may be saved. And seeing under the terms of Justifying by works, taken in
different senses, opposite Errors did trouble the Church, who can say to the
contrary, but that these two Apostles might be moved to use these very terms,
either by the spirit of God, or by their own agreement, that each should
confute those several errors within his several line, namely James within
the line of Circumcision, and Paul elsewhere? Concerning this seeming
opposition between Paul and James (whereof I spoke somewhat before but not
enough) there are extant diverse other Reconciliations; whereof I oppose none:
but leave every man to that sense whereby he may be most edified.

4. The fourth verity is this; The works which continue my Justification are
acts of Love. The tenure whereby the Israelites continued their Justification
to the kingdom of Canaan to hold and enjoy it, were the works of the Law in
the literal sense. For thus speaks Moses to the people, Deuteronomy. 5.33. You shall
walk in all the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you, and that you
may prolong your days in the Land which ye shall possess. i. e. Your walking
in Gods Laws shall continue and prolong your possession in the Land whereto
ye are justified or have a right. And in after-ages, when their children
should ask them the meaning of these Laws, they must answer their children
thus, Deuteronomy. 6.24. The Lord commanded us to do all these statutes; to fear the
Lord our God for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is
this day: and it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
commandments before the Lord our God as he has commanded us. Thus speaks the
Law it self, Levit. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my
Judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them. i. e. By keeping my
Laws you shall continue your right and state of life, to prolong the course of
it, and to secure it from any violent death to be inflicted by the Law. Thus
the Prophet Ezech. 18.9. He that has walked in my statutes to deal truly, he
is just, he shall surely live. i. e. by his walking in my Laws he becomes
upright, and by his uprightnes he shall continue and prolong his temporal
life, which (he not transgressing the Law) shall not by the Law be cut off.
And thus also the Apostle, Romans 2.13. The doers of the Law shall be justified.
i. e. shall continue to be justified; for that by the deeds of the Law, they
could not begin to be justified, he means to prove at large in the following
chapters of that Epistle. And for default of these works, the ten tribes
forfeited their right to that Land for ever: and the other two tribes were
sequestered for the term of 70 years under their captivity in Babylon.

But the tenure whereby under the Gospel I hold my state of alliance with God,
and continue my right of inheritance to the kingdom of Heaven, are not the
works of the Law in the literal sense. Not her Ceremonies; as her Feasts, in
observing days, and months, and times, and years; and her Fasts, in not
touching, not tasting, not handling; and her Capital Ceremony of Circumcision,
which in Christ Jesus avails nothing. Not her Moralities; as to be no
Idolater, no perjurer, no Sabbath-breaker, no murderer, adulterer, thief,
liar, nor deceiver. For a profession of my self to be no sinner, will not
continue my Justification; nay a confession of my self to be a sinner will
rather justify me, then a justifying of my self to be no sinner; for upon
this ground as I am taught, Luke 18.14. The Publican went down to his house
justified rather then the Pharisee. But because that Pharisee was an Hypocrite,
let us hear another kind of Pharisee, who was no Hypocrite, and yet
confesses of his Innocence, that it justified him not, 1. Cor. 4.4. I know
nothing by my self, yet am I not therefore justified. I observe the Moralities
of the Law: because otherwise I should make my self a transgressor, and
thereby destroy my justification; for although my innocence in being no
Idolater, no perjurer, no Sabath-breaker, etc. will neither constitute nor
continue my divine alliance and inheritance: yet my Transgression in being an
idolater, a perjurer, a murderer, or adulterer, or the like, will discontinue
and destroy it. The Moralities of the Law therefore I do and must observe: yet
I observe them not in duty to the Law, because she commands them: nor for fear
of the Law, because she threatens the breach of them. For I am not under the
Law, but am dead to the Law; and it is a part of my Justification to be free
from the Law.

But the works which continue my Justification are the works of Grace. For
seeing God has so highly Graced me, as to make me his son and heir,
therefore to show my gratefulnes and thankefulnes to God for his grace, I
observe those duties, offices, and services whatsoever they be, whereto not the
letter of Gods Law, but the spirit of his grace does move and draw me; those
works which the grace of his Gospel commands and requires from me; for I am
under his Grace. And the works which Gods grace causes in me and requires
from me, are the acts of Love, exercising it self in the offices of equity,
mercy, courtesy and kindness. For seeing God has so loved and graced me, as
to make me his son and heir; what other works should his love and grace
produce in me, but the works of love? for what should love beget but love? and
what duties should the son do to his father, but the duties of love?

And these works of Love have two strange properties; for 1. They are
super-legall, i. e. above and beyond the Law of Moses, not only fulfilling but
transcending and exceeding it. As to feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, to
entertain the stranger, to visit the sick, and releeve the prisoner. 2. They
are super-naturall, i. e. above and beyond the law of Nature: for as there is a
miraculous faith, so there is also a miraculous love, which in a manner works
miracles, surpassing the common course of naked nature. As not to be Angry, not
to resist or revenge evil, to suffer persecution gladly and joyfully, to lay
down my life for my brother, and therefore much more for my heavenly Father, to
love mine enemies who hate, revile and persecute me, and in some case to hate
my friends, as my father and mother, my wife and children, my brothers and
sisters, Luke 14.26. These and the like works of Love are not the commands of
the Law; for they are not there manifested, though some of them be there
testified. But they are the Commands of Grace; for they are manifested in the
Gospel, which containing the precepts and rules of equity, mercy, courtesy and
kindness, whereto Gods Grace obliges and enableth me, is therefore called the
word of his Grace. Hence Christ calls Love a new Commandment; John 13.34. A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. And Christ calls it his commandment,
John 15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you.

And these works, offices, and services of Love, are the tenure to continue
and maintain my state of Justification. For, says Paul, Gal. 5.6. In Christ
Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith
which works by love. i. e. The only thing which avails to make me continue
and abide in Christ, is faith working by love. And 1. John 2.10. He that loves
his brother abides in the light. i. e. Continues in his state of light and
life. And 1. John 4.16. He that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him. i.e. He that continues in the works of love, continues in that
alliance which is between God and him. And when James affirms, that a man is
justified by works, he means not works of the law, but works of love; and of
such love as is both super-legall and supernatural, according to the two
strange properties formerly mentioned.

For, says he, Jam. 2.21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when
he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Did not Abraham continue justified
by his work in offering Isaac? Was that work a duty of the Law, or was it not
a service of love, whereby at Gods immediate command he offered unto God his
only son in sacrifice? Was not his love super-legall above and beyond the
Law? For did any Law command, that a father should sacrifice his son? And was
not his love super-naturall, above and beyond the Law of nature, when his love
to God with whom he had alliance only by faith, surpassed his love to his only
son, with whom he had alliance by nature, and in whose behalf he had received
the promises? Again, Jam. 2.25. Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot
justified by works, when she had received the Messengers, and had sent them
out another way? Did not Rahab continue justified by her work in receiving the
Messengers? Was that work a duty of the Law, or was it not an office of love,
or as she called it, Jos. 2.12. a showing of kindness, whereby she entertained
and lodged strangers? Was not her love super-legall, above and beyond the Law;
for did any Law command that a woman of the City should entertain Spies, who
came to prepare the destruction of the City? And was not her love
super-naturall above and beyond the Law of nature, when she showed kindness to
her enemies, in housing, hiding, and sending them out another way?

These Offices of love, at least the super-legall are the works, whereby at
the day of Judgment my Justification must take effect, for my salvation or
final possession of that inheritance whereto I am justified. For according to
these works the final sentence of Blessedness is formed and pronounced by
Christ for the righteous, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an
hungered and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, I was a
stranger and ye took me in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye
visited me, I was in prison and ye came unto me. And although to me in my own
person ye did not this, yet in as much as ye have done it to one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. And for default of these works,
my present Justification will then at that day become of no benefit unto me*
but will prove frustrate, void, and of no effect. For according to the contrary
of these works, the contrary sentence of eternal death is framed and
pronounced upon the wicked, whether they were ever justified or not justified;
as appears in the following part of that Chapter.

VERSE 19.
Text.
For I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. Sense.
Through the Law.] i. e. Through the death of the Law, which is expired and
dead.

I am dead to the Law.] i. e. I have left my old carnal life according to the
letter and rules of the Law, and do not the works thereof.

That I might live unto God.] viz. In a new spiritual life aceptable and
pleasing to God.

Reason.
Here begins a second Argument to prove the Negative of his principal
assertion concerning Justification, namely that A man is not justified by the
works of the Law; and consequently that he himself was not so justified; for
having translated his discourse unto his own person, he continues his
argument accordingly. For because the Law it self is expired and dead
therefore it can produce no such effect as to justify me; for a thing that is
dead is without effect. And because I am dead, to the Law, not living by her
rules nor doing her works; therefore by them I cannot be justified; for no
man is justified by an act which he does not. And his purpose herein is, that
this argument should conclude much more for the Gentiles; for if the Law be
dead unto Paul who was a Jew by nature, and for whom it was enacted: much more
was it dead unto the Gentiles, upon whom it was never in force; and therefore
much less should they be forced to the works of it. This verse seems to be
the sum of the first six verses in the seventh Chapter to the Romans.

Comment.
The Law ordained as perpetual. Not limited to a time certain: Yet limited to
a time uncertain; But is now expired, how far, and why so. and to what effect,
and sub-effect.

FOR I through the Law.] There must here be made a supply of the word Death, or
some such like to that sense, thus, For I through the death, expiration or
cessation of the Law, am dead, expired or ceased to the Law. The Law of Moses
in respect of the duration, how long it should continue and remain in force,
was ordained by God to be perpetual; for unto many ordinances thereof there
are annexed express words of perpetuity. So Circumcision which was the
sovereign ordinance and the chief Ceremony of the whole Law, was enjoined for
an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17.13. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for
an everlasting Covenant. So the Passover was to be observed as an Ordinance for
ever, Exodus 12.14. And you shall keep it a Feast to the Lord throughout your
generations: you shall keep it a Fevst by an Ordinance for ever. So the Sabbath
was to be observed for a perpetual covenant, Exodus 31.16. Wherefore the
children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout
their generations for a perpetual covenant. So the Fast of Expiation was to
be an everlasting statute, Levit. 16.34. And this shall be an everlasting
statute unto you, to make an atonement for the Children of Israel, for all
their sins once a year. So the holy Assemblies or Festivals of the Lord
mentioned Levit. 23. were to be statutes for ever throughout their generations
in all their dwellings. So the Lamps for the Sanctuary, Lev. 24.3. must burn
before the Lord continually; it shall be a statute for ever in your
generations. And the like is said for the Shewbread, Levit. 24.8. Every Sabbath
he shall set it in order before the Lord continually, being taken from the
children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.

Notwithstanding all these several expressions of Perpetuity, yet the Law of
Moses was not ordained to be so everlasting, that it should last as long as
the World lasts, and have no end till the Worlds end. For this opinion was
and is the error of the unbeleeving Jews, and of the believing Judaizers. But
the Law of Moses though it was ordained to be perpetual and everlasting, yet
withal it was ordained also to be transitory, mutable, and ceaseable. For the
understanding whereof, we must observe, that the duration of the Law was
ordered two ways. 1. The duration of it was not limited to any time certain,
or to a set number of years: And in this respect it was perpetual or
everlasting; especially because as the event showed, it lasted for the space of
fifteen hundred years; and according to the phrase of the Scripture, any long
space of time, or any thing lasting long is called everlasting; as Psalm. 24.7.
And be ye lift up ye everlasting doors. i. e. Ye doors of Cedar, which is
a long lasting wood. For the Perpetuity or everlastingnesse of a Law implies
not a duration infinite, that should never have an end; but consists in a
duration indefinite that is not limited to a time certain. And a Law so
unlimited, is thereupon called perpetual, or (according to the phrase of
Scripture) everlasting, to distinguish it from a law temporary, whose duration
is limited to a time certain. Yet the Perpetuity of a Law does never debar
the Lawmakers from his power to revoke, repeal, or alter at his pleasure, as
cause shall require, either the Law it self, or the duration of it. And
therefore upon just cause, by expunging the clause of limitation, he may
advance a Law temporary to become perpetual; or by inserting a clause of
limitation, he may reduce a Law perpetual to be temporary.

2. The duration of it was limited to a time uncertain, the event whereof
exceeded humane knowledge. For that this kind of limitation was made, it
plainly appears from hence; in that the Tabernacle and the services thereto
belonging, Heb. 9.9. are called a figure for the time present: and the rest of
the Ceremonies in meats, drinks, and washings, Heb. 9.10. were imposed until
the time of Reformation. Now the period or event of that time present, and of
the time of Reformation, was at the making of the Law, so uncertain that it
passed the reach of humane knowledge. And that uncertain time which the
duration of the Law was limited, was the time of Christ, whose time was the
time of Reformation. For the Law of Moses was but a way leading unto the Gospel
of Christ, and ended at Christ, Romans 10.4. for Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes. And as the occasion of the Law was
for transgressions, so the duration of it was until the coming of Christ,
Gal. 3.19. The Law was added because of transgressions, till the seed should
come to whom the promise was made. It was a Schoolmaster to initiate the Jew
for a time, until the coming of Christ, Gal. 3.24. Wherefore the Law was our
Schoolmaster unto Christ. And it was a tutor or governor to overruled the
childhood or the Jew for a time, the fullness whereof was fulfilled at the
coming of Christ, Gal. 4.2. We when we were children, were in bondage under
the elements of the world; but when the fullness of the time was come, God sent
forth his son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the Law. Because then the duration of the Law was not limited to any time
certain, therefore it was perpetual and everlasting: and yet because the
duration of it was limited to a time uncertain, therefore it was transitory,
mutable, and ceasable.

Wherefore during the current of that uncertain time, the Law was all that
while mortal, and at the expiration of that time, it expired and died, i. e.
it was then of no force, but frustrate and void. For as the Obligation or Bond
of the Law while it stands in force, is called the life of the Law; for hence
it is said, Romans 7.1. The Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives. i.
e. as long as the Law is in force, so the cessation of the Law when the force
of it is expired, is called the death of the Law; for hence again it is said,
Romans 7.6. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held. i. e. The Law being ceased and dead. Wherefore to speak accurately
and properly the Law was not abrogated or repealed: but of it self it expired
and ceased: because the fulness of her time was come; for that uncertain term,
whereto her duration was limited, was by the coming of Christ certainly
determined. Yet this Expiration or Death of the Law is expressed by several
other words; for it is called Abolishing; Ephesians. 2.15. Having abolished in his
flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments. And Cancelling or blotting
out, Col. 2.14. Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us.
And Disanulling, Heb. 7.18. For verily there is a disanulling of the
commandment going before, for the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof. And
Antiquating or making old, Heb. 8.13. In that he says a new Covenant, he has
(antiquated or) made the first old.

Thus all the Laws of Moses are as dead as the Laws of Solon or Lycurgus. Yet
the death of the Moralityes contained in the Decalogue or elsewhere dispersed
must be cautelously understood by distinguishing between the Constitution of a
Law, whereby it first has being, and the Declaration of a Law, whereby that
being which it had before is made known. For according to this distinction we
say of Judges, that they do not make Law, by constituting it: but they only
declare Law, by manifesting that to be Law, which was constitute and made
before. Much more may the Lawmakers himself, in case of ignorance or question
declare that to be his Law, which he had constituted for Law before. Now the
Moralities in the Decalogue had their Constitution at the beginning of the
world, for they are Laws of nature, which God made at the making of man, from
whose creation they resulted. But they had a declaration in the Decalogue,
wherein God wrote them and published them to the Israelites; that thereby they
taking notice of them to be his Laws might not make their ignorance an excuse
for their transgressions; for some Laws of nature are of themselves obscure,
and those that are known are not to all men equally manifest. And they had a
new Declaration in the new Covenant; for thereby Hebr. 8.10. God has put them
into our minds, and written them in our hearts; and lest our own minds and
hearts should deceive us, he has sufficiently manifested them by Christ and
his Apostles throughout the New Testament. The Moralityes then in the Law of
Moses are dead as to that declaration which they had there; for by virtue
thereof they bind no man: but they are not dead in respect of two other bonds;
whereof the one is their new declaration in the New Testament, by virtue
whereof they bind all Christians; and the other their first Constitution as
Laws of nature, by virtue whereof they bind all men whatsoever.

The reason why the Law is dead, and why it expired at the death of Christ; is
because the Gospel published by Christ is the last Will and Testament of God,
established upon better promises and better Precepts then were in the Law; and
was confirmed by the death of Christ; and therefore the Law which was Gods
former Will and Testament is thereby infringed and frustrated. For of Persons
testable the last and newest Will is always the best, and of such validity or
force, that at the very making of it, all former Wills are infringed; and at
the confirming of it, all former are frustrated. And Christ who was the
Executor of Gods last Will, did disanull the first, to establish the last, Heb.
10.9. Then said he, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God: He takes away the first
that he may establish the second. And Christ at his death by one and the same
act effected both these things; for by his suffering on the Cross he
confirmed the New Will and Testament; for hence his blood is called the blood
of the New Testament, and the Wine at the Communion is the memorial of that
Blood, Mat. 26.27. And he took the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is the blood of the New Testament. And by
the same suffering he cancelled the first Will and Testament, Col. 2.14.
Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances which was against us, which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross. Yet he
cancelled the first Will but only Consequently i. e. upon his confirmation of
the last Will, it followed necessarily that thereby the first was cancelled and
frustrated.

Am dead to the Law.] In respect of the Law, I am putatively or as it were a
dead person, who am no way acted or moved at any thing in the Law; not at her
Promises, nor her Judgments, nor her Precepts in any kind, whether for matter
of Policy, Ceremony, or Morality. For I regard neither what she promises, nor
what she threatens: not what she commands, nor what she forbids. And these
words of mine are not presumptuous, nor any way opprobrious or reproachful to
the Law; because the Law it self is the cause why I am thus dead unto the Law;
namely, because the Law it self is dead; for through her death to me, I to her
am dead. Yet my Person is not dead, but my subjection to the Law is dead; for
my subjection was correlative to her dominion; and Relatives as they mutually
give being one to another, so they mutually take away each others being; for
when either of the Relatives fail, the whole Relation cease; the dominion
therefore of the Law being dead, does make my subjection to dye with it. As by
the death of the Husband the Wife also dies: Yet not in her person as she is a
woman, but in her relation as she is a wife; for she cease to be a wife,
though still she remain a woman. For by this comparison the Apostle does
elegantly illustrate both the death of the Law, and the death of the Jew unto
the Law, Romans 7.2. For the woman which has an husband, is bound by the Law to
her husband, so long as he lives: But if the husband be dead, she is loosed
from the Law of her husband, i. e. She cease to be his wife. And from hence
he inferres this conclusion, verse. 4. Wherefore my brethren ye also are
become dead to the Law by the body of Christ.

That I might live unto God.] These words are a tacit prevention of an
objection that might be made against his former words. For some man might say
unto him, if the Law be dead, and you dead to the Law, and free from the
dominion of it, then you may freely sin without control. Heereto his answer
is; I am not dead to the Law for that purpose, that I might sin: But
contrarily, I am dead to the law, that I might not sin, but might dye as well
to sin as to the Law. For I am therefore dead unto the Law, that I might live
unto God; by framing all my actions according to his grations Will, his last
Will and Testament; which is the Will that he has surrogated to the deceased
Law of Moses, that was his former Will, but is now infringed; and which is the
Rule whereby I am now to walk, that my ways may be acceptable and pleasing
unto God. For to this very end the Old Law is dead, and I am dead to the Law,
that I might become a new Creature to live a new life in the service of God. To
serve him, not carnally after the old way in the Old Testament; but spiritually
after the new way declared in the New Testament, Romans 7.6. But now we are
delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should
serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter. A like
expression to the words in hand we have Romans 6 11. Likewise reckon ye your
selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. And another afterward, Romans 6.13. Neither yield ye your members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; but yield your selves unto God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God.

VERSE. 20.
Text.
I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Sense.
I am crucified.] i. e. Quasily, or in a manner; for my old man, or the man that
I was is mortified or put to death.

With Christ.] i. e. By way of resemblance, as Christ was put to death, and
because he was put to death.

Nevertheless I live.] (...), i. e. But I live, viz. a temporal life in this
world.

Yet not I.] (...), i. e. No more I, or no longer the same man, that I was
before, when sin lived in me.

But Christ lived in me.] i. e. Christ by his spirit, and by his doctrine is
the guide and rule of all my life.

And the life which I now live in the flesh.] (...), i. e. But in that I now
live in my mortal body, or body of flesh.

I live by the faith.] (...), i. e. I live in the Faith, or in the Religion, q.
d. though I live in a body of flesh: Yet my life is not fleshly, but religious.

Of the Son of God.] (...), i. e. That of the Son of God, q. d. the
Religion wherein I now live, is not that of Moses; but that of Christ, who is
the son of God.

And gave himself for me.] (...), i. e. And delivered himself for me, viz.
unto death, or suffered death for my sake.

Reason.
This Verse is a Confirmation of his words in the former, wherein he affirmed
that he was dead unto the Law; not to this end, that he might freely sin;
but to this, that he might afterward live in the service of God; the reason is
(says he) because I am crucified with Christ. For his being crucified does
argue or prove him dead; because all Crucifying is dying, and being crucified
effectually, is being dead; though all dying be not crucifying; for crucifying
is but one kind of violent dying. And his being crucified with Christ does
argue or prove that he lived to God: Because Christ though he dyed on the
Cross, yet now lives unto God. The rest of the Verse being a further
Declaration of this first clause is adorned and varied with pathetick
expressions, arguing his divine and pious affections; wherein by continuing his
former Personation in transferring upon himself the person of a man justified
by Christ, he does highly magnify the benefit and religion of Christ; thereby
to manifest unto the Galatians, their great rashness and weakness in suffering
themselves to be seduced from the Religion of Christ, and reduced under the Law
of Moses.

Comment.
Christian crucifying or mortification, the Pattern of it. the Ground of it;
the End or Effect of it. Of self-love, the Nature of it, the Necessity of it,
the Facility, and want of it: the work of it, the Order of that work, the
nessity of it, and Neglect of it. Mortificatio^ is true life, and really is
Sanctification, by altering my life to the life of Christ. Sense of the Text.
Faith put for Religion. To live in the flesh. To live in the Faith. Natural
actions may become religious, and be subject to faith. An attribute of Christ.
why given him here? The Religion of Moses servile: But that of Christ is
liberal and noble. Another Attribute of Christ. Delivering put for Dying. The
authors of Christ's death. (Actions are morallized from their causes.) The end
or purpose of it, Christ dyed not in my stead: But for my sake, or for my good,
to certify me of blessedness, to justify me to it, to Sanctify me for it. to
Exemplify the way to it, to glorify me with it. Christ dyed for me eminently.
More then any other person can. Christ's love caused his death; not excluding
Gods love, which also caused it, and not his Anger. God then was not angry with
Christ, not with us, but with the Jews he was. Christ dyed for Paul; and for
me, by my name appellative of a Believer, which kind of Nomination is
Certain, and Valid to the Inheritance of Heaven. A Prayer unto Christ.

I Am Crucified.] The Cross was an instrument for criminal executions,
whereon malefactors were put to death; a punishment much practiced, and well
known among the Romans, Greeks, and Jews. And to be Crucified was to be
nailed hand and foot upon the Cross, to suffer thereby a shameful, paynfull,
and lingering death. Hence by way of metaphor or resemblance, the Faithful when
they renounce, reject, and cross the motions, desires, and lusts of their
carnal or fleshly appetite, are said in Scripture to crucify, or mortify the
flesh; and thereupon they themselves are said to be crucified, or mortified.
For when the Flesh or carnal appetite, which is a kind of Malefactor, is so
curbed and crossed, that she cannot enjoy her former liberty and usual motions
unto sin; then she resembles a man crucified, or nailed to the cross, who
thereby loses, first his motion, and at last his life. The Apostle therefore
would say; My death unto the Law, does so far remove me from living in sin,
that I am dead to sin also: because I am as it were crucified. For as a man
that is crucified or nailed to the cross, does dye a violent and paynfull
death: so my old man, or that man that I was formerly, is so bruised and
crossed, that it is dead; not a natural and easy, but a violent and paynfull
death. For the denial of my former self, by crossing the motions, desires,
and lusts of the flesh, is unto my sensual appetite not only a simple death,
but a death with violence and torment: because when my appetite is crossed, she
accounts her self vexed and tormented.

With Christ.] Not really and locally, but putatively and quasively; for I am
mortified, in a manner as he was crucified; and so I am for two reasons. 1.
Because his Crucifying is the Pattern, resemblance, or likeness of mine. For
as Christ was crucified and dyed to his mortal life, that he might rise to a
new life, and live unto God: so I am mortified and dead unto sin, that I might
turn to a new life, and live unto God as a new creature. And as Christ was
crucified but once, dying no more but once; for death had dominion over him no
more but once: so I am mortified and dead to sin once for all; and sin
shall never have dominion over me more: because I will never again return
under the bondage of it. For according to these resemblances the Apostle
proposes Christ unto every Christian, as the true pattern of mortification;
Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin: for he
that is dead is freed from sin. And again at the next verse following but
one, the other resemblance follows, Knowing that Christ being raised from the
dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him. For in that he dyed,
he dyed unto sin once: but in that he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise,
reckon ye also your selves, to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. Because his Crucifying is the cause; ground, or reason of mine. For as
through the death of the Law, I am dead to the Law: so through the Crucifying
of Christ, I am crucified with Christ. i. e. his Crucifying and dying on the
Cross is the cause, ground, and bond, why I must be mortified and dead unto
sin. For seeing Christ by his death upon the Cross did confirm and
establish the last Will and Testament of God, to the Legacyes and Promises
whereof I by faith am justified, to have the same right in God with Christ or
as Christ has; namely a right of alliance and inheritance to be the son and
heir of God, as Christ is the son and heir of God; and consequently to be the
brother of Christ, and a co-heyre with him to eternal blessedness. Are not
these benefits by the death of Christ a cause, ground, and bond sufficient to
engage and oblige me to crucify or mortify my sin? Shall I partake in the
alliance and inheritance of Christ, to be a co-ally and a co-heire with him?
and shall I not partake in his obedience, to be a sufferer with him? especially
in this holy suffering whereby my sin only suffers death? For seeing Christ
for my sake laid down his life; shall not I for his sake lay down my sin?
Can I possibly do less for his sake, who suffered so much for mine, then thus
to conform and plant my self into the likeness of his death? And can I
possibly do more for my own sake; when by thus conforming and planting my
self into the likeness of his death (Romans 6.5.) I shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection? If Christ dyed for me, then must I dye to
sin: because his death binds me to it; 2 Cor. 5.14. For if one dyed for
all, then were all dead. i. e. then were all to dye, or then all ought or must
dye to sin; for in this place, as in diverse others, the action past is put for
the duty to come. If Christ have any right in me, I must be thus dead; Romans
8.10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. i. e. the
flesh or sensual appetite is mortified or dead, that thereby ye may avoid
sin: as a man is said to fly because of his enemies. i. e. to avoid his
enemies. And lastly, if I have any right in Christ, I must be thus Crucified
with Christ; Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts. i. e. have vowed and are bound to crucify the flesh,
and must perform it; for here again the action is put for the duty.

The End for which I am crucified or mortified is to continue my Justification;
to preserve and maintain my divine state of alliance and inheritance with God.
For (as formerly has been showed) my Justification is continued by good
works, especially works of love: but unto such works my mortification must
needs be antecedent, as a necessary preparative, without which I can perform
no good works at all. For unless I first be dead unto sin, how can I
possibly live unto holiness, whose actions are good works? unless the old
creature first dye, how can I become a new creature to bring forth the fruits
of the spirit? Do men gather Grapes of thorns, or Figs of thistles? ^or can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit? Our Savior Christ says, John 12.24.
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and dye, it abides alone, (or is
without fruit:) but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit. So except a man
justified become also mortified, there comes no fruit of it: but if he be
mortified, much fruit will come of it. And the end for which I am crucified or
mortified with Christ, as he was and because he was, is to Continue my
Communion or fellowship with Christ. For as my Justification to be the son and
heir of God, does make me to communicate or partake in the alliance and
inheritance of Christ, to be a co-ally and a co-heyre with Christ, who is
eminently and supreamely the son and heir of God; so my mortification to be
dead unto sin does make me to communicate or partake in the suffering and
glorifying of Christ; that suffering as he did, I may be glorified as he is,
Romans 8.17. And if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint-heyres with
Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. But because upon the eighteenth Verse of this Chapter, I showed, that
my state of Justification is mutable, and therefore requires a tenure to
maintain it; that the tenure maintayning it are good works, and that those
good works are acts of love; therefore correspondently unto those verities, I
shall here subjoine these two following.

1. The first work of my love is to love my self. For the objects upon whom
my love is exercised are God, my neighbor and my self: but because the acts
or works of my love toward these three objects, must not be practiced in a
disorderly way, but in a right and due course, therefore they must commence and
begin at my self. Yet by my self-love, I mean not my Lust, which is a
sensual desire of the flesh to have worldly good, as pleasure, profit, and
credit; for my Lust is an inordinate, improbous; and malignant motion of my
flesh or sensual appetite condemned in the holy Scriptures; and therefore is
that man in me that must be mortified, and that sin that must be put to
death, or whereto I must die. But by my self-love I mean that effect of my
faith, which is a rational affection of my will, doing service to the spirit,
and moving so contrary to my lust, that by means of my Love, my lust must be
mortified: for my self-love is my Will to do, and also my doing of that good,
which is decent, honest and holy, and for the doing whereof the spirit
sanctifies me, as the seeking of mine own salvation, my neighbors
edification, and Gods glory; which last is the first in my intention, though it
come the last in execution.

For if I conceive it a thing possible for me, truly to love either God or my
neighbor, before I have truly loved my self, I greatly deceive mine own
soul. Because my Love to my self is the standerd, canon, or rule of that
love, which I owe to my neighbor: for the law of Love commands me to Love my
neighbor as my self. i. e. As I love my self, so must I love my neighbor:
if therefore I do not really and truly love my self, how and whereby should I
proportion, regulate or measure out any true love unto my neighbor. And
because my Love to my self is also the standerd, canon, or rule of that love
which I owe to God; for the law of Love commands me, to Love the Lord my God
with all my heart, with all my soul, and with all my mind. i. e. Really and
truly, to the utmost of my power; not barely as I love my self, but much more
and in a greater measure. If therefore in my heart, soul and mind, I have no
true love at all, how can I love God with all that love which is in my heart,
soul and mind? or when I have no measure of love to my self, how can I be
said to love God, in a greater measure then I love my self?

True it is, that my love to God is the first Commandment, i. e. the first for
dignity; but the first for practice is love to my self; and therefore my love
must begin at my self, that thence proceeding to my neighbor, it may
determine in God, who is the chiefest, highest, and final object of it; That
rebounding back again from him, it may for his sake be increased upon my
neighbor, and for my neighbors sake upon my self. And my love to God is the
greatest Commandment, i. e. the greatest for performance: but the least for
performance is love to my self; and therefore again my love must begin at my
self: Because I am to begin at things least and most easy; for if I can not
truly love my self, which is the least and easiest performance, how shall I
love my brother which is greater and harder, and consequently how God, which is
the greatest and hardest task of love? For seeing God is invisible, whom I see
not, and my brother is visible whom I see, it must needs be a matter of
greater difficulty to love God, then to love my brother; for, 1. John 4.20. He
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen?

Does it not from hence plainly appear, that he is but an hypocrite, who
professes to love God, and yet loves not his brother? for too manifest it is,
that many Christians who profess the love of Christ, are so far from
brotherly love, that they hate their brother for whom Christ dyed; and hate him
more, then do many Jews who profess themselves enemies unto Christ. And my
soul bleeds to consider the bloody Wars that for many years have raged, and
still continue in most parts of Christendom, wherein more Christian blood has
been spilt by Christians, then ever was shed by all the Heathen. Oh what a
foul stain is this to the profession of Christ, that they for whose salvation
Christ was crucified, should daily practice one another destruction? Amongst
many other causes, whereby Christians fall into these Unchristian courses, it
seems this is one, by mistaking the course and order of love, in beginning the
practice of it upon God, in whom the practice should determine. This is not the
way of true zeal, but the error of that which is blind.

2. My first self-love is to mortify my sins. For my mortification is a
work of true love to my self. Because this work is a killing or deading of
that ferity or wildness, which naturally is bred in my flesh, i. e. in my
sensual appetite, by subduing, mastering, and taming her motions and desires,
regulating and ordering them in such manner, that about carnal pleasure, they
run not into the sins of uncleanness, to pollute, defile, and surfeit my
soul with gluttony, drunkenesse, and whoredom; that about worldly profit,
tney fall not into the sin of Covetousness, to fill my heart with the
thorns of worldly cares, and with the hooks of filthy lucre; that about
worldly credit they rise not into the sin of Pride, to swell my mind with
the tumors and botches of humane praises and commendations. Is not this work
of mortification, a doing of my self great good, and therefore a work of true
love to my self? for if I bear not from my self so much love to my self as
to fortify, watch, and ward my soul, against the invasions and assaults of
these sins; I am a traitor to mine own soul; for is not he is treacherous
villain, that will suffer his City to be entered by that enemy, whom he has
power to repel? If I have any love to my life and health, I am careful to
keep my self from the Pox and the Plague; are the Pox and the Plague more
dangerous to my body, then are drunkenesse and whoredom both to my body and
soul? Or is a soul defiled with these sins, less filthy then a Leper, or
less ugly then a face all crusted with the Pox.

And my mortification is the first work of my love. Because until this work
be done, I can do no works of love at all. None to my self; for when I am a
Drunkard, a Leacher, covetous and proud, how can I perform such love to my
self, as to furnish and adorn my soul with the virtues of Sobriety,
Chastity, Liberality, and Humility? For by what means can these virtues enter,
while their contrary vices keep the possession of of me? None to my Brother;
for when I am covetous and greedy after worldly gain, to get what I can out of
my brother; how can I perform the duties of Justice and Equity, to give my
brother his right and his due in all things that are his, either by Law or
Reason? Or when my Covetousness makes me so nigardly, that to thrive in the
world by sparing and saving, I scarce allow my Family meat and drink fitting
for it according to my condition; how then can I do the offices of Mercy and
Kindness to my brother, in giving meat to the hungry, and drink to the
thirsty, in entertaining the stranger, clothing the naked, and visiting the
sick? Yet these are the works of brotherly love, whereby I must be tried at
the day of Judgment, and whereby the final sentence must pass upon me.

Lastly, until this work be done, I can do no works of love to God; my acts
of piety and devotion in prayers, praises, and thanksgivings, for the worship
and service of God, cannot pass for works of love. For when I am a Drinker or
a Leacher, can I love God, and will God accept love from a loathsome soul, that
stinketh of Drunkenness and Leachery? When I am covetous, can I love God, and
will God accept love from an idolatrous soul? for is not covetousness
idolatry? and can I worship two such contrary deities, as God and an idol? or
can I serve two such contrary masters, as God and Mammon? When I am proud, can
I love God, and will God accept love from a lofty soul, that is puffed up with
vain glory, preferring her own praise before Gods glory? But some man may
say, that God loved us then when we were sinners, and so loved us that he gave
his Son to die for us. To him I answer, that indeed God did so: yet he loved
us, not to this end that we should continue in sin; but to this, that we
should not continue in it, but mortify and put it to death, that being purged
and cleansed from it, we might thereby be prepared and fitted to love him
again with love beseeming his acceptance.

Hence again there appears another hypocrisy, when I am careful to mortify
the sin of my brother, before I have killed mine own. And the exercise of this
hypocrisy in mistaking the due order and practice of mortification has been
one cause of the greatest troubles in the Church of Christ. For as my practice
of love must not begin at God but end in him, so my practice of mortification
must not begin upon my brother, but must commence at my self and determine in
him. That having first cast out the beam out of mine own eye, I may see
clearly to cast out the mote out of my brothers eye: that having first beaten
down the beams of pride and covetousness which are inward malignities in my
self, and the roots of all evil unto others, I may mortify the moates of
swearing and drunkenness which are the outward infirmities of my brother. For
if mine own beam move me to mortify my brothers moate, I quicken a greater
sin in my self, to kill a less in him. Very fitting it is for the advance
of Gods glory, that my brothers idolatry should be mortified: but when my
covetousness moves me to mortify it, that I may devour his estate, I kill an
idolatry in him to quicken a greater in my self. For of all idolatry
covetousness is the greatest: because it is an idolatry altogether profane,
without any color or show of piety. Hence says the Apostle, Romans 2.22. Thou
that abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege? i. e. Art thou so covetous,
as to rob God? For all sacrilege is a work of covetousness, and all robbing
of God is a foul impiety.

Nevertheless I live.] (...), i. e. but I live. Herein he prevents a tacit
objection which some man might seem to make against him thus: You say, you are
dead to the Law, and yet alive to God: and yet again that you are crucified
with Christ; how can these contrarieties stand together, that you should be
thus both dead and alive? and quickened: Wherefore I am dead and alive in
respect of different faculties of my soul: because the death of one faculty is
the life of the other; for the death of my flesh is the life of my spirit.

This kind of death and life not only may, but needs must consist, comply, and
stand together in me; for in effect and substance this death and life are but
one and the same thing, which under contrary names make up in me that one and
the same thing, which is sanctity or holiness. For as in a journey, there seem
two contrarieties, namely a departing from one place, and a traveling to
another: yet really and in effect, both these are but one and the same journey;
differing only in terms of recesse from one place, and access to another,
yet the motion interceding between those distant places is one and the same.
Or as in curing the body of some disease, there seem two contrary actions,
namely an expelling of the disease, and an inducing of health: yet really, and
in effect both these make but one and the same cure. So in my Repentance,
regeneration, renovation, sanctification, or by what names soever the
Scriptures call the cure of my soul, there seem two contrarietyes, namely my
forsaking of sin, or dying to it, and my approaching to holiness or living to
God: yet really and in effect, both these are but one and the same conversation
or walking.

Hence it appears that mortification and vivification are really but one and
the same motion, making up in me that one and the same moral alteration, which
is my sanctification, yet there is between them a rational difference in 3
respects. 1. Of their order; for in order of nature or reason, though not of
time or continuance, mortification is first; for that begins, that
consequently vivification may follow. 2. Of their object, for the matter
mortified is sin; but that vivified is holiness. 3. Of the subject; for the
faculty mortified is the flesh, but that vivified is the spirit. Yet the
faculty of my flesh is not mortified for the essence of it: but for some
qualityes of it; for the faculty of the flesh does also live in me as much as
that of the spirit: for although unto some motions my flesh be deaded, yet
unto some others it still lives, and conduces to useful and lawful effects
in me. For as in the killing of quicksilver, the silver remains after the
killing it, and serves for several uses: but that malignity, ferity, or
quicknes of the silver, which in the use thereof would prove noxious and
hurtful, is extinguished, and deaded. So in the Mortifying of my flesh, the
faculty remains after the mortifying and lives in me to diverse good purposes:
but that fiercenes, rashness and quicknes of my appetite, the lusts and frauds
of it whereby it would usurp over my Spirit to reign and rule in me, these
qualities and motions of my appetite are mortified and extinguished; that
thereby she may become obedient and serviceable unto my spirit for the better
speeding of many holy duties. And so when a horse is made to amble, his motion
lives in him still: but the trot of his motion is deaded, and a pace is put
upon it, that moves with more ease to the rider.

Yet not I.] (...). i. e. no more I, or no longer I the same man that I was
before I was justified, when sin lived in me. For elsewhere the very same words
are translated No more I; as Romans 7.17. Now then (...). i. e. it is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me. And Romans 7.20. Now if I do that I
would not, (...). i. e. it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me. And in this very place our former English translation, which was in use
before that of King James, has it thus. not I any more. q. d. Though after my
crucifying or mortifying I live: yet I am not any more the man that I was
before; neither do I live any longer the life I did, when living a natural
and carnal life, sin lived in me and overruled me. For the man that I was
is now mortified and dead unto sin; it is crucified as Christ was crucified,
and because he was crucified. But now there is a great alteration in my moral
life or conversation; for my old man which was natural and carnal being dead,
I am now become a new man and a new creature, to live a life which is
spiritual and christian. For in vain I profess my self a Christian, unless
I become a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ he is
a new creature. For neither Ceremony nor not-Ceremony, nor any thing else
avails in Christ, but only this to become a new creature; Gal. 6.15. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature.

But Christ lives in me.] Not by his Person; for so he lives in Heaven
sitting at the right hand of God. But he lives in me by his spirit; for his
spirit infused into me, inspireth my spirit, inlightning my mind, animating
my will, and governing my actions to a life of holiness, whereto my single
spirit in her naked state of nature could never of her self elevate and raise
me. For unto my spirit the spirit of Christ is a Light, a Strength, and a
Guide, by whom I am lead, and after whom I walk in the ways of holiness. And
Christ lives in me by his life; for as his death was the cause and pattern of
my death, whereby I am mortified with him: So his life is the cause and pattern
of my life, whereby I am vivified with him. For the holiness of his life has
such an influence upon mine, that according to the measure of grace and of my
ability in my mortal condition, I labor to be holy as he was holy; that I
may imitate and resemble his holiness, though I can not equal it. However,
he is the Rule whereby I live; for I live not after mine own will, but after
his; and he is the End for which I live; for I live not unto my self to seek
my self, but unto him, to seek him who dyed for me; and I therefore live
thus, because he dyed for me. For a like phrase to this, is that, 2. Cor.
5.15. And that he dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose again.

And the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith. ] (...), i.
e. But in that I now live in the flesh. For so it is rendered in the Vulgar
Latin, in the Vulgar Italian, in the Vulgar French, and in our former English
Translation in use before that of King JAMES, which leaves the Greek, and
follows the Latin of Beza. Yet in the Translation of King JAMES, the
Particle (...), in other places of the New Testament is rendered in that; as
Romans 6.10. (...). i. e. for in that he dyed. I live by the faith, (...), i. e.
I live in the faith; for so the Vulgar Latin, Italian, and French render it.
The Greek Particle, (...), though many times it signify by or through: Yet
here it does not so; for the Apostles meaning is not to show the means
whereby he lived, but the manner wherein he lived. And the word faith by way
of metonymy or transnomination is here put for Religion, which is the proper
and due effect of faith; for so faith is taken in diverse places, as Gal. 1.23.
Now preaches the faith which once he destroyed, i. e. the Religion which once
he destroyed. And 1. Tim. 4.1. In the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, i. e. from the Religion. And 1. Tim. 5.8. If any man provide not for his
own, especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith, i. e.
the Religion of Christ.

To live in the flesh, is to perform the natural and civil acts of a mortal
man, who is compassed with flesh and blood; as to eat, drink, and sleep, to
labor, traffic, or otherwise follow the works of my worldly calling. But to
live after the flesh, is another and a contrary thing, not allowable to any
Christian, not compatible with mortification, nor consistent with salvation.
For living after the flesh is a continuance in those sins, which will for
certain exclude the sinner from his divine inheritance in the Kingdom of God;
as will appear afterward in this Epistle, cap. 5. verse. 19. etc. To live in
the faith, or Religion of Christ, is to perform those works of Love, which
belong to a Believer professing the faith of Christ; as works of love to
himself, by Patience, Temperance, Chastity, and Humility; Love to his brother,
by Equity, Mercy, Meekness, and Kindness; Love to God, by Piety and Devotion
in his Worship and Service. Or to live in the faith, as the Apostle expresses
it in other words, Ephesians. 4.1. Is to walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith
we are called with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing one another in love. And again, Coloss. 1.10. It is to walk worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, etc. In a
word, it is to live a religious and holy life, according to the profession and
obligation of my faith; for if my faith have not this effect upon me, to make
me live thus, my faith is dead. I were as good have no faith, as have the
Devils faith which justifies not: And I were as good again have no faith, as
to have such a bare semblance or shadow of a justifying faith, which sanctifies
me not. For my Justification is before my Sanctification, not only in nature
and time, but also is or ought to be the cause of it, and will be frustrate
unless it have that effect.



For while I perform those natural and civil actions which belong to flesh
and blood as necessary to the course of this mortal life, I have always a
respect to the Faith and Religion of Christ which I profess; thereby
moderating, ordering, and ruling all my actions, that I may walk worthy of the
vocation whereto I am called; carrying all things in a due conformity thereto,
and avoiding all, tnat either may bring a scandal upon it, or be any way
unworthy thereof. For even my natural and civil actions are now all referred
unto God, and being done in thankfulness to him for his grace, they serve to
declare and advance his glory. Whether I eat or eat not; to the Lord I eat or
eat not, and give God thanks, Romans 4.6. He that eats, eats to the Lord,
for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not,
and gives God thanks. This clause therefore of Living in the flesh, and yet
living in the Faith, seems to be the same with that, 2. Cor. 10.3. Though we
walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh.

Hence it appeeres, that Our natural and civil actions, as far as they are
capable of morality, do belong unto faith. For even upon such actions faith
may have such an influence, that they may be done in faith; and that action
which in one man is merely natural, may in another be both natural and
religious, being clothed with some circumstance which may make it a service
acceptable unto God. Although my Faith and Religion oblige me not to undertake
every kind of action; yet faith must moderate the manner of every action which
I undertake, that it be suitable to the will of God; and faith must direct the
end of every action, that it tend to the glory of God. Hence the Scripture is
copious in her Exhortations, that all things be done in a due manner; nothing
uncharitably, Romans 14.15. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk
thou not charitably. Nothing offensively; 1. Cor. 10.32. Give no offense,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Nothing
contentiously, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory
etc. And that all things be done to the right end; All unto the Lord, Romans
14.8. Whether we live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto
the Lord. All unto his glory, 1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. All in thankfulness to him,
Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the father through him. When I live thus,
ordering my humane actions in this manner and to this end, then I may truly say
of my self, In that I now live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the son of
God; as it follows in the next words.

Of the Son of God.] (...). i. e. I live in the faith or religion, in that
(faith or religion) of the son of God. The particle that being placed after
faith, does emphatically determine and specify the Author of that faith and
religion wherein he lived, namely in that of the Son of God. And there is
another emphasis in the article affecting the son (...), i. e. in that faith or
religion of that Son of God, that he might lay out a singular designation of
Christ, in distinguishing him from other sons of God. For he has reference
unto that person whom in this verse he had before mentioned by the name of
Christ, in saying I am crucified with Christ; and Christ lives in me. Here
therefore he again mentions the same person by another name in saying, I live
in the faith, (or religion) in that of that Son of God who loved me and gave
himself for me. i.e. of Christ; for these words are an eloquent and
affectionat circumlocution or description of Christ. Wherein are expressed two
excellencyes or eminent qualityes of Christ, the one of his Birth in relation
to God, that he was the Son of God; the other of his death in relation to man,
whom he so loved that he dyed for his sake. Every Angel, every Prophet, and
every Believer is A son of God: but Christ is The or That son of God, in a most
eminent and singular manner, above all other persons that are sons of God,
whether they be men or Angels. Because (to omit all other reasons not serving
to the Apostles scope in this place) he was begotten on a Virgin, not by the
power of any man or Angel, but by the power of the Highest: for (as the Angel
Gabriel certifies the Virgin Mary his mother, Luke 1.35.) he was therefore
called the Son of God. And here the Apostle understands no other filiation of
Christ, then that whereby he was a mortal man: because he argues from his
death in saying, who loved me, and gave himself (to death) for me.

He describes Christ by this attribute of the Son of God; that thereby he
might express another cause that moved him to forsake the Law and Religion of
Moses, to embrace the faith and Religion of Christ, and thereby to regulate all
the actions of his life; namely because Christ is the Son of God. Which first
argues for his person, that Christ is a person of far greater dignity then
Moses. For although Moses were a great Prophet, yet his ordinary style in
reference to God runs but thus, that he was the servant of God, and the man
of God: But the constant title and style of Christ, is to be the Son of God.
For from this very difference of condition, the Apostle argues the high
prerogative of Christ above that of Moses, Heb. 3.5. And Moses verily was
faithful in all his house as a servant, etc. but Christ as a son over his
own house. And secondly, hereby he highly commends the Religion introduced
by Christ, beyond that which was settled by Moses, as a Religion and service
more agreeable to the will and pleasure of God. For the Author to the Hebrews
does in this respect exalt the Religion of Christ, in that God has delivered
the message thereof by his Son, Heb. 1.1.2. God who spoke in time past unto
the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his son.

Hence it will easily be collected, that the Religion of Moses being but the
servant of God, was but a servile Religion; for the services thereof were very
servile, Heb. 9.10. which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse
washings and carnal ordinances imposed on them, until the time of
Reformation. Hence that whole Religion is called, Romans 8.15. The spirit of
bondage to fear; because it wrought in the people a passion of slavish fear,
such as they commonly have who live under bondage or servitude. Hence also the
services thereof are called (Gal. 4.3.) the Elements (or Rudiments of the
World; under which as under Tutors and Governors, the Jews though they were
the adopted Children and Heirs of God, were held in bondage, in a condition
nothing different from servants. But the Religion of Christ, who is that son
of God is a filial, liberal, and noble Religion, whose services are fitted for
the sons of God, according to the state and degree of sons in their
plenage, who are come to their perfect growth and fulness of time. For so it
follows in the place forecited: But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his son to redeem them, that were under the Law, in the condition
of children and servants, that they might receive the adoption of sons, i. e.
That they might receive their emancipation from the state of children, to have
their liberature according to the state and degree of sons in their plenage,
or full age. The highest dignity which the Scripture ascribes to the Law or
Religion of Moses, is taken from the Publication of it, in that it was ordained
and spoken by Angels: and yet even in this respect she preferres the Religion
of Christ before it: because this was ordained and spoken by that son of God,
who is the Lord, not only of men, but also of the Angels, Heb. 2.2. For if the
word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward: How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord?

Who loved me and gave himself for me.] Here he adds the other attribute
or eminent quality of Christ, expressing thereby another motive that caused him
to forsake the Religion of Moses, and to embrace that of Christ; namely,
because Christ had thereto endeared him by dying for him; who (says he) loved
me, and gave himself (to death) for me. Whereby he would insinuate that Christ
was far more excellent then Moses, not only for the dignity of his person, in
being the Son of God; but also for the dearness of his affection in dying for
Believers; for neither of those are true of Moses. (...). i. e. And delivered
himself for me. Yet here and elsewhere, it is well enough translated gave
himself: because the words give and deliver, when they are used in this sense,
are many times interchanged, and one put for the other. But in the word
Deliver, standing thus single and applied to a person, there is commonly an
ellipsis or defect, which is to be supplied according to the exigency of the
matter in hand, and which for the most part is some evil, especially Death,
from which or whereto the person is said to be delivered; as Mat. 27.43. He
trusted in God, let him deliver him now. i. e. Let him deliver him now from
death. And 2. Pet. 2.7. and delivered just Lot, i. e. from death, at the
destruction of Sodom. But in diverse other places the deliverance is not from
evil, but unto evil; and the evil whereunto Christ was delivered, was death.
So Romans 4.25. who was delivered for our offenses, i. e. delivered unto death.
And Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us
all. i. e. delivered him up to death. So here; and delivered himself for me,
i. e. delivered or gave himself unto death for me.

The Person who delivered Christ unto death, was Christ himself; for he
delivered himself and gave himself to die, Ephesians. 5.2. And walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us: where in the
Original, it is, has delivered himself for us. And again in the same
Chapter, ver. 25. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it: where again the Original has it, and
delivered himself for it. Yet besides Christ there were other persons who were
concurrent in this delivery of Christ to death. For God the Father by his
Decree, and by the consent of Christ, did deliver him to death, Act. 2.23. Him
being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have
taken and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. And Judas who betrayed him
delivered him; for all treachery is a delivery of the person who is betrayed;
and Judas to extenuate the foulness of his treachery, calls it by the moderat
and general name of delivery, Mat. 26.15. Then one of the twelve called Judas
Iscariot, went unto the chief Priests and said unto them; what will ye give
me, and I will deliver him unto you? and they covenanted with him for 30
pieces of silver; and from that time he sought opportunity to betray him: where
in the Greek the same word stands for delivering and betraying; for all
unlawful and sinful delivering is betraying. Likewise the Rulers of the
Jews, as the chief Priests, the Scribes and Elders delivered him, Luke 20.20.
And they watched him and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just
men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him
unto the power and authority of the Governor. And lastly Pilate the Governor
delivered him, Mat. 27.26. And when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to
be crucified.

Yet this one and the same action wherein so many persons concurred, was in God
and Christ an holy Act; but in the rest a wicked crime. Because actions are
moralized to be good or evil from their causes and circumstances, which being
altered, do alter the good or evil of the action. God who was the father of
Christ, had power to deliver his son unto death; and did actually deliver him
for this end; viz. to glorify him; that raising him after death to an
immortal life, he might become the perpetual Priest and King of his Church;
and consequently the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him. And
this act of God was good, because he had power to do it, and did it to a good
and blessed end. And Christ who was the son of God, had power to deliver
himself to death, and in obedience to his father actually did it to the same
end; namely, to be glorified, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne
of God. And this act of Christ was good: because he had power to do it; for
though no man had authority to take his life from him, yet he had authority
from his father to lay it down, John 10.18. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to
take it again; this commandment have I received of my father. And because
Christ did this act for a good end, that thereby he might compass his own
glory and man's salvation. But in Judas and the Jews, this very act of
delivering Christ unto death, was a foul wickedness; because they had no
lawful authority to do it; and because they did it to an evil end, namely to
destroy him; and because they did it, not as Gods will, but as Satan's will and
their own; for John 13.2. The Devil put it into the heart of Judas. Thus one
and the same action done by diverse agents, upon diverse motives, and for diverse
ends, may be diversely moralized, to become in one respect good and holy, but in
another foul and wicked.

For me.] Christ delivered himself unto death, and died; yet not for himself
only, and only for his own sake, but also for me, and for my sake. Which is
not to be so understood, as if Christ had died in my stead, or in my room, by
suffering that death which I for my sin am to suffer. For although Christ
suffered a death, in a manner somewhat like to that death which I deserve to
suffer, and suffered it for that end, to free me from that death which I
deserve to suffer; and from which I should not have been freed, unless he had
suffered death. Yet first, He suffered not that very death which I deserve to
suffer; for the death which I deserve to suffer is eternal death: which kind
of death Christ suffered not; for his death lasted but three days; neither
could he suffer it, because God had decreed and promised the contrary. And if
he had suffered it, then could I have never been freed from it: and yet my
freedom from it was the maine end for which he suffered. For if Christ had
continued in death, and had not been raised from it, my faith to be raised
from it, is vain; and whenever I die, I shall utterly perish, 1. Cor. 15.17.
And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins:
then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. And secondly,
The death which Christ suffered, was not in stead or liew of mine: For the
temporal death which Christ suffered, does not free me from temporal death,
because I shall suffer that kind of death, and shall lie under it till the
Resurrection; not as a punishment of my sin (for unto the Remission of my
sins I am already justified, and my death is not a punishment for them) but
as a Calamity of my birth, as being the son of Adam, in whose attainder I was
tainted, and for whose sin I must die. But by the temporal death of Christ,
my temporal death shall determine, which otherwise would become eternal; for
his Rising from his death will raise me from mine, 1. Cor. 15.22. For as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

But of these words for me, the meaning is, that Christ delivered himself to
death, and actually died for my sake, for my good and for my great benefit;
which benefit is no less unto me, then first my Right, and afterward my
Possession of eternal Blessedness. For by or through his death I collect from
Scripture these five benefits. 1. He Certified me of blessedness. That the
Will and Testament which he published to the World concerning the future
blessedness of heaven, was the true, whole and last Will and Testament of God;
seeing he testified this truth and made faith thereof by his death; for
because he witnessed it with his blood; therefore his blood is said to bear
witness on earth, 1 John 5.8. And there are three that bear witness on
earth, the spirit and the water and the blood. 2. He justified me to
blessedness. For the Will and Testament of God, wherein the Legacies or Promises
of blessedness are devised unto me, was confirmed and established by the blood
and death of Christ; who dyed instead of the Testator, that the Testament might
be in force; and that being in force, I am upon my actual faith actually
justified to my Legacies therein; for hence we are said to be justified by
the blood of Christ, Romans 5.9. Being now justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him.

3. He sanctified me for blessedness.] For those acts of holiness which
consist in dying to sin, and in newness of life; and which are the conditions
and Precepts of Gods Will and Testament whereto the possession of blessedness is
limited, and without which I shall never possess it, were figured and
shaddowed out unto me by the death and resurrection of Christ. For he that
had no sin himself, how could he otherwise represent unto me this duty of my
death unto sin and newnes of life? And that Christ dyed to do this good upon
me, is expressly taught in many places of the Scripture; as Gal. 1.4. Who gave
himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this present evil world.
And Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, etc.
And Tit. 2.14. who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
And Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God. And 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye know that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious
blood of Christ. And 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree; that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness.

4. He exemplified unto me the way to blessedness. The way leading unto
blessedness, is a hard, rough, and narrow lane, beset with many troubles,
dangers, and certain death, through all which he commands me to pass. A way
that unto flesh and blood is exceeding fearful and full of horror; for it
seems to lead me unto utter destruction: yet is indeed the right, true, and
only way to eternal blessedness. Now seeing Christ by his death passing this
way, came thereby to his crown of glory; does not he by his example in taking
the assay of death, and in tasting it for me, encourage me to suffer death,
and assure unto me the likeness of his glory? for may I not plainly see this
in the death of my Savior Jesus Christ? Heb. 2.9. But we see Jesus who was
made a little lower then the Angels for the suffering of death crowned with
glory and honor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.

5. He will glorify me with the crown of blessedness. The Legacies or
promises of my future blessedness are to be performed unto me by Christ: because
he is the sole Executor of that Will and Testament wherein they are devised
unto me; and therefore also he is the Captain of my salvation. Unto which
Office he was enabled and perfected through the sufferings of death; that
after his death he might possess his own glory, and might also bring me to
glory after mine: because this was a way beseeming and becoming the good
pleasure of God, whereby to bring all his sons unto glory; Heb. 2.10. For it
became him for whom are all things and by whom are all things, in bringing many
sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through
sufferings. Christ himself having been once dead, and gained by his death the
power over death, does the more commiserate my death, and will be the readier,
first to succor me at it, and hereafter to raise me from it; Heb. 2.18. for in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, be is able to succor them that
are tempted. In a word, he therefore dyed and revived, that he might be my
gracious Lord, in what state soever I am, whether dead or alive; Romans 14.9. For
to this end, Christ both dyed and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both
of the dead and the living.

Yet I am further to conceive, that these words (Christ gave himself or dyed
for me) must be understood of him by way of eminency or excellency in a
special and singular manner: For although some other persons may dye for me,
yet they cannot be said to do it in that manner, or in that sense that he did
it. Because Christ was the first person who dyed for me in this kind, and by
the means of whose death principally and chiefly according to the grace and
mercy of God, my salvation is established. And because Christ was the only
person who dyed for me to these special ends of Justifying, Sanctifying, and
Glorifying of me, as he was my sole and only Mediator, without the
conjunction of any other person herein. And because this deed of Christ in
dying for me is sometime in Scripture attributed unto Christ, as a special
property peculiar to him; for hence it is said, Romans 14.15. Destroy not him
with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed, viz. in an eminent and excellent manner.
And 1. Cor. 1.13. Was Paul crucified for you? i. e. Neither Paul, nor any other
person was crucified for you principally and especially.

Otherwise besides Christ, some other person may also dye for me, and may be
truly said to dye for the good of my salvation. For touching himself Paul
says, 2. Cor. 1.6. That he was afflicted for the consolation and salvation of
the Corinthians. And 2. Cor. 12.15. That he would very gladly spend, and be
spent for their souls; for so the Margin declares the Original. And Ephesians.
3.1. That he was the Prisoner of Jesus Christ for the Gentiles; and if
consequently to his imprisonment he had suffered death, then it must needs
follow that he had dyed for the Gentiles. And 2. Tim. 2.10. That he endured
all things for the Elects sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which
is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. And this was not the singular charity
of Paul alone: But it is also the duty of every Believer to lay down his life
for his brethren, especially when the matter concerns their salvation; for
hereof the death of Christ is both the reason and the example, 1. John. 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us;
and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Likewise of every true
Martyr, by whose constancy I find my self confirmed in the truth, it may be
truly said, that he dyed for the good of my salvation. Yet notwithstanding
all other persons besides Christ, are in this kind, only subservient unto
Christ; and the benefit which I have by their death, does only second my
blessing by his.

Who loved me.] The Motive that induced Christ to give himself for me; was
his Love to me. For as the fruit of his death was my good: So the root of it
was his love; for because he loved me; therefore he dyed for me. Certainly
a real love, not in word, or in tongue, but in deed and in truth, testified
and certified by his death; for by the outward passion of his death, he
declared the inward affection of his love. And certainly a liberal love; for
seeing love delights to give, what could he give me more then to give
himself for me? For the greatness of his love unto me is here signified by
two circumstances that enclose and stand about his Love. One before it, by the
greatness of his person, in that he was the son of God; for what greater
person was there in the world, who was mortal and able to dye for me? The
other after it, by the greatness of his passion in that he gave himself to
death for me; for what could he possibly do more for my sake, then to lay
down his life for me? Seeing beyond this, there can be no greater love; and
hence he himself commends the greatness of love, John 15.13. Greater love
has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. His love
therefore was the Cause of his death; and his death was the Effect of his love.
For hence in several passages of Scripture, his Love and his Death go hand in
hand, as the Cause with the effect; As Ephesians. 5.2. Walk in love, as Christ
also has loved us, and given himself for us. And Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love
your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. And
1. John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his
life for us.

Yet the love of Christ unto me, was not the sole and only cause of his death
for me; so as to exclude the love of the Father from being concurrent with the
love of Christ. For God the Father also loved me, and loved me so eminently
and so principally, that his love was the cause why Christ loved me; and
therefore consequently Gods love unto me must needs be the cause why Christ
dyed for me, and must needs be also the supreme cause, that has no higher
cause above it. For Christ therefore dyed for me, because he loved me, and
he therefore loved me, because God loved me: But why God loved me, I know
no cause, beside his love. Yet that Gods love to me is the cause why Christ
dyed for me, is manifest from several passages of Scripture; as John 3.16.
For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, i. e. Gave
him to dye; for his love to the World was the cause, why he exposed his son
to death. And Romans 3.25. God has set forth Christ, to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, i. e. His kindness,
which is the effect of his love. And Romans 5.8. But God commends his love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. And 1. John
4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent
his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

And the greatness of Gods love herein, is manifest also by two
circumstances. One of the Person dying; a person of that Majesty, and of so
near alliance unto God, that he was the son of God, and his only begotten
son. Which must needs argue in God an excess and high degree of love. For
he that is so free, as to give up his own son for me, does thereby further
give me to understand, that he would willingly give me all that ever he
has. And beyond this, can there be any greater love, or can any love be more
free? Yet such was Gods love to me in the death of Christ, Romans 8.32. He that
spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all; how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? The other Circumstance is of the
persons for whom Christ dyed; for they were sinners and ungodly wretches;
persons deserving death themselves, and altogether unworthy that any one should
dye for them, and therefore much less the son of God. Peradventure for good
and godly men, some man would dye; but would any man dye for sinners and
ungodly wretches? But Christ dyed for us while we were yet sinners and
ungodly; and therein God commended the greatness of his love to us, Romans 5.7.
Peradventure for a good man, some would even dare to dye; but God commends
his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us.
Hence there will follow these three verities.

1. Gods wrath was not the cause of Christ's death.] For we cannot find any
such Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures: But from several express
Scriptures we have clearly showed, that the cause of Christ's death was Gods
love unto us; and that love was not ordinary and vulgar, but singularly and
entirely the greatest, that ever was in the world. We were indeed the
children of wrath, i. e. liable to Gods wrath, and worthy of it: Yet it does
not* thence follow that God was then actually wrath with us; for God who is
rich in grace and mercy may (in a diverse respect) actually love them, who
actually deserve his wrath. And when Christ dyed for us, we were then dead in
sins, i. e. guilty of death by reason of our sins: Yet it thence follows
not, that our sins were punished in the death of Christ; for God may actually
pardon their life, who actually are guilty of death. This God may do de jure,
and has already done it de facto; and he has done it for this end, that
thereby he might show the exceeding riches of his love and grace, in his mercy
and kindness toward us through Christ; Ephesians. 2.3. We all had our
conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as
others; but God who is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by
grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the Ages to come, he might show
the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us through Christ
Jesus. Certainly such love as here is mentioned, so exceeding rich in grace,
mercy, and kindness, must needs be free from wrath and anger; unless we
are content to say, that at one and the same time in respect of the same
action, and of the same persons, God was exceeding loving, and yet exceeding
angry; which at last will come to this, that at the same time the same God
loved and loved not.

2. God was not angry with Christ when he dyed.] For would God be angry with
his only begotten Son, of whom he gave this public testimony from Heaven?
Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. With his Son who
was so obedient, that he took upon him the form of a servant, and God calls
him his chosen servant, in whom his soul was well pleased; Mat. 12.18. Behold
my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased.
With his Son who was so Innocent, that in all his life he knew no sin, and
therefore could be no subject of Gods anger. And could God be angry with his
Son then, when he was about Gods own work? a work to God so pleasing,
that God therefore loved him, because he undertook it; John 10.17. Therefore
does my Father love me because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.
A work to God so agreeable, that (Ephesians. 5.2.) it was an Offering and a
sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. A work to God so acceptable,
that for his undergoing of it, God has highly exalted him, and caused every
knee to bow unto him; Phil. 2.8. He humbled himself and became obedient unto
death even the death of the Cross: wherefore God also has highly exalted him,
and given him a name which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow. etc.

3. God was not angry with us when Christ dyed for us.] For could God be angry
with us then, when we were the objects of his admirable and infinite love;
when he did a work for our sakes, whereby he especially intended to free us
wholly from his anger? a work wherein he plainly declared the exceeding riches
of his grace, and the abundance of his mercy and kindness toward us? a work
wherein he spared not his own most dearly beloved Son, but delivered him up
for us all, and thereby manifested that he would freely give us all things? a
work whereby he conveyed unto us, a right, interest, and claim to the
eternal possession of Heavenly blessedness? Or if God were then angry with us,
when to settle upon us eternal life, he exposed his own Son to a bitter
death; what sufficient argument can we draw from his death, whereby to assure
our souls, that God remains not angry with us still, even unto this very day.

True it is, that God was angry with the Jews who put Christ to death; for his
blood was upon them and upon their children; and afterward God punished their
wickedness with a sin all desolation. Yet if we consider that anger of God
according to the right course of causality, we shall easily perceive, that Gods
anger against the Jews was not the cause of Christ's death: but contrarily,
Christ's death was the cause of Gods anger against the Jews. For God whose
anger caused not the work, was justly angry with the workmen who did it:
because they on their part made it a wicked work; for they did it not as Gods
work, not as his Will, not for his sake, not for his end, nor by his
authority. Gods anger therefore against the Jews for the death of Christ,
makes nothing against the verities by me premised, that his anger was not the
cause why Christ dyed. For the like may be said of every Martyr; whose death
is a just cause of Gods anger against his Persecutors, though Gods anger be no
cause at all of his death.

But some man may say, that the truth of these words [who loved me and gave
himself for me,] being spoken by Paul of himself, and in his person of every
Christian, might be certainly known unto Paul. Because he might be assured
of this truth by the means of some revelation made unto him thereof; for
either Christ whom he had heard and seen; or God who revealed Christ unto him,
might also reveal this truth unto him. But you that were borne some hundred
years since the death of Christ, and have no revelation touching any such love
of Christ toward you: how can you for your part certainly know and be assured
concerning your self, that Christ loved you, and gave himself for you?

Hereto I answer. That this saying is also true of me, I certainly know and
am assured from hence, because my name is written in Gods last Will and
Testament, that Christ loved me and gave himself for me. Yet I find not my
name written there by my proper Christian and surname: but by an appellative
or common name of mine, which unto me is far better and more certain then
my proper name. For I certainly know of my self, that I am a Believer in
Christ, and am truly called by that name; and under that name I find it
written of me, that Christ loved me, and dyed for me; John 3.16. God so loved
the world, that he gave (to death) his only begotten Son; that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And again,
Romans 3.21. But now the righteousness (i. e. the kindness) of God without the Law
is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets: even the
righteousness (or kindness) of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all
and upon all them that believe. Being justified freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. Christ then dyed for all Believers
whatsoever, of what Nation and what age soever; not only for those who lived
in that age wherein he dyed, but for all those also who should afterward live
in any age whatsoever. Now because Christ for certain dyed for all Believers,
and I for certain am a Believer: therefore for certain Christ dyed for me.
And if this Reasoning be not right, there is no reason why man should be
accounted a reasonable creature: or if this Reasoning breed not certainty, man
can have no certainty in any knowledge; and consequently he cannot be certain
that himself is a man; much less can he be certain that any thing is
doubtful.

This nomination of me by the common name of a Believer, is fully sufficient
to convey unto me a proper right to everlasting blessedness. My Father by his
last Will settled his estate upon my elder Brother and upon his heirs: but my
Brother dying without issue, I came to enjoy my fathers estate. Because I was
named to it in his Will; yet not by my single or proper name, but by my
appellative or common name of Heir; for collaterally by my birth I was heir
to my Brother. But because this is a parable, therefore it is not necessary,
that the Argument of it should agree with the thing it should argue, in every
particular circumstance; but it shall suffice that it hold in the maine purpose
and scope of it. My heavenly Father by his last Will settled the Kingdom of
Heaven upon Christ my elder Brother and upon his Heirs; and hereby the
inheritance of Heaven is assured unto me. Because in Gods Will I am named to
it; not by my single or proper name, but by my appellative or common name of
heir to Christ; for having God my Father by faith, I consequently become
Brother to Christ and co-heire with him. And an heir by faith, when the
Testator is pleased so to assign it, is jurally as sure as an heir by birth;
and in the case present much surer: because the assignation is universal to
all in general, Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. And the righteousness of God, unto all and upon all them that
believe. If therefore a common name written in man's will be of force to convey
and assure an estate: much more shall it do the like in Gods Will.

Oh my dear and blessed Lord, who have loved me, and given thy self for me,
and therefore wilt give me any thing else beside; grant me the spirit of thy
love, that thine to me may beget mine to thee: But let mine be a sovereign
love to adhere to thee against all the world; and let it be a diligent love,
not in word but in deed, to serve thee faithfully in all thy commands. Grant
me also the virtue of thy death, to work in me my death to sin; that as
thou for my sake did lay down thy life, so I for thy sake may lay down my
sin. Let the sprinkling of thy blood fall upon my heart, to withdraw me from
the course of the world, to cleanse me from all vain conversation, to purify
me from sin and iniquity, to consecrate and dedicate my soul to holiness;
that as Adams sin made me guilty, so thy death may make me holy. And when
my natural death approaches, seeing thou have tasted death for me, be
pleased to succor me at the hour of mine: Let me not fear, or grieve, or
grudge to dye, but answering the way of thy love, let me give my self for
me; and then Lord Jesus receive my spirit, for which thou did vouchsafe to
dye.

VERSE. 21.
Text.
I do not frustrate the grace of God: For if righteousness come by the Law,
then Christ is dead in vain. Sense.
I do not frustrate the grace of God.] i. e.I make it not vain or void, by
despising or rejecting it, in attributing that blessing unto Gods Law, which
proceeds from his grace.

For if righteousness come by the Law.] i. e. If the Right whereto Gods
righteousness (or kindness) justifies, come by the Law; or if Justification
come by the Law, as an effect of the Law.

Then Christ is dead in vain.] (...), i. e. dyed without a cause; then Christ
who dyed on the Cross to settle that Will and Testament of God whereby this
Right was conveyed, dyed without a cause: or there was no sufficient reason why
he should so dye.

Reason.
These words contain the third and last Argument in this Chapter, whereby he
proves the Negative of his principal Assertion concerning Justification, that
A man is not Justified by the works of the Law; and consequent]y that he
himself was not so justified. For the Apostle according to his former
personation, continues his argument in his own person; concluding his
Negative from an absurdity which must necessarily follow upon the contrary
Affirmative of it. For if I am justified by the works of the Law; then it must
needs follow, that thereby I do frustrate or made void the grace of God:
because the Law of God and the Grace of God make such opposite titles, that if
I claim by his Law, I must needs disclaim his Grace. The Necessity of this
consequence he further declares and confirms by instancing in the gracious
Means, whereby this divine Right of Inheritance to Blessedness is conveyed and
settled upon me; namely by the bitter death of Christ upon the Cross, wherein
God showed the riches of his grace, when by the death of his own Son he
testified and confirmed that Will and Testament, wherein this Inheritance was
devised unto me. For if my Right of Inheritance came by reason of the Law,
then Christ who died to settle this Right upon me, dyed without any cause on
Gods part, and there was no sufficient reason why his Father who so dearly
loved him, should expose him unto death, much less unto such a bitter death;
if therefore I frustrate the death of Christ, I thereby also frustrate the
grace of God. And for this argument from Gods grace, he seems to take
occasion from the last words of the former verse, wherein he mentioned the
love of Christ; because all grace is love.

Comment.
Frustrate, ampliated to 4 senses; which really are the same. Grace put for it
self, and for all the effects of it. Of Justification the Matter, the Title,
the Tenure, the Author, the Motive is mere Grace. The Nature of grace, in 2.
things. Testimonies for it. No causes for it: Yet reasons 5. 1. From Gods gift.
2. from his good pleasure. 3. from his goodness or kindness. 4. from his Mercy.
5. From his Will and Testament. Gods grace is rich. Testimonies hereof, and
Reasons 3. 1 It is without cause. Not from Merit, nor Request, nor Inquiry, But
from Gods proper motion, According to his own will, which otherwise were not
his but ours. 2. Rich for the Effect, of Alliance, and Inheritance seated most
gloriously. 3. For the Means, which was costly, and precious. Why Grace is not
caused by my Works, nor by my Will: but is only Gratis for Thanks, (...) what
(...) are. Yet they follow not necessarily and why not. Grace how frustrated.
Righteousness put sometime for Uprightnes, Faithfulness, Kindness. Here for a
Right: For so it is taken in the Old Testament: So in the New: And sometime is
so Englished. So also here and why. (...) signifies without desert, here
without cause. Christ's death ampliated to his other actions, Especially to his
Resurrection. Causes of Christ's death fit to be known; the ^ Causes humane,
the Divine, which must be: 1. Consequent to Gods grace. 3 Respective to the New
Testament. and so they are chiefly 3. which was very necessary, and done very
sufficiently, and very solemnly, and why so; from Reason, and testimonies of
Scripture. 2. To Confirm it, which also was necessary, and Effected: Yet not
by the Testator in his own person: But in the person of his own Son. Which
assures my Right, and argues the love of God and of Christ. Hence is the Blood
of the New Testament opposed to that of Abel, and to that of the Old Testament:
and is far more holy. 3. To Execute it, for this is the Life of a Testament,
and a Bond upon the Executor, who of the New Testament was Christ, whereof the
Reasons, and the Testimonies from Scripture. Christ a vested Executor for his
Inheritance, Power, Honor, and Office, But upon the Condition of his Death, a
Condition strange: Yet Possible and Necessary. for 2 reasons. 1. For his own
Inheritance, which otherwise he could not enter. 2. For discharge of Legacies.
Hence he is the Captain of Salvation, and Author of Salvation. Hence at his
Ascension he fulfilled Gods Will, in giving gifts to men. Hence our Expiation,
our Consolation, our Resurrection, and Glorification. Hence Christ's doctrine
for the Necessity of his death; whereof the causes remote were many, yet all
subordinate to the three forementioned: But the Remission of sins is most
mentioned, and the Reason. The force of Paul's argument. The effect of a
Testament. Gods two Testaments are different, and therefore are Repugnant. The
Old not in force, because it was faulty or else Paul's argument is so, and
Christ dyed without cause. Arguments of Gods grace for the Effect of it, and
the Means, which was Rich, Requiring my Faith, and Hope, and Love. It comes
not by the Law, but is opposed to it.

I Do not frustrate the grace of God.] The Greek is, (...), i. e. I do not
despise, reject, disanul, or bring to nothing the the grace of God; for these
four ways the word is Englished elsewhere, and in this place only is rendered
frustrate. As Luke. 10.16. He that hears you, hears me, and ((...)) he
that despises you, despises me. And Marc. 7.9. And he said unto them; full
well ((...)) ye reject the commandment of God. And Gal. 3.15. Though it be
but a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man ((...)) disanulleth or
adds thereto. And 1. Cor. 1.19. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
((...)) I will bring to nothing the understanding of the Prudent. And all these
four ways the word signifies here: Because these several senses are not
really different; but are either in a manner the same, or else one consequent to
the other. For what I despise, that also I reject; and what I reject, that I
disanull or bring to nothing in effect, by making it frustrate or void in
respect of any use or benefit to my self. If therefore I frustrate or make
void the grace of God, from having that effect upon me, which God purposed
toward me, I disanul his grace or bring it to nothing; which argues my
refusal of it to reject it; and my rejection argues my contempt of it, that I
disesteeme or despise it.

Concerning the nature of Gods grace, what it is, we have spoken somewhat
before, cap. 1. verse. 6. where the Reader may peruse it. Here therefore we
shall consider that effect of it, from which the Apostle argues and reasons
in this place; for here the word is put by way of metonymy or transnomination
for all those effects both mediall and final, whereof Gods grace is the
originary and primary cause. The Right whereto I am justified is a divine state
of alliance and inheritance to be the son and heir of God; for this is the
Matter of my right. The Title whereby I acquire or have this Right, is only my
Faith to accept it; for my Faith is a mean procreant cause on my part, whereby
I receive this Right. The Tenure whereby I continue or hold it, are the Duties
and Services of holiness, or the good works of love; for these are a mean
cause conservant on my part, that my right may not escheat or be forfeited.
The principal person who imputes, deriveth, or conveyeth this right unto me
is God the Father; for who but God as the principal Agent, can make me the
son and heir of God? The Motive inducing God to impute or convey this Right
unto me is his mere Grace; I mean that inward affection residing in God,
which is his goodwill, love, favor, mercy, and kindness; for all these are
really the same, but rationally different in respects. So that my title on Gods
part is Gods mere grace, which is the supreme or prime cause, having no other
cause above or beyond it.

The cause why every Believer is the son and heir of God is because God in
his last Will and Testament has so devised or promised it. And the cause why
God in his Will made this devise or promise, is his mere Grace, i. e. his love
or goodwill to dignifie a person who deserves it not. For Gods love is his
goodwill to benefie or do good; and when the benefit done is a dignity or
honor to the receiver, and the receiver a person who deserves it not, then
such Love of God is his Grace. My alliance with God to be his son and heir,
has it not in it there ^o qualities? The one, that it is an high dignity and
honor unto me; the other, that it is far beyond my desert. For no man can
deserve to be borne of his Father, or after he is borne to be made the son
of another: But the only cause of a son is love; and the only cause to be
made the son of God, is the grace of God: Because to be made the son of
God, is the greatest dignity and honor in the Would; for thereby man's dignity
approaches to the Majesty of the most high God; who though by reason of his
power he be the Father of all, yet by way of grace he is not so.

My Justifying therefore unto this alliance with God, is by the Scriptures
attributed to the grace of God, Romans 3.24. Being satisfied freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And Romans 4.16. Therefore it is
of faith that it might be by grace to the end the promise might be sure to
all the seed; what is the thing that is of faith? The divine inheritance to be
made the heirs of God; as it appears in the words preceding, verse. 13. and
14. And Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein or
whereby) he has made us accepted in the beloved, i. e. Whereby he has
justified us, or made us co-heires with his beloved son. And Ephesians. 2.4.5.
But God who is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with Christ; by grace
ye are saved, i. e. The cause of your present right to future salvation, is
the grace of God. And Tit. 3.7. That being justified by his grace, we should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life, i. e. The cause of our
Justifying is Gods grace, and the effect of it is, that thereby we are made
heirs of eternal life; and because we are heirs, we have good reason to
hope for it; for who can have better hope of any thing then an heir has of
his inheritance? These are the chief authorities from the Scriptures to
testify this truth, that our inheritance is by grace. Causes to prove it,
there are none; for we said, that Gods grace was the highest cause, which had
none above it; and therefore this verity must needs be a principle, and
consequently cannot be proved; for he abuses a principle who attempteth to
prove it. Yet there are reasons that may argue and persuade it; and they being
grounded on Scripture, are chiefly these five following.

1. Because this Right comes from Gods gift. John 4.10. If thou knew the
gift of God. i. e. everlasting life which comes from Gods gift; for so the Well
of water is interpreted at the last words of the 14. verse following. And Acts
11.18. Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. i. e.
then has God given them the benefit or fruit of repentance which is eternal
life; for the original is (...). i. e. given: yet it is Englished well enough,
because every grant is a gift. And Romans 5.15. But not as the offense, so also
is the free gift; for if through the offense of one, many be dead, much more
the grace of God and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has
abounded unto many: here unto eternal death, the cause whereof was the offense
or sin, is opposed eternal life the cause whereof is grace, for it is a gift
by grace. And Romans 6.23. But the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. i. e. The cause of our present
guiltiness unto eternal death is sin, whereof death is the wages: but the
cause of our present right unto eternal life is not our holiness, but Gods
grace whereof life is the gift; and that gift is conveyed unto us by the means
of Jesus Christ. And Heb. 6.4. It is impossible for those who were once
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift. i. e. who have had the
knowledge and have felt the joy of their inheritance to blessedness, which is no
earthly purchase, but a heavenly gift proceeding from God. Now the fountain or
cause from which gifts and grants proceed is not Law and justice, but grace and
favor; for what else is a gift or grant, but an act of grace?

2. Because it comes from Gods good pleasure. Luke 2.14; Glory to God in the
highest and on earth peace, good will toward men; (...). i. e. good pleasure
toward men; q. d. Let the God of Heaven be glorified, for that blessedness on
earth, descended from his favor or good pleasure toward men, which he has
abundantly testified by sending his son to be their Savior. And Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock; for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. i. e. fear not the want of food and raiment; for God is your Father,
and therefore will give it you; and more then so; for he will also give you the
Kingdom of Heaven; for the blessing thereof comes from his gift, and that gift
proceeds from his good pleasure. And Ephesians. 1.9. having made known unto us the
mystery of his Will according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in
himself. i. e. That Will and Testament of God, wherein we are made heirs to
the inheritance of Heaven, was a long time a mystery and concealed in secret:
but is now published and made known unto us; and this is according to his good
pleasure which he purposed in himself, first for the making of that Will, and
after for the publishing of it. Now that which proceeds from the good pleasure
of any person, is not an act of Law and justice, but of Grace and favor: for
matters of Law and justice leave not a man to his good pleasure, but oblige him
to that which Law and justice require to be done.

3. Because it comes from Gods goodness or kindness. Romans 11.22. Behold therefore
the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell, severity: but toward
thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou also shall be
cut off. i. e. The Jews were once in the state of alliance with God, to be his
children and people: but because they fell from their obedience, God cut them
off; and their excision proceeded from Gods severity: but Gods election of thee
in their room proceeds from his goodness or kindness toward thee, if thou
continue in that state wherinto his goodness has grafted thee* otherwise thou
also shall be cut off with the like severity. And Ephesians. 2.7. And has raised us
up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that
in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus. i. e. God has raised Christ from
the dead, and has seated him in Heaven; and in him he has given us a
precedent of our future possession there, to be raised as he was, and to be
seated as he is; for he was raised and seated there to him and his coheirs. i.
e. to all believers in him: that in the world to come after the Resurrection,
God might show and impart unto us the exceeding riches or abundance of that
blessedness, which proceeds from the abundance of his grace and kindness toward
us, through the means of Jesus Christ. And Tit. 3.4. But after that the
kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. i. e. Those
benefits whereby God is the Savior of man, proceeds from Gods kindness and
love toward man. Now Gods goodness or kindness is really the very same thing
with his grace; for his grace is that inward affection from whence his outward
kindness flows, as the effect thereof.

4. Because it comes from Gods Mercy or Pity, Romans 11.30. For as ye in times
past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their
unbelief: Even so have these also now not believed; that through your mercy,
they also may obtain mercy, i. e. As heretofore ye Gentiles were Infidells
or Unbelievers; yet now have believed upon the Jews unbelief: So now the
Jews are become unbelievers, that upon your belief, they may be provoked to
believe. He calls belief mercy; because the thing believed, and the act of
believing proceed from Gods mercy. And Tit. 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, i. e. Our final
salvation which God has decreed or devised unto us, and our Sanctification in
regenerating or renewing us by his holy Spirit, which is the means to the
former end, proceeds not from any works of ours, which we had done before,
according to any righteousness that was in us: But our right thereunto
proceeds from Gods work, as an act of his mercy. And 1. Pet. 1.3. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, etc. i. e. Blessed be
God who by the Resurrection of Christ has begotten and wrought in us a lively
hope of eternal life, which is an inheritance incorruptible: All which
proceeds from the abundance of his mercy. Now all Mercy is Grace, though all
Grace be not Mercy: But when grace is so affected with the misery of a
miserable person, that thereby she is moved to relieve him from his misery,
then grace becomes mercy: Because all mercy is grace to a person in misery.

5. Because it comes by Gods Will and Testament, John 1.13. Who were borne not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, i.
e. Believers are made the sons of God, not by generation or birth from the
will of flesh and blood: Nor by any adoption from the will of man: But by that
adoption which is from the Will and Testament of God. And Ephesians. 1.5. Having
predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will, i. e. Our adoption to be the
sons of God, and the co-heires with Christ by means of Christ is
predestined, ordained, or devised unto us, according to that good pleasure of
God, which he has expressed in his Will and Testament. And in the same
Chapter, verse. 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the
counsel of his own Will. i. e. In or through Christ we are made co-heires
with Christ unto blessedness, whereto we are predestined, instituted, and
ordained by God, who performs all things according to that purpose, counsel,
or meaning of his, which he has expressed in his Will and Testament. Now
things conveyed or devised by Will and Testament are not debts and duties
whereto the Testator is bound by Law and justice: but are gifts and Legacies
proceeding from his grace, favor, and kindness toward those Legataries, unto
whom they are devised; for hence it is, that Wills require a favorable
construction or interpretation, because they contain matters of favor.

And Gods grace whereby I am justified unto this Right, is rich grace. For that
is a frequent attribute whereby the Scripture does commend and magnify the
greatness, plenty, and abundance of Gods grace, by stiling it the riches of his
grace. As Romans 11.12. Now if the fall of them be the richesse of the World, and
the diminishing of them the richesse of the Gentiles. i. e. The fall of the
Jews is the occasion of Gods grace, and of the riches or abundance thereof
unto the Gentiles, and unto all the world besides. And Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, according to the riches of his grace,
wherein he has abounded toward us. And Ephesians. 2.7. That in the ages to come,
he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us
through Jesus Christ. i. e. the exceeding plenty and abundance of his grace;
for although grace and kindness be really one and the same thing: yet after
the word grace, the Apostle adds the word kindness; that by the abundance of
his words, he might signify the abundance of Gods grace. Certainly sin
abounds in the world, and has done so in all ages; yet grace does
over-abound it; Romans 3.20. The Law entered that the offense might abound: but
where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. i. e. After the Law was
given, the event was, that sin abounded: and after sin had abounded, the event
was, that grace did super-abound, by over-reigning, overruling, and
overcomming sin: because God by his grace does not only forgive eternal death
which is the punishment of sin: but over and above he does give us a right unto
eternal life, by justifying us thereunto through Christ; as it there follows
in the next verse; That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace
reign through righteousness (through a Right) unto eternal life. And this
richness or greatness of Gods grace appears from three grounds.

1. Because Gods grace is without a cause. There was no cause moving God to
justify me; for as we said before, his grace is hereof the supreme or prime
cause, having no other cause above or beyond it to actuate or move it. What
moved God to be so gracious unto me, as to predestinate or devise unto me in
his last Will and Testament, this divine state of alliance and inheritance with
him? Certainly, no Merit or desert of mine moved him; for it was not for any
work or other act of mine, which I had done, or which God foresaw I would do,
that could deserve this grace. Because Gods grace and my works are in respect
of causality so inconsistent and contrary, that they cannot both concur as
causes procreant of the same blessing: But the claim by one, does necessarily
exclude the other. For if it be by works, it is of debt, and then it cannot
be of grace, Romans 4.4. Now to him that works, is the reward reckoned, not of
grace, but of debt. But if it be by grace, it is of gift, and then it cannot
be of works, Romans 11.6. And if by grace, then it is no more of works,
otherwise grace is no more grace. No Petition or Request of mine moved him; for
I never made any motion or suit for it; neither was it my counsel or advice,
that God should devise this Legacy unto me; for Romans 11.34. Who has known
the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? Neither had I any
existence when Gods Will was framed. Lastly, no inquiry or seeking of mine
moved him heereto; for I never asked after it, nor desired it, and I had no
desire to it, because I had no knowledge of it; hence says God in respect of
his grace, Romans 10.20. I was found of them that sought me not, I was made
manifest unto them that asked not after me. And when by the preaching of the
Gospel, God sought me, asked after me, and called me to accept his grace, I
was hardly persuaded to believe and receive it. And unto this day many Nations
cannot be persuaded of it; yea some Christians are not rightly and fully
persuaded of it.

But God was heereto moved of his own mere and proper motion, wherein the
will of his grace was the prime cause or first mover. For according to the good
pleasure, purpose, and counsel of his own Will, he predestined or devised
this Legacy unto me, Ephesians. 1.11. In whom we have obtained an inheritance,
being predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things
after the counsel of his own Will. For in all Testaments, what other cause is
there of the Legacies therein devised, but only the will and purpose of the
Testator; whose Testament is in that respect called his Will? But if the
Legacies proceed from the Will of the Legataries, then to speak properly, the
Testament is their Will, and not the Will of the Testator. And although among
men it may fall out, that the Testator may be moved to some Legacy by the
Petition of the Legatary, or by the intercession of some friend: Yet with God
it cannot be thus; because his Will was made from the foundation of the World,
before the existence of any person interessed who could solicit or move him
thereupon. Now that Grace which has no cause moving it, but moves of its own
free accord, is far more rich and gracious then that grace which has a
cause, which is solicited and moved by the importunities and petitions of the
Receiver. For as an Injury done without cause is the more malicious, so a
kindness without cause is the more gracious; whereas grace begged is but
beggarly grace.

2. Because the Effect of Gods grace, is rich. That effect is my divine
Alliance and inheritance to be the son and heir of God; and certaynely such a
state must needs be a rich condition. For when David was solicited to an
alliance with King Saul, his Answer was, 1. Sam. 18.23. Seems it to you a
light thing to be a Kings son in law; seeing that I am a poor man and
lightly esteemed? And can it seem a light thing to me to be made the son
and heir of God; seeing that I am a sinful man, who stand condemned to death?
Is not the grace infinitely greater, for man to be made the son of God, then
for David to be made the son of Saul? And the future Inheritance which God
has prepared for me is so glorious, that the plenty or richness thereof, is
both ineffable which no tongue can express, and incomprehensible which no
heart can imagine; for it cannot enter the eye or the care, which are the
senses that should convey it to the heart; 1. Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things that God has
prepared for them that love him. Yet of the City wherein I shall be seated
John had a vision, wherein he saw the richness of it, Revel. 21.10. That the
walls were made of precious stones, the gates of pearl, the streets of pure
gold transparant as glass, the light of the City was the glory of God and of
the Lamb; and they two were also the Temple of it. Certainly the Inhabitants
of such a City must needs be, not only rich, but very glorious; and therefore
Gods grace in translating me from the grave, which is the den of death and
rottenness, to seat me in heaven, which is the mansion of joy and blessedness,
must needs be very gracious.

3. Because the Means was rich, whereby the former effect is wrought. That
means was the Death of Christ upon the Cross; for the Means of his death, my
alliance and inheritance with God is conveyed unto me; a Means certainly very
gracious, arguing the admirable and singular love of God toward me. For it
cost God that person who was most dear unto him, even his own and only
begotten son, whose blood was spilt and spent out to convey the effect of
this grace unto me: and that blood was expended not by an ordinary death, but
by the bitter, painful, and shameful death of the Cross, whereon he suffered
in the condition of a malefactor, and of a cursed person. Hence we are said to
be Gods Purchase, which he bought at a price, 1. Cor. 6.20. Ye are not your
own, for ye are bought with a price. And for the purchase of us, he paid very
dear; for the price wherewith we were bought, was the price of blood, Ephesians.
1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood. And the blood of our
redemption was precious blood, 1. Pet. 18.19. Ye know that ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation
received by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ.
For the blood of Christ must needs be precious, because it was the blood of
God. Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves -- to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. And the cause why God
expended that blood, was his mere grace according to the richesse and
abundance of it; Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace, wherein he has
abounded toward us. Now that grace which is so chargeable to the donour, that
it costeth blood, must needs be rich and costly.

My works then are not the cause of Gods grace; because his grace is herein
the supreme and prime cause, that has no cause but is without cause: and
because grace is not grace if it be of works, though it be grace when it is
granted upon request: and because the poorness of my works can never cause
the richness of his grace. But contrarily, Gods grace is the cause of my
works, if I have any that are good; for his grace is the cause of my alliance
with him; and my alliance with him, is or should be, the cause of my good
works. Neither is my will the cause of Gods grace, because God had first a
will to give it me, before I had any will to have it; and he first called me to
take it, before I ever called upon him to ask it. For in order both of nature
and time Gods grace is first, and is first given me for this purpose, namely to
prepare and produce in me those works of holiness, which is my gratefulness
or thankfulness for his grace: for hence, John 1.16. Gods grace is called
grace for grace. i. e. grace for thanks: for the word grace does signify an
antecedent kindness done, and the subsequent thankfulness due for that
kindness; and it is a frequent elegancy in Scripture, to repeat sometime in
one sentence the same word in another sense, when it commonly bears two
senses. Which thankfulness to God for his grace, I can no otherwise really
express, but by my works of holiness; for that holiness which in respect of
his Law that commands it, is my obedience; the very same in respect of his
grace which requires it, is my thankfulness. Likewise Gods love was first, and
first showed, to prepare and produce my love; for God loves me, not therefore
because I first loved him: But contrarily, because God first loved me,
therefore I must and do love him, 1. John. 4.19. We love him, because he
first loved us.

And it goes very well and happily with me, if Gods grace have this effect
upon me, to be seconded and followed with my works of holiness, by way of
gratefulness for his grace. For this effect does not follow necessarily, but
only contingently, which may be or may be not: Seeing too manifest it is,
that in some men it follows not: Because otherwise Gods grace could not be
frustrated, which the Apostle here supposes. Yet I must constantly note, that
although my works of holiness be not the cause procreant to produce the
existence of Gods grace toward me: Yet they are the cause conservant, to
maintain the continuance of it; because otherwise his grace will be
frustrated. Seeing then Gods grace is on Gods part the cause of my
Justification unto this divine alliance and inheritance with him; if therefore
unto my works I ascribe that cause which belongs unto his grace; do I not
hereby frustrate the grace of God, by denying it that effect which properly it
does produce? Am I not hereby a Rejector and a Despiser of Gods grace, as a
thing superfluous and needless? And consequently am I not an ungrateful and
an ungracious wretch, to magnify the poorness of my works above the
richness of his grace? Seeing unto works of holiness I stood bound before by
the Law of nature as I am Gods Creature, though he had conferred upon me no
such grace of alliance as to make me his son and heir.

For if righteousness come by the Law.] A further confirmation and
illustration of this last argument in the former clause of this verse,
comprising withal a prevention of a tacit objection. for (says he) if the
right of inheritance come by the Law, then Christ dyed without a cause; and
consequently the riches of Gods grace, which appeared by the means of Christ's
death, should be made frustrate and void.

The word Righteousness in reference to God, does often signify that virtue
of God, which is his Uprightness, whereby all his actions are just and right,
according to that holiness, which unto him is natural. Sometime it signifies
his faithfulness in keeping and performing that promise which he has made:
But more frequently it signifies his kindness, which went before his promise,
and was the cause why he made it. For why does God keep his promise? The
reason is, because he is just and faithful: but why did he first make his
promise? the reason is, because he is kind and gracious. Of the word
Righteousness in this latter sense, we spoke somewhat largely before in this
Chapter, verse 16. But here in this verse the word signifies jurally, for that
right of alliance and inheritance, which on my part is the effect or consequent
of Gods kindness to me, and whereto his righteousness or kindness does
justify me: All which amount in one word unto Justification; as if the
Apostle had expressed it thus; if my Justification, or the right whereto Gods
kindness does justify, come by the Law. For Gods kindness, his Justfying,
and my Right thence resulting, are in this respect either put for the other:
Because they are all concurrent unto one and the same purpose; for his
righteousness or kindness is the cause whereof my Right is the effect; and
his Justifying is the act whereby (through the means of my faith) his
kindness does convey this Right unto me.

That therefore we may here perform what was before intimated in this
Chapter, verse. 16. We are to observe, that the Hebrew word Zedakah in the Old
Testament, and the Greek (...), in the New, which in our Translations are
commonly Englished by the word Righteousness, do many times signify the
Latin word Jus, whereof the English is a Right, Interest, or Claim. As Genesis
15.6. And Abraham believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him (Zedakah) for
righteousness (or a Right) i. e. God upon Abraham's faith conveyed unto Abraham
a right to the blessing which God had promised. And Genesis 30.33. So shall
(Zidkathi) my righteousness (or right) answer for me in time to come, when it
shall come for my hire before thy face. q. d. All the young ones of the flock
which shall fall out to be spotted, shall be my hire for keeping the flock;
and my Right to these shall answer your question concerning my future wages;
for if you find with me any other then such, let it be theft in me. And
Psalm. 35.27. Let them shout for joy and be glad, that favor (Zidki) my
righteousness, i. e. my right, or (as it is there translated) my righteous
cause. And Proverb. 16.8. Better is a little (Bizdekah) with righteousness, i.
e. with right; for the words following require that sense; then great revenues
without right. And Esaias. 5.23. Which justify the wicked for reward, and take
away (Zedakah Zaddikim) the righteousness of the righteous from him, i. e. the
right of the righteous from him; for no man can take away the uprightness or
moral righteousness of the righteous from him; but his jurall right may be,
and many times is taken from him.

Likewise in the New Testament the Greek word (...), does many times signify
a right. As Heb. 11.7. And Noah became Heir ((...)) of the righteousness
which is by faith, i. e. of the right which he accepted by his faith; For the
matter whereto a man becomes heir is some right, interest, or claim, and not
uprightness or moral righteousness; because such righteousness is not
inheritable or deviseable to be conveyed from one person to another, as Rights
and Interests may and do. And Romans 4.4.5. Now to him that works, is the
reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt; but to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted ((...)) for
righteousness, i. e. for a Right; for it has reference to the thine former
words, Reward, Grace, and Debt; which are jurall terms concerning matters of
Right, and plainly teach us this comparison, between the Laborer and the
Believer; who agree in this, that both have a good right, interest, or claim,
the Labourer to his wages, and the Believer to his promise. But in this they
differ, that the Labourer by title of his work has a right to his wages, and
his right is of debt: But the Believer by title of his faith has a right to
his promise, and his right is of grace. And in the same Chapter, verse. 11. And
Abraham received the sign of circumcision, a seal ((...)) of the
righteousness of the faith, which he had being uncircumcised; that he might
be the Father of all them that believe, i. e. A seal of the right which he
had by faith being uncircumcised; for a seal is not a sign of uprightness or
moral righteousness, but of a right, interest, or claim; and the right
sealed unto Abraham is here specified, That he might be the Father of all
them that believe; which condition in Abraham was not a moral righteousness,
but a jurall right of dignity. And again, verse. 13. For the promise that he
should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham, or to his seeds through
the Law, but ((...)) through the righteousness of faith, i. e. through the
right which he had by faith; for it has reference to the two former words,
Promise and Heir, which are jurall terms proper to matters of right; for a
Promise is an act which makes a Right, and an Heir is a person who has a
right. The like sense the word Righteousness bears in diverse passages of
that Epistle, the recital whereof would prove too numerous and tedious.

Yet for our further confirmation herein, we may take notice, that in the Old
Testament the Hebrew word Zedakah does not only signify a right, but in King
JAMES his translation is sometime so Englished; As 2. Sam. 19.28. For all my
Fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the King: yet did thou set thy
servant among them, that did eat at thine own table; (mah iesh li Zedakah)
what right have I therefore yet to cry any more unto the King. The Right here
mentioned is the right of Inheritance which Mephibosheth had to his Land,
whereof he stood then disseised by the treachery and calumny of Ziba; as it
appears by the words following. And Nehemiah 2.20. Then I answered them and
said unto them; the God of Heaven he will prosper us; therefore we his servants
will arise and build: but you have no portion (Uzedakah) nor right, nor
memorial in Jerusalem. The Right here mentioned was a Right of Inheritance or
of some special Privilege, which the three persons to whom he spoke could
not claim: because they were not Jews but Strangers; for Sanballat was a
Samaritan, Tobiah an Amonite, and Geshem an Arabian. And Psalm. 9.4. For thou
have maintained my right and my cause, thou satest in the throne Judging
(Zedek) right. And Psalm. 17.1. Hear (Zedek) the right, O Lord, attend unto my
cry. Thus the Hebrew word Zedakah, the Greek (...), and the English
righteousness, does many times signify a Right, and is sometime so Englished.

Now that the same word does also signify a Right here in the Text which we
have now in hand, though here it be not so Englished, it plainly appears from
a parallel place in the next chapter following, verse 18. For if the
Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise. For first, both these
sayings carry the same sense: because every Inheritance is a Right, though not
contrarily, every Right is not an Inheritance; for there be diverse other Rights
besides Inheritances. But an Inheritance is one special kind, and indeed the
best kind of Right, when it comes to be in possession: because it is an
universal and perpetual Right extended to a whole estate for ever. What
therefore in one place is meant by the general word (...), i. e. Right: the
same is expressed in the other by the special word (...). i. e. Inheritance.
Secondly, both these sayings carry the same reason: because in both places he
argues for one and the same conclusion; namely that a man is not justified by
the Law; which he proves from the several absurdities, which upon a supposall
of the affirmative will necessarily follow; for if a man be justified by the
Law, or if his right come by the Law; or if his Inheritance be of the Law, (for
all these sayings are all one in effect) then all is frustrate, void, without
cause, and of no effect; for the grace of God is frustrate, faith is made void,
the death of Christ is without cause, and the promise is of no effect. For when
he says It is no more of Promise, he seems to say, The Promise is of no
effect: for so he says expressly in a place parallel to both these, Romans 4.14.
For if they which be of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and the Promise
made of no effect.

Then Christ is dead in vain.] (...). i. e. Dyed without cause. This is the
absurdity which will necessarily follow upon the former supposition, that the
right to blessedness comes by the Law. The Greek Adverbe (...) does not
signify in vain; for that is in vain which is without effect: neither is it
elsewhere in the New Testament ever translated in vain; neither is that sense
the mind of the Apostle here; though that sense be a truth and will follow
upon the former supposition. But (...) properly signifies gratis. i. e. for
nothing, or of gift, without desert, reward, or recompense; and in this sense
it is commonly translated by the word freely; as Romans 3.24. being justified
((...)) freely by his grace. Yet sometime, and so here in this place it
signifies causelessly or without cause; and that is done causlesly or without
cause, for which there is no reason, or at least no just, weighty, or
sufficient reason. So the word is rendered, John 15.25. they hated me ((...))
without a cause; and so in this place it stands rendered in that English
translation which was here in use before that of King JAMES. q. d. If the Right
of Inheritance unto blessedness be Legitimate and come by the Law; then there
was no just cause nor no sufficient reason can be given, why God should deliver
Christ, and Christ should deliver himself up to death.

But here in the Death of Christ must be tacitly comprehended by way of
Synecdoche, all those other actions of his, without which his death would have
failed of that due effect, for which it was purposed, as his Doctrine before
it, and especially his Resurrection after it. For when the Apostle declares the
causes of his Death, he commonly also makes express mention of his
Resurrection, joining it with his death in respect of causality; As Romans 4.25.
Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. And Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead to the glory of the
Father: Even so we also should walk in newness of life. And Romans 8.34. Who
is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed; yea rather that is risen
again. And Romans 14.9. For to this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived,
that he might be Lord both of the dead and the living. And 2. Cor. 5.15. And
that he dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose again. And 1 Thessalonians.
4.14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again; even so them also
which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him: Yet here, and sometimes
elsewhere the Apostle does mention only the death of Christ: Because above all
his other actions, his Death was the hardest work, and the greatest argument
of his love; and therefore his death should most strongly move us, to the
works of love and ways of holiness.

The Effects and Benefits of Christ's death were specified before upon these
words of the former verse, Who gave himself for me. Here therefore we shall
mention the Causes or Reasons of his death: Partly because there is much
difference between the causes and the effects of the same thing, though
sometime these to them may be subordinate. Partly because it much conduces to
our understanding and belief of a thing, to know the causes and reasons of it;
especially a thing of such moment as is the death of Christ. But chiefly
because the force of the Apostles argument lies in these words, that then
Christ dyed without a cause. Yet here we intend not to meddle with the
Natural cause of his death; for manifest it is, that naturally his Crucifying
caused it. Nor yet with the voluntary causes of it on the Jews part: For so
the causes of it were, partly the sentence of Pilate, whose will it was to
condemn him; partly the Malice of the Jews, whose will it was to importune
that sentence; and partly the Treachery of Judas, whose will it was to betray
him. But our meaning is to declare the voluntary causes of it on Gods part, why
God had a will to decree the death of Christ, and actually to subject him
thereunto.

And the Causes thereof on Gods part, if they be rightly alleged according
to the Scriptures, must needs have in them these three qualities. 1. They must
be repugnant unto Justifying by the Law; for otherwise we lose the force of
the Apostles argument, which runs thus; For if righteousness (or the right
whereto a man is justified) come by the Law, then Christ dyed without a cause,
i. e. If the Law have this effect to justify, then there is no just cause why
Christ dyed; and therefore there must be such a repugnancy between that
effect of the Law, and the cause of Christ's death, that he who supposes the
former does thereby overthrow the latter; and contrarily if there be a cause
of Christ's death, the Law must needs be without that effect.

2. They must be Consequent to the love and grace of God; for otherwise again
we lose another force of the Apostles reasoning, whereby he infers, that
if Christ dyed without cause, then I frustrate the grace of God: But I do not
frustrate the grace of God, who by the death of Christ conveyeth that grace
unto me. For indeed the supreme, inward, impulsive cause, or prime motive of
Christ's death, was the love and grace of God toward us; and not his hatred or
wrath; but of this remote cause we spoke before upon the former verse, and
therefore shall not insist upon it any further. 3. They must be Respective
unto the New Testament: Partly because the New Testament is both repugnant to
Gods Law, and also consequent to Gods grace: Partly because the New Testament
is that solemn Will and Act of God wherein his love and grace is conveyed, and
whereon all the actions of Christ reflected. Repugnantly therefore to the
effect of the Law; and consequently to the love and grace of God; and
respectively to the New Testament, the immediate, proper, final causes or
reasons of Christ's death are chiefly three.

1. To testify or prove the truth of the New Testament. Every Testament ought
to be sufficiently and solemnly testified; for hence by way of eminency it is
called a Testament. Partly because actively, it does testify the mind or will
of the Testator, as the Civil Law delivers it, which thereupon says,
Testamentum ex eo appellatur, quod sit testatio mentis. But chiefly (under
correction) because passively it is solemnly testified by the Testimony of
several testable persons, who are to attest the truth of it, and in case it
be a written Testament, actually do attest it under their hands and seals:
For the ancient solemnity whereof there are extant several rules in the Civil
Law. But unto the New Testament a solemn Testimony was especially requisite:
Because it was to encounter with strong opposition, which Gods people would and
did raise against it in defense of the Law; which was Gods Testament also, and
had a solemn Testimony on Mount Sinai, wherewith lightning, and thunder, and
the shrill sound of a Trumpet, it was testified by an Angel in the audience of
all the Nation. And besides this solemn testimony, the Law had the
prescription of being in force for the space of fifteen hundred years. The
New Testament therefore which was to infringe the Old, wherein a whole Nation
had been so long interessed, had need of good testimony; because men will
struggle hard for their Laws, Customs, and Religion; wherein the graver sort
will hardly endure any change.

And the New Testament, though it were not written as was the Old; but was
nuncupative, declared by God only to Christ: Yet it had very sufficient
testimony, as good and better then the Old. For the certainty and truth thereof
was testified by the Son of God, a greater person then any Angel; and he
testified it by greater means, not with lightning and thunder, but with works
of wonder, such as never were done in the World before, such as had they been
in Sodom; it would have remained until this day; as the strangeness of his
Miracles, the holiness of his life, and the solemnity of his death. Which
solemnity was performed upon Mount Calvary, in the view of all the Nation then
assembled to eat the passover, in a greater Congregation then was at Mount
Sinai. And that solemnity was attended with greater wonders then were at Mount
Sinai; for there only the Air was rent with lightnings, thunders, and the
sound of a Trumpet: But at the death of Christ there were far greater and
stranger rents; for Mat. 27.51. The veil of the Temple was rent in twain from
the top to the bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the
Graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose. For
because Christ could not gain belief for Gods New Testament, neither by the
constancy of his Doctrine, nor by the strangeness of his Miracles, nor by the
holiness of his life; therefore he testified it by the solemnity of his
death; and afterward further attested it by the glory of his Resurrection; for
thereby his Disciples who stood doubtful before, gave full faith to his
testimony, and have since co-attested it over all the World.

Hence Christ says of himself, John 3.11. Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
we speak that we know, and testify that we have seen, viz. the New
Testament or last Will of God, which God had therefore revealed unto him, that
he should speak and testify it. And again he says, John 18.37. To this
end was I borne, and for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear
witness unto the truth; viz. unto the New Testament, that it was the true and
last Will of God. Hence the Apostle says of him, 1. Tim. 6.13. that before
Pontius Pilate he witnessed a good confession; now the confession which Christ
witnessed before Pilate, he also witnessed with his death. Hence he is called
the faithful and true witness, Revel. 3.14. These things says the Amen, the
faithful and true witness; viz. because he was the first true Martyr of the
New Testament to testify it with his blood. Hence his blood is termed a
witness on earth, 1. John 5.8. And there are three that bear witness on
earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one.
And hence his Gospel which is the New Testament, is called his Testimony:
Because it was testified and witnessed by his death, 1. Cor. 1.6. Even as the
testimony of Christ was confirmed in you, i. e. the Gospel or New Testament,
which Christ testified. And 2. Tim. 1.8. be not thou ashamed of the testimony
of our Lord. i. e. of the Gospel or New Testament which Christ testified by his
death upon the Cross; for unto the Gospel that shameful death was made the
common reproach, and there was no other cause why Timothy should be ashamed
thereof.

2. To establish or confirm the force of the New Testament.] Every Testament
does necessarily require a solemn Confirmation of it, that may cause it to be
of strength and in force: because the constitution or making of a Testament is
in it self an imperfect and infirm act, until it be ratified and established
by a further act of Confirmation, whereby all power to revoke it is
extinguished in the Testator, and whereby the Testament comes to be of force.
And among men, this Confirmation of a Testament is made or done by the death of
the Testator: because his death does wholly and for ever extinguish in him all
power to revoke it; for the dead have no power to do any act at all, much less
to make or revoke a Testament made. That Testament therefore which during the
Testators life, lay dormant, and was of no force, does upon his death ipso
facto come to be in force. Because every Testament according to the definition
and nature of it, is a Decree touching things to be done after death. For the
Testator in the time of his life does predestinate, ordain, and devise in his
Testament those things which he would have take effect after his death, and
which before his death are of no force. Hence says the Apostle, Heb. 9.16.
Where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the
Testator; for a Testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no
strength at all, whilst the Testator lives.

The New Testament then was confirmed: because God would have the world take
notice, that he had not only no will to revoke it, but also had left himself
no power to revoke it. And it was confirmed by death: because God would further
have all men to understand, that upon the death of the Confirmer, the Testament
was ipso facto in force, and began to take effect. But God who is the Testator
could not confirm his Testament by his own death in his own proper person:
because though he be a Person Testable who can make a Testament, yet withal he
is a person immortal, who cannot dye: and therefore the most High God has
this prerogative, that he may confirm his Testament by the death of another.
For hereupon God confirmed his Old Testament by the death of Beasts, whose
blood was sprinkled on the people, to establish his Testament unto them. Exodus
24.8. And Moses took the blood (of the Oxen slain for sacrifice, verse. 5.)
and sprinkled on the People, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant (or
Testament) which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words. But
God confirmed his New Testament by the death of Christ, a most Sacred person,
who was next himself, and so near unto him, that he was in a manner himself,
even his only and dearly beloved Son, whom God made his substitute to dye in
his stead for the confirmation of his last Will and Testament. For as the New
Testament is better then the Old, and established upon better Promises: so it
had a most excellent confirmation.

For can I devise a greater assurance of blessedness, then to read the devise
of it in Gods last Testament, which cannot be revoked, but is confirmed by the
death of Christ to stand in force for ever, and therefore actually justifies
upon the access of my faith, by giving me a present right to the future
possession of that Inheritance, which long before the confirmation of that
Testament, was therein predestined, pre-imputed and devised unto me? Could
God who could not dye, devise a way to come nearer death, then by the death of
Christ who was next unto him? Or could God devise a course more consequent and
suitable to that love and grace which he showed in framing of the New
Testament, then that his own and only Son should suffer death to confirm it?
Or could Christ devise a more precious means whereby to show his love, then to
lay down his life for a company of sinners, who stood condemned to death, that
by Means of his death, that Testament might come to be in force, by which they
might claim not only a pardon from eternal death, but also an Inheritance to
eternal life, which is settled upon them at the price of his blood.

For hence Christ instituted the Eucharist as a perpetual commemoration of his
death, and called his blood, the blood of the New Testament: because the New
Testament was thereby established and confirmed to be in force; Mat. 26.28. For
this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission
of sins. i. e. the Wine in this cup is a memorial representing or betokening
my blood, which is to be shed to confirm the New Testament, wherein the
Remission of sins is bequeathed unto many, even unto all Believers. And
again the like saying is expressed, Marc. 14.24. This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many. i. e. the blood whereby the New Testament was
confirmed. Hence Christ is frequently in Scripture said to give himself for us
and to dye for us; because by his death he confirmed the new Testament to be
in force for our sakes, that we thereupon might actually have our present
right to all the blessings therein conveyed unto us. Hence also the blood of
Christ is opposed to the blood of Abel, and is said to speak better things
then that of Abel; Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament,
and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.
viz. Because the sprinkling of Christ's blood confirmed the New Testament, which
gives rights and claymes to blessedness; whereas the blood of Abel clamors and
cries for vengeance.

Hence the New Testament is highly magnified above the Old in respect of the
confirmation; for although the Old Testament was confirmed by blood, yet that
confirmation was made but by the blood of beasts, as of Oxen, Calves, and
Goats; for that with such blood only the Old Testament was established or
confirmed, it appears plainly, Exodus 24.8. which place we recited before; and
is further manifested, Heb. 9.18. Whereupon neither the first Testament was
dedicated (or confirmed to be in force) without blood; for when Moses had
spoken every Precept to all the people according to the Law, he took the blood
of Calves and of Goats, with water, and scarlet wool and hysop, and sprinkled
both the Book and all the people; saying, this is the blood of the Testament
which God has enjoined unto you. And hence a contempt against the New
Testament is far more fearful and dangerous, then a despite against the
Old: because the New was sanctified, confirmed, or hallowed with holy blood,
even with the blood of the Son of God; Heb. 10.28. He that despised Moses Law,
dyed without mercy, under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the blood of the covenant (or New Testament) wherewith
he (it should be, wherewith it, viz. the New Testament) was sanctified. i. e.
was ratified, confirmed, and established to be and to stand in force.

3. To execute or perform the Decrees of the New Testament. According to the
rule of right reason, and to the Law of natural equity, the will of the dead
is to be performed: Because otherwise the will also is dead. For it is a rule
among the Civilians, Voluntas Testatoris pro Lege habet^^, i. e. the Testators
Will is a kind of Law. As therefore the Execution if the Law is the life of
the Law: So the Execution of a Will is the life of the Will; and as the Law
binds the Magistrate to execute it: So does a Will bind the Executor. But it
is definitive and natural to a Testament, to be a Will wherein an Executor is
nominated; that Will therefore wherein no Execution is nominated is no
Testament, or is not properly so called. And to what purpose is an Executor
nominated, or nominated by the name of an Executor, if he execute not the
Testament of the Testator. And because it is definitive and natural to a
Testament to predestinate and pre-decree things to be executed after death:
that Testament therefore which after death is not executed, is frustrated; or
frustrated to those particulars which are not executed. And avested Executor
who has some benefit by the Testament wherein he is nominated, may be compelled
to accept the Executorship, or else to lose his benefit by the Testament. And
although a nude or bare Executor, who has no benefit by the Testament, be not
precisely bound to undertake the Executorship, for if he see cause, he may
refuse it: Yet when once he has accepted it, he is then precisely bound to
execute it.

Now of the New Testament the Executor was Christ. For the New Testament was
the last and best Will of God, established upon better Promises, better
Inheritances, and better Legacies, then were ordained in the former Testament.
And therefore what better Executor could God nominate and depute for the
performance of it, then Christ? Because Christ was the Son of God, and by that
relation above all persons in the World was nearest in alliance unto the
Testator, and fittest in ability to execute the Testament. For who but Christ
can execute the Office of that Priest, who was to enter the Sanctuary of
Heaven, and there to sanctify the people of God, by expiating their sins,
and sending unto them the holy spirit of God to purify and cleanse their
conscience from sin? And who but Christ can execute the Office of that King,
who was to set on the Throne of Heaven, there to govern the people of God, to
subdue all their enemies, to raise them from death, to invest them with
heavenly bodies, and to seat them in the possession of blessedness? For the
Priestly and Kingly Office of Christ, wherein else does it chiefly consist,
but in the execution of the New Testament? In a word, who but Christ can
discharge the Promises or Legacies of blessedness, which in the New Testament
are made and devised unto Believers?

Hence Christ is called the Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. 9.15. And for
this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament. And again, Heb. 12.24.
And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, or Testament; for that word
stands in the Margin, and should have been in the Text. Now the Mediator of a
Testament is he, whom in these times we call the Executor of it; for although
every Mediator be not the Executor of a Testament, yet every Mediator of a
Testament is the Executor of it. Because the Executor thereof is a Mediator or
middle person between the Testator and the Legataries; and by Means of him,
the final effect of the Testament is procured, and therein in consists the
final execution of it. But although this be not the only respect, wherein
Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament; for he mediated it, by testifying
the truth of it, and he mediated it by confirming the force of it: yet he also
mediated it this way, and chiefly this way, namely by executing the decrees of
it. For albeit the Testament were of force upon the confirmation of it: yet
till the Execution of it, it was of no effect. But here we shall not further
prosecute this verity, that Christ is the Executor of the new Testament:
because we certified it before upon verse 16.

And Christ was a vested Executor. Because he was to receive an infinite
benefit by the new Testament. For therein he was appointed the universal heir
of God; Heb. 1.2. God in these last days has spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things. Now in a testamentary construction,
an heir, and a vested Executor are really all one and the same; although some
rational difference may be between them. Thereby he was to receive universal
Power over all the world, both in heaven and earth; for such power was given
him, and after his Resurrection he received it; Mat. 28.18. And Jesus came and
spoke unto them saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.
Thereby he was to receive universal honor from all persons in Heaven, in
earth, or under the earth; for all were to worship and serve him with divine
Honor: for unto such honor God exalted him, Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of persons in Heaven, and in earth,
and under the earth. i. e. that Christ might have divine worship from all manner
of persons, whether they be Angels in Heaven, or men on earth, or the dead
under the earth. For if the Angels of Heaven have a command to worship him, as
they have, Heb. 1.6. And let all the Angels of God worship him: much more is
worship due to him from men on earth. And lastly, thereby he was constituted
and ordained to be the High Priest of Gods Church, and the King of Gods
Kingdom, to set upon the throne of Heaven, as the highest person in the world,
excepting only the most high God; 1 Cor. 15.27. For he has put all things
under his feet: but when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest
that he is excepted, which did put all things under him. Thus Christ was a
vested Executor.

But his Executorship was conditional. For it was charged with the condition
of his own death; he must dye before he can enter it, and therefore dye that
he might perform it. Every Testament is a decree of things to be done after
death: But the New Testament of God had this strange Prerogative, that it was
of things to be done after the death of the Executor; who was to do the things
of it after his own death. A course quite contrary to the Testaments of men,
wherein the Executor after his own death is able to do nothing. Although Gods
Testament were in force upon the confirmation of it: yet the effect of that
force, for the execution of it must necessarily be suspended, until this
condition was accomplished. But as the case stood, one and the same death of
one and the same person, was both a Confirmation of that Testament, and the
condition for the execution of it. A condition somewhat difficult and
burdensome unto flesh and blood; for it is an hard case that an Executor must
dye to compass his Executorship. Yet unto Christ the condition was possible,
and lay in his power to perform; for unto a person who is mortal, what is
more possible then death? And unto Christ it was very feasible; for seeing he
must dye for the testimony of Gods testament, and for the confirmation of it,
the same death also would serve as the condition for the execution of it. And
unto Christ this condition was very Necessary; for his death was the Means by
or through which that testament must be executed; and without this Means it
could not be performed. And for the Necessity of this Means these are two
reasons.

1. Because without his death, he could not receive his own Inheritance. For
by means of his death he was prepared, fitted, and perfected to receive that
Inheritance which was ordained unto him in the testament whereof he was the
Executor; as his universal power, honor, and glory, to set upon the throne of
Heaven as the perpetual Priest and King over the people of God. Because (1
Cor. 15.50.) flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; much less
can it set upon the throne of God. That mortal person therefore that will
enjoy immortality, must first be divested of mortality: and the mortality of a
person mortal is divested only by the means of death, or of a sudden change
instead of death, as shall be done at the last day. Christ at the first was
made flesh, John 1.14. And the word was made flesh: but afterward he was made a
spirit; 1 Cor. 15.45. The last Adam was made a quickening spirit. And Christ at
the first was made mortal; for he was made a little lower then the Angels: but
afterward he was made immortal; for he was crowned with glory and honor
above the Angels: and the Means through which this change was made from his
mortality to immortality, was by or through the suffering of death; Heb. 2.9.
But we see Jesus who was made a little lower then the Angels, for (by or
through) the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; for the meaning
of the Apostle is not, that the death of Christ was the merit of his crowning,
but the means to it; because between the two extremes of his mortality and
immortality, his death was the interposed Mean through which he was to pass
from one to the other.

2. Because without his death he could not discharge the Legacies given to
Believers. For through means of his death he was prepared, fitted, and
perfected to perform all the Promises of the New Testament. For seeing every
Testament is a Decree touching things to be done after death, and the New
Testament was touching things to be done after the death of Christ; therefore
Christ must needs dye before they can be done, and before he can do them;
that through his death he might be qualified and perfected for the doing of
them. God for the bringing of many sons unto glory, will constitute Christ
the Captain of their salvation: But for this Function he will make Christ
perfect through the suffering of death. And this means of perfecting was so
decent and comely, that it became Almighty God to perfect him by this means,
Heb. 2.10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. Christ was the son of God, who learned
obedience by the things which he suffered; and through that suffering he was
made perfect, to become the author of salvation to all who obey him, Heb. 5.8.
Though he were a son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of salvation unto all
them that obey him.

Christ is ascended into the highest parts of the Heavens, for this end and
purpose, that he might execute and fulfill all things that were to be done
according to the last Will and Testament of God. But thither he could not
ascend, unless he first dyed and descended into the Grave, which is the lower
part of the earth, Ephesians. 4.9. Now that he ascended, what is it but that he
also descended first into the lower parts of the Earth? He that descended, is
the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all
things, or rather fulfill all things; for so it is in the Margin, and should
have been so in the Text. Because in this place the word fulfill is a
testamentary word, which signifies the executing and performing of a Testament,
in distributing and discharging the Gifts and Legacies therein devised, to
fulfill the mind of the Testator. For that here the word bears this sense it
plainly appears, partly by the words preceding, ver. 8. When he ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; and partly by the
words immediately following, verse. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. Now to do these things, was to execute and fulfill the
last Will of God.

Hence the Apostle teaches the convenience of Christ's death, through the
means whereof he was fitted and perfected for the executing and doing of
those things, which according to the last Will of God, conduce to our final
salvation. For hence is our Expiation, whereby we are absolved and acquitted
from our sins; for Christ through his death was made a merciful and
faithful high Priest, to perform this gracious Office unto us, Heb. 2.17.
Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest, in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people; for in that he
himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. And whereas at the Legal Expiation the Priest entered the Tabernacle
after he had shed the blood of Goats and Calves: But Christ first shed his
own blood, and thereupon entered the Sanctuary of Heaven once for all, to make
an eternal Expiation, Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves;
but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption.

Hence is our Consolation, whereby we are succored in all our sufferings and
distresses; for seeing Christ suffered and was tried in all points as we are,
therefore he has a sense of our infirmities, and thereupon we may
confidently come to him for help in time of need, Heb. 4.15. For we have not
an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities;
but was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin; let us therefore
come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. Hence is our Resurrection, whereby we are
raised from death; for Christ through his death destroys the Devil, who had
the power of death, and delivers us from our death; whereof though we feel
the pressure, yet we need not fear the bondage, that it will be eternal,
Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them
who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. And
hence is our Glorification, whereby the possession of our eternal inheritance
is delivered unto us; for Christ was the Executor of the New Testament, for
this very cause, that through the means of his death, we might receive the
possession of that eternal inheritance to the present right whereof we are
called and justified, Heb. 9.15. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the
New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are called might
receive the promise (the promised possession) of eternal inheritance.

Hence also Christ himself before his death, taught his Disciples the
Expediency of his death; that it was expedient for them, he should dye; for
otherwise the Comforter which was the holy Ghost would not come unto them, John
16.7. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go
away; for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you; But if I
depart I will send him unto you. By his going away and departing, he means
his dying; for we commonly express dying by the words of going away and
departing. And after his death, he taught them the Necessity of his death,
that it behoved him to die and rise again from the dead, that thereupon the
Gospel might be preached in his name, Luke 24.46. And he said unto them, thus
it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead
the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached
in his name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Thus the immediate,
proper, final causes or reasons why Christ dyed, are chiefly three; namely,
to Testify the truth of the New Testament; to Confirm the force of it, and to
Execute the decrees of it; for unto a Testament once constituted, what acts
more do necessarily belong then the Testification, the Confirmation, and the
Execution of it?

But the remote causes of his death might be many and various. For all the
actions done by Christ as Mediator of the New Testament, were causes of his
death; whether we respect his Prophetic Office in publishing Gods Will,
preaching his Doctrine, and working Miracles; or his Priestly Office, in
sanctifying Believers, and expiating their sins; or his Kingly Office, in
governing his people, and subduing their enemies. And all benefits redounding
to Believers, as the Legacies and Promises of the New Testament, were causes of
his death; as their Justification, the Remission of their sins, their
Resurrection and Glorification. And all Duties to be done by Believers, as the
conditions without which they are not to enjoy their Legacies, are the causes
of his death; as their sanctity or holiness; their dying to sin, and
newness of life in all the good works of love. But all these and the like are
not opposite or repugnant to the three causes by us assigned; but are
comprehended and included in them, are subordinate and consequent to them, are
collected and inferred from them. For because Christ dyed to testify, confirm,
and execute the New Testament, and my sanctity or holiness is a Precept
thereof, and a duty by me to be done; therefore Christ dyed for my
Sanctification that I might dye unto sin, and live unto holiness; and
consequently he dyed for my patience, temperance, mercifulness, etc. because
these and the like are branches of holiness. And because Christ dyed to
testify, confirm and execute the New Testament, wherein Remission of sins,
the Resurrection from the dead, and Glorification were devised and promised as
Legacies unto Believers; therefore Christ also dyed for the Remission of my
sins, for my Resurrection and Glorification.

Yet among the remote Causes of Christ's death, the Scripture does most
frequently mention the Remission of sins. Because my sins have the greatest
force upon me to bereave, or at least to hinder me from the hope of their
forgivenes. For according to the evidence of reason; if I look upon my sins to
consider the custom and foulness of them, how can I choose but fear, that I
have deserved a fearful punishment, and that God in his Justice will inflict
it on me? Or if I look upon my death to consider my dissolution and
rottenness in the Grave, how can I hope, that God whom I have so often and so
much offended, should ever restore me to life, and translate me unto the Joys
of blessedness? The Scripture therefore is very frequent in pressing the point
for the Remission of my sins: because my gracious heavenly Father would have me
to conceive and embrace a firm, sure, and steadfast hope of their future
forgivenes; that by virtue of that hope I might utterly forsake them, and
seriously devoting my life to holiness, I might cherefully walk on in the way
to blessedness. Unto the Remission of my sins I have in this life a present
right: but the possession and benefit of this right is so future, that I shall
not enjoy it till the Resurrection; and then all my sins past unto this day
shall be actually forgiven, upon my present forsaking of my sins. For this
futurity must exercise my hope, and my hope of their future forgiveness must
engage me to a present forsaking of them. Thus it is evident that Christ dyed
not without cause; seeing of his death there were three immediate causes, and
diverse other remote causes. Now let us consider the Apostles Argument, and we
shall perceive the force of it from these two points following.

1. In that these causes are repugnant to Justifying by the Law.] For between
these causes of Christ's death and that effect of the Law, the repugnancy
arises thus. It is the proper effect of every testament to Justify; for
therein the testator does give a present right to the future possession of
gifts, Legacies, and Inheritances, which he predestinateth, ordains, and
devises, unto those persons whom he loves and favors. Hence it was an
ancient Law of the twelve tables, Vti quisque legassit suae rei, ita jus esto.
i. e. as any man devises his estate by his Will, so let the right pass; and
hereto agree both the Law of Nations and of nature. That Testament therefore
wherein no person is justified, is more inofficious then that, wherein persons
to be necessarily justified, are wholly preterited. It is therefore the effect
of both Gods testaments, of the Old and the New, of the Law and the Gospel, to
justify in their kind.

But these two Testaments are apparently different. Because they Justife
differently; for they justify different persons; the Old justifying workers
only, but the New only Believers; they justify from different sins, the
Old only from ignorances and infirmities, but the New from all sins
whatsoever: And they justify unto different inheritances, the Old only to
terrene and temporal, but the New unto caelestiall and eternal; as was largely
declared before upon verse. 16. Hence of the New Testament it is said expressly,
Heb. 8.6. That it is a better Testament, which was established upon better
Promises. But if between the Old and the New, there be no difference, it
cannot be truly said of the New, that it is a better Testament: because of two
things that have no difference, neither can be better then the other. This
difference then between these two Testaments breeds such a repugnancy between
them, that they cannot both subsist. For when one and the same testator makes
different testaments, then the subsistence of either is repugnant to the
subsistence and force of the other. Because one and the same person, especially
God who here is the testator, cannot at one and the same time have two
different Wills or testaments in force. But the last and newest testament is
always the best, and of such force, that it wholly infringeth the former,
though the former at the first making of it were valid and good; for when a
latter testament is made, it necessarily argues, that then at that time there
is some defect or fault in the former, which is amended in the latter.

If therefore the Old Testament be still in force, or if it be an effect of the
Old to justify unto those better promises, or if the right thereto come by the
Law; then there had been no cause of making the New Testament, and therefore
no cause why Christ should dye, to testify, confirm, and execute it, For if a
man's first testament be faultlesse, there can be no cause why he should make
a second: because the true cause of making a second is to amend something
amiss in the first: but in a thing faultlesse there can be nothing amiss, and
therefore such a thing needs no amending. Hence says the Apostle, Hebr. 8.7.
If that first Testament had been faultlesse, then should no place have been
sought for the second. But if the two testaments of God be in effect all one,
(as some teach they are) then is the Apostles argument apparently fallacious.
For then they can have no different effects, but whatsoever is the effect of
either, must be also the effect of the other; then the first Testament and the
last must equally justify unto the same blessedness; then the Right thereto
must come by the Law, and consequently Christ dyed without cause. For what
cause could there be, why he should dye for the last Testament if the first
stood still in force, and could effect as much as the last? But if no discreet
man will make two testaments, that shall be both wholly to one and the same
effect; (for there can be no cause of his so doing) much less may we imagine
this to be done of the most wise God.

2. In that these causes were consequent and suitable to the love and grace of
God. When I was a poor miserable creature in the state of a grievous
transgressor, who had offended against the Law of God; in the state of an
improbous sinner who was peccant against the rules of natural equity; in the
state of a calamitous sinner, who was blemished as an alien and stranger to the
Kingdom of God, distressed and abandoned to all the miseries of this life,
tainted in the attainder of Adams sin, and borne condemned to eternal death;
was it not an argument of Gods love and grace, that he would so far please to
cast his eye upon me, as to Justify me, by releasing, and freeing me from my
state of sin and death, and by giving me besides a present right of alliance
and inheritance with him, to be his Son and Heir to eternal blessedness? Was
it not an argument of his love and grace to me, that he would justify me upon
the condition of holiness? For seeing he justified me to be his Son and Heir;
was it not reason I should carry my self as his Son and Heir, in the ways of
holiness, answerable to the holiness of my heavenly Father? For could it
stand with the wisdom and holiness of God to require any less condition of
me, then to walk worthy of his love and grace toward me?

And was it not an argument of his further love and grace, that he would make
my Justification to be Testamentary, to convey this Right unto me by his last
Will and Testament, wherein by way of Legacy he predestined and devised it
unto me? For can any conveyance of any estate be more firm and sure, then that
which is settled by the means of a Testament, an instrument which naturally
requires all favorable construction, that things may take effect according to
the best meaning of the Testator? And was it not the richness of Gods grace,
that he would settle this Testament by the death of Christ, who was his own
and only son, whom he made his substitute to dye in his stead, for the
testifying, confirming, and executing of his Testament, that it might be in
force and take effect, whereby I might finally enjoy the benefit of it? For
could not God have settled his Testament by means less chargeable and costly
to him, then the precious blood of his own Son? And lastly this richnes and
abundance of grace, was it not grace only for grace, only for my thanks? i.
e. only for my faith to accept the present right to it, for my hope to expect
the future possession of it, and for my love to perform the condition of it?

For is not the richness of this grace abundant enough to draw these thanks
from me? Is it not rich enough to persuade my faith to accept the present
right to my Legacy, and to embrace it with all my heart, and all my soul?
Seeing Christ has dyed to testify, confirm, and execute that Testament,
wherein it is devised unto me? For is faith to be given to any thing which I
have not seen, if this be not credible, and to be believed? Is not this
grace rich enough to assure my hope, to receive the future possession of my
Legacy? for when the Executor of the Testament so loved me, that he dyed for
my sake, that the Will might be in force for which he dyed; can I imagine
that he will deny me my Legacy? For what will not he give me, who gave
himself for me? When the Executor sits at the right hand of the Testator
upon his Throne in Heaven, where he has all honor and power to do all
things; can I imagine that he can be either unwilling or unable to perform
the whole Will of the Testator? For will such an Executor in such a condition
wrong the Testator, or defraud any Legatary, who is co-heire with him? Is not
this grace rich enough to procure my love, to perform the condition of my
Legacy? For seeing the Executor so loved me, that he dyed for my sake, to
perform the condition of his Executorship: Is it not reason that I should love
him again, and chearefully address my self to the works of love in all the
ways of holiness, which is the condition of my Legacy?

If therefore I conceive that this grace of God comes to me by the Law, and
claim my right to it by the Law: Do I not hereby wave the death of Christ,
and suppose that he dyed without a cause, that there was no need of his
death, to testify, confirm, and execute the New Testament? And consequently,
do I not hereby frustrate the grace of God, and disanul the gracious means
whereby it was conveyed, and finally debar my self from the benefit of it?
For what right have I to this grace of God, if that Testament wherein it is
devised unto me, be of no force, and have no effect? For what force or effect
can any Testament have which is not testified, confirmed, and executed? But
contrarily if I mean that Gods grace shall be effectual, and will hope to
enjoy the blessing of it, I must acknowledge the gracious means whereby it was
conveyed unto me; namely, through the death of Christ, who shed his precious
blood to testify, confirm, and execute that Testament wherein it was
conveyed. For this grace was not given by means of the Law, but it came by the
means of Jesus Christ, John 1.17. For the Law was given by Moses: But grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ. Hence the New Testament is called, the Gospel
of the grace of God, Act. 20.24. So that I might finish my course with joy, and
the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of the grace of God. And afterward it is called the word of his grace, in the
same Chapter, verse. 32. And now brethren I commend you to God, and to the word
of his grace. But unto the Law grace is contrary; for they are things in
themselves opposite, Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under grace.
Thus the causes of Christ's death were repugnant to the effect of the Law; and
were consequent to the effects of Gods Love and Grace.

The Contents of this Second Chapter, are
1. History. Paul went not to Jerusalem to learn the Gospel. verse. 1. 1.
Because fourteen years after (his Preaching of it) he went up to Jerusalem
with Barnabas, and took Titus with him also. verse. eod. 2. Because he went up
by revelation, and communicated unto them, that Gospel which he Peached among
the Gentiles. verse. 2. 3. Because Titus who was with him, was not compelled to
be circumcised; although and because (it was urged) of false brethren, to whom
he gave place by subjection, no not for an hour. verse. 3, 4, 5.
2. History. Paul was no way inferior to the chiefest Apostles verse. 6. 1.
Because from those who seemed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were, he differed
nothing. verse. eod. 2. Because they who seemed to be somewhat, in conference
added nothing to him. verse. eod. 3. Because they saw that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto him, as the Gospel of the circumcision was
unto Peter. verse. 7. 4. Because he that wrought effectually in Peter to the
Apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in Paul toward the
Gentiles. verse. 8. 5. Because when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be
pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto Paul, they gave to him and
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, only desiring them to remember the
poor, verse. 9.10.
3. History. At Antioch Paul withstood Peter to his face. verse. 11. 1. Because
Peter was to be blamed. verse. eod. 2. Because before that certain came from
James, Peter did eat with the Gentiles: But when they were come, he withdrew,
fearing them of the circumcision. verse. 12. 3. Because the other Jews
dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with
their dissimulation. verse. 13. 4. Because when Paul saw that they walked not
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, he said unto Peter before them
all, if thou being a Jew live as the Gentiles, and not as the Jews, why
compellest thou the Gentiles to live as the Jews? verse. 14.
4. Doctrine. A man is not justified by the works of the Law; (but by the
faith of Jesus Christ) verse. 16. 1. Because by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be declared righteous. v. eod. 2. Because through (the death of) the
Law, I am dead to the Law that I might live unto God; for I am crucified with
Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet no more I (the man that I was) but Christ
lives in me. And though I now live in a body of flesh; yet I live in the
Faith or Religion (not of Moses, but) of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. verse. 19.20. 3. Because I do not frustrate the grace of
God; for if the right (whereto I am justified) come by the Law, then Christ
dyed without cause. verse. 21.
5. Duty. While we seek to be justified by Christ, we must not be found
sinners (to continue in sin, verse. 17. 1. Because, God forbid, that Christ
should be (or be thought to be) the Minister of sin, verse. eod. 2. Because,
if I build again the things (or sins) which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressour. verse. 18.

FINIS.
O My Heavenly loving Father, that have justified me to be thy son, and
have given me faith to accept the grace of it, Circumcise my heart of flesh,
and cut away from it all carnal love; operate and polish it with thy spirit,
and engrave therein thy Law of love, that with all reverence and obedience I
may worship and serve thee, in all the offices and duties of a son: lest I
prove an ungracious wretch, unworthy of so gracious a Father.

And thou my dear Lord and Savior, that have dyed to buy me with thy blood,
to make me thy Brother and Co-heire, make me thy Disciple in love, that from
thee I may learn the ways of love, and for thy sake love them that are thine:
doing to all men as I would they should do unto me.


