STEPS TO THE TEMPLE. Sacred Poems, With other Delights of the MUSES. By
RICHARD CRASHAW, sometimes of Pembroke Hall, and late Fellow of S. Peter's Coll.
in Cambridge.

Printed and Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T.W. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1646

The Preface to the Reader.
Learned Reader,
THe Authors friend, will not usurp much upon thy eye: This is only for
those, whom the name of our Divine Poet has not yet seized into admiration, I
dare undertake, that what Jamblicus (in vita Pythagorae) affirms of his
Master, at his Contemplations, these Poems can, viz. They shall lift thee
Reader, some yards above the ground: and, as in Pythagoras School, every
temper was first tuned into a height by several proportions of Music; and
spiritualized for one of his weighty Lectures; S^ may thou take a Poem hence,
and tune thy soul by it, into a heavenly pitch; and thus refined and borne up
upon the wings of meditation. In these Poems thou may talk freely of God,
and of that other state.

Here Is Herbert's second, but equal, who has retriv'd Poetry of late, and
returned it up to its Primitive use; Let it bound back to heaven gates, whence
it came. Think ye, St. Augustine would have steyned his graver Learning with
a book of Poetry, had he fancied their dearest end to be the vanity of
Love-Sonnets, and Epithalamiums? No, no, he thought with this, our Poet, that
every foot in a high-borne verse, might help to measure the soul into that
better world: Divine Poetry; I dare hold it, in position against Suarez on the
subject, to be the Language of the Angels; it is the Quintessence of Fantasy
and discourse centered in Heaven; it is the very Outgoings of the soul; it is
what alone our Author is able to tell you, and that in his own verse.

It were profane but to mention here in the Preface those under-headed Poets,
Retainers to seven shares and a half; Madrigall fellows, whose only
business in verse, is to rhyme a poor six-penny soul, a Subburd sinner into
hell; -- May such arrogant pretenders to Poetry vanish, with their prodigious
issue of tumorous heats and flashes of their adulterate brains, and for ever
after, may this our Poet fill up the better room of man, Oh! when the general
arraignment of Poets shall be, to give an account of their higher souls, with
what a triumphant brow, shall our divine Poet sit above, and look down upon
poor Homer, Virgil, Horace, Claudian? etc. who had amongst them the ill luck
to talk out a great part of their gallant Genius upon Bees, Dung, froggs, and
Gnats, etc. and not as himself here, upon Scriptures, divine Graces, Martyrs
and Angels.

Reader, we style his Sacred Poems, Stepps to the Temple, and aptly, for in the
Temple of God, under his wing, he led his life in St. Mary's Church near St.
Peter's College: There be lodged under Tertullian's roof of Angels: There he
made his nest more gladly then David's Swallow near the house of God: where
like a primitive Saint, he offered more prayers in the night, then others
usually offer in the day; There, he penned these Poems, Stepps for happy souls
to ^limbe heaven by.

And those other of his pieces entitled, The Delights of the Muses, (though of
a more humane mixture) are as sweet as they are innocent.

The praises that follow are but few of many that might be conferred on him,
he was excellent in five Languages (besides his Mother tongue) vid. Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, the two last whereof he had little help in
they were of his own acquisition.

Amongst his other accomplishments in Accademick (as well pious as harmless
arts) he made his skill in Poetry Music, Drawing, Limming, graving,
(exercises of his curious invention and sudden fancy) to be but his
subservient recreations for vacant hours, not the grand business of his soul.

To the former Qualifications I might add that which would crown them all,
his rare moderation in diet (almost Lessian temperance) he never created a
Muse out of dist^mpers, nor with our Canary scribblers) cast any strange mists
of surfets before the Intelectuall beams of his mind or memory, the latter of
which, he was so much a master of, that he had there under lock and key in
readiness, the richest treasures of the best Greek and Latin Poets, some of
which Authors he had more at his command and by heart, then others that only
read their works, to retain little, and understand less.

Enough Reader, I intend not a volume of praises, larger then his book, nor
need I longer transport thee to think over his vast perfections, I will
conclude all that I have impartially writ of this Learned young Gent. (now dead
to us) as he himself does, with the last line of his Poem upon Bishop Andrews
Picture before his Sermons Verte paginas.

-- Look on his following leaves, and see him breath.
The Authors Motto.
Live Jesus, Live, and let it be
My life to dye, for love of thee.
REader, there was a sudden mistake ('it is too late to recover it) thou will
quickly find it out, and I hope as soon pass it over, some of the humane
Poems are misplaced amongst the Divine.

The Weeper.
1
Hail Sister Springs,
Parents of Silver-forded rills!
Ever bubling things!
Thawing Crystal ^ Snowy Hills!
Still spending, never spent; I mean
Thy fair Eyes sweet Magdalene.
2
Heavens thy fair Eyes be,
Heavens of ever-falling stars,
It Is seed-time still with thee
And stars thou sow'st whose harvest dares
Promise the earth; to countershine
What ever makes Heavens forehead fine.
3
But we are deceived all,
Stars they are indeed too true,
For they but seem to fall
As Heavens other spangles do:
It is not for our Earth and us,
To shine in things so precious.
4
Upwards thou do weep,
Heavens bosom drinks the gentle stream.
Where the milky rivers meet,
Thine Crawles above and is the Cream.
Heaven, of such fair floods as this,
Heaven the Crystal Ocean is.
5
Every morn from hence,
A brisk Cherub something sips
Whose soft influence
Adds sweetness to his sweetest lips.
Then to his Music, and his song
Tastes of this breakefast all day long.
^
When some new bright guest
Takes up among the stars a room,
And Heaven will make a feast,
Angels with their Bottles come;
And draw from these full Eyes of thine,
Their Masters water, their own Wine.
7
The dew no more will weep,
The Primroses pale cheek to deck,
The deaw no more will sleep,
Nuzzel'd in the Lillies neck.
Much rather would it tremble here,
And leave them both to be thy Tear.
8
Not the soft Gold which
Steals from the Amber-weeping Tree,
Makes sorrow half so Rich,
As the drops distilled from thee.
Sorrows best Jewels lie in these
Caskets, of which Heaven keeps the Keys.
9
When sorrow would be seen
In her brightest Majesty,
(For she ^s a Queen)
Then is she dressed by none but thee.
Then, and only then she wears
Her richest Pearls, I mean thy Tea^es.
10
Not in the Evenings Eyes
When they red with weeping are,
For the Sun that dies,
Si^s sorrow with a face so fair.
Nowhere but here did ever meet
Sweetness so sad, sadness so sweet.
11
Sadness all the while
She sits in such a Throne as this,
Can do naught but smile,
Nor believes she sadness is
Gladness it self would be more glad
To be made so sweetly sad.
12
There is no need at all
That the Balsame-sweating bough
So coyly should let fall,
His med'cinable Tears; for now
Nature has learned to extract a dew,
More sovereign and sweet from you.
13
Yet let the poor drops weep,
Weeping is the case of woe,
Softly let them creep
Sad that they are vanquished so,
They, though to others no releife
May Balsame be for their own grief.
14
Golden though he be,
Golden Tagus murmurs though,
Might he flow from thee
Content and quiet would he go,
Richer far does he esteem
Thy silver, then his golden stream.
15
Well does the May that lies
Smiling in thy cheeks, confess,
The April in thine eyes,
Mutual sweetness they express.
No April e're lent softer showers,
Nor May returned fairer flowers.
16
Thus do thou melt the year
Into a weeping motion,
Each minute waits here;
Takes his tear and gets him gone;
By thine eyes tinct enobled thus
Time lays him up: he is precious.
17
Time as by thee he passes,
Makes thy ever-watry eyes
His Hower-Glasses.
By them his steps he rectifies.
The sands he used no longer please,
For his own sands he will use thy seas.
18
Does thy song lull the Air?
Thy tears just Cadence still keeps time.
Does thy sweet breathed Prayer
Up in clouds of Incense climb?
Still at each sigh, that is each stop:
A bead, that is a tear does drop.
19
Does the Night arise?
Still thy tears do fall, and fall.
Does night loose her eyes?
Still the fountain weeps for all.
Let night or day do what they will
Thou have thy task, thou weepest still.
20
Not, so long she lived,
Will thy tomb report of thee
But so long she greiv'd,
Thus must we date thy memory.
Others by Days, by Months, by Years
Measure their Ages, Thou by Tears.
21
Say watery Brothers
Ye simpering sons of those fair eyes,
Your fertile Mothers.
What has our world that can entice
You to be borne? what is it can borrow
You from her eyes swollen wombes of sorrow.
22
Whither away so fast?
O whither? for the sluttish Earth
Your sweetness cannot taste
Nor does the dust deserve your Birth.
Whither have ye then? o say
Why ye trip so fast away?
23
We go not to seek
The darlings of Aurora's bed,
The Roses modest cheek
Nor the Violets humble head.
No such thing; we go to meet
A worthier object, Our Lords feet.
The Tear.
1.
WHat bright soft thing is this?
Sweet Mary thy fair Eyes expense?
A moist spark it is,
A watery Diamond; from whence
The very Term, I think, was found
The water of a Diamond.
2
O it is not a Tear,
It Is a star about to drop
From thine eye its sphere;
The Sun will stoop and take it up.
Proud will his sister be to wear
This thine eyes Jewel in her Ear.
3
O it is a Tear,
Too true a Tear; for no sad eyne,
How sad so e're
Rain so true a Tear as thine;
Each Drop leaving a place so dear,
Weeps for it self, is its own Tear.
4
Such a Pearl as this is,
(Slipped from Aurora's dewy Breast)
The Rose buds sweet lip kisses;
And such the Rose its self when vexed
With ungentle flames, does shed,
Sweating in too warm a Bed.
5
Such the Maiden Gemme
By the wanton Spring put on,
Peeps from her Parent stem,
And blushes on the watery Sun:
This watery Blossom of thy Eyne
Ripe, will make the richer Wine.
6
Fair Drop, why quak'st thou so?
'Cause thou straight must lay thy Head
In the Dust? o no*
The Dust shall never be thy Bed*
A pillow for thee will I bring,
Stuffed with Down of Angels wing.
7
Thus carried up on high,
(For to Heaven thou must go)
Sweetly shall thou lie,
And in soft slumbers bath thy woe;
Till the singing Orbs awake thee,
And one of their bright Chorus make thee.
8
There thy self shall be
An eye, but not a weeping one,
Yet I doubt of thee,
Whither thou had rather there have shone
An eye of Heaven; or still shine here
In th'Heaven of Mary's eye, a Tear.
Divine Epigrams. On the water of our Lords Baptism.
EAch blessed drop, on each blessed limme,
Is washed it self, in washing him:
It Is a Gemme while it stays here,
While it falls hence it is a Tear.
Act. 8 On the baptized Ethiopian.
LEt it no longer be a forlorn hope
To wash an Aethiope:
He Is washed, His gloomy skin a peaceful shade
For his white soul is made:
And now, I doubt not, the Eternal Dove,
A black-fac'd house will love.
On the miracle of multiplied loaves.
SEe here an easy Feast that knows no wound,
That under Hungers Teeth will needs be sound:
A subtle Harvest of unbounded bread,
What would ye more? Here food it self is fed.
Upon the Sepulcher of our Lord.
HEre, where our Lord once laid his Head,
Now the Grave lies buried.
The Widows Mites.
TWo Mites, two drops, (yet all her house and land)
Falls from a steady Heart, though trembling hand:
The others wanton wealth foams high, and brave,
The other cast away, she only gave.
Luke 15. On the Prodigal.
TEll me bright Boy, tell me my golden Lad,
Whither away so frolic? why so glad?
What all thy Wealth in counsel? all thy state?
Are Husks so dear? troth it is a mighty rate.
On the still surviving marks of our Saviors wounds.
WHat ever story of their cruelty,
Or Nail, or Thorn, or Spear have writ in Thee,
Are in another sense
Still legible;
Sweet is the difference:
Once I did spell.
Every red letter
A wound of thine,
Now, (what is better)
Balsome for mine.
Act. 5. The sick implore St. Peter's shadow.
Under thy shadow may I lurk a while,
Death's busy search I Will easily beguile:
Thy shadow Peter, must show me the Sun,
My light's thy shadows shadow, or it is done.
Mar. 7. The dumb healed, and the people enjoined silence.
CHrist bids the dumb tongue speak, it speaks, the sound
He charges to be quiet, it runs round,
If in the first he used his fingers Touch:
His hands whole strength here, could not be too much.
Mat. 28. Come see the place where the Lord lay.
SHow me himself, himself (bright Sir) O show
Which way my poor Tears to himself may go,
Were it enough to show the place, and say,
Look, Mary, here see, where thy Lord once lay,
Then could I show these arms of mine, and say
Look, Mary, here see, where thy Lord once lay.
To Pontius washing his hands.
THy hands are washed, but o the waters spilt,
That labored to have washed thy guilt:
The flood, if any can that can suffice,
Must have its Fountain in thine Eyes.
To the Infant Martyrs.
Go smiling souls, your new built Cages break,
In Heaven you will learn to sing ere here to speak,
Nor let the milky fonts that bath your thirst,
Be your delay;
The place that calls you hence, is at the worst
Milk all the way.
On the Miracle of Loaves.
NOw Lord, or never, they will believe on thee,
Thou to their Teeth have proved thy Deity.
Mark 4. Why are ye afraid, O ye of little faith?
AS if the storm meant him;
Or, 'cause Heavens face is dim,
His needs a cloud.
Was ever froward wind
That could be so unkind,
Or wave so proud?
The Wind had need be angry, and the Water black,
That to the mighty Neptune's self dare threaten wrack*
There is no storm but this
Of your own Cowardice
That braves you out;
You are the storm that mocks
Your selves; you are the Rocks
Of your own doubt:
Besides this fear of danger, there is no danger here,
And he that here fears Danger, does deserve his Fear.
On the Blessed Virgins bashfulnesse.
THat on her lap she casts her humble Eye,
It Is the sweet pride of her Humility.
The fair star is well fixed, for where, o where
Could she have fixed it on a fairer Sphere?
It Is Heaven it is Heaven she sees, Heavens God there lies,
She can see heaven, and never lift up her eyes:
This new Guest to her Eyes new Laws has given,
'Twas once look up, it is now look down to Heaven.
Upon Lazarus his Tears.
RIch Lazarus! richer in those Gems, thy Tears.
Then Dives in the Roabes he wears:
He scorns them now, but o they will suit full well
With the Purple he must wear in Hell.
Two went up into the Temple to pray.
TWo went to pray? o rather say
One went to brag, the other to pray:
One stands up close and treads on high,
Where the other dares not send his eye.
One nearer to Gods Altar trod,
The other to the Altars God.
Upon the Ass that bore our Savior.
Has only Anger an Omnipotence
In Eloquence?
Within the lips of Love and Joy does dwell
No miracle?
Why else had Baalams Ass a tongue to chide
His Masters pride?
And thou (Heaven-burthen'd Beast) have never a word
To praise thy Lord?
That he should find a Tongue and vocal Thunder,
Was a great wonder.
But o me thinks it is a far greater one
That thou find'st none.
Matthew 8. I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.
THy God was mak^ng have into thy roof,
Thy humble faith and fear keeps him aloof:
He Will be thy Guest, because he may not be,
He Will come -- into thy house? no, into thee.
Upon the Powder Day.
HOw fit our well-ra^k'd Feasts do follow,
All misch^efe comes after All Hallow.
I am the Door.
ANd nowth'art set wide open, The Speare's sad Art,
Lo! has unlockt thee at the very Heart:
He to himself (I fear the worst)
And h^s own hope
Has shut these Doors of Heaven, that durst
Thus set them open.
Matthew. 10. The blind cured by the word of our Savior.
THou speak the word (thy word's a Law)
Thou spak'st and stre^ght the blind man saw.
To speak and make the bl^nd man see,
Was never man Lord spak^ l^ke Thee.
To speak thus, was to speak (say I)
Not to his Ear, but to his Eye.
Matthew. 27. And he answered them nothing.
O Mighty Nothing! unto thee,
Nothing, we owe all things that be.
God spoke once when he all things made,
He saved all when he Nothing said.
The world was made of Nothing then;
It Is made by Nothing now again.
To our Lord, upon the Water made Wine.
THou water turn'st to Wine (fair friend of Life)
Thy foe to cross the sweet Arts of thy Reign,
Distills from thence the Tears of wrath and strife,
And so turns wine to Water back again.
Matthew. 22. Neither durst any man from that Day ask him any more Questions.
Midst all the dark and knotty Snares,
Black wit or malice can or dares,
Thy glorious wisdom breaks the Nets,
And treads with uncontrouled steps.
Thy quel'd foes are not only now
Thy triumphs, but thy Trophies t^o:
They, both at once thy Conquests be,
And thy Conquests memory.
Stony amazement makes them stand
Waiting on thy victorious hand,
Like statues fixed to the fame
Of thy renoune, and their own shame.
As if they only meant to breath,
To be the L^fe of their own Death.
'Twas time to hold their Peace when they,
Had nere another word to say:
Yet is their silence unto thee,
The full sound of thy victory.
Their silence speaks aloud, and is.
Thy well pronounced Panegyris.
While they speak nothing, they speak all
Their share, in thy Memorial.
While they speak nothing, they proclaim
Thee, with the shrillest Trumpe of fame.
To hold their peace is all the ways,
These wretches have to speak thy praise.
Upon our Saviors Tomb wherein never man was laid.
HOw Life and Death in Thee
Agree?
Thou had a virgin Womb
And Tomb.
A Joseph did betroth
Them both.
It is better to go into Heaven with one eye, etc.
ONe Eye? a thousand rather, and a Thousand more
To fix those full-fac't Glories, o he is poor
Of Eyes that has but Argus store,
Yet if thou wilt fill one poor Eye, with thy Heaven and Thee,
O grant (sweet Goodness) that one Eye may be
All, and every whit of me.
Luke 11. Upon the dumb Devil cast out, and the slanderous Jews put to
silence.
TWo Devils at one blow thou have laid flat,
A speaking Devil this, a dumb one that.
Wa'st thy full victories fairer increase,
That the one spoke, or that the other held his peace?
Luke 10. And a certain Priest coming that way looked on him and passed by.
Why do Thou wound my wounds, o Thou that passest by
Handling and turning them with an unwounded eye?
The calm that cools thine eye does shipwreck mine, for o!
Vnmov'd to see one wretched, is to make him so.
Luke 11. Blessed be the paps which Thou have sucked.
SVppose he had been Tabled at thy Teates,
Thy hunger feels not what he eats:
He Will have his Teat e're long (a bloody one)
The Mother then must suck the Son.
To Pontius washing his blood-stained hands.
^S murder no sin? or a sin so cheap,
That thou need'st heap
^ Rape upon it? till thy Adult'rous touch
Taught her these sullied cheeks this blubbered face,
She was a Nymph, the meadows knew none such,
Of honest Parentage of unstained Race,
The Daughter of a fair and well-fam'd Fountain
As ever Silver-tipt, the side of shady mountain.
See how she weeps, and weeps, that she appears
Nothing but Tears;
Each drop's a Tear that weeps for her own wast;
Hark how at every Touch she does complain her:
Hark how she bids her frighted Drops make have,
And with sad murmurs, chides the Hands that stain her.
Leave, leave, for shame, or else (Good judge) decree,
What water shall wash this, when this has washed thee.
Matthew 23. Ye build the Sepulchers of the Prophets.
THou trim'st a Prophets Tomb, and do bequeath
The life thou took'st from him unto his Death.
Vain man! the stones that on his Tomb do lie,
Keep but the score of them that made him dye.
Upon the Infant Martyrs.
TO see both blended in one flood.
The Mothers Milk, the Childrens blood,
Makes me doubt if Heaven will gather,
Roses hence, or Lillies rather.
Joh. 16. Verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament.
WElcome my Grife, my Joy; how deare's
To me my Legacy of Tears!
I Will weep, and weep, and will therefore
Weep, 'cause I can weep no more^
Thou, thou (Dear Lord) even thou alone,
Giv'st joy, even when thou give none.
Joh. 15. Upon our Lords last comfortable discourse with his Disciples.
ALL Hybla's honey, all that sweetness can
Flows in thy Song (o fair, o dying Swan!)
Yet is the joy I take in it small or none;
It is too sweet to be a long-lived one.
Luke 16. Dives asking a drop.
A Drop, one drop, how sweetly one fair drop
Would tremble on my pearle-tipt fingers top?
My wealth is gone, o go it where it will,
Spare this one Jewel; I Will be Dives still.
Mark 12. (Give to Caesar --) (And to God --)
ALL we have is God's, and yet
Caesar challenges a debt,
Nor has God a thinner share,
What ever Caesar's payments are;
All is God's; and yet it is true
All we have is Caesar's too;
All is Caesar's; and what ods
So long as Caesar's self is Gods?
But now they have seen, and hated.
Seen? and yet hated thee? they did not see,
They saw Thee not, that saw and hated thee:
No, no, they saw the not, o Life, o Love,
Who saw ought in thee, that their hate could move.
Upon the Thorns taken down from our Lords head bloody.
Know thou this Soldier? it is a much changed plant, which yet
Thy self did set,
It Is changed indeed, did Autumn e're such beauties bring
To shame his Spring?
O! who so hard an husbandman could ever find
A soil so kind?
Is not the soil a kind one (think ye) that returns
Roses for Thorns?
Luc. 7. She began to wash his feet with tears and wipe them with the hairs
of her head.
Here eyes flood lickes his feets fair sta^ne,
Her hairs flame lickes up that again.
This flame thus quenched has brighter beams:
This flood thus stained fairer streams.
On St. Peter cutting of Malchus his ear.
WEll Peter do thou wield thy active sword,
Well for thy self (I mean) not for thy Lord.
To strike at ears, is to take heed there be
No witness Peter of thy perjury.
Joh. 3. But men loved darkness rather then Light.
THe worlds light shines, shine as it will,
The world will love its Darkness still:
I doubt though when the World's in Hell,
It will not love its Darkness half so well.
Act. 21. I am ready not only to be bound but to dye.
COme death, come bands, nor do you shrink, my ears,
At those hard words man's cowardice calls fears.
Save those of fear, no other bands fear I;
Nor other death then this; the fear to dye.
On St. Peter casting away his Nets at our Saviors call.
THou have the art on it Peter; and can tell
To cast thy Nets on all occasions well.
When Christ calls, and thy Nets would have thee st^^
To cast them well's to cast them quite away.
Our Lord in his Circumcision to his Father.
TO thee these first fruits of my growing death
(For what else is my life?) ^o I bequeath.
Taste this, and as thou like this lesser flood
Expect a Sea, my heart shall make it good.
Thy wrath that wades here now, e're long shall swim
The flood-gate shall be set wide open for him.
Then let him drink, and drink, and do his worst,
To drown the wantonness of his wild thirst.
No'ws but the Nonage of my pains, my fears
Are yet both in their hopes, not come to years.
The day of my dark woes is yet but morn,
My tears but tender and my death newborn.
Yet may these unfledged griefs give fate some guess,
These Cradle-torments have their towardness.
These purple buds of blooming death may be,
Erst the full stature of a fatal tree.
And till my riper woes to age are come,
This knife may be the spears Praeludium.
On the wounds of our crucified Lord.
O These wakefull wounds of thine!
Are they Mouths? or are they eyes?
Be they Mouths, or be they eyne,
Each bleeding part some one supplies.
Lo! a mouth, whose full-bloom'd lips
At two dear a rate are roses.
Lo! a blood-shot eye! that weeps
And many a cruel tear discloses.
O thou that on this foot have laid
Many a kiss, and many a Tear,
Now thou shal't have all repaid,
Whatsoever thy charges were.
This foot has got a Mouth and lips,
To pay the sweet sum of thy kisses:
To pay thy Tears, an Eye that weeps
In stead of Tears Such Gems as this is.
The difference only this appears,
(Nor can the change offend)
The debt is paid in Ruby-Teares,
Which thou in Pearls did lend.
On our crucified Lord Naked, and bloody.
The have left thee naked Lord, O that they had;
This Garment too I would they had denied.
Thee with thy self they have too richly clad,
Opening the purple wardrobe of thy side.
O never could be found Garments too good
For thee to wear, but these, of thine own blood.
Easter day.
RIse, Heir of fresh Eternity,
From thy V^rgin Tomb:
Rise mighty man of wonders, and thy world with thee
Thy Tomb, the universal East,
Natures new womb,
Thy Tomb, fair Immortalities perfumed Nest,
Of all the Gloryes Make Noone gay
This is the Morn.
This rock buds forth the fountain of the streams of Day
In joys white Annals live this hour,
When life was borne,
No cloud scoule on his radiant lids no tempest lowre.
Life, by this light's Nativity
All creatures have.
Death only by this Days just Doom is forced to Dye;
Nor is Death forced; for may he ly
Throned in thy Grave;
Death will on this condition be content to Die.
On the bleeding wounds of our crucified Lord.
Jesus, no more, it is full tide
From thy hands and from thy feet,
From thy head, and from thy side,
All thy Purple Rivers meet.
Thy restless feet they cannot go.
For us and our eternal good
As they are wont; what though?
They swim, alas! in their own flood.
Thy hand to give thou can not lift;
Yet will thy hand still giving be;
It gives, but o it self's the Gift,
It drops though bound, though bound it is free.
But o thy side! thy deep dig'd side
That has a double Nilus going,
Nor ever was the Pharian t^de
Half so fruitful, half so flowing.
What need thy fair head bear a part
In Tears? as if thine eyes had none?
What need they help to drown thine heart,
That strives in Torrents of its own?
Watered by the showers they bring,
The thorns that thy blessed brows encloses
(A cruel and a costly spring)
Conceive proud hopes of proving Roses.
Not a hair but pays his River
To this Red Sea of thy blood,
Their little channels can deliver
Something to the general flood.
But while I speak, whither are run
All the Rivers named before?
I counted wrong; there is but one,
But o that one is one all'ore.
Raine-swolne Rivers may rise proud
Threatening all to overflow,
But when indeed all is overflowed
They themselves are drowned too.
This thy Bloods deluge (a dire chance
Dear Lord to thee) to us is found
A deluge of deliverance,
A deluge least we should be drowned.
Nere was it thou in a sense so sadly true,
The well of living Waters, Lord, till now.
Sampson to his Dalilah.
COuld not once blinding me, cruel, suff^ce?
When first I looked on thee, I lost mine eyes.
Psalm 23.
HAppy me! o happy sheep!
Whom my God vouchsafes to keep;
Even my God, even he it is
That points me to these ways of bliss;
One whose pastures cheerful spring,
All the year does sit and sing,
And rejoicing smiles to see
Their green backs were his liverie*
Pleasure sings my soul to rest,
Plenty wears me at her breast,
Whose sweet temper teaches me
Nor wanton, nor in want to be.
At my feet the blubb'ring Mountain
Weeping, melts into a Fountain,
Whose soft silver-sweating streams
Make high Noone forget his beams:
When my waiward breath is flying,
He calls home my soul from dying,
Strokes and tames my rabid Grief,
And does woe me into life:
When my simple weakness strayes,
(Tangled in forbidden ways)
He (my Shepherd) is my Guide,
He Is before me, on my side,
And behind me, he beguiles
Craft in all her knotty wiles:
He expounds the giddy wonder
Of my weary steps, and under
Spreads a Path clear as the Day,
Where no churlish rub says nay
To my joy-conducted Feet,
Whilst they Gladly go to meet
Grace and peace, to meet new lays
Tuned to my great Shepherds praise.
Come now all ye terrors, sally
Muster forth into the valley,
Where triumphant darkness hovers
With a sable wing, that covers
Brooding Horror. Come thou Death,
Let the damps of thy dull Breath
Overshadow even the shade,
And make darkness self afraid;
There my feet, even there shall find
Way for a resolved mind.
Still my Shepherd, still my God
Thou art with me, Still thy rod,
And thy staff, whose influence
Gives direction, gives defense.
At the whisper of thy Word
Crowned abundance spreads my Board:
While I feast, my foes do feed
Their rank malice not their need,
So that with the self-same bread
They are starved, and I am fed.
How my head in ointment swims!
How my cup orelooks her Brims!
So, even so still may I move
By the Line of thy dear Love;
Still may thy sweet mercy spread
A shady Arm above my head,
About my Paths, so shall I find
The fair Center of my mind
Thy Temple, and those lovely walls
Bright ever with a beam that falls
Fresh from the pure glance of thine eye,
Lighting to Eternity.
There I Will dwell for ever, there
Will I find a purer air
To feed my Life with, there I Will sup
Balm and Nectar in my Cup,
And thence my ripe soul will I breath
Warm into the Arms of Death.
Psalm 137.
ON the proud banks of great Euphrates flood,
There we sat, and there we wept:
Our Harpes that now no Music understood,
Nodding on the Willowes slept,
While unhappy captived we
Lovely Sion thought on thee.
They, they that snatched us from our Countries breast
Would have a Song carved to their Ears
In Hebrew numbers, then (o cruel jest!)
When Harpes and hearts were drowned in Tears:
Come, they cried, come sing and play
On of Sions songs to day.
Sing? play? to whom (ah) shall we sing or play,
If not Jerusalem to thee?
Ah thee Jerusalem! ah sooner may
This hand forget the mastery
Of Musicks dainty touch, then I
The Music of thy memory.
Which when I lose, o may at once my Tongue
Lose this same busy speaking art
Vnpearcht, her vocal Arteries unst^ung,
No more acquainted with my Heart,
On my dry pallats roof to rest
A withered Leaf, an idle Guest*
No, no, thy good, Sion, alone must crown
The head of all my hope-nurst joys.
But Edom cruel thou! thou cryd'st ddowne, down
Sink Sion, down and never rise,
Her falling thou did urge and thrust,
And haste to dash her into dust.
Do laugh? proud Babels Daughter! do, laugh on,
Till thy ruin teach thee Tears,
Even such as these, laugh, till a venging throng
Of woes, too late do rouse thy fears.
Laugh, till thy childrens bleeding bones
Weep precious Tears upon the stones.
A Hymn of the Nativity, sung by the Shepherds.
Chorus. COme we Shepherds who have seen
Days King deposed by Nights Queen.
Come lift we up our lofty song,
To wake the Sun that sleeps too long.
He in this our general joy,
Slept, and dreampt of no such thing
While we found out the fair-ey'd Boy,
And kissed the Cradle of our King;
Tell him he rises now too late,
To show us ought worth looking at.
Tell him we now can show him more
Then he e're showed to mortal sight,
Then he himself e're saw before,
Which to be seen needs not his light:
Tell him Tityrus where thou have been,
Tell him Thyrsis what thou have seen.
Tytirus. Gloomy Night embraced the place
Where the noble Infant lay:
The Babe looked up, and showed his face,
In spite of Darkness it was Day.
It was thy Day, Sweet, and did r^se,
Not from the East, but from thy eyes,

Thyrsis. Winter chid the world, and sent
The angry North to wage his wars:
The North forgot his fierce intent,
And lest perfumes, in stead of scarres:
By those sweet Eyes persuasive Powers,
Where he meant frosts, he scattered Flowers.

B^th. We saw thee in thy Balmy Nest,
Bright Dawne of our Eternal Day;
We saw thine Eyes-break from the East,
And chase the trembling shades away:
We saw thee (and we blessed the sight)
We saw thee by thine own sweet Light.

Tityrus. I saw the curled drops, soft and slow
Come hovering over the places head,
Offering their whitest sheets of snow,
To furnish the fair Infants Bed.
Forbear (said I) be not too bold,
Your fleece is white, but it is too cold.

Thyrsis. I saw th'officious Angels bring,
The down that their soft breasts did strew,
For well they now can spare their wings,
When Heaven it self lies here below.
Fair Youth (said I) be not too rough,
Thy Down though soft's not soft enough.

Tityrus. The Babe no sooner 'gan to seek,
Where to lay his lovely head,
But straight his eyes advised his Cheek,
'Twixt Mothers Breasts to go to bed.
Sweet choice (said I) no way but so,
Not to lie cold, yet sleep in snow.

All. Welcome to our wondering sight
Eternity shut in a span!
Summer in Winter! Day in Night!

Chorus. Heaven in Earth! and God in Man!
Great little one, whose glorious Birth,
Lifts Earth to Heaven, stoops heaven to earth*
Welcome, though not to Gold, nor Silk,
To more then Caesar's Birthright is.
Two sister-Seas of virgins Milk,
With many a rarely-temper'd kiss,
That breathes at once both Maid and Mother,
Warmes in the one, cooles in the other.
She sings thy Tears asleep, and dips
Her Kisses in thy weeping Eye,
She spreads the red leaves of thy Lips,
That in their Buds yet blushing lie.
She against those Mother-Diamonds tryes
The points of her young Eagles Eyes.
Welcome, (though not to those gay flies
Gilded in the Beams of Earthly Kings
Slippery souls in smiling eyes)
But to poor Shepherds, simple things,
That use no varnish, no oiled Arts,
But lift clean hands full of clear hearts.
Yet when young Aprils husband showers,
Shall bless the fruitful Maia's Bed,
We Will bring the firstborn of her flowers,
To kiss thy feet, and crown thy head.
To thee (Dread Lamb) whose Love must keep
The Shepherds, while they feed their sheep.
To thee meek Majesty, soft King
Of simple Graces, and sweet Loves,
Each of us his Lamb will bring,
Each his pair of silver Doves.
At last, in fire of thy fair Eyes,
We Will burn, our own best sacrifice.
Upon the Death of a Gentleman.
Faithless and fond Mortality,
Who will ever credit thee?
Fond and faithless thing! that thus,
In our best hopes beguilest us.
What a reckoning have thou made,
Of the hopes in him we laid?
For Life by volumes lengthened,
A Line or two, to speak him dead.
For the Laurel in his verse,
The sullen Cypress over his Hearse.
For a silver-crowned Head,
A durty pillow in Death's Bed.
For so dear, so deep a trust,
Sad requital, thus much dust!
Now though the blow that snatched him hence,
Stopped the Mouth of Eloquence,
Though she be dumb e're since his Death,
Not used to speak but in his Breath,
Yet if at least she not denies,
The sad language of our eyes,
We are contented: for then this
Language none more fluent is.
Nothing speaks our Grief so well
As to speak Nothing, Come then tell
Thy mind in Tears who e're Thou be,
That ow'st a Name to misery.
Eyes are vocal, Tears have Tongues,
And there be words not made with lungs;
Sententious showers, o let them fall,
Their cadence is Rhetorical.
Here Is a Theme will drink the expense,
Of all thy watery Eloquence,
Weep then, only be expressed
Thus much, He Is Dead, and weep the rest.
Upon the Death of Mr. Herrys.
A Plant of noble stem, forward and fair,
As ever whispered to the Morning Air
Thrived in these haphy Grounds, the Earth's just pride,
Whose rising Glories made such haste to hide
His head in Clouds, as if in him alone
Impatient Nature had taught motion
To start from Time, and cheerfully to fly
Before, and seize upon Maturity.
Thus grew this gracious plant, in whose sweet shade
The Sun himself often wished to sit, and made
The Morning Muses perch like Birds, and sing
Among his Branches: yea, and vowed to bring
His own delicious Phoenix from the blessed
Arabia, there to build her Virgin nest,
To hatch her self in, amongst his leaves the Day
Fresh from the Rosy East rejoyc't to play.
To them she gave the first and fairest Beam
That waited on her Birth* she gave to them
The purest Pearls, that wept her Evening Death,
The balmy Zephirus got so sweet a Breath
By often kissing them, and now begun
Glad Time to ripen expectation.
The timourous Maiden-Blossomes on each Bough,
Peept forth from their first blushes: so that now
A Thousand ruddy hopes smiled in each Bud,
And flattered every greedy eye that stood
Fixed in Delight, as if already there
Those rare fruits dangled, whence the Golden Year
His crown expected, when (o Fate, ^ Time
That seldom lett'st a blushing youthful Prime
Hide his hot Beams in shade of silver Age;
So rare is hoary virtue) the dire rage
Of a mad storm these bloomy joys all tore,
Ravished the Maiden Blossoms, and down bore
The trunk. Yet in this Ground his precious Root
Still lives, which when weak Time shall be poured out
Into Eternity, and circular joys
Dance in an endless round, again shall rise
The fair son of an ever-youthfull Spring,
To be a shade for Angels while they sing,
Mean while who e're thou art that ^assest here,
O do thou water it with one kind Tear.
Upon the Death of the most desired Mr. Herrys.
DEath, what do? o hold thy Blow,
What thou do, thou do not know.
Death thou must not here be cruel,
This is Natures choycest Jewel.
This is he in whose rare frame,
Nature labored for a Name,
And meant to leave his precious feature,
The pattern of a perfect Creature.
Joy of Goodness, Love of Art,
Virtue wears him next her heart.
Him the Muses love to follow,
Him they call their vice- Apollo.
Apollo golden though thou be,
Thou Art not fairer then is he.
Nor more lovely lift'st thy head,
Blushing from thine Eastern Bed.
The Gloryes of thy Youth never knew,
Brighter hopes then he can show.
Why then should it e're be seen,
That his should fade, while thine is Green*
And will Thou, (o cruel boast!)
Put poor Nature to such cost?
O 'twill undo our common Mother,
To be at charge of such another.
What? think we to no other end,
Gracious Heavens do use to send
Earth her best perfection,
But to vanish and be gone?
Therefore only give to day,
To morrow to be snatched away?
I Have seen indeed the hopeful bud,
Of a ruddy Rose that stood
Blushing, to behold the Ray
Of the new-saluted Day;
(His tender top not fully spread)
The sweet dash of a shower now shead,
Invited him no more to hide.
Within himself the purple pride
Of his forward flower, when ^o
While he sweetly 'gan to show
His swelling Gloryes, Auster spide him,
Cruel Auster thither hy'd him,
And with the rush of one rude blast,
Shamed not spitefully to wast
All his leaves, so fresh, so sweet,
And lay them trembling at his feet.
I Have seen the Mornings lovely Ray,
Hover over the newborn Day:
With rosy wings so richly Bright,
As if he scorned to think of Night,
When a ruddy storm whose scoule,
Made Heavens radiant face look foul*
Called for an untimely Night,
To blot the newly blossomed Light.
But were the Roses blush so rare,
Were the Mornings smile so fair
As is he, nor cloud, nor wind
But would be courteous, would be kind.
Spare him Death, o spare him then,
Spare the sweetest among men.
Let not pity with her Tears,
Keep such distance from thine Ears,
But o thou will not, can not spare,
Haste has never time to hear.
Therefore if he needs must go,
And the Fates will have it so,
Softly may he be possessed,
Of his monumentall rest.
Safe, thou dark home of the dead,
Safe o hide his loved head.
For Pitties sake o hide him quite,
From his Mother Natures sight:
Lest for Grief his loss may move,
All her Births abortive prove,
Another.
IF ever Pity were acquainted
With stern Death, if e're he fainted,
Or forgot the cruel vigor,
Of an Adamantine rigor,
Here, o here we should have known it,
Here or no where he would have shown it.
For he whose precious memory,
Bathes in Tears of every eye*
He to whom our sorrow brings,
All the streams of all her springs*
Was so rich in Grace and Nature,
In all the gifts that bless a Creature.
The fresh hopes of his lovely Youth,
Flourisht in so fair a grouth.
So sweet the Temple was, that shrin'd
The Sacred sweetness of his mind.
That could the Fates know to relent?
Could they know what mercy meant;
Or had ever learnt to bear,
The soft tincture of a Tear:
Tears would now have flowed so deep,
As might have taught Grief how to weep.
Now all their steely operation,
Would quite have lost the cruel fashion.
Sickness would have gladly been,
Sick himself to have saved him:
And his Fever wished to prove
Burning, only in his Love.
Him when wrath it self had seen,
Wrath its self had lost his spleen.
Grim Destruction here amazed,
In stead of striking would have gazed.
Even the Iron-pointed pen,
That notes the Tragic Doomes of men
Wet with tears stilled from the eyes,
Of the flinty Destinyes;
Would have learned a softer style,
And have been ashamed to spoil
His lives sweet stoty, by the have,
Of a cruel stop ill placed.
In the dark volume of our fate,
Whence each leaf of Life has date,
Where in sad particulars,
The total sum of Man appears.
And the short clause of mortal Breath,
Bound in the period of Death,
In all the Book if any where
Such a term as this, spare here
Could have been found 'twould have been read,
Writ in white Letters over his head:
Or close unto his name annexed,
The fair gloss of a fairer Text.
In brief, if any one were free,
He was that one, and only he.
But he, alas! even he is dead
And our hopes fair harvest spread
In the dust. Pity now spend
All the tears that grief can lend.
Sad mortality may hide,
In his ashes all her pride;
With this inscription over his head
All hope of never dying, here lies dead
His Epitaph.
PAssenger who e're thou art,
Stay a while, and let thy Heart
Take acquaintance of this stone,
Before thou passest further on.
This stone will tell thee that beneath,
Is entombed the Crime of Death;
The ripe endowments of whose mind,
Left his Years so much behind,
That numbering of his vertuos praise,
Death lost the reckoning of his Days;
And believing what they told,
Imagined him exceeding old.
In him perfection did set forth,
The strength of her united worth.
Him his wisdoms pregnant growth
Made so reverend, even in Youth,
That in the Center of his Breast
(Sweet as is the Phaenix nest)
Every reconciled Grace,
Had their General meeting place
In him Goodness joy'd to see
Learning, learn Humility.
The splendour of his Birth and Blood,
Was but the Gloss of his own Good:
The flourish of his sober Youth,
Was the Pride of Naked Truth.
In composure of his face,
Lived a fair, but manly Grace.
His Mouth was Rhetoricks best mold,
His Tongue the Touchstone of her Gold.
What word so e're his Breath kept warm,
Was no word now but a charm.
For all persuasive Graces thence
Sucked their sweetest Influence.
His virtue that within had root,
Could not choose but shine without.
And th'heart-bred luster of his worth,
At each corner peeping forth,
Pointed him out in all his ways,
Circled round in his own Rays:
That to his sweetness, all men's eyes
Were vowed Loves flaming Sacrifice.
Him while fresh and fragrant Time
Cherisht in his Golden Prime;
E're Hebe's hand had overlaid
His smooth cheeks, with a downy shade:
The rush of Death's unruly wave,
Swept him off into his Grave.
Enough, now (if thou can) pass on,
For now (alas) not in this stone
(Passenger who e're thou art)
Is he entombed, but in thy Heart.
An Epitaph Upon Husband and Wife, which died, and were buried together.
TO these, Whom Death again did wed,
This Grave's the second Marriage Bed.
For though the hand of Fate could force,
'Twixt Soul and body a Divorce:
It could not sever Man and Wife,
Because they both lived but one Life.
Peace, good Reader, do not weep;
Peace, the Lovers are asleep:
They (sweet Turtles) folded lie,
In the last knot that love could tie.
Let them sleep, let them sleep on,
Till this stormy night be gone.
And the eternal morrow dawne,
Then the Curtains will be drawn,
And they waken with that Light,
Whose day shall never sleep in Night.
An Epitaph. Upon Doctor Brook.
A Brook whose stream so great, so good,
Was loved was honored as a flood:
Whose Banks the Muses dwelt upon,
More then their own Helicon;
Here at length, has gladly found
A quiet passage under ground;
Mean while his loved banks now dry,
The Muses with their tears supply.
Upon Mr. Staninough's Death.
Dear relics of a dislodged soul, whose lack
Makes many a mourning Paper put on black;
O stay a while e're thou draw in thy Head,
And wind thy self up close in thy cold Bed:
Stay but a little while, until I call
A summons, worthy of thy Funeral.
Come then youth, Beauty, and Blood, all ye soft powers,
Whose silken flatteryes swell a few fond hou^es.
Into a false Eternity, come man,
(Hyperbolized nothing!) know thy span.
Take thine own measure here, down, down, and bow
Before thy self in thy Idaea, thou
Huge emptiness contract thy bulk, and shrink
All thy wild Circle to a point! o sink
Lower, and lower yet; till thy small size,
Call Heaven to look on thee with narrow eyes*
Lesser and lesser yet, till thou begin
To show a face, fit to confess thy kin
Thy neighborhood to nothing! here put on
Thy self in this unfeigned reflection;
Here gallant Ladies, this unpartiall glass
(Through all your painting) shows you your own face.
These Death-scal'd Lips are they dare give the lie,
To the proud hopes of poor Mortality.
These curtain'd windows, this selfe-prison'd eye,
Out-stares the Liddes of large-look't Tyranny.
This posture is the brave one: this that lies
Thus low stands up (me thinks) thus, and defyes
The world -- All daring Dust and Ashes, only you
Of all interpreters read nature true.
Upon the Duke of York his Birth A Panegyricke.
Britain, the mighty Oceans lovely Bride,
Now strech thy self (fair I Will) and grow, spread wide
Thy bosom and make room; Thou art oppressed
With thine own Gloryes: and art strangely blessed
Beyond thy self: for lo! the Gods, the Gods
Come fast upon thee, and those glorious ods,
Swell thy full gloryes to a pitch so high,
As sits above thy best capacitye.
Are they not ods? and glorious? that to thee
Those mighty Genii throng, which well might be
Each one an Ages labor, that thy days
Are gilded with the Union of those Rays,
Whose each divided Beam would be a Sun,
To glad the Sphere of any Nation.
O if for these thou mean to find a seat,
Thou Have need o Britain to be truly Great.
And so thou art, their presence makes thee so,
They are thy Greatness; Gods where e're they go
Bring their Heaven with them, their great footsteps place
An everlasting smile upon the face,
Of the glad Earth they tread on, while with thee
Those Beams that ampliate Mortality,
And teach it to expatiate, and swell
To Majesty, and fullness deigne to dwell.
Thou by thy self may sit, (blessed Isle) and see
How thy Great Mother Nature doats on thee:
Thee therefore from the rest apart she hurled,
And seemed to make an Isle, but made a world.
Great Charles! thou sweet Dawne of a glorious day,
Center of those thy Grandsires, shall I say
Henry and James, or Mars and Phoebus rather?
If this were Wisdoms God, that Wars stern father,
It Is but the same is said, Henry and James
Are Mars and Phoebus under diverse Names.
O thou full mixture of those mighty souls,
Whose vast intelligences tuned the Poles
Of Peace and War; Thou for whose manly brow
Both Laurels twine into one wreath, and woo
To be thy Garland: see (sweet Prince) o see
Thou and the lovely hopes that smile in thee
Are taken out and transcribed by thy Great Mother,
See, see thy real shadow, see thy Brother,
Thy little self in less, read in these Eyne
The beams that dance in those full stars of thine.
From the same snowy Alablaster Rock
These hands and thine were hew'n, these Cherrimock
The Coral of thy lips. Thou art of all
This well-wrought Copy the fair Principal.
Justly, Great Nature, may thou brag and tell
How even thou have drawn this faithful Parallel,
And matched thy Masterpiece: o then go on
Make such another sweet comparison.
See thou that Mary there? o teach her Mother
To show her to her self in such another:
Fellow this wonder too, nor let her shine
Alone, light such another star, and twine
Their Rosy Beams, so that the Morn for one
Venus, may have a Constellation.
So have I seen (to dress their Mistress May)
Two silken sister flowers consult, and lay
Their bashful cheeks together, newly they
Peep't from their buds, showed like the Gardens eyes
Scarce wakt: like was the Crimson of their joys,
Like were the Pearle^ they wept, so like that one
Seemed but the others kind reflection.
But stay, what glimpse was that? why blushed the day*
Why ran the started air trembling away?
Who Is this that comes circled in rays, that scorn
Acquaintance with the Sun? what second Morn
At midday opes a presence which Heavens eye
Stands off and points at? is it some Deity
Stepped from her Throne of stars deignes to be seene^
Is it some Deity? or is it our Queen?
It Is she, it is she: her awful Beauties chase
The Days abashed Glories, and in face
Of Noone wear their own Sunshine, o thou bright
Mistress of wonders! Cynthia's is the Night,
But thou at Noone do shine, and art all Day,
(Nor does the Sun deny't) our Cynthia,
Illustrious sweetness! In thy faithful womb,
That' Nest of Heroes, all our hopes find room.
Thou art the Mother Phaenix, and thy Breast
Chaste as that Virgin honor of the East,
But much more fruitful is; nor does, as she,
Deny to mighty Love a Deity*
Then let the Eastern world brag and be proud
Of one coy Phaenix, while we have a brood
A brood of Phaenixes; while we have Brother
And Sister Phaenixes, and still the Mother;
And may we long; long may thou live, t'encrease
The house and family of Phaenixes.
Nor may the light that gives their Eyelids light,
E're prove the dismal Morning of thy Night:
Never may a Birth of thine be bought so dear,
To make his costly cradle of thy Beer.
O may thou thus make all the year thine own,
And see such Names of joy sit white upon
The brow of every Month; and when that is done
May in a son of his find every son
Repeated, and that son still in another,
And so in each child often prove a Mother:
Long may thou laden with such clusters lean
Upon thy Royal Elm (fair Vine) and when
The Heavens will stay no longer, may thy glory
And Name dwell sweet in some eternal story.
Pardon (bright excellence) an untuned string,
That in thy Ears thus keeps a murmuring
O speak a lowly Muses pardon; speak
Her pardon or her sentence; only break
Thy silence; speak; and she shall take from thence
Numbers, and sweetness, and an influence
Confessing thee: or (if too long I stay)
O speak thou and my Pipe has naught to say:
For see Appollo all this while stands mute,
Expecting by thy voice to tune his Lute.
But Gods are gracious: and their Altars, make
Precious their offerings that their Altars take.
Give then this rural wreath fire from thine eyes.
This rural wreath dares be thy sacrifice.
Upon Ford's two Tragedyes Loves Sacrifice and The Broken Heart.
THou cheat'st us Ford, make one seem two by Art.
What is Loves Sacrifice, but the broken Heart?
On a foul Morning, being then to take a journey.
WHere art thou Sol, while thus the blindfold Day
Staggers out of the East, looses her way
Stumbling on Night? Rouse thee Illustrious Youth,
And let no dull mists choke the Lights fair growth.
Point here thy Beams; o glance on yonder flocks,
And make their fleeces Golden as thy locks.
Unfold thy fair front, and there shall appear
Full glory, flaming in her own free sphere.
Gladness shall cloth the Earth, we will in style
The face of things, an universal smile.
Say to the Sullen Morn, thou come to court her;
And wilt command proud Zephirus to sport her
With wanton gales: his balmy breath shall lick
The tender drops which tremble on her cheek;
Which rarifyed, and in a gentle rain
On those delicious banks distilled again
Shall rise in a sweet Harvest; which discloses
To every blushing Bed of newborn Roses.
He Will fan her bright locks teaching them to flow,
And friske in curled Maeanders: He will throw
A fragrant Breath sucked from the spicy nest
O'th preticus Phoenix, warm upon her Breast.
He with a dainty and soft hand, will trim
And brush her Azure Mantle, which shall swim
In silken Volumes, wheresoever she will tread,
Bright clouds like Golden fleeces shall be spread.
Rise then (fair blew-ey'd Maid) rise and discover
Thy silver brow, and meet thy Golden lover.
See how he runs, with what a hasty flight
Into thy Bosom, bathed with liquid Light.
Fly, fly profane fogs, far hence fly away,
Taint not the pure streams of the springing Day,
With your dull influence, it is for you,
To sit and scoule upon Nights heavy brow;
Not on the fresh cheeks of the virgin Morn,
Where naught but smiles, and ruddy joys are worn.
Fly then, and do not think with her to stay;
Let it suffice, she will wear no mask to day.
Upon the fair Ethiopian sent to a Gentlewoman.
LO here the fair Chariclia! in whom strove
So false a Fortune, and so true a Love.
Now after all her toils by Sea and Land,
O may she but arrive at your white hand.
Her hopes are crowned, only she fears that than,
She shall appear true Ethiopian.
On Marriage.
I Would be married, but I Would have no Wife,
I would be married to a single Life.
To the Morning. Satisfaction for sleep.
WHat succor can I hope the Muse will send
Whose drowsinesse has wronged the Muses friend?
What hope Aurora to propitiate thee,
Unless the Muse sing my Apology?
O in that morning of my shame! when I
Lay folded up in sleeps captivity;
How at the sight did Thou draw back thine Eyes,
Into thy modest veyle? how did thou rise
Twice di'd in thine own blushes, and did run
To draw the Curtains, and awake the Sun?
Who rowzing his illustrious tresses came,
And seeing the loathed object, hid for shame
His head in thy fair Bosom, and still hides
Me from his Patronage; I pray, he chides:
And pointing to dull Morpheus, bids me take
My own Apollo, try if I can make
His Lethe be my Helicon: and see
If Morpheus have a Muse to wait on me.
Hence it is my humble fancy finds no wings,
No nimble raptures, starts to Heaven and brings
Enthusiasticke flames, such as can give
Marrow to my plumpe Genius, make it live
Dressed in the glorious madness of a Muse,
Whose feet can walk the milky way, and choose
Her starry Throne; whose holy heats can warm
The Grave, and hold up an exalted arm
To lift me from my lazy Vrne, to climb
Upon the stooped shoulders of old Time;
And trace Eternity -- But all is dead,
All these delicious hopes are buried,
In the deep wrinckles of his angry brow,
Where mercy cannot find them: but o thou
Bright Lady of the Morn, pity does lie
So warm in thy soft Breast it cannot dye.
Have mercy then, and when he next shall rise
O meet the angry God, invade his Eyes,
And stroke his radiant Cheeks; one timely kiss
Will kill his anger, and rev^ve my bliss.
So to the treasure of thy pearly deaw,
Thrice will I pay three Tears, to show how true
My grief is; so my wakefull lay shall knock
At the Oriental Gates; and duly mock
The early Larkes shrill Orizons to be
An Anthem at the Days Nativitie.
And the same rosie-fingerd hand of thine,
That shuts Nights dying eyes, shall open mine.
But thou, faint God of sleep, forget that I
Was ever known to be thy votery.
No more my pillow shall thine Altar be,
Nor will I offer any more to thee
My self a melting sacrifice; I Am borne
Again a f^esh Child of the Buxome Morn,
Heir of the Suns first Beams; why threat'st thou so^
Why do thou shake thy leaden Scepter? go,
Bestow thy Poppy upon wakefull woe,
Sickness, and sorrow, whose pale lidds never know
Thy downy finger, dwell upon their Eyes,
Shut in their Tears; Shut out their miseryes
Loves Horoscope.
LOve, brave virtues younger Brother,
Erst has made my Heart a Mother,
She consults the conscious Spheres,
To calculate her young sons years.
She asks if sad, or saving powers,
Gave Omen to his infant hours,
She asks each star that then stood by,
If poor Love shall live or die.
Ah my Heart, is that the way?
Are these the Beams that rule thy Day?
Thou know a Face in whose each look,
Beauty lays open loves Fortune-booke,
On whose fair revolutions wait
The obsequious motions of Loves fate,
Ah my Hear^, her eyes and she,
Have taught thee new Astrology.
How e're Loves native hours were set,
What ever starry Synod met,
It Is in the mercy of her eye,
If poor Love shall live or dye,
If those sharp Rays putting on
Points of Death bid Love be gone
(Though the Heavens in counsel sat,
To crown an uncontrouled Fa^e,
Though their best Aspects twined upon
The kindest Constellation,
Cast amorous glances on h^s Birth,
And whispered the confederate Earth
To pave his paths with all the good
That warmes the Bed of youth and blood
Love has no plea against her eye
Beauty frowns, and Love must dye.
But if her milder influence move;
And guild the hopes of humble Love:
(Though heavens inauspicious eye
Lay black on loves Nativitye;
Though every Diamond in Jove's crown
Fixed his forehead to a frown,)
Her Eye a strong appeal can give,
Beauty smiles and love shall live.
O if Love shall live, o where
But in her Eye, or in her Ear,
In her Breast, or in her Breath,
Shall I hide poor Love from Death?
For in the life ought else can give,
Love shall dye although he live.
Or if Love shall dye, o where,
But in her Eye, or in her Ear,
In her Breath, or in her Breast,
Shall I Build his funeral Nest?
While Love shall thus entombed lie,
Love shall live, although he dye.
Sospetto d' Herod. Libro Primo.
Argomento.
Casting the times with their strong signs,
Death's Master his own death divines.
Struggling for help, his best hope is
Hero'ds suspicion may heal his.
Therefore he (ends a fiend to wake,
The sleeping Tyrant's fond mistake;
Who fears (in vain) that he whose Birth
Means Heaven, should meddle with his Earth.
1
Muse, now the servant of soft Loves no more,
Hate is thy Theme, and Herod, whose unblest
Hand (o what dares not jealous Greatness?) tore
A thousand sweet Babes from their Mothers Breast:
The Bloomes of Martyrdom. O be a Door
Of language to my infant Lips, ye best
Of Confessors: whose Throats answering his swords,
Gave forth your Blood for breath, spoke souls for words.
2
Great Anthony! Spains well-beseeming pride,
Thou mighty branch of Emperors and Kings.
The Beauties of whose dawne what eye may bide,
Which With the Sun himself weigh's equal wings.
Map of Heroic worth! whom far and wide
To the believing world Fame boldly sings:
Deigne thou to wear this humble Wreath that bows,
To be the sacred Honor of thy Brows.
3.
Nor needs my Muse a blush, or these bright Flowers
Other then what their own blessed beauties bring.
They were the smiling sons of those sweet Bowers,
That drink the deaw of Life, whose deathlesse spring,
Nor Sirian flame, nor Borean frost deflowers:
From whence Heav'n-labouring Bees with busy wing,
Suck hidden sweets, which well digested proves
Immortal Honey for the Hive of Loves.
4.
Thou, whose strong hand with so transcendent worth,
Holds high the reine of fair Parthenope,
That neither Rome, nor Athens can bring forth
A Name in noble deeds Rival to thee!
Thy Fames full noise, makes proud the patient Earth,
Far more then matter for my Muse and me.
The Tyrrhene Seas, and shores sound all the same,
And in their murmures keep thy mighty Name.
5.
Below the Botome of the great Abyss,
There where one Center reconciles all things;
The worlds profound Heart pants; There placed is
Mischifes old Master, close about him clings
A curled knot of embracing Snakes, that kiss
His correspondent cheeks: these loathsome strings
Hold the perverse Prince in eternal Ties
Fast bound, since first he forfeited the skies,
6.
The Judge of Torments, and the King of Tears:
He fills a burnisht Throne of quenchlesse fire:
And for his old fair Roabes of Light, he wears
A gloomy Mantle of dark flames, the Tire
That crowns his hated head on high appears;
Where seav'n tall Horns (his Empires pride) aspire.
And to make up Hells Majesty, each Horn
Seav'n crested Hydra's horribly adorn.
7.
His Eyes, the sullen dens of Death and Night,
Star^le the dull Air with a dismal red:
Such his fell glances as the fatal Light
Of staring Comets, that look Kingdoms dead.
From his black nostrills, and blew lips, in spite
Of Hells own stink, a worser stench is spread.
His breath Hells lightning is: and each deep groan
Disdaines to think that Heaven Thunders alone.
8.
His flaming Eyes dire exhalation,
Unto a dreadful pile gives fiery Breath;
Whose unconsum'd consumption preys upon
The never-dying Life, of a long Death.
In this sad House of slow Destruction,
(His shop of flames) he fryes himself, beneath
A mass of woes, his Teeth for Torment gnash,
While his steel sides found with his Tails strong lash.
9.
Three Rigourous Virgins waiting still behind,
Assist the Throne of the Iron-Sceptred King.
With whips of Thorns and knotty vipers twined
They rouse him, when his rank Thoughts need a sting,
Their locks are beds of uncomb'd snakes that wind
About their shady brows in wanton Rings.
Thus reigns the wrathful King, and while he reigns
His Scepter and himself both he disdaines.
10
Disdainefull wretch! how has one bold sin cost
Thee all the Beauties of thy once bright Eyes?
How has one black Eclipse cancelled, and crossed
The glories that did guild thee in thy Rise?
Proud Morning of a perverse Day! how lost
Art thou unto thy self, thou too selfe-wise
Narcissus? foolish Phaeton? who for all
Thy high-aym'd hopes, gaind'st but a flaming fall
11
From Death's sad shades, to the Life-breathing Air,
This mortal Enemy to mankinds good,
Lifts his malignant Eyes, wasted with care,
To be come beautiful in humane blood.
Where Jordan melts his Crystal, to make fair
The fields of Palestine, with so pure a flood,
There does he fix his Eyes: and there detect
New matter, to make good his great suspect.
12
He calls to mind the old quarrel, and what spark
Set the contending Sons of Heaven on fire:
Often in his deep thought he revolves the dark
Sibills divining leaves: he does enquire
Into the old Prophesies, trembling to mark
How many present prodigies conspire,
To crown their past predictions, both he lays
Together, in his pondrous mind both weighes.
13.
Heavens Golden-winged Herald, late he saw
To a poor Galilean virgin sent:
How low the Bright Youth bowed, and with what awe
Immortal flowers to her fair hand present.
He saw the old Hebrews womb, neglect the Law
Of Age and Barennesse, and her Babe prevent
His Birth, by his Devotion, who began
Betimes to be a Saint, before a Man.
14.
He saw rich Nectar thawes, release the rigor
Of the Icy North, from frost-bount Atlas hands
His Adamantine fetters fall: green vigor
Gladding the Scythian Rocks, and Libian sands.
He saw a vernall smile, sweetly disfigure
Winters sad face, and through the flowery lands
Of fair Engaddi hony-sweating Fountains
With Manna, Milk, and Balm, new broach the Mountains.
15.
He saw how in that blessed Day-bearing Night,
The Heav'n-rebuked shades made have away;
How bright a Dawne of Angels with new Light
Amazed the midnight world, and made a Day
Of which the Morning knew not: Mad with spite
He marked how the poor Shepherds ran to pay
Their simple Tribute to the Babe, whose Birth
Was the great business both of Heaven and Earth.
16.
He saw a threefold Sun, with rich increase,
Make proud the Ruby portalls of the East.
He saw the Temple sacred to sweet Peace,
Adore her Princes Birth, flat on her Breast.
He saw the falling Idols, all confess
A coming Deity. He saw the Nest
Of poisonous and unnatural loves, Earth-nurst;
Touched with the worlds true Antidote to burst.
17.
He saw Heaven blossom with a newborn light,
On which, as on a glorious stranger gazed
The Golden eyes of Night: whose Beam made bright
The way to Beth'lem, and as boldly blazed,
(Nor asked leave of the Sun) by Day as Night.
By whom (as Heavens illustrious Handmaid) raised
Three Kings (or what is more) three Wise men went
Westward to find the worlds true Orient.
18.
Struck with these great concurrences of things,
Symptoms so deadly, unto Death and him;
Feign would he have forgot what fatal strings,
Eternally bind each rebellious limb.
He shook himself, and spread his spacious wings:
Which like two Bosomed sails embrace the dim
Air, with a dismal shade, but all in vain,
Of sturdy Adamant is his strong chain.
19.
While thus Heavens highest counsails, by the low
Foot steps of their Effects, he traced too well,
He tossed his troubled eyes, Embers that glow
Now with new Rage, and wax too hot for Hell.
With his foul claws he fenced his furrowed Brow,
And gave a ghastly shreeke, whose horrid yell
Ran trembling through the hollow vaults of N^ght,
The while his twisted Tail he gnawed for sp^ght.
20.
Yet on the other side, feign would he start
Above his fears, and think it cannot be.
He studies Scripture, strives to sound the heart,
And feel the pulse of every Prophecy.
He knows (but knows not how, or by what Art)
The Heaven expecting Ages, hope to see
A mighty Babe, whose pure, unspotted Birth,
From a chaste Virgin womb, should bless the Earth.
21.
But these vast Mysteries his senses smother,
And Reason (for what is Faith to him?) devour.
How she that is a maid should prove a Mother,
Yet keep inviolate her virgin flower;
How Gods eternal Son should be man's Brother,
Poseth his proudest Intellectual power.
How a pure Spirit should incarnate be,
And life it self, wear Deaths frail Livery.
22.
That the Great Angell-blinding light should shrink
His blaze, to shine in a poor Shepherds eye.
That the unmeasured God so low should sink,
As Prisoner in a few poor Rags to lie.
That from his Mothers Breast he milk should drink,
Who feeds with Nectar Heavens fair family.
That a vile Manger his low Bed should prove,
Who in a Throne of stars Thunders above.
23.
That he whom the Sun serves, should fainely peep
Through clouds of Infant flesh: that he the old
Eternal Word should be a Child, and weep.
That he who made the fire, should fear the cold;
That Heavens high Majesty h^s Court should keep
In a clay-cottage, by each blast controlled.
That Glories self should serve our Griefs, and fears:
And free Eternity, submit to years.
24.
And further, that the Laws eternal Giver,
Should bleed in his own laws obedience:
And to the circumcising Knife deliver
Himself, the forfeit of his slaves offense.
That the unblemisht Lamb, blessed for ever,
Should take the mark of sin, and pain of sense.
These are the knotty Riddles, whose dark doubt
Intangles his lost Thoughts, past getting out.
25.
While new Thoughts boiled in his enraged Breast,
His gloomy Bosoms darkest Character,
Was in his shady forehead seen expressed.
The forehead's shade in Gr^efes expression there,
Is what in sign of joy among the b^est
The faces lightning, or a smile is here.
Those stings of care that his strong Heart opp^est,
A desperate, Oh me, drew from his deep Breast.
26.
Oh me! (thus bellowed he) oh mee^ what great,
Portents before mine eyes their Powers advance?
And serves my purer sight, only to beat
Down my proud Thought, and leave it in a Trance?
Frown I; and can great Nature keep her seat?
And the gay stars lead on their Golden dance?
Can his attempts above st^ll prosperous be,
Auspicious still, in sp^ght of Hell and me?
27.
He has my Heaven (what would he more?) whose bright
And radiant Scepter this bold hand should bear.
And for the never-fading fields of Light.
My fair Inheritance, he confines me here,
To this dark House of shades, horror, and Night,
To draw a long-lived Death, where all my cheer
Is the solemnity my sorrow wears,
That Mankinds Torment waits upon my Tears.
28.
Dark, dusky Man, he needs would single forth,
To make the partner of his own pure ^ay:
And should we Powers of Heaven, Spirits of worth
Bow our bright Heads, before a King of clay?
It shall not be, said I, and clombe the North,
Where never wing of Angel yet made way
What though I m^st my blow? yet I struck high,
And to dare something, is some victory.
29.
Is he not satisfied? means he to wrest
Hell from me too, and sack my Territories?
Vile humane Nature means he not t'invest
(O my despite!) with his divinest Glories?
And rising with rich spoils upon his Breast,
With his fair Triumphs fill all ^uture stories?
Must the bright arms of Heaven, rebuke these eyes?
Mock me, and dazzle my dark Mysteries?
30.
Art thou not Lucifer? he to whom the droves
Of stars, that guild the Morn in charge were given?
The nimblest of the lightning-winged Loves?
The fairest, and the firstborn smile of Heaven?
Look in what Pomp the Mistress Planet moves
Rev'rently circled by the lesser seven,
Such, and so rich, the flames that from thine eyes,
O pressed the common people of the skies.
31.
Ah wretch! what boots thee to cast back thy eyes,
Where dawning hope no beam of comfort shows?
While the reflection of thy forepast joys,
Renders thee double to thy present woes.
Rather make up to thy new miseries,
And meet the mischief that upon thee grows.
If Hell must mourn, Heaven sure shall sympathize
What force cannot effect, fraud shall devise.
32.
And yet whose force fear I? have I so lost
My self? my strength too with my innocence?
Come try who dares, Heaven, Earth, what ere do boast,
A borrowed being, make thy bold defense.
Come thy Creator too, what though it cost
Me yet a second fall? we would try our strengths.
Heaven saw us struggle once, as brave a sight
Earth now should see, and tremble at the sight.
33.
Thus spoke the impatient Prince, and made a pause,
His foul Hags raised their heads, and clapped their hands.
And all the Powers of Hell in full applause
Flourisht their Snakes, and tossed their flaming brands.
We (said the horrid sisters) wait thy laws,
Th'obsequious handmaids of thy high commands.
Be it thy part, Hells mighty Lord, to lay
On us thy dread commands, ours to obey.
34.
What thy Alecto, what these hands can do,
Thou made bold proof upon the brow of Heaven,
Nor should thou bate in pride, because that now,
To these thy sooty Kingdoms thou art driven.
Let Heavens Lord chide above louder then thou
In language of his Thunder, thou art even*
With him below: here thou art Lord alone
Boundless and absolute: Hell is thine own.
35.
If usual wit, and strength will do no good,
Virtues of stones, nor herbs: use stronger charms,
Anger, and love, best hooks of humane blood.
If all fa^le we will put on our proudest Arms,
And pouring on Heavens face the Seas huge flood
Quench his curled fires, we will wake with our Alarmes
Ru^ne, where e're she sleeps at Natures feet;
And crush the world till his wide corners meet.
36.
Replied the proud King, O my Crowns Defense?
Stay of my strong hopes, you of whose brave worth,
The frighted stars took faint experience,
When against the Thunders mouth we marched forth:
Still you are prodigal of your Love's expense
In our great projects, both against Heaven and Earth.
I thank you all, but one must single out,
Cruelty, she alone shall cure my doubt.
37.
Fourth of the cursed knot of Hags is she,
Or rather all the other three in one;
Hells shop of slaughter she does oversee,
And still assist the Execution.
But chiefly there does she delight to be,
Where Hells capacious Cauldron is set on:
And while the black souls boil in their own gore,
To hold them down, and look that none seethe over.
38.
Thr^ce howled the Caves of Night, and thrice the sound,
Thundering upon the banks of those black lakes
Rung, through the hollow vaults of Hell profound:
At last her l^stning Ears the noise o'retakes,
She lifts her sooty lamps, and looking round
A general h^sse, from the whole Tire of snakes
Rebounding, through Hells inmost Cavernes came,
In answer to her formidable Name.
39.
Among all the Palaces in Hells command,
No one so merciless as this of hers.
The Adamantine Doors, for ever stand
Impenetrable, both to prai'rs and Tears,
The walls inexorable steel, no hand
Of Time, or Teeth of hungry Ruin fears.
Their ugly ornaments are the bloody stains,
Of ragged limbs, torn sculls, and dashed our Brains.
40.
There has the purple Vengeance a proud seat,
Whose ever-brandisht Sword is sheathed in blood.
About her Hate, Wrath, War, and slaughter sweat;
Bathing their hot limbs in life's precious flood.
There rude impetuous Rage does storm, and fret:
And there, as Master of this murdering brood,
Swinging a huge Since stands impartial Death,
With endless business almost out of Breath.
41.
For Hangings and for Curtains, all along
The walls, (abominable ornaments!)
Are tools of wrath, Anvills of Torments hung;
Fell Executioners of foul intents,
Nails, hammers, hatchets sharp, and halters strong,
Swords, Spears, with all the fatal Instruments
Of sin, and Death, twice dipped in the dire stains
Of Brothers mutual blood, and Fathers brains.
42.
The Tables furnished with a cursed Feast,
Which Harpyes, with lean Famine feed upon,
Vnfill'd for ever. Here among the rest,
Inhumane Erisi-^thon too makes one;
Tantalus, Atreus, Progne, here are guests:
Wolvish Ly^aon here a place has won.
The cup they drink in is Medusa's scull,
Which mixed with gall and blood they quaffe brim full.
43.
The foul Queens most abhorred Maids of Honor
Medaea, Iezabell, many a meager Witch
With Circe, Scylla, stand to wait upon her.
But her best huswifes are the Parcae, which
Still work for her, and have their wages from her.
They prick a bleeding heart at every stitch.
Her cruel clothes of costly threads they weave,
Which short-cut lives of murdered Infants leave.
44.
The house is hers'd about with a black wood,
Which nods with many a heavy headed tree.
Each flowers a pregnant poison, tried and good,
Each herb a Plague. The winds sighs timed-bee
By a black Fount, which weeps into a flood.
Through the thick shades obscurely might you see
Minotaures, Cyclopses, with a dark drove
Of Dragons, Hydraes, Sphinxes, fill the Grove.
45.
Here Diomed's Horses, Phereus dogs appear,
With the fierce Lions of Therodamas.
Eusiris has his bloody Altar here,
Here Sylla his severest prison has.
The Lestrigonians here their Table rear;
Here strong Procrustes plants his Bed of Brass.
Here cruel Scyron boasts his bloody rocks,
And hateful Schinis his so feared Oaks.
46.
What ever Schemes of Blood, fantastic frames
Of Death Mezentius, or Geryon drew;
Phalaris, Ochus, Ezelinus, names
Mighty in mischief, with dread Nero too,
Here are they all, Here all the swords or flames
Assyrian Tyrants, or Egyptian knew.
Such was the House, so furnished was the Hall,
Whence the fourth Fury, answered Pluto's call.
47.
Scarce to this Monster could the shady King,
The horrid sum of his intentions tell;
But she (swift as the momentary wing
Of lightning, or the words he spoke) left Hell.
She rose, and with her to our world did bring,
Pale proof of her fell presence, The Air too well
With a changed countenance witnest the sight,
And poor fowls intercepted in their flight.
48.
Heaven saw her rise, and saw Hell in the sight.
The field's fair Eyes saw her, and saw no more,
But shut their flowery lids for ever Night,
And Winter strew her way; yea, such a sore
Is she to Nature, that a general fright,
An universal palsy spreading over
The face of things, from her dire eyes had run,
Had not her thick Snakes hid them from the Sun.
49.
Now had the Night's companion from her den,
Where all the busy day she close does ly,
With her soft wing wipt from the brows of men
Day's sweat, and by a gentle Tyranny,
And sweet oppression, kindly cheating them
Of all their cares, tamed the rebellious eye
Of sorrow, with a soft and downy hand,
Sealing all breasts in a Lethaean band.
50.
When the Erinnys her black pineons spread,
And came to Bethlem, where the cruel King
Had now retired himself, and borrowed
His Breast a while from care's unquiet sting.
Such as at Thebes dire feast she showed her head,
Her sulphur-breathed Torches brandishing,
Such to the frighted Palace now she comes,
And with soft feet searches the silent rooms.
51
By Herod -- now was borne
The Scepter, which of old great David swaid.
Whose right by David's image so long worn,
Himself a stranger to, his own had made.
And from the head of Iudahs house quite torn
The Crown, for which upon their necks he laid.
A sad yoke, under which they sighed in vain,
And looking on their lost state sighed again.
52
Up, through the spacious Palace passed she,
To where the Kings proudly-reposed head
(If any can be soft to Tyranny
And selfe-tormenting sin) had a soft bed.
She thinks not fit such he her face should see,
As it is seen by Hell; and seen with dread.
To change her faces style she does devise,
And in a pale Ghost's shape to spare his Eyes.
53
Her self a while she lays a side, and makes
Ready to personate a mortal part.
Joseph the Kings dead Brothers shape she takes,
What he by Nature was, is she by Art.
She comes toth' King and with her cold hand slakes
His Spirits, the Sparks of Life, and chills his heart,
Life's forge; feigned is her voice, and false too, be she said
Her words, sleep'st thou fond man? sleep'st thou?
54
So sleeps a Pilot, whose poor Bark is pressed
With many a mercylesse over mastring wave;
For whom (as dead) the wrathful winds contest,
Which of them deep'st shall dig her watery Grave.
Why do thou let thy brave soul lie suppressed,
In Death-like slumbers; while thy dangers crave
A waking eye and hand? look up and see
The fates ripe, in their great conspiracy.
55
Know thou not how of the Hebrews royal stem
(That old dry stock) a despaired branch is sprung
A most strange Babe! who here concealed by them
In a neglected stable lies, among
Beasts and base straw: Already is the stream
Quite turned the ungrateful Rebels this their young
Master (with voice free as the Trumpe of Fame)
Their new King, and thy Successor proclaim
56
What busy motions, what wild Engines stand
On tiptoe in their giddy Brains? the have fire
Already in their Bosoms; and their hand
Al^eady reaches at a sword: They hire
Poisons to speed thee; yet through all the Land
What one comes to reveal what they conspire?
Go now, make much of these; wage still their wars
And bring home on thy Breast more thanklesse scarrs*
57.
Why did I spend my life, and spill my Blood,
That thy firm hand for ever might sustain
A well-pois'd Scepter? does it now seem good
Thy Brothers blood be-spilt like spent in vain?
Against thy own sons and Brothers thou have stood
In Arms, when lesser cause was to complain:
And now cross Fates a watch about thee keep,
Can thou be careless now? now can thou sleep?
58.
Where art thou man? what cowardly mistake
Of thy great self, has stolen King Herod from thee?
O call thy self home to thy self, wake, wake,
And fence the hanging sword Heaven throws upon thee.
Redeem a worthy wrath, rouse thee, and shake
Thy self into a shape that may become thee.
Be Herod, and thou shall not miss from me
Immortal stings to thy great thoughts, and thee.
59.
So said, her richest, which to her wrist
For a beseeming bracelet she had tied
(A special Worm it was as ever kissed
The foamy lips of Cerberus) she applied
To the Kings Heart, the Snake no sooner hist,
But virtue heard it, and away she hy'd,
Dire flames diffuse themselves through every vein,
This done, Home to her Hell she hy'd amain.
60.
He wakes, and with him (never to sleep) new fears:
His Sweat-bedewed Bed had now betrayed him,
To a vast field of thorns, ten thousand Spears
All pointed in his heart seemed to invade him:
So mighty were th'amazing Characters
With which his feeling Dream had thus dismayed him,
He his own fancy-framed foes defies:
In rage, My arms, give me my arms, he cries.
61.
As when a Pile of food-preparing fire,
The breath of artificial lungs embraves,
The Caldron-prison'd waters straight conspire,
And beat the hot Brass with rebellious waves:
He murmures, and rebukes their bold desire;
The Impatient liquor, frets, and foames, and raves;
Till his o'reflowing pride suppress the flame,
Whence all his high spirits, and hot courage came.
62.
So boyles the fired Herod's blood-swolne breast,
Not to be slakt but by a Sea of blood.
His faithless Crown he feels loose on his Crest,
Which on false Tyrants head never firmly stood.
The worm of jealous envy and unrest,
To which his gnawed heart is the growing food
Makes him impatient of the lingering light.
Hate the sweet peace of all-composing Night.
63.
A Thousand Prophecies that talk strange things,
Had sown of old these doubts in his deep breast.
And now of late came tributary Kings,
Bringing him nothing but new fears from The East,
More deep suspicions, and more deadly stings.
With which his feav'rous cares their cold increast.
And now his dream (Hels firebrand) still more bright,
Showed him his fears, and killed him with the sight.
64.
No sooner therefore shall the Morning see
(Night hangs yet heavy on the lids of Day)
But all his Counselors must summoned be,
To meet their troubled Lord: without delay
Heralds and Messengers immediately
Are sent about, who poasting every way
To th'heads and Officers of every band;
Declare who sends, and what is his command.
65.
Why art thou troubled Herod? what vain fear
Thy blood-revolving Breast to rage does move?
Heavens King, who doffs himself weak flesh to wear,
Comes not to rule in wrath, but serve in love.
Nor would he this thy feared Crown from thee Tear,
But give thee a better with himself above.
Poor jealousy! why should he wish to prey
Upon thy Crown, who gives his own away?
66
Make to thy reason man; and mock thy doubts,
Look how below thy fears their causes are;
Thou art a Soldier Herod; send thy Scouts
See how he is furnished for so feared a war.
What armor does he wear? A few thin clouts.
His Trumpets? tender cries, his men to dare
So much? rude Shepherds. What his steeds? alas
Poor Beasts! a slow Ox, and a simple Ass.
Il fine del libro primo.
On a prayer book sent to Mrs. M. R.
Lo here a little volume, but large book,
(Fear it not, sweet,
It is not hipocrit)
Much larger in it self then in its look.
It is in one rich handful, heaven and all
Heavens royal Hoasts incampt, thus small;
To prove that true schools use to tell,
A thousand Angels in one point can dwell.
It is loves great Artillery,
Which here contracts it self and comes to lie
Close coucht in your white bosom, and from thence
As from a snowy fortress of defense
Against the ghostly foe to take your part:
And fortify the hold of your chaste heart.
It is the Armory of light,
Let constant use but keep it bright,
You Will find it yields
To holy hand, and humble hearts,
More swords and sheilds
Then sin has snares, or hell has darts.
Only be sure,
The hands be pure,
That hold these weapons and the eyes
Those of turtles, chaste, and true,
Wakefull, and wise
Here is a friend shall fight for you,
Hold but this book before your heart,
Let prayer alone to play his part.
But of, the heart
That studyes this high art,
Must be a sure house keeper,
And yet no sleeper.
Dear soul be strong,
Mercy will come ere long,
And bring her bosom full of blessings,
Flowers of never fading graces;
To make immortal dressings.
For worthy souls whose wise embraces
Store up themselves for him, who is alone
The spouse of Virgins, and the Virgins son.
But if the noble Bridegroom when he comes
Shall find the wandering heart from home,
Leaving her chaste abode,
To gad abroad:
Amongst the gay mates of the god of flies
To take her pleasures, and to play
And keep the devils holy day.
To dance in the Sunneshine of some smiling
but beguiling.
Sphere of sweet, and sugared lies,
Some slippery pair,
Of false perhaps as fair
Flattering but forswearing eyes
Doubtless some other heart
Will git the start,
And stepping in before,
Will take possession of the sacred store
Of hidden sweets, and holy joys,
Words which are not heard with ears,
(These tumultous shops of noise)
Effeactuall whispers whose st^^l voice,
The soul it self more feels then hears.
Amorous Languishments, Luminous trances,
Sights which are not seen with eyes,
Spiritual and soul peircing glances.
Whose pure and subtle lightning, ^lies
Home to the heart, and setts the house on fire;
And melts it down in sweet desire:
Yet does not stay
To ask the windows leave, to pass that way.
Delicious deaths, soft exhalations
Of soul dear, and divine annihilations.
A thousand unknown rites
Of joys, and rarifyed delights.
An hundred thousand loves and graces,
And many a misticke thing,
Which the divine embraces
Of the dear spowse of spirits with them will bring.
For which it is no shame,
That dull mortality must not know a name.
Of all this hidden store
Of blessing, and ten thousand more;
If when he come
He find the heart from home,
Doubtless he will unload
Himself some other where,
And power abroad
His precious sweets,
On the fair soul whom first he meets.
O fair! o fortunate! o rich! o dear!
O happy and thrice happy she
Dear silver breasted dove
Who ere she be,
Whose early Love
With winged vows,
Makes haste to meet her morning spowse:
And close with his immortal kisses.
Happy soul who never misses,
To improve that precious hour:
And every day,
Seize her sweet prey;
All fresh and fragrant as he rises,
Dropping with a balmy shower
A delicious dew of spices.
O let that happy soul hold fast
Her heavenly armefull, she shall taste
At once, ten thousand paradises
She shall have power,
To rifle and deflower,
The rich and ros^all spring of those rare sweets,
Which with a swelling bosom there she meets,
Boundless and infinite --
-- bottomless treasures,
Of pure inebriating pleasures,
Happy soul she shall discover,
What joy, what bliss,
How many heavens at once it is,
To have a God become her lover.
On Mr. G. Herberts book entitled the Temple of Sacred Poem, sent to a
Gentlewoman.
KNow you fair, on what you look;
Divinest love lies in this book:
Expecting fire from your eyes,
To kindle this his sacrifice.
When your hands unty these strings,
Think you have an Angel by the wings.
One that gladly will be nigh,
To wait upon each morning figh.
To flutter in the balmy air,
Of your well prefumed prayer.
These white plumes of his heel lend you,
Which every day to heaven will send you:
To take acquaintance of the sphere,
And all the smooth faced kindred there.
And though Herberts name do owe
These devotions, fairest; know
That while I lay them on the shrine
Of your white hand, they are mine.
In memory of the Virtuous and Learned Lady Madre de Teresa that sought an
early Martyrdom.
LOve thou art absolute, sole Lord
Of life and death -- To prove the word,
We need to go to none of all
Those thy old soldiers, stout and tall
Ripe and full, grown, that could reach down,
With strong arms their triumphant crown:
Such as could with lusty breath,
Speak loud unto the face of death
Their great Lords glorious name, to none
Of those whose large breasts built a throne
For love their Lord, glorious and great,
Weell see him take a private seat,
And make his mansion in the mild
And milky soul of a soft child.
Scarce had she learnt to lisp a name
Of Martyr, yet she thinks it shame
Life should so long play with that breath,
Which spent can buy so brave a death.
She never undertook to know,
What death with love should have to do.
Nor has she ere yet understood.
Why to show love she should shed blood,
Yet though she cannot tell you why,
She can love and she can dye.
Scarce had she blood enough, to make
A guilty sword blush for her sake;
Yet has she a heart dares hope to prove,
How much less strong is death then love.
Be love but there, let poor six years,
Be posed with the maturest fears
Man trembles at, we straight shall find
Love knows no nonage, nor the mind.
It Is love, not years, or Limbs, that can
Make the martyr or the man.
Love touched her heart, and lo it beats
High, and burns with such brave heats:
Such thirst to dye, as dare drink up,
A thousand coled deaths in one cup.
Good reason for she breaths all fire,
Her weak breast heaves with strong desire,
Of what she may with fruitless wishes
Seek for, amongst her mothers kisses.
Since it is not to be had at home,
She Will travel to a martyrdom.
No home for her confesses she,
But where she may A martyr be.
She Will to the Moors, and trade with them,
For this unvalued Diadem,
She offers them her dearest breath,
With Christ's name ^nt, in change for death.
She Will bargain with them, and will give
Them God, and teach them how to live
In him, or if they this deny,
For him she will teach them how to dye.
So shall she leave amongst them sown,
Her Lords blood, or at lest her own.
Farewell then all the world, adeiu,
Teresa is no more for you:
Farewell all pleasures, sports and joys,
Never till now esteemed toys.
Farewell what ever dear may be,
Mothers arms, or fathers knee.
Farewell house, and farewell home:
She Is for the Moors and Martyrdom.
Sweet not so fast, Lo thy fair spouse,
Whom thou seek'st with so swift vows
Calls thee back, and bi^s thee como,
To Embrace a milder Martyrdom.
Blessed powers forbid thy tender life,
Should bleed upon a barbarous knife.
Or some base hand have power to race,
Thy Breasts chaste cabinet; and uncase
A soul kept there so sweet. O no,
Wise heaven will never have it so.
Thou art Loves victim, and must dye
A death more mystical and high.
Into Loves hand thou shall let fall,
A still surviving funeral.
His is the dart must make the death
Whose stroke shall taste thy hallowed breath*
A dart thrice dipped in that rich Hame,
Which writes thy spowses radiant name*
Upon the roof of heaven where ay
It shines, and with a sovereign ray,
Beats bright upon the burning faces
Of souls, which in that names sweet graces,
Find everlasting smiles. So rare,
So spiritual, pure and fair,
Must be the immortal instrument,
Upon whose choice point shall be spent,
A life so loved, and that there be
Fit executioners for thee.
The fairest, and the first borne Loves of fire,
Blessed Seraphims shall leave their quire,
And turn Loves soldiers upon thee,
To exercise their Archerie.
O how often shall thou complain
Of a sweet and subtle pain?
Of intolerable joys?
Of a death in which who dies
Loves his death, and dies again,
And would for ever so be slain!
And lives and dies, and knows not why
To live, but that he still may die.
How kindly will thy gentle heart,
Kiss the sweetly -- killing dart:
And close in his embraces keep,
Those delicious wounds that weep
Balsome, to heal themselves with --
-- thus
When these thy deaths so numerous,
Shall all at last dye into one,
And melt thy souls sweet mansion:
Like a soft lump of Incense, hasted
By too hot a fire, and wasted,
Into perfuming clouds. So fast
Shall thou exhale to heaven at last,
In a disolving sigh, and then
O what! ask not the tongues of men,
Angels cannot tell, suffice,
Thy self that feel thine own full joys.
And hold them fast for ever there,
So soon as thou shall first appear.
The moon of maiden stars; thy white
Mistress attended by such bright
Souls as thy shining self, shall come,
And in her first ranks make thee room.
Where among her snowy family,
Immortal wellcomes wait on thee.
O what delight when she shall stand,
And teach thy Lips heaven, with her hand,
On which thou now may to thy wishes,
Heap up thy consecrated kisses.
What joy shall seize thy soul when she
Bending her blessed eyes, on thee
Those second smiles of heaven shall dart,
Her mild rays, through thy melting heart:
Ange^ls thy old friends there shall greet thee,
Glad at their own home now to meet thee.
All thy good works which went before,
And waited for thee at the door:
Shall own thee there: and all in one
Weave a Constellation
Of Crowns, with which the King thy spouse,
Shall build up thy triumphant brows.
All thy old woes shall now smile on thee,
And thy pains set bright upon thee.
All thy sorrows here shall shine,
And thy sufferings be devine.
Tears shall take comfort, and turn Gems.
And wrongs repent to diadems.
Even thy deaths shall live, and new
Dross the soul, which late they slew.
Thy wounds shall blush to such bright scarres,
As keep account of the Lambs wars
Those rare works, where thou shall leave wit,
Loves noble history, with wit
Taught thee by none but him, while here
They feed our souls, shall cloth thine there.
Each heavenly word, by whose hid flame
Our hard hearts shall strike fire, the same
Shall flourish on thy brows; and be
Both fire to us, and flame to thee:
Whose light shall live bright, in thy face
By glory, in our hearts by grace.
Thou shall look round about, and see
Thousand of crowned souls, throng to be
Themselves thy crown, sons of thy nowes:
The Virgin births with which thy spowse
Made fruitful thy fair soul; Go now
And with them all about thee, bow
To him, put on (heel say) put on
My Rosy Love, that thy rich Zone,
Sparkeling with the sacred Hames,
Of thousand souls whose happy names,
Heaven keeps upon thy score thy bright
Life, brought them first to kiss the light.
That kindled them to stars, and so
Thou with the Lamb thy Lord shall go.
And where so e're he sitts his white
Steps, walk with him those ways of Light.
Which who in death would live to see,
Must learn in life to dye like thee.
An Apology for the precedent Hymn.
THus have I back again to thy bright name
Fair sea of holy fires transfused the flame
I took from reading thee it is to thy wrong
I know that in my weak and worthless song
Thou here art set to shine, where thy full day
Scarce dawnes, o pardon, if I dare to say
Thine own dear books are guilty, for from thence
I learnt to know that Love is eloquence
That heavenly maxim gave me heart to try
If what to other tongues is tuned so high.
Thy praise might not speak English too, forbid
(by all thy mysteries that there lie hid;)
Forbid it mighty Love, let no fond hate
Of names and words so far prejudicate
Souls are not Spaniards too, one friendly flood
Of Baptism, blends them all into one blood.
Christ's Faith makes but one body of all souls,
And loves that bodies soul; no Law controules
Our free trafick for heaven we may maintain,
Peace sure with piety, though it dwell in Spain.
What soul soever in any Language can
Speak heaven like hers, is my souls countryman.
O it is not Spanish, but it is heaven she speaks,
It Is heaven that lies in ambush there, and breaks
From thence into the wondering readers breast,
Who finds his warm heart, hatched into a nest
Of little Eagles, and young Loves, whose high
Flights scorn the lazy dust, and things that dye.
There are enough whose draughts as deep as hell
Drink up all Spain in Sack, let my soul swell
With thee strong wine of Love, let others swim
In puddles, we will pledge this Seraphim
Bowls full of richer blood then blush of grape
Was ever guilty of, change we our shape,
My soul, some drink from men to beasts; o then,
Drink we till we prove more, not less then men:
And turn not beasts, but Angels. Let the King,
Me ever into these his Cellars bring;
Where flows such Wine as we can have of none
But him, who trod the Wine Press all alone:
Wine of youths Life, and the sweet deaths of Love,
Wine of immortal mixture, which can prove
Its tincture from the Rosy Nectar, wine
That can exalt weak earth, and so refine
Our dust, that in one draught, Mortality
May drink it self up, and forget to die.
On a Treatise of Charity.
RIse then, immortal maid! Religion rise!
Put on thy self in thine own looks: to our eyes
Be what thy beauties, not our blots, have made thee,
Such as (e're our dark sins to dust betrayed thee)
Heaven set thee down new dressed; when thy bright birth
Shot thee like lightning, to th'astonisht earth.
From the dawn of thy fair eyelids wipe away
Dull mists and melancholy clouds: take day
And thine own beams about thee: bring the best
Of whatsoever perfumed thy Eastern west.
Girt all thy glories to thee: then sit down,
Open this book, fair Queen, and take thy crown.
These learned leaves shall vindicate to thee
Thy holiest, humblest, handmaid Charity.
Sh'l dress thee like thy self, set thee on high
Where thou shall reach all hearts, command each eye*
Lo where I see thy offerings wake, and rise
From the pale dust of that strange sacrifice
Which they themselves were; each one putting on
A majesty that may beseem thy throne.
The holy youth of heaven, whose golden rings
Girt round thy awful Altars, with bright wings
Fanning thy fair locks (which the world believes
As much as sees) shall with these sacred leaves
Trick their tall plumes, and in that garb shall go
If not more glorious, more conspicuous tho.
-- Be it enacted then
By the fair laws of thy firm-pointed pen,
Gods services no longer shall put on
A sluttishnesse, for pure religion:
No longer shall our Churches frighted stones
Lie scattered like the burnt and martyred bones
Of dead Devotion; nor faint marbles weep
In their sad ruins; nor Religion keep
A melancholy mansion in those cold
Vrns. Like Gods Sanctuaries they looked of old:
Now seem they Temples consecrate to none,
Or to a new God Desolation.
No more the hypocrite shall the upright be
Because he is stiff, and will confess no knee:
While others bend their knee, no more shall thou
(Disdainful dust and ashes) bend thy brow;
Nor on Gods Altar cast two scorching eyes
Baked in hot scorn, for a burnt sacrifice:
But (for a Lamb) thy tame and tender heart
New struck by love, still trembling on his dart;
Or (for two Turtle doves) it shall suffice
To bring a pair of meek and humble eyes.
This shall from henceforth be the masculine theme
Pulpits and pens shall sweat in; to ^edeem
Virtue to action, that life-feeding flame
That keeps Religion warm: not swell a name
Of faith, a mountain word, made up of air,
With those dear spoils that wont to dress the fair
And fruitful Charities full breasts (of old)
Turning her out to tremble in the cold.
What can the poor hope from us, when we be
Uncharitable even to Charity.
In Picturam Reverendissimi Episcopi, D. Andrews.
HAec charta monstrat, Fama quem monstrat magis,
Sed and ipsa nec dum fama quem monstrat satis,
Ille, ille totam solus implevit Tubani,
Tot ora solus domuit and famam quoque
Fecit modestam: meant is igneae pater
Agilique radio Lucis aelernae vigil,
Per alta rerum pondera indomito Vagus
Cucurrit Animo, quippe naturam ferox
Exhausit ipsam mill Foelus Artibus,
Et mill Linguis ipse se ingentes procul
Variavit omnes fuitque toti simul
Cognatus orbi: sic sacrum and solidum jubar
Saturumque coelo pectus ad patrios Libens
Porrexit ignes: hac eum (Lector) vides
Haec (ecce) charta O Vtinam and audires quoque
On the Assumption.
Hark she is called, the parting hour is come,
Take thy farewell poor world, heaven must go home.
A piece of heavenly Light purer and brighter
Then the chaste stars, whose choice Lamps come to light her.
While through the crystal orbs clearer then they
She climbes, and makes a far more milky way;
She Is called again, hark how the immortal Dove
Sighs to his silver mate: rise up my Love,
Rise up my fair, my spotless one,
The Winter's past, the rain is gone:
The Spring is come, the Flowers appear,
No sweets since thou art wanting here.
Come away my Love,
Come away my Dove
cast off delay:
The Court of Heaven is come,
To wait upon thee home;
Come away, come away.
She Is called again, and will she go;
When heaven bids come, who can say no?
Heaven calls her, and she must away,
Heaven will not, and she cannot stay.
Go then, go (glorious) on the golden wings
Of the bright youth of Heaven, that sings
Under so sweet a burden: go,
Since thy great Son will have it so:
And while thou go, our song and we,
Will as we may reach after thee.
Hail holy Queen of humble hearts,
We in thy praise will have our parts.
And though thy dearest looks must now be light
To none but the blessed heavens, whose bright
Beholders lost in sweet delight;
Feed for ever their fair sight
With those divinest eyes, which we
And our dark world no more shall see.
Though, our poor joys are parted so,
Yet shall our lips never let go
Thy gracious name, but to the last,
Our Loving song shall hold it fast.
Thy sacred Name shall be
Thy self to us, and we
With holy cares will keep it by us,
We to the last,
Will hold it fast.
And no Assumption shall deny us.
All the sweetest showers,
Of our fairest Flowers,
Will we strew upon it:
Though our sweetness cannot make
It sweeter, they may take
Themselves new sweetness from it.
Mary, men and Angels sing,
Maria Mother of our King.
Live rarest Princess, and may the bright
Crown of an incomparable Light
Embrace thy radiant brows, o may the best
Of everlasting joys bath thy white breast.
Live our chaste love, the holy mirth
Of heaven, and humble pride of Earth:
Live Crown of Women, Queen of men:
Live Mistress of our Song, and when
Our weak desires have done their best;
Sweet Angels come, and sing the rest.
Epitaphium in Dominum Herrisium.
SIste te paulum (viator) ubi Longum Sisti
Nescese erit, huc nempe properare te scias
quocunque properas.
Morae praetium erit
Et Lacrimae,
Si jacere hic scias
Gulielmum
Splendidae Herrisiorum familiae
Splendorem maximum:
Quem cum talem vixisse intelexeris,
Et vixisse tantum;
Discas licet
In quantus spes possit
Assurgere mortalitas,
De quantis cadere.
Quem Infantem, Essexia -- vidit
Quem Iuvenem, Cantabrigiae vidit
Senem, ah infaelix utraque
Quod non vidit.
Qui
Collegii Christi Alumnus,
Aulae Pembrokianae socius,
Vtrique, ingens amoris certamen fuit.
Donec
Dulciss. Lites elusit Deus,
Eumque coelestis Collegii
Cujus semper Alumnus fuit
socium fecit;
Qui and ipse Collegium fuit,
In quo
Musae omnes and gratiae,
Nullibi magis sorores,
Sub praeside religione
In tenacissimum sodalitium coaluere.
Quem Oratoriae Agnovcre.
Quem Poetica Agnovcre.
Quem Vtraque Agnovcre.
Quem Christianum Agnovcre.
Quem Poetam Agnovcre.
Quem Oratorem Agnovcre.
Quem Philosophum Agnovcre.
Quem Omnes Agnovcre.
Qui Fide Superavit.
Qui Spe Superavit.
Qui Charitate Superavit.
Qui Humilitate Superavit.
Qui Mundum Superavit.
Qui Coelum Superavit.
Qui Proximum Superavit.
Qui Seipsum Superavit.
Cujus
Sub verna fron^e-senilis animus,
Sub morum facilitate, severitas virtutis;
Sub plurima indole, pauci anni;
Sub majore modestia, maxima indolesadeo se occuluerunt
ut vitam ejus
Pulchram dixeris and pudicam dissimulationem:
Imo vero and mortem,
Ecce enim in ipso funere
Dissimulari se passus est,
Sub tantillo mar more tantum hospitem,
Eo nimirum majore monumento
quo minore tumulo.
Eo ipso die occubuit quo Ecclesia
Anglicana ad vesperas legit,
Raptus est ne malitia mutaret Intellectun ejus;
Scilicet Id Octobris, Anno S 1631.
An Himne for the Circumcision day of our Lord.
RIse thou first and fairest morning,
Rosy with a double red:
With thine own blush thy cheeks adorning,
And the dear drops this day were shed.
All the purple pride of Laces,
The crimson curtains of thy bed;
Guild thee not with so sweet graces;
Nor sets thee in so rich a red.
Of all the fair cheekt flowers that fill thee,
None so fair thy bosom strowes;
As this modest Maiden Lilly,
Our sins have shamed into a Rose.
Bid the golden god the Sun,
Burnisht in his glorious beams:
Put all his red eyed rubies on,
These Rubies shall put out his eyes.
Let him make poor the purple East,
Rob the rich store her Cabinets keep,
The pure birth of each sparkling nest,
That flaming in their fair bed sleep.
Let him embrace his own bright tresses,
With a new morning made of gems;
And wear in them his wealthy dresses,
Another day of Diadems.
When he has done all he may,
To make himself rich in his rise,
All will be darkness, to the day
That breaks from one of these fair eyes.
And soon the sweet truth shall appear,
Dear Babe e're many days be done:
The Moon shall come to meet thee here,
And leave the long adored Sun.
Thy nobler beauty shall bereave him,
Of all his Eastern Paramours:
His Persian Lovers all shall leave him,
And swear faith to thy sweeter powers.
Nor while they leave him shall they loose the Sun,
But in thy fairest eyes find two for one.
On Hope, By way of Question and Answer, between A. Cowley, and R. Crashaw.
Cowley. HOpe, whose weak being ruined is
Alike, If it succeed, and if it miss.
Whom Ill, and Good does equally confound,
And both the horns of Fates dilemma wound.
Vain shadow! that does vanish quite
Both at full noone, and perfect night.
The Fates have not a possibility
Of blessing thee.
If things then from their ends we happy call,
It Is hope is the most hopeless thing of all.

Crashaw. Dear Hope! Earths dowry, and Heavens debt,
The entity of things that are not yet.
Subt'lest, but surest being! Thou by whom
Our Nothing has a definition.
Fair cloud of fi^e, both shade, and light,
Our life in death, our day in night.
Fates cannot find out a capacity
Of hurting thee.
From thee their thin dilemma with blunt horn
Shrinkes, like the sick Moon at the wholesome morn.

Cowley. Hope, thou bold taster of delight,
Who, in stead of doing so, devour'st it quite.
Thou bring'st us an estate, yet leave us poor,
By clogging it with Legacies before.
The joys, which we entire should wed,
Come deflour'd virgins to our bed.
Good fortunes without gain imported be,
So mighty Custome's paid to thee.
For joy, like Wine kept close does better taste:
If it take air before, its spirits waste.

Crashaw. Thou art Loves Legacy under lock
Of Faith: the steward of our growing stock.
Our Crown Lands lie above, yet each meal brings
A seemly portion for the Sons of Kings.
Nor will the Virgin-joyes we wed
Come less unbroken to our bed,
Because that from the bridal check of Bliss,
Thou thus steal'st down a distant kiss,
Hopes chaste kiss wrongs no more joys maidenhead,
Then Spousall rites prejudge the marriage bed.

Cowley. Hope, Fortunes cheating Lotterie,
Where for one prize an hundred blankes there be.
Fond Archer Hope, who take thine aim so far,
That still, or short, or wide thine arrows are.
Thine empty cloud the eye, it self deceives
With shapes that our own fancy gives:
A cloud, which gilt, and painted now appears,
But must drop presently in tears.
When thy false beams over Reasons light prevail,
By ignes fatus, not North stars we sail.

Crashaw. Fair Hope! our earlier Heaven! by thee
Young Time is taster to Eternity.
The generous wine with age grows stong, not sower;
Nor need we kill thy fruit to smell thy flower.
Thy golden head never hangs down,
Till in the lap of Loves full noone
It falls, and dies: oh no, it melts away
As does the dawne into the day:
As lumpes of Sugar lose themselves, and twine
Their subtle essence with the soul of Wine.

Cowley. Brother of Fear! more gaily clad
The merrier Fool of the two, yet quite as mad.
Sire of Repentance! shield of fond desire,
That blows the Chymicks, and the Lovers fire,
Still leading them insensibly on,
With the strange witchcraft of Anon.
By thee the one does changing Nature through
Her endless Laborinths pursue,
And the other chases woman, while she goes
More ways, and turns, then hunted Nature knows.

Crashaw. Fortune alas above the worlds law wars:
Hope kicks the curled heads of conspiring stars.
Her keele cuts not the waves, where our winds sture,
And Fates whole Lottery is one blanke to her.
Her shafts, and she fly far above,
And forage in the fields of light, and love.
Sweet Hope! kind cheat! fair fallacy! by thee
We are not where, or what we be,
But what, and where we would be: thus art thou
Our absent presence, and our future now.

Crashaw. Faith's Sister! Nurse of fair desire^
Fears Antidote! a wise, and well stayed fire
Tempered 'twixt cold despair, and torrid joy:
Queen Regent in young Loves minority.
Though the vexed Chymick vainly chases
His fugitive gold through all her faces,
And loves more fierce, more fruitless fires assay
One face more fugitive then all they,
True Hope's a glorious Huntresse, and her chase
The God of Nature in the field of Grace.

THE DELIGHTS OF THE MUSES. OR, Other Poems written on several occasions. By
Richard Crashaw, sometimes of Pembroke Hall, and late Fellow of St. P^ters
College in Cambridge.

Mart. Dic mihi quid melius desidiosus agas.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for H. Moseley, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1646.

Musicks Duel.
NOw Westward Sol had spent the richest Beams
Of Noons high Glory, when hard by the streams
Of Tiber, on the scene of a green plat,
Under protection of an Oak; there sat
A sweet Lutes-master: in whose gentle aires
He lost the Days heat, and his own hot cares.
Close in the covert of the leaves there stood
A Nightingale, come from the neighboring wood:
(The sweet inhabitant of each glad Tree,
Their Muse, their Siren. harmless Siren she)
There stood she listening, and did entertain
The Musicks soft report: and mold the same
In her own murmures, that what ever mood
His curious fingers lent, her voice made good:
The man perceived his Rival, and her Art,
Disposed to give the light-foot Lady sport
Awakes his Lute, and against the fight to come
Informs it, in a sweet Praeludium
Of closer strains, and ere the war begin,
He lightly skirmishes on every string
Charged with a flying touch: and streightway she
Carves out her dainty voice as readily,
Into a thousand sweet distinguished Tones,
And reckons up in soft divisions,
Quick volumes of wild Notes; to let him know
By that shrill taste, she could do something too.
His nimble hands instinct then taught each string
A capring cherfulness; and made them sing
To their own dance; now negligently rash
He throws his Arm, and with a long drawn dash
Blends all together; then distinctly tripps
From this to that; then quick returning skipps
And snatches this again, and pauses there.
She measures every measure, every where
Meets art with art; sometimes as if in doubt
Not perfect yet, and fearing to be out
Trayles her plain Ditty in one long-spun note,
Through the sleeke passage of her open throat:
A clear unwrinckled song, then does she point it
With tender accents, and severely joint it
By short diminutives, that being reared
In controverting warbles evenly shared,
With her sweet self she wrangles; He amazed
That from so small a channel should be raised
The torrent of a voice, whose melody
Could melt into such sweet variety
Strains higher yet; that tickled with rare art
The tatling strings (each breathing in his part)
Most kindly do fall out; the grumbling Base
In surly groans disdaines the Trebles Grace.
The high-perch't treble chirps at this, and chides,
Until his finger (Moderatour) hides
And closes the sweet quarrel, rowsing all
Hoarce, shrill, at once; as when the Trumpets call
Hot Mars to the Harvest of Deaths field, and woo
Men's hearts into their hands; this lesson too
She gives him back; her supple Breast thrills out
Sharp Aires, and staggers in a warbling doubt
Of dallying sweetness, hovers ore her skill,
And folds in waved notes with a trembling bill,
The plyant Series of her slippery song.
Then starts she suddenly into a Throng
Of short thick sobs, whose thundering volleyes float,
And roll themselves over her lubricke throat
In panting murmurs, stilled out of her Breast
That ever-bubling spring; the sugared Nest
Of her delicious soul, that there does lie
Bathing in streams of liquid Melody;
Musicks best seed-plot, when in ripend Aires
A Golden-headed-Harvest fairly reares
His Honey-dropping ^cops, plowed by her breath
Which there reciprocally labors.
In that sweet soil it seems a holy quire
Founded to the Name of great Apollo's lyre,
Whose sylver-roofe rings with the sprightly notes
Of sweet-lipp'd Angell-Imps, that swill their throats
In cream of Morning Helicon, and then
Prefer soft Anthems to the Ears of men.
To woo them from their Beds, still murmuring
That men can sleep while they their Matten^ sing:
(Most divine service) whose so early^ lay,
Prevents the Eye-lidds of the blushing day.
There might you hear her kindle her soft voice,
In the close murmur of a sparkling noise.
And lay the groundwork of her hopeful song,
Still keeping in the forward stream, so long^
Till a sweet whirlwind (striving to get o^t)
Heaves her soft Bosom, wan^ers round about,
And makes a pretty Earthquake in her Breast,
Till the fledged Notes at length forsake their Nect;
Fluttering in wanton shoales, and to the Sky
Winged with their own wild Eccho's pra^ling fly.
She opes the floodgate, and lets loos^ a Tide
Of streaming sweetness, which in state does rid^
On the waved back of every swelling strain,
Rising and falling in a pompous tra^ne.
And while she thus discharges a shrill peale
Of flashing Aires; she qualifi^s their zeal
With the cool Epode of a grave Noat,
Thus high, thus low, as if her silver throat
Would reach the brazen voice of warr's hoarce Bird;
Her little soul is ravished: and so poured
Into loose ecstasies, that she is placed
Above her self, Musicks Enthusiast
Shame now and anger mixed a double stain
In the Musicians face; yet once again
(Mistress) I come; now reach a strain my Lu^e
Above her mock, or be for ever mute.
Or tune a song of victory to me,
Or to thy self, sing thine own Obsequie;
So said, his hands sprightly as fire he ^lings,
And with a quavering coyness tastes the strings.
The sweet-lip't sisters musically frighted,
Singing their fears are fearfully delighted.
Trembling as when Appollo's golden hairs
Are fan'd and frizled, in the wanton airs
Of his own breath: which married to his lyre
Does tune the Spbaeares, and make Heavens self look higher
From this to that, from that to this he flies
Feels Musicks pulse in all her Arteryes,
Caught in a net which the^e Appollo spreads,
His fingers struggle with the vocal threads,
Following those little rills, he sinkes into
A Sea of Helicon; his hand does go
Those parts of sweetness which with Nectar drop,
Softer then that which pants in Hebe's cup.
The humourous strings expound his learned touch,
By various Glosses; now they seem to grutch,
And murmur in a buzzing dinne, then g^ngle
In shrill tongued accents: striving to be single^
Every smooth turn, every delicious stroke
Gives life to some new Grace; thus does h'invoke
Sweetness by all her Names; thus, bravely thus
(Fraught with a fury so harmonious)
The Lutes light Genius now does proudly rise,
Heaved on the surges of swollen Rapsodyes.
Whose flourish (Meteor-like) does curle the air
With flash of high-borne fancyes: here and there
Dancing in lofty measures, and anon
Creeps on the soft touch of a tender tone:
Whose trembling murmurs melting in wild aires
Runs to and fro, complaining his sweet cares
Because those precious mysteryes that dwell,
In musick's ravished soul he dare not tell,
But whisper to the world: thus do they vary
Each string his Note, as if they meant to carry
Their Masters blessed soul (snatched out at his Ears
By a strong Ecstasy) through all the sphaeares
Of Musicks heaven; and seat it there on high
In the Empyraeum of pure Harmony.
At length (after so long, so loud a strife
Of all the strings, still breathing the best life
Of blessed variety attending on
His fingers fairest revolution
In many a sweet rise, many as sweet a fall)
A full-mouth Diapason swallows all.
This done, he lists what she would say to this,
And she although her Breath's late exercise
Had dealt too roughly with her tender throat,
Yet summons all her sweet powers for a Noate
Alas! in vain! for while (sweet soul) she tryes
To measure all those wild diversities
Of chatt'ring stringes, by the small size of one
Poor simple voice, raised in a Natural Tone;
She fails, and failing grieves, and grieving dies*
She dies: and leaves her life the Victous prise,
Falling upon his Lute; o fit to have
(That lived so sweetly) dead, so sweet a Grave!
Principi recens natae omen maternae indolis.
CResce, o dulcibus imputanda Divis,
O cresce, and propera, puella a Princeps,
In matris propera a venire parts.
Et cum par breve fulminum minorum,
Illin^ Carolus, and Iucobus inde,
In patris faciles subire famam,
Ducent fata furoribus decoris;
Cum terror sacer, Anglicique magnum
Murmur nominis increpabit omnem
Late Bosperon, Ottomanicasque
Non picto quatiet tremore Lunas;
Te tunc altera, nec timenda paci,
Poscent praelia. Tu potens pudici
Vibratrix ocuci, pios in hosts
Late dulcia fata dissipabis.
O cum flostenet ille, qui recenti
Pressus sidere jam sub or a ludit,
Olim fortior omne cuspidatos
Evolvet latus aureum per ignes;
Quique imbellis adhuc, adultus olim,
Puris expatiabitur genarum
Campis imperiosior Cupido;
O quam certa superbiore penna
Ibunt spicula, melleaeque mor^es,
Exultantibus hinc and inde turmis,
Quoquo jusseris, impigre volabunt!
O quot corda calentium deorum
De te vulnera delicata descent
O quot pectora Principum magistris
Fient molle negotium sagittis!
Nam quae non poteris per arma ferri,
Cui matris sinus atque utrumque sidus
Magnorum patet officina Amorum?
Hinc sumas licet, o puella Princeps,
Quantacunque opus est tibi pharetna.
Centum sum Cupidines ab uno
Matris lumine, Gratiasque ceutum,
Et centum Veneres: adhuc manebunt
Centum mill Cupidines; manebunt
Ter centum Veneresque Gratiaeque
Puro font superstites per aevum.
Out of Virgil, In the praise of the Spring.
ALL Trees, all leavy Groves confess the Spring
Their gentlest friend, then, then the lands begin
To swell with forward pride, and seed desire
To generation; Heavens Almighty Sire
Melts on the Bosom of his Love, and powers
Himself into her lap in fruitful showers.
And by a soft insinuation, mixed
With earths la^ge Mass, does cherish and assist
Her weak conceptions; No loan shade, but rings
With chatting Birds, delicious murmurings.
Then Venus mild instinct (at set times) yields
The Herds to kindly meetings, then the fields
(Quick with warm Zephires lively breath) lay forth
Their pregnant Bosoms in a fragrant Birth.
Each body's plump and jucy, all things full
Of supple moisture: no coy twig but will
Trust his beloved bosom to the Sun
(Grown lusty now;) No Vine so weak and young
That fears the foul-mouthed Auster, or those storms
That the Southwest-wind hurries in his Arms,
But hasts her forward Blossoms, and lays out
Freely lays out her leaves: Nor do I doubt
But when the world first out of Chaos sprang
So smiled the Days, and so the tenor ran
Of their felicity. A spring was there,
An everlasting spring, the jolly year
Led round in his great circle; No winds Breath
As then did smell of Winter, or of Death.
When Life's sweet Light first shone on Beasts, and when
From their hard Mother Earth, sprang hardy men,
When Beasts took up their lodging in the Wood,
Stars in their higher Chambers: never could
The tender growth of things endure the sense
Of such a change, but that the Heavens Indulgence
Kindly supplies sick Nature, and does mold
A sweetly tempered mean, nor hot nor cold.
With a Picture sent to a Friend.
I Paint so ill, my piece had need to be
Painted again by some good Poesy.
I write so ill, my slender Line is scarce
So much as th'Picture of a well-lim'd verse:
Yet may the love I send be true, though I
Send nor true Picture, nor true Poesy.
Both which away, I should not need to fear,
My Love, or Feigned or painted should appear.
In praise of Lessius his rule of health.
Go now with some dareing drugg,
Bait thy disease, and while they tugg
Thou to maintain their cruel strife,
Spend the dear treasure of thy life:
Go take physic, dote upon
Some bigg-named composition,
The oraculous doctors mistick bills,
Certain hard words made into pills;
And what at length shall get by these?
Only a costlyer disease.
Go poor man think what shall be,
Remedy against thy remedy.
That which makes us have no need
Of Physic that's Physic indeed.
Hark hither, Reader, would thou see
Nature her own Physician be.
Would see a man all, his own wealth,
His own Physic, his own health?
A man whose sober soul can tell,
How to wear her garments well?
Her garments that upon her sit,
As garments should do close and fit?
A well clothed soul that's not oppressed,
Nor choakt with what she should be dressed?
A soul shearhed in a crystal shrine,
Through which all her bright features shine?
As when a piece of wanton lawne,
A thin aiereall veil is drawn
Over beauties face, seeming to hide
More sweetly shows the blush'ng bride.
A soul whose intelectuall beams
No mistes do mask no lazy steames?
A happy soul that all the way,
To heaven, has a summers day?
Would thou see a man whose well warmed blood,
Bathes him in a genuine flood?
A man whose tuned humors be,
A set of rarest harmony?
Would see blithe looks, fresh cheeks beguile
Age, would see December smile?
Would see a nest of Roses grow
In a bed of reverend snow?
Warm thoughts free spirits, flattering
Winters self into a spring?
In sum, would see a man that can
Live to be old and still a man?
The beginning of Helidorus.
THe smiling Morn had newly wak't the Day,
And tipped the Mountains in a tender ray:
When on a hill (whose high Imperious brow
Looks down, and sees the humble Nile below
Lick his proud feet, and have into the seas
Through the great mouth that's named from Hercules)
A band of men, rough as the Arms thy wore
Looked round, first to the sea, then to the shore.
The shore that showed them what the sea denied,
Hope of a prey. There to the maine land tied
A ship they saw, no men she had; yet pressed
Appeared with other lading, for her breast
Deep in the groaning waters wallowed
Up to the third Ring; over the shore was spread
Death's purple triumph, on the blushing ground
Life's late forsaken houses all lay drowned
In their own bloods dear deluge some new dead,
Some panting in their yet warm ruins bled:
While their affrighted souls, now winged for flight
Lent them the last flash of her glimmering light.
Those yet fresh streams which crawled every where
Showed, that stern war had newly bathed him there:
Nor did the face of this disaster show
Marks of a fight alone, but feasting too,
A miserable and a monstrous feast,
Where hungry war had made himself a Guest:
And coming late had eat up Guests and all,
Who proved the feast to their own funeral, etc.
Out of the Greek Cupid's Crier.
LOve is lost, nor can his Mother
Her little fugitive discover:
She seeks, she sighs, but no where spies him;
Love is lost; and thus she cries him.
O yes! if any happy eye,
This roaving wanton shall descry:
Let the finder surely know
Mine is the wagge; It Is I that owe
The winged wanderer, and that none
May think his labor vainly gone,
The glad descryer shall not miss,
To taste the Nectar of a kiss
From Venus lips. But as for him
That brings him to me, he shall swim
In riper joys: more shall be his
( Venus assures him) then a kiss;
But least your eye discerning slide
These marks may be your judgments guide
His skin as with a fiery blushing
High-colour'd is; His eyes still flushing
With nimble flames, and though his mind
Be never so cursed, his Tongue is kind:
For never were his words in ought
Found the pure issue of his thought.
The working Bees soft melting Gold,
That which their waxen Mines enfold,
Flow not so sweet as do the Tones
Of his tuned accents; but if once
His anger kindle, presently
It boyles out into cruelty,
And fraud: He makes poor mortals hurts
The objects of his cruel sports.
With dainty curles his froward face
Is crowned about; But o what place,
What farthest nooke of lowest Hell
Feels not the strength, the reaching spell
Of his small hand? Yet not so small
As it is powerful therewithal.
Though bare his skin, his mind he covers,
And like a saucy Bird he hovers
With wanton wing, now here, now there,
'Bout men and women, nor will spare
Till at length he perching rest,
In the closet of their breast.
His weapon is a little Bow,
Yet such a one as ( Jove knows how)
Never suffered, yet his little Arrow,
Of Heavens highest Arches to fall narrow.
The Gold that on his Quiver smiles,
Deceives men's fears with flattering wiles.
But o (too well my wounds can tell)
With bitter shafts it is sauc't too well.
He is all cruel, cruel all;
His Torch Imperious though but small
Makes the Sun (of flames the fire)
Worse then Sunburned in his fire.
Wheresoever you chance to find him
Cease him, bring him, (but first bind him)
Pity not him, but fear thy self
Though thou see the crafty Else,
Tell down his Silver-drops unto thee,
They Are counterfeit, and will undo thee.
With baited smiles if he display
His ^awning cheeks, look not that way
If he offer sugared kisses,
Start, and say, The Serpent hisses.
Draw him, drag him, though he pray
Woo, entreat, and crying say
Prithee, sweet now let me go,
Here Is my Quiver Shafts and Bow,
I Will give thee all, take all, take heed
Lest his kindness make thee bleed.
What e're it be Love offers, still presume
That though it shines, it is fire and will consume.
HIgh mounted on an Ant Nanus the tall
Was thrown alas, and got a deadly fall
Under the unruly Beasts proud feet he lies
All torn; with much ado yet ere he dies,
He strains these words; Base Envy, do, laugh on.
Thus did I fall, and thus fell Phaethon.
Upon Venus putting on Mars his Arms.
WHat? Mars his sword? fair Cytherea say,
Why art thou armed so desperately to day?
Mars thou have beaten naked, and o then
What need'st thou put on arms against poor men?
Upon the same.
PAllas saw Venus armed, and straight she cried,
Come if thou dare, thus, thus let us be tried.
Why fool! says Venus, thus provok'st thou me,
That being nak't, thou know could conquer thee?
In Senerissimae Reginae partum hyemalem.
SErta, puer: (quis nunc flores non praebeat hortus?)
^exe mihi facili pollice serta, puer.
Quid tu nescio quos narras mihi, stulte, Decembres?
Quid mihi cum nivibus? damihi serta, puer.
Nix? and byems? non est nostras quid tale per oras;
Non est: vel si sit, non tamen esse potest.
Ver agitur: quaecunque trucem dat larva Decembrem,
Quid fera cunque fremant frigora, ver agitur.
Nonne vides quali se palmite regia vitis
Prodit, and in sacris quae sedet uvajugis?
Tam laetis quae bruma solet ridere racemis?
Quas hyemis pingit purpura tanta genas?
O Maria! O divum soboles, genitrixque Deorum!
Siccine nostra tuus tempora ludus erunt?
Siccine tu cum vere tuo nihil horrida brumae
Sydera, nil madidos sola morare notos?
Siccine sub medi^ poterunt tua surgere brum^,
Atque suas solum lilia nosse nives?
Ergo vel invitis nivibus, frendentibus Austris,
Nostra novis poterunt regna tumere rosis?
O bona turbatrix anni, quae limite noto
Tempora sub signis non sinis ire suis
O pia praedatrix hyemis, quae tristia mundi
Murmura tam dulci sub ditione tenes!
Perge precor nostris vim pulchram far Calendis:
Perge precor menses sic numerare tuos.
Perge intempestiva utque importuna videri;
Inque uteri titulos sic rape cuncta tui.
Sit nobis sit saepe hyemes sic cernere nostras
Exhaeredatas floribus ire tuis.
Saepe sit has vernas hyemes Maiosque Decembres,
Has per te roseas saepe videre nives.
Altera gens varium per sydera computet annum,
Atque suos ducant per ^aga signa dies.
Nos deceat nimiis tantum permittere nimbis?
Tempora tam tetricas far Britanna vices?
Quin nosirum tibi nos omnem donabimus annum:
In partus omnem expende, Maria, tuos.
Sit tuus ille uterus nostri bonus arbiter anni:
Tempus and in titulos transeat omne tuos.
Namquae alia indueret tam dulcia nomina mensis?
Aut qua tam posset candidus ire toga?
Hanc laurum Ianus sibi vertice vellet utroque,
Hanc sibi vel tota Chloride Majus emet.
Tota suam (vere expulso) respublica florum
Reginam cuperent te, sobolemve tuam.
O bona sors anni, cum cuncti ex ordine menses
Hic mihi Carolides, hic Marianus erit!
Upon Bishop Andrews his Picture before his Sermons.
THis reverend shadow cast that setting Sun,
Whose glorious course through our Horrizon run,
Left the dim face of this dull Hemisphaeare,
All one great eye, all drowned in one great Tear.
Whose fair illustrious soul, led his free thought
Through Learnings Universe, and (vainly) sought
Room for her spacious self, until at length
She found the way home, with an holy strength
Snathc't her self hence, to Heaven: filled a bright place,
Among those immortal fires, and on the face
Of her great maker fixed her flaming eye,
There still to read true pure divinity.
And now that grave aspect has deigned to shrink
Into this less appearance; If you think,
It Is but a dead face, art does here bequeath:
Look on the following leaves, and see him breath.
Ad Reginam.
ET vero jam tempus erat tibi, maxima Matter,
Dulcibus his oculis accelerare diem:
Tempus erat, ne qua tibi basia blanda vacarent;
Sarcina ne collo sit minus apta tuo.
Scilicet ille tuus, timor and spes ille suorum,
Quo primumes felix pignore facta parens,
Ille ferox iras jam nunc meditatur and enses;
Iam patris magis est, jam magis ille suus.
Indolis O stimulos! Vix dum illi transiit infans;
Iamque sibi impatiens arripit ille virum.
Improbus ille suis adeo negat ire sub annis:
Iam nondum puer est, major and est puero,
Si quis in aulaeis pictas animatus in iras
Stat leo, quem docta cuspide lusit acus,
Hostis (io!) est; neque enim ille alium dignabitur hostem;
Nempe decet tantus non minor ira manus.
Tunc hasta gravis adversum furit; hasta bacillum est:
Mox falsum vero vulnere pectus hiat.
Stat leo, ceu stupeat tali been fixus ab host;
Ceu quid in his oculis vel timeat vel amet,
Tam torvum, tam dulce micane: nescire ^atetur
Mars ne sub his oculis esset, an esset Amor.
Quippe illic Mars est. sed qui been possit amari;
Est and Amor certe, sed metuendus Amor:
Talis Amor, talis Mars est ibi cernere; qualis
Seu puer hic esset, sive vir ille deus.
Hic tibi jam scitus succedit in oscula fratris,
Res (ecce!) in lusus non operosa tuos.
Basia jam veniant tua quatacunque caterva;
Iam quocunque tuus murmr ludat amor.
En! Tibi materies tenera and tractabilis hic est:
Hic ad blanditias est tibi cera satis.
Salve infans, tot basiolis, molle argumentum,
Maternis labiis dulce negotiolum,
O salve! Nam te nato, puer aur^e, natus
Et Carolo and Mariae Tertius est oculus.
Out of Martial.
Four Teeth thou had that ranck'd in goodly state
Kept thy Mouths Gate.
The first blast of thy cough left two alone,
The second, none.
This last cough Aelia, cought out all thy fear,
Thou Have left the third cough now no business here.
Out of the Italian. A Song.
To thy Lover
Dear, discover
That sweet blush of thine that shameth
(When those Roses
It discloses)
All the flowers that Nature names.
In free Air,
Flow thy Hair;
That no more Summers best dresses,
Be beholden
For their Golden
Locks, to Phoebus flaming Tresses.
O deliver
Love his Quiver,
From thy Eyes he shoots his Arrows,
Where Apollo
Cannot follow:
Featherd with his Mothers Sparrowes.
O envy not
(That we dye not)
Those dear lips whose door encloses
All the Graces
In their places,
Brother Pearls, and sister Roses.
From these treasures
Of ripe pleasures
One bright smile to cle^re the weather.
Earth and Heaven
Thus made even,
Both will he good friends together.
The air does woo thee;
Winds cling to thee,
Might a word once fly from out thee*
Storm and Thunder
Would sit under,
And keep silence round about Thee.
But if Natures
Common Creatures,
So dear Glories dare not borrow:
Yet thy Beauty
Owes a Duty,
To my loving, lingering sorrow.
When to end me
Death shall send me
All his Terrors to affright me:
Thine eyes Graces,
Guild their faces,
And those Terrors shall delight me*
When my dying
Life is flying;
Those sweet Aires that often slew me;
Shall revive me,
Or reprive me,
And to many Deaths renew me.
Out of the Italian.
LOve now no fire has left him,
We two betwixt us have divided it.
Your Eyes the Light has r^st him.
The heat commanding in my Heart does sit,
O! that poor Love be not for ever spoiled,
Let my Heat to your Light be reconciled.
So shall these flames, whose worth
Now all obscured lies
(Dressed in those Beams) start forth
And dance before your eyes.
Or else partake my flames
(I care not whither)
And so in mutual Names
Of Love, burn both together.
Out of the Italian.
WOuld any one the true cause find
How Love came nak't, a Boy, and blind?
It Is this; listening one day too long,
To the Sirens in my Mistress Song,
The ecstasy of a delight
So much o're-mastring all his might,
To that one Sense, made all else thrall,
And so he lost his Clothes, eyes, heart and all.
In faciem Augustiff. Regis a morbillis integram.
MVsaredt; vocat alma parens Academia: Noster
Enredit, ore suo noster Apollo redit.
Vultus adhuc suus, and vultu sua purpura tantum
Vivit, and admixtas pergit amare nives.
Tune illas violare genas? tune illa profanis,
Morbe ferox, tantas ire per or a notis?
Tu Phoebi faciem tentas, vanissime? Nostra
Nee Phoebe maculas novit habere suas.
Ipsa sui vindex facies morbum indignatur;
Ipsa sedet radiis o been tuta suis:
Quippe illic deus est, coelumque and sanctius astrum;
Quippe sub his totus ridet Apollo genis.
Quod facie Rex tutus erat, quod caetera tactus:
Hinc hominem Rex est fassus, and inde deum.
On the Frontispiece of Isaacsons Chronology explained.
IF with dictinctive Eye, and Mind, you look
Upon the Front, you see more then one Book*
Creation is Gods Book, wherein he writ
Each Creature, as a Letter filling it.
History is Creations Book; which shows
To what effects the Series of it goes.
Chronologie's the Book of History, and bears
The just account of Days, Months, and Years*
But Resurrection, in a Later Press,
And New Edition, is the sum of these.
The Language of these Books had all been one,
Had not the Aspiring Tower of Babylon
Confused the Tongues, and in a distance hurled
As far the speech, as men, oth' new filled world.
Set then your eyes in method, and behold
Times emblem, Saturn; who, when store of Gold
Coined the first age, Devoured that Birth, he feared;
Till History, Times eldest Child appeared;
And Phoenix-like, in spite of Saturnes rage,
Forced from her Ashes, Heirs in every age.
From the rising Sun, obtaining by just Suit,
A Springs Engender, and an Autumnes Fruit.
Who in those Volumes at her motion penned,
Unto Creations Alpha does extend.
Again ascend, and view Chronology,
By Optic Skill pulling far History
Nearer; whose Hand the piercing Eagles Eye
Strengthens, to bring remotest Objects nigh.
Under whose Feet, you see the Setting Sun,
From the dark Gnomon, over her Volumes run,
Drowned in eternal Night, never to rise;
Till Resurrection, show it to the eyes
Of Earth-worne men; and her shrill Trumpets sound
Affright the Bones of Mortals from the ground.
The Columns both are crowned with either Sphere,
To show Chronology and History bear,
No other Culmen; then the double Art,
Astronomy, Geography, impart.
Or Thus.
LEt hoary Time's vast Bowels be the Grave
To what his Bowels birth and being gave;
Let Nature die, ( Phoenix-like) from death
Revived Nature take a second breath;
If on Times right hand, s^t fai^e History;
If, from the seed of empty Ruin, she
Can raise so fair an Harvest: Let Her be
Never so far distant, yet Chronology
(Sharp sighted as the Eagles eye, that can
Out-stare the broad-beam'd Days Meridian)
Will have a Perspicill to find her out,
And, through the Night of error and dark doubt*
Discern the Dawne of Truth's eternal ray,
As when the rosy Morn budds into Day.
Now that Time's Empire might be amply filled*
Babels bold Artists strive (below) to build
Ruin a Temple; on whose fruitful fall
History reares her Pyramids more tall
Then were the Egyptian (by the life, the^e give,
The Egyptian Pyramids themselves must live:)
On these she lifts the World; and on their base
Shows the two terms and limits of Time's race:
That, the Creation is; the Judgment, this;
That, the World's Morning, this her Midnight is.
An Epitaph Upon Mr. Ashton a conformable Citizen.
THe modest front of this small floor
Believe me, Reader can say more
Then many a braver Marble can,
Here lies a truly honest man.
One whose Conscience was a thing,
That troubled neither Church nor King.
One of those few that in this Town,
Honor all Preachers; hear their own.
Sermons he heard, yet not so many
As left no time to practice any.
He heard them reverendly, and then
His practice preached them over again.
His Parlour-Sermons rather were.
Those to the Eye, then to the Ear.
His prayers took their price and strength
Not from the lowdnesse, nor the length.
He was a Protestant at home,
Not only in despite of Rome.
He loved his Father; yet his zeal
Tore not off his Mothers veil.
To the Church he did allow her Dress,
True Beauty, to true Holiness.
Peace, which he loved in Life, did lend
Her hand to bring him to his end;
When Age and Death called for the score,
No surfets were to reckon for.
Death tore not (therefore) but sans strife
Gently untwin'd his thread of Life.
What remains then, but that Thou
Write these lines, Reader, in thy Brow,
And by his fair Examples light,
Burn in thy Imitation bright.
So while these Lines can but bequeath
A Life perhaps unto his Death.
His better Epitaph shall be,
His Life still kept alive in Thee.
Rex Redux.
ILle redit, redit. Hoc populi bona murmura vol^unt;
Publicus hoc (audin'?) plausus ad astra refert:
Hoc omn^ sedet in vultu commune serenum;
Omnibus hinc una est laetitiae facies.
Rex noster, lux nostra redit; redeuntis ad ora
Aridet totis Anglia laeta genis:
Quisque suos oculos oculis accendit ab istis;
Atque novum sacro sumit ab ore diem.
Forte roges tanto quae digna pericula plausu
Evadat Carolus, quae mala, quosve metus;
Anne perrerati male fida volumina ponti
Ausa illum terris pene negare suis:
Hospitis an nimii rurcus sibi conscia, tellus
Vix been speratum reddat Ibera caput.
Nil horum; nec enim male fida volumina ponti
Aut sacrum tellus vidi^ Ibera caput.
Verus amor tamen haec sibi falsa pericula fingit:
(Falsa peric'la solet fingere verus amor)
At Carolo qui falsa timet, nec vera timeret:
(Vera peric'la solet temnere verus amor)
Illi falsa timens, sibi vera pericula temnens,
Non solum est fidus, sed quoque fortis amor.
Interea nostri satis ille est causa triumphi:
Et satis (ah!) nostri causa doloris erat.
Causa doloris erat Carolus, sospes licet esset;
Anglia quod saltem discere posset, Abest.
Et satis est nostri Carolus nunc causa triumphi;
Dicere quod saltem possumus, Ille redit.
Out of Catullus,
COme and let us live my Dear,
Let us love and never fear,
What the sowrest Fathers say:
Brightest Sol that dies to day
Lives again as blithe to morrow,
But if we dark sons of sorrow
Set; o then, how long a Night
Shuts the Eyes of our short light!
Then let amorous kisses dwell
On our lips, begin and tell
A Thousand, and a Hundred score
An Hundred, and a Thousand more,
Till another Thousand smother
That, and that wipe of another.
Thus at last when we have numbered
Many a Thousand, many a Hundred;
We Will confound the reckoning quite,
And lose our selves in wild delight:
While our joys so multiply,
As shall mock the envious eye,
Ad Principem nondum natum.
NAscere nunc; o nunc! quid enim, puer alme, moraris?
Nulla tibi dederit dulcior hora diem.
Ergone tot tardos ( o lent!) morabere menses?
Rex redit. Ipse veni, and dic bone, Gratus ades.
Nam quid Ave nostrum? quid nostri verba triumphi?
Vagitu melius dixeris ista tuo.
At maneas tamen: and nobis nova causa triumphi
Sic demum fueris; nec nova causa tamen:
Nam, quoties Carolo novus aut nova nascitur infans,
Revera toties Carolus ipse redit.
Wishes. To his (supposed) Mistress.
WHo ere she be,
That not impossible she,
That shall command my heart and me;
Where ere she lie,
Locked up from mortal Eye,
In shady leaves of Destiny:
Till that ripe Birth
Of studied fate stand forth,
And teach her fair steps to our Earth;
Till that Divine
Idaea, take a shrine
Of Crystal flesh, through which to shine:
Meet you her my wishes,
Be speak her to my blisses,
And be ye called my absent kisses.
I wish her Beauty,
That owes not all his Duty
To gaudy Tire, or glistring shoo-ty.
Something more than
Taffata or Tissew can,
Or rampant feather, or rich fan.
More then the spoil
Of shop, or silkewormes Toil
Or a bought blush, or a set smile.
A face that's best
By its own beauty dressed,
And can alone command the rest.
A face made up
Out of no other shop,
Then what natures white hand sets open.
A cheek where Youth,
And Blood, with Pen of Truth
Write, what the Reader sweetly ru'th.
A Cheek where grows
More then a Morning Rose:
Which to no Box his being owes*
Lips, where all Day
A lovers kiss may play,
Yet carry nothing thence away.
Looks that oppress
Their richest Tires but dress
And cloth their simplest Nakedness.
Eyes, that displaces
The Neighbor Diamond, and out faces
That Sunshine by their own sweet Graces.
Tresses, that wear
Jewels, but to declare
How much themselves more precious are.
Whose native Ray,
Can tame the wanton Day
Of Gems, that in their bright shades play.
Each Ruby there,
Or Pearl that dare appear,
Be its own blush, be its own Tea^e.
A well tamed Heart,
For whose more noble smart,
Love may be long choosing a Dart.
Eyes, that bestow
Full quivers on loves Bow;
Yet pay less Arrows then they owe.
Smiles, that can warm
The blood, yet teach a charm,
That Chastity shall take no harm*
Blushes, that bin
The burnish of no sin,
Nor flames of ought too hot within.
Joys, that confess,
Virtue their Mistress,
And have no other head to dress.
Fears, fond and flight,
As the coy Brides, when Night
First does that longing lover right.
Tears, quickly fled,
And vain, as those are shed
For a dying Maydenhead.
Days, that need borrow,
No part of their good Morrow,
From a ^ore spent night of sorrow.
Days, that in spite
Of Darkness, by the Light
Of a clear mind are Day all Night.
Nights, sweet as they,
Made short by lovers play,
Yet long by the absence of the Day.
Life, that dares send,
A challenge to his end,
And when it comes say Welcome Friend.
Sydnaean showers
Of sweet discourse, whose powers
Can Crown old Winters head with flowers,
Soft silken Hours,
Open suns; shady Bowers,
Bove all; Nothing within that lowers.
What ere Delight
Can make Days forehead bright,
Or give Down to the Wings of Night.
In her whole frame,
Have Nature all the Name,
Art and ornament the shame.
Her flattery,
Picture and Poesy,
Her counsel her own virtue be.
I wish, her store
Of worth, may leave her poor
Of wishes; And I wish -- No more.
Now if Time knows
That her whose radiant Brows,
Weave them a Garland of my vows;
Her whose just Bays,
My future hopes can raise,
A trophie to her present praise;
Her that dares be,
What these Lines wish to see:
I seek no further, it is she.
It Is she, and here
Lo I uncloath and clear,
My wishes cloudy Character.
May she enjoy it,
Whose merit dare apply it,
But Modesty dares still deny it.
Such worth as this is.
Shall fix my flying wishes,
And determine them to kisses.
Let her full Glory,
My fancyes, fly before ye,
Be ye my fictions; But her story.
Imprimatur Na: Brent.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THe Weeper. Page 1 The Tear. 6 Divine Epigrams begin at page the 8 On the
Water of our Lords Baptism 8 Act. 8. on the Baptized Ethiopian 8 On the
Miracle of multiplied Loaves 8 Upon the Sepulcher of our Lord 8 The Widows
Mights 9 Luke 15. on the Prodigal 9 On the still surviving marks of our
Saviors wounds 9 Acts 5. the sick implore St. Peter's shadow 9 Mark 7. the
Dumb healed, and the people enjoined silence 10 Mat. 28. Come see the place
where the Lord lay 10 To Pontius washing his hands 10 To the Infant Martyrs 10
On the Miracle of Loaves 11 Mark. 4. Why are ye afraid, O ye, of little faith
11 On the blessed Virgins bashfulnesse 12 Upon Lazarus his Tears 12 Two men
went up into the Temple to pray 12 Upon the Asses that bore our Savior 12
Matthew 8. I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof. 13 Upon the
Powder day 13 I am the door 13 Math. 10. The blind cured by the word of our
Savior 14 Math. 27. And he answered nothing, 14 To our Lord upon the water
made wine 14 Matthew 22. Neither durst any man from that day ask him any more
questions 15 Upon our Saviors Tomb wherein never man was laid 16 It is better
to go to heaven with one eye, etc. 16 Luke 11. Upon the dumb devil cast out,
and the slanderous Jews put to silence 16 Luke 10. And a certain Priest
coming that way looked on him and passed by 16 Luke 11. Blessed be the paps
which thou have sucked 17 To Pontius washing his blood-stained hands 17 Math.
23. To build the Sepulchers of the Prophets 17 Upon the Infant Martyrs 18 Ioh.
16. Verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament 18 Ioh. 15. Upon our
Lords last comfortable discourse with his Disciples 18 Luke 16. Dives asking a
drop. 18 Mark. 12. Give to Caesar, and to God 19 But now they have seen and
hated 19 Upon the Thorns taken down from our Lords head, bloody 19 Luke 7.
She began to wash his feet with tears, and wipe them with the hairs of her
head 20 On St. Peter cutting off Malchus his ear 20 John 3. But men loved
darkness rathet then light 20 Act. 21. I am ready not only to be bound, but
to dye 20 On St. Peter casting away his nets at our Saviors call 20 Our Lord
in his Circumcision to his Father 21 On the wounds of our crucified Lord 21 On
our crucified Lord naked and bloody 22 Easter day 22 On the bleeding wounds of
our crucified Lord 23 Sampson to his Dalilah 24 Psalm 23. 25 Psalm 137. 27 A
Himne on the Nativity sung by the Shephcards 28 Upon the death of a Gentleman
31 Upon the death of Mr. Herrys 32 Another upon the death of the most desired
Master Herrys 33 Another 36 His Epitaph 38 An Epitaph upon Husband and Wife
which dyed, and were buried together 39 An Epitaph upon Doctor Brook 40 Upon
Master Stannoughs death 40 Upon the Duke of York his birth. A Panegyric 41
Upon Fords two Tragedyes, Loves Sacrifice, and the broken heart 45 On a foul
morning being then to take a Journey 45 Upon the fair Ethiopian sent to a
Gentlewoman 46 On Marriage 47 To the morning Satisfaction for sleep 47 Loves
Horoscope 49 Sospetto d'Herode Libro primo 51 On a Prayer book sent to Mrs M.
R. 74 On Master George Herberts book entitled the temple of Sacred poems sent
to a Gentlewoman 78 In memory of the Virtuous and Learned Lady Madre de Teresa,
that sought an early Martyrdom 79 An Apology for the precedent Himne 85 On a
Treatise of Charity 86 In Picturam Reverendissimi Episcopi Dr. Andrews 89 On
the Assumption 90 Epitaphium in Dominum Herrissium 92 An Himne for the
circumcision day of our Lord 94 On Hope, by way of Question an Answer, between
A. Cowley and R. Crasnaw. 96 MVsicks Duel 103 Principi recens natae omen
maternae Indolis 108 Out of Virgil in the praise of the Spring 110 With a
Picture sent to a friend 111 In praise of Lessius his rule of health 112 The
beginning of Heliodorus 114 Out of the Greek, Cupids Crier 115 On Nanus
mounted upon an Ant 117 Upon Venus putting on Mars his Arms 117 Upon the same
017 In Senerissimae Regine partum Hyemalem 118 Upon Bishop Andrews his Picture
before his Sermons 120 Ad Reginam 121 Out of Martial 122 Out of the Italian. A
Song 123 Out of the Italian 125 Out of the Italian 126 In faciem Augustiss.
Regis a morbillis integram 127 On the Frontispice of Isaacsons Chronology
explained 128 Or thus 129 An Epitaph upon Master Ashton a conformable Citizen
130 Rex Redux 131 Out of Catullus 132 Ad Principem nondum natum 133 Wishes to
his (supposed) Mistress 134
FINIS.

