Exomologesis: OR, A Faithful Narration OF The Occasion and Motives of the
Conversion unto Catholic Unity OF HUGH-PAULIN DE CRESSY, Lately Deane of
Laghlin, etc. in Ireland, and Prebend of Windsore in England.

Now a second time printed; With Additions and Explications, by the same
Author, who now calls himself, B. Serenus Cressy, Religious Priest of the holy
Order of S. Benedict, in the Convent of S. Gregory in Doway.

Luc. cap. 22. verse. 32. Tu aliquando conversus, confirma fratres. A PARIS,
Chez Jean Billaine, Rue S. Jacques a l'Ensigne S. Augustine. MDCLIII.

To the Honorable, Walter Montagu, Esquire.
Sir,
IN this happy retrayt of a voluntary banishment from the world, (which by Gods
goodness I have made choice of) one principal design of my thoughts is not
to think of the world; yet this cannot justify nor excuse me, if I should
endeavor or be willing to forget such a Person, as you, and one to whom I have
so great obligations. Indeed I should not comply with this my Vocation, if I
did not oftentimes remember you. To think of you, to write to you, or converse
with you, are not worldly businesses: they may become, and cannot but be
advantageous, even in matter of spirit, to the most abstracted persons: for
what will such an object represent to them, but a true esteem of heaven,
gracefully set off by an heroical contempt of earth; and this exemplified to
the best advantage by one, who in the midst of the greatest affluence of all
worldly contentments, in the strength of his age, and vigor of capacity, when
he was most disposed and enabled to taste whatever was gustfull in them, yet had
the succesfull courage to despise and renounce them: And which is more
admirable, one that still maintains a fearlesnesse of their skill to recall his
liking of them; since out of pure charity to God, and his distressed servants,
he dares yet live in sight of them, a stranger to them; one that (with himself)
consecrates all his own riches to God, and only interesses himself in the
wealth of others, to the end that he may procure supplies for those that want,
and to enrich those, who by supplying such wants, can be persuaded to purchase
eternal treasures?

To you, SIR, therefore I address my self, willing to take any, even this poor
occasion, by a very mean Present to testify to the world my cordial
affectionate esteem of you and my thankful acknowledgment of your great
goodness and charity toward me, expressed by a considerable pension, without
any intercession of friends, voluntarily offered, and out of your own prison
and straitness freely sent me immediately after my Conversion, though a mere
stranger to you, yet sufficiently recommended by relinquishing of Friends,
Estate, and Country, for that Religion's sake, which before had made the same
conquest over you: And since expressed by many testimonies of your friendly
benignity and confidence.

I take leave therefore to present unto you this Book, as it is now a second
time published. The subject of it is the story of my uncertainties and
wanderings; and in conclusion, my fixed establishment in the same solid
foundation of Truth with you, which gained ^e first the happiness of your
affection. And I pretend in this second publication to a further entrance into
the same affection, not for any worth of the Treatise, but only for the
testimony that I, of mine own accord, give publicly of my declining, to
consider mine own fame or esteem with men, in a matter that respects, though
only the circumstances of divine Truth; Since the ground why I renew the
impression is to signify, that I detest to maintain, with a perverse
constancy, even the smallest phrases or words, which I could suspect might be
obnoxious to offense or misconstruction.

I cannot call it a Book of Controversies, though the essential points of
Catholic Religion be asserted in it: or if of Controversies, it is principally
against those that unnecessarily multiply them.

Whatsoever it is, a poor Present it is, God knows; and yet even in that
respect less unacceptable to you, who despise riches; and more becoming me,
whose profession is poverty. I pretend to no reward, or if any, I am content
that your pardon should be my reward: Yet I must recall my words; I do indeed
humbly expect and beg a great reward, no less then the richest kind of Alms,
Prayers: and the best of that best sort of Alms, your prayers; mine for you
have been always due, since I knew you; and, God willing, shall be most
faithfully paid at Gods holy Altar; for I am, in truth of heart,

Paris, 21. October. 1652. SIR, Your Servant in our Lord, most affectionately
devoted, B. SERENUS CRESSY.

To the Right Reverend Fathers, the Fathers DD. Religious of the Holy Order of
the Carthusians in the English Convent at Newport in Flanders.
Right R. R. Fathers.
SInce it was the eminent sanctity of your Order (in vain endeavored with
greater care by you to be hid from the observation of the world, then by others
their hypocrisy) which contributed much to put me in a condition of writing a
discourse of this nature: And since it was by the command, and for the
satisfaction of certain Superiors of your Order likewise, that contrary to my
Resolution I adventured upon this work: and lastly, since it was by the advice
and encouragement of certain of your Fathers Religious, that I took the
confidence to publish it, being written; therefore in strict justice it ought
to return and address it self thither, from whence in so many respects it took
its original.

But whereas the language made it incapable either of the censure or apology of
those persons who had the greatest and immediate influence upon it, and
besides, though it had been Translated, it would not have procured that effect
which I infinitely desire; Therefore it may seem that mere necessity has cast
upon you this trouble and charity. Though the truth is seeing the almost only
argument of this Book is to maintain Catholic Unity against the sacrilege of
Schism, there could scarce be chosen fitter Patrons for it' then such persons,
who are the true successors of those Innocent Martyrs, with the effusion of
whose blood, both Catholic Unity expired in England, and that Sacrilegious
Tyrant K. Henry 8. dedicated his accursed Idol of Schism; an act, which alone
may be able to rectify the judgments of the seducing and seduced World: for
can any man think otherwise, but that Catholic Unity is a daughter of heaven,
whose Victimes have been the lives of persons so only heavenly in their
conversation^ and how could that infernal, monster of Schism prove her
^rig^nall, better, then by being the design of that Prince ^^ abandoned to all
impiety, as that he made choice to establish this his darling by sacrilege and
murder: Saeriledge most palpably against his conscience, since in that regard
be always continued a Catholic: and murder of a most studied beyon^sness
being committed upon persons so innocent^ that they that hated them, must
thereby have professed that they hated innocence and Christian (...) it self;
and so far from provoking him, that they had no other commerce with mankind,
but only in praying for it? But has not almighty God given a succes^
answerable? For what remains of that impious King, after six marriages (lawful
and unlawful,) and innumerable (...), but only the issue of a wicked Soul,
viz. God knows, how many seditious, murders, sacriledges, schisms, and
be^^s^^r^ Whereas on the other side those innor^^^ Martyrs d^^ no doubt, from
heaven (...) with joy (...) you a lawful seed propagated in an uninterrupted
succession in (...) way, and continuing in the same Faith, Piety, Charity, and
devotion, which the^^ ^^^^lif^ed with their lives and sealed with their blood; a
blessing, (...), (...) all other Religious English Orders of men, only allowed
to you, though contrary to all humane judgment and probability; You being
persons wholly uninteressed in secular designs, unknown to the world, and, by
reason of your solitude and never-discontinued devotions, incapable of
soliciting for the assistance of others.

Be pleased therefore (right RR. FF.) with your natural benig^ity and charity
to admit this discour^e into your peaceful solitude: A blessing which the
Author (alas!) dares not promise to himself, since by himself he is judged
unworthy, and by others incapable of it. He does notwithstanding with the
greater confidence expect this favor of your charity to his Book, because he
may pretend in some degree to deserve it, since by presenting this Narration to
your view, he shall afford unto you, who live the life of Angels, the pleasure
of Angels; viz. an occasion to rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, and the
exercise of Angels too, which is to procure, at least by their prayers, a
continuance of divine Mercy to him. Which if by being remem, bred in your
devotions, he shall obtain he will think that he has prudently chosen to
prefer your Patronage before that of the greatest Princes.

Your RR. Fatherhoods Most humble and devoted servant. H. P. de Cressy.

APPROBATIO.
NO^ Fr. Placidus Gascoigne, Benedictinorum ^ongregationis Anglicanae Praeses
Generalis, Librum hune, inscriptum EXOMOLOGESIS, or a Narration, etc. a duobus
Congregationis nostrae Theologis a Capitulo Generali ad id deputatis, lectum
and approbatum, typis excudi permittimus. In quorum fidem nomen nostrum
subscripsimus.

Datum in Conventu nostro Parisiensi, 10. Augusti, 1652.

Fr. Placidus Gascoigne Praeses, qui supra.

APPROBATIO.
EGo subscriptus in sacra Theologia Facultate Parisiensi Magister perlegi
Tractatum hunc, cui titulus est, EXOMOLOGESIS, or, A Faithful Narration of the
occasion and motives of the Conversion unto Catholic Unity of HVGH-PAVLIN de
CRESSY, etc. Quem and Catholicae Fidei consonum inveni, and veritati revelatae
Catholice credentes certissimis inniti principiis ad summos rationis apices
ostendentem. Hic etenim Libellus evidentissime demonstrat Exotica and
petulantissima Socinianorum posita (qui tamen soli eorum omnium qui ab Ecclesia
descivere videntur aliquatenus ratiocinari) ipsiusmet Religionis fundamenta
subvertere: Quos vero haud jam diu Protestantium nomine notatos habuimus,
Anglos nominatim, quantumvis Veterem Ecclesiam and antiquos Patres crepent,
Novitatis, Schismatis and erroris manifestissime evinxit. Quapropter typis
utiliter mandari posle judicavi.

Datum Parisiis 15. Junii, 1647.

H. Holden.

PERMISSION.
VEu I'Approbation de Monsieur Henry Holden Docteur en Theology, permis
d'imprimer, le premier de Iuillet, 1647.

Sign, Daubray.

APPROBATIO.
HVnc, quem jam ab aliquot annis diligenter perlegi and approbavi Librum (cujus
titulus est Exomologesis, etc. ut supra) iterum libenter approbo. Ea vero loca,
quae ab aliquibus vel ex inscitia, vel ex pravo affectu male intellecta
audiverit Author, clariori modo, aliisque verbis in hac secunda Editione
explicuit; qui nedum infirmis voluit scandalum praebere. Appendiculam etiam
adjunxit, qua heterodoxi cujusdam anonymi leviores quasdam in doctrinam s^^am
and Catholicam objectiunculas dissolvit ac pessundedit. Quae omnia testor esse
Catholicae Ecclesiae fidei and pietati congrua, ac proinde Librum hunc
dignissimum judico qui denuo typis promulgetur.

Datum Parisiis 12. Octobris, 1652.

H. Holden.

APPROBATIO.
LIbrum (cuititulus Exomologesis, etc. una cum Appendice) legi, in quo nihil
Orthodoxiae aut Christianae pietati dissonum deprehendi; imo methodo facili,
compendio sa, uinceque secura, veritas vere Catholica Catholicis fundamentis
stabilitur, omnesque simul Haereses solid, modeste and erudite refelluntur;
ideoque dignum judico, qui in communem utilitatem saepius imprimatur.

Datum Parisiis 20. October. 1652.

Fr. Paulus Dei Custodiens. S. Theologiae Doctor and Diffinitor Congregationis
Anglo Ben.

Ad Dignissimum Authorem.
LEgi and perlegi Exomologesim tuam (o vere Seren^) and magnopere delectatus
cum Orationis facilitate and Methodi luce, tum multo magis and animi candore,
and sulco luminis, quo viam e periculosissimo Errore ad constantissimam
veritatem penitus instravisti; neque, quin tibi gratularer and Editionem
commendarem, neque si quos, mei nominis quam desideras ad scriptio, movere
potest, iis illam ne acceptissimam facerem, me potui continere.

Datum e tuguriolo meo pridie Kalendas Octobris, Anno Salutis supra millesimum
sexcentesimum, quingagesimo secundo.

Thomas Albius. S. Theologiae Professor.

APPROBATIO.
ACcepto Theologi, viri docti ac side digni, testimonio (cui librum hunc
inscriptum EXOMOLOGESIS, or a faithful Narration, etc. perlegendum commisi)
nihil hoe in opere contra fidem ac bonos mores; quinimo plurimum utilitatis, ad
reducendas intra gremium Ecclesiae oves perditas, easque veritati pristinae
vindicandas, contineri; Librum istum merito imprimendum, ac fidelibus sum
commendandum censeo.

Datum e Musaeo nostro 1. Octobr. 1652.

H. Metham. E. C. V. G. and olim S. Theol. Professor.

APPROBATIO.
EXomologesim hanc, antiquae Fidei vindicem, ab eruditissimo Domino D. Sereno
Cressy, viro Novatoribus invidendo, conscriptam, non tam oculis hominum
orthodoxe Sapientium quam animis imprimendam judico. Dignum siquidem ut
Sphaeram plane candidam inveniat silius lucis emancipatus ex regno tenebrarum.
Prodeat igitur e coelo suo sidus suum, and ut palam in terris radios videant
ultro-coecutientes, Opus typis evulgetur.

Dat. 3. Kalend. October. 1652.

T. I. sacrae Theologia Professor.

S. AVGVSTIN. Ep. ad Fund. c. 4.
OMitting therefore that wisdom which you deny to be in the Catholic Church;
there are many other things which most justly retain ine in her b^^ome: The
consent of Peoples and Nations retain me there: Authority begun by Miracles,
nourished by hope, augmented by charity, confirmed by Antiquity, retain me
there: The succession of Prelates ever since the scat of S. Peter (to whom our
Lord after his Resurrection consigned the feeding of his Sheep (to the present
Episcopaecy, retains me there; Lastly, the very name of Catholic retains me
there, which, not without cause, this Church only, among so many and so great
Heresies, has in such sort maintained, that when a stranger demands, Where men
meet to communicate with the Catholic Church; there is not any one Heretic
has the confidence to direct him to his Temple or house.

S. AUGUST. de Unit. Eccles. c. 19.
I Suppose if there were extant any wise man to whom our Lord Jesus Christ had
afforded his testimony, and if he were consulted with by us concerning this
question, we should by no means doubt to do that which he should determine; and
this left we should be judged to oppose our selves not so much to him, as to
the Lord Jesus Christ, by whose tectimony he was commended. Now Christ has
afforded a testimony to his Church.

THE PREFACE.
1. I Had no intention at all to write, much less to give to public view this
account of the Reasons and Motives of my relinquishing Error and Schism, and
rejoyning my self to Catholic Unity. Not that I preferred mine own ease before
the endeavoring to contribute, though in the smallest degree, to the
spiritual good of others: But me thought a writing of such a nature would seem
to argue that I judged my self a person of such consideration, as that men
would expect from my hands such an account: A conceit, which truly I never
entertained, neither had I any reason so to do.

2. Yea afterward, when some men (I am confident, without any visible grounds
either from my conversation in times past, or late proceedings) did assume to
themselves the authority, or rather, license, to judge of my inward thoughts
and intentions, charging me with worldly ambition, discontent, or melancholy,
and attributing to such unworthy Principles that change, which was only the
effect of Divine goodness and mercy implored with earnest and continual
prayers: Yet other men's injustice to me did not make me injust to my self, so
far as to think that that could qualify me so as to be fit to appear in
public. All the effect it had upon me was, in regard of my self, a secret joy
to suffer any thing for so blessed a cause, as Catholic Unity; and in regard
of the authors of such aspersions, a secret grief and compassion, that they
would needs declare themselves illwillers to me for endeavoring, without any
others hinderance or loss, to save mine own Soul; or that (resolving to be so
injust) they would make choice of such imputations, which (though they had in
themselves been true, yet) no man could believe them to have been competent
accusers and informers of thoughts, known only to almighty God.

3. But, what neither the just contempt and disesteem which I had of my self
would permit, nor the unjust calumniations of others could extort from me, a
command intimated from certain virtuous worthy persons Superiors of the Holy
Order of the Carthusians (whom I thought my self in some sort obliged to obey,
though as yet my Superiors only in desire and reverence) gave me the assurance
to adventure upon. They, judging it requisite that I should give some proof
both of the matute advice, and also of the reasonableness of my change, made
me consider my self only as fit to obey them, without altering in any degree
the mean esteem I had of my self: And the same persons advising the publication
of what I wrote, have thereby made me by this in genuous declaration of what I
knew of my self (almost against my will) to answer the aspersions; which those
that, I am sure, knew me not so well, have published.

4. Now I do not pretend by this Narration to deprive them of their liberty of
calumniating me still, since they may, if they please, say, linguam nostram
magnisicabimus, labia nostra a nobis sunt: quis n^ster Dominus est? Psa. 11. 5.
After this profession of the occasion and progress of my enquiry, and
resolution in point of Religion, which I here make in the presence of God, and
before the world, protesting that I do my self believe this history of my self
which I now publish, I assure them I shall not put my self to the trouble of
saying any more for mine own vindication in this respect. Neither here do I
answer their calumnies any other way, then by discovering my self naked to my
very thoughts.

5. They may hereafter, if they please, continue to traduce me more probably
and ingenuously, for no doubt I shall in this writing give them many advantages
against my self: yea I must tell them my intention was to do them this
pleasure; and for that reason I called this Narration an Exomologesis, and that
with reflection upon several notions of that word: For first it is a public
Confession, and that not only of my former errors and Schism, but withal
joined with a discovery of, no doubt, many imperfections in searching after
truth, during the twilight of my doubtings and uncertainties, and many
weaknesses in defending the truth, after I had found it: So that they have
confitentem reum, and such an one as will be glad to have discovered unto him
whatsoever is disproveable in this Treatise, to the end that, when he is
convinced, he may satisfy for them also. Besides, this is called an
Exomologesis in as much as it is intended to be a public Confession or
Thanksgiving, a Tabula votiva representing to the world the tempests of
Schism and Heresy, from which I could not have escaped the utmost danger of
shipwreck, had not almighty God (the lover of souls) provided a secure haven
for me in the Catholic Church. And therefore(...) etc. I give thee thanks O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for that thou have hidden these (mercies)
from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes,(...)Even so Lord, for
such was thy good pleasure. HOSANNA IN EXCELSIS.

The first Section.
Containing an Historical Narration of the Authors occasion of doubting, and
method in searching satisfaction.

CHAP. I.
The occasion of my departure out of England.

Bloody commotions of Calvinists there.

The horriblenesse and strangeness of them.

1. IT was in the month of June in the year of our Lord 1644. that those most
unnatural bloody dissentions in Great-Brittaine, universally spread through
all the Provinces of that unhappy Nation, constrained me (not so much to avoid
my personal danger, as out of the horror to be a spectatour of such inhumane
Tragedies, as were every where daily acted) to forsa^e my native country, to
recreate my self with a voluntary exile, and to follow the conduct of the
merciful hand of God, which provided for me not only an opportunity and
convenience of subsisting in foreign countries, but likewise means of diverting
in some measure my mind from the sad remembrance of the miseries I left behind
me, and, by a retreit into places less frequented by passengers, of
withdrawing mine cares from being wounded with fresh relations of new bloodshed
and massacres.

2. I confess that war was to me an object not only of horror, but even
astonishment, as having never read or heard of any other that could enter into
any comparison with it.

3. Now that which astonished me in the present Commotions was, 1. To consider,
that fatal concatenation of a world of dispositions and circumstances
praeceding this war, so strange that no humane prudence could have foreseen or
suspected them, if any of which had not happened, there had been no possibility
of any prosperous success to the Anti-Royallists. 2. To observe an event
incredibly successful to designs the most unreasonable and seemingly
ridiculous that ever were. For, for example, who could imagine that an
inconsiderable number of peevish ignorant Presbyterians should ever come to be
able to constreine a whole kingdom to forswear the Religion, in which they
had been bred, and to subvert their own Church upon a groundless suspicion
that the King had a design to change his Religion, who yet was almost the only
person that remained constant in it, so as to hazard not only the ruin of his
estate, but the loss of his life also; For the time was, when (if he would
have given up Episcopacy) he might have obtained in all other respects very
tolerable conditions; Whereas several of the wisest and learned of his
Clergy, have been content to buy their security with a voluntrry degrading of
themselves from their offices and titles; yea it may truly be said, that though
many of them have suffered in extremity, yet it was not properly with an eye to
their Religion, but rather their fidelity and loyalty to their Prince; or upon
quarrels against Episcopal Tyranny, to persuade a Nation to accept of
Presbyterian Tyranny, infinitely more unreasonable and intolerable: And which
is beyond belief, that they should be persuaded to imbarke themselves in a
war, wherein so many myriads of Souls have perished, when the only
differences (by the confession of the chief incendiaries, the
Calvinist-Ministers and their partisans in France) were only trifling
inconsiderable ceremonies and circumstances: Blessed God, what a strange
furious spirit is this, which has from Calvin descended upon his followers,
that moves them to such horrible resolutions and extremities even for matters
in their own opinion of no considerable moment, and to the end to enforce
their novelties and fancies upon the consciences of others against all justice
and reason. For what is more unreasonable then that Sects, whose essential
grounds are Scripture alone, with a renouncing of all visible authority to
interpret it, should yet assume to themselves an authority to enforce their
opinions upon the consciences of others?

4. Was it possible to consider these things without astonishment? Is not the
hand of God as manifest to the eyes of men's understandings in this business,
as the hand from heaven was to Baltassar, when by the help of Daniel he read
the final doom of his own and his kingdoms ruin in those words, MANE THE CEL
PHARES? I must needs confess that, though at my leaving of the kingdom the
affairs between the King and Anti-royallists stood almost in aequilibrio,
there being no considerable advantage on either party, notwithstanding I could
not free my self from grievous apprehensions that Gods Providence had not been
so busy and vigilant in contriving such a concurrence of ominous and
prodigious events, to the end to suffer all things quickly to conclude in peace
and tranquillity.

CHAP. II.
Sacrilege and Perjury acknowledged even by Heathens to be principal causes
of public calamities.

1. FRom a view of our present miseries in England, and a sad presumption of
yet worse to succeed, I turned my thoughts to a modest consideration and
probable divination of what might be supposed to be the causes of so so daine
and dismal a change there, that is, what peculiar national sins have lately
reigned in that kingdom, and awakned the just severity of God to make it such
a spectacle of desolation, and Proverb of misery above any other nation.

2. Even the Heathens themselves take notice of two especial sins so
immediately and directly contumelious to the Divine Majesty, and therefore in
themselves so heinous, that they never escaped any long time an exemplary
vengeance, and the punishment ordinarily inwrapped even the posterity of the
delinquents: Yea though they had been committed only by a private person, and
that only inwardly and in design, yet the Divine Justice did commonly extend
the punishment to a whole nation: such sins the Graecians therefore called
A'(...) that is, piacular extermnating crimes: among which the principal were
esteemed Sacrilege and Perjury: so that whatsoever calamities seized any time
upon any Nation, if it could be found out that either of these two heinous
crimes had been committed, though but by a few particular persons, they
presently absolved their Gods from any imputation of rigor, and much more of
injustice.

3. Of this argument Plutarch speaks excellently in his book de ser a Numinis
vindicta. And particularly of Sacrilege there is extant in Elian (va^ Hist.
lib. 3 cap. 43.) an ancient memorable Delphian Oracle, to this effect, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
That is, Divine vengeance delayeth not to pursue those that are guilty of this
crime of Sacrilege, neither can they deprecate or avoid it, no not though they
were the offspring of Jove himself: but it hovers continually over the heads
of the guilty, and their Children also, and one calamity on their family
overtakes another. An example whereof we find mentioned by Strabo and Gel^ius,
in that so known History of the Gold of Toulouse. Strab. Geogr. lib. 4. A.
Gell. lib. 3. cap. 9.

4. Then concerning Perjury, there is a remarkable example in Herodotus of
Glaucus Epicydides, who could not escape punishment for having only deliberated
and in his thoughts designed the forswearing a thing committed to his trust:
where likewise this Pythian Oracle is mentioned, (...)
(...)
(...)
That is, To a perjurd person there is an offspring given obscure, without name,
maimed in hands, and lame in feet: and this judgment seises upon him suddenly
and irrcsistably, never quitting him till it have brought to desolation all his
flock and family.

CHAP. III.
England prodigiously guilty of Sacrilege since the Schism.

Visible judgments have continually pursued this crime there.

1. NOw how dreadfully and universally the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland have been guilty of these two scandalous, and even to Heathens
abominable crimes, Sacrilege and Perjury, since the time that the schism from
Catholic Unity began, is notoriously apparent to all the world, and with a
secret remorse bewailed even by the English Protestants themselves. No man
therefore can jnstly blame me as a discoverer and publisher of the faults of my
beloved country, too far spread already, and too much boasted of by that
infamous faction of Calvinists, heretofore the chief authors of these sins
there, and now the avengers of them. It is Schism only to which I impute
these prodigious crimes: for before the birth of that monster, I appeal to all
manner of ancient Records, if ever there was any nation more abounding in holy
Offerings, or more exactly obscuring a sincere fidelity and simplicity. I may
therefore without blame set down the dire effects of the most pernicious sect
that ever was, which is able to convert Paradise it self into a savage
wastnesse.

2. In the first place then, what a ravage of holy Offerings did that
unsatiable gulf of luft and avarice King Henry the VIII. of England make at
the beginning, and for the justifying of his Schism? How did he at one fatal
swoope, snatch away all the goods and revenewes, drive out all the consecrated
servants, and with axes and hammers hew down all the houses of God in the land
belonging to all Religious Orders? A crime the more horrible in him, in as much
as he professed at the same time, and made that profession good by his cruelty
that (excepting his withdrawing himself from his Obedience to the Pope) he
continued in the belief of all other Catholic Doctrines, preserving likewise
in the Calender, and celebrating the memory of those Saints, S. Benedict, Saint
Bruno, S. Dominick, S. Francis, etc. whose Religions he utterly demolished.

3. In the days of his Son and Successor King Edward the VI. a Child, the
then- Pro^ctour and Governors adding complete Haeresie to the former Schism,
continued likewise the Sacrilege, sweeping some few gleanings that had escaped,
and upon a ridiculous pretense of superstition devoured even to the very
Hospitalls, Colleges, Schools and some Parish Churches. Even Qu. Elizabeth her
self, how generous a Princess soever, could yet streine her self to swallow
down many goodly Manors belonging to her own Bishops.

4. Since her times, even till this fatal age, Sacrilege has much languished
there: But now the present bloody Presbyterian Reformers intending as it were
to fill the measure of Sacrilege to and above the brimme, and envying the
pleasure of this sin to the successors of this their new Schism, do labor
to dig up the very roots of all Ecclesiastical revenews, violently ravishing
whatsoever belongs almost to Almighty God in the Kingdom, the design of many
of them being not to spare even the tithes of Parishes, which they intend to
exchange into narrow and scandalous stipends.

5. Now to justify that observation of the Heathens touching Gods revenge
continually attending this sin of Sacrilege, and to demonstrate that God has
showed himself at least as sensible of this affront done him by Christians, as
heretofore by Idolaters, I adjure all the inhabitants of England to witness
with me, if a continual curse has not pursued and rested upon the families and
estates of those, who have thought to enrich themselves by adjoining the
possessions of Gods Church to the inheritance of their Ancestors; if those holy
things have not continually cankred and consumed whatsoever temporal goods or
lands have been annexed to them; In a word; whether that may not be verified
proportionably through that whole Kingdom, which to this purpose was observed
by that learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, who discoursing of this argument,
and bewayling, as often he did, the insensiblenesse of his country to this
visible curse of God, took a Map of his own Province, and opening a
compass to the distance of about twenty English miles, fixed one foot upon his
own house, with the other drawing a circle about it, and protesting that
within that circle there had anciently been (as I remember) near thirty
Monastries, Priories, Nunneries, and other Religious houses distributed to
several familes there: Withal that within the same compass there were about
as many ancient Families that had had no portion in those Sacrilegious Spoils;
and that of the former kind there were not left above three Religious houses
and Manors which continued in the same families to which in the age
immediately before they had been given: and of the later sort there were not
above three families and estates that had failed and changed Masters.

6. Now can any one possibly expect that Almighty God will be moved to repent
himself of the plagues destined to that unhappy Kingdom, or that he will
make use of such unchristian Reformers to procure the peace and tranquillity of
it, when so visible examples of his curses upon Sacrilege are not only
despised, but even a defiance is made against his severity, by persons, who
most blasphemously style it an honor done to Christ, only to reverse the
sacred truths by him left unto his Church, and the Holy Orders by him
established in it, but also to despoyle him of his coat after the loss of his
cloak, and to expose him almost naked, in his Ministers, to the miseries and
scorn of the world?

7. Can any thing else be expected for a proof that our English Reformers are
arrived to the height and perfection of this crime? Yet even something beyond
this may be added. Let this age of Christians take notice, and let them not
forget to tell it to their Posterity (if they can believe it) that concerning
Sacrilege, Order is taken by a public law: And this, not to confirm the
possession of Church Lands in those sacrilegious hands, to which they have
been given, not to afford them indemnity and security against any claim of
God or his servants: (for how poor and inconsiderable an attentat is that to
the impudence of our Reforming Calvinists!) But Order is taken by law against
any man's repentance hereafter for Sacrilege, against fear of divine
vengeance, against avoiding such visible curses from heaven: it is a crime for
any man to cease to be Sacrilegious, or to presume to restore unto Almighty God
those things which he is persuaded belong unto him: it is not permitted to such
a man to restore to the Priest to whom the care of souls is committed, the
tithes, which certainly are either Gods due, or no man's: Before this can be
done, allowance and indulgence must be had from all the three Estates of the
Kingdom, they must all agree, as it were to their own condemnation before
such a man can be allowed to ease his tormented conscience, by freeing himself
from such accursed spoils. My dear country, I hope, will pardon me, if I
profess that I could not free my self from grievous apprehensions that a
fearful account will be exacted by Almighty God for a crime so continually and
heynously committed, at which even Heatherto themselves would tremble.

CHAP. IV.
Perjury how frequently, and how heynously committed in England since the
Schism.

1. THen for the crying destructive sin of Perjury, the guilt thereof so
often, so heynously, so manifestly against conscience repeated has almost
universally seized upon the whole Kingdom. Indeed this sin, as well as the
former of Sacrilege, is the ordinary and almost necessary attendant of Schism
and Haeresie. That great Patriarch of both, Calvin, would not vouchsafe to
impart his skill in these two qualities to them of Geneva, till they had by a
solemn public oath obliged themselves indispensibly to embrace whatsoever
doctrines he should establish among them, and till they had charged a curse
upon themselves and their posterity for ever, if afterward they did repent
themselves of that Perjury and Rebellion against their lawful Prince and
Bishop.

2. Concerning England, the poor subjects there, ever since Schism and
Haeresie found entrance, have been as of course accustomed to be constreined
to forswear themselves by public Order and in a most solemn fashion,
whenever either the lusts or interests of their Princes have moved them to
introduce any novelties among them. First, Henry the eight, without giving his
subjects leave or space to study the point of Controversy (which yet indeed
was then no controversy at all) with forced consent of his Parliament
constreined them generally to renounce one Article of that Faith (namely,
Obedience to the Visible Universal Pastor of the Catholic Church) wherein
they and their Ancestors for many ages had been bred, a doctrine introduced,
and generally embraced there ever since the Nation was converted from
Heathenisme by their glorious Apostle S. Augustine, the Benedictin Monk
delegated thither by the more glorious Pope S. Gregory the Great. To effect
which Perjury, the meaner sort of people were forced by Tyranny, and the
Great-ones allured by partaking in the spoils of Sacrilege.

3. After his death, those sacrilegious persons who governed the Kingdom
during the reign and minority of his Son, caused the Parliament a second time
to impose upon the whole Nation a yet greater Perjury, namely entirely to
swear away a great part of that Faith which made them Christians. And though
they willingly repented their former Perjuries and impieties, returning to
their ancient Belief and Obedience during the short reign of that Catholic
Princess Q. Mary: Yet, the interests of her sister and successor Q Elizabeth
prevailed so far, as to make them repent their repentance, and to swear over
again all their former Perjuries, her cunning Counselors by all unlawful
ways of violence and allurements surprising the Parliament, corrupting the
Clergy, and violencing the consciences of the subjects, and so contriving
their designs, as that they confidently imagined that Schism and Haeresie were
established in England irremoveably, being settled by a law, as irrevocable, as
that of the Medes and Persians.

4. But in vain: For Schism and Heresy, wanting firm and real foundations,
and being built only upon secular interests, when those interests come to fail
(as all worldly things must in time) naturally sink lower and lower into that
gulf which has no bottom. For it is remarkable that Heresy being the ruin
of Faith, as Schism is of Charity, all changes that are made in them are still
to the worse. Faith is continually more and more undetermined, and Charity more
and more cried down and made unlawful. A fearful example of this has been
represented to the world in this late Schism in England from a former Schism:
For heretofore the English Protestants pretended that by their Separation from
the Catholic Church there was made a rent only in the semelesse garment of
Christ, but yet so that the parts hung together still, allowing the Catholic
Church to be a true Church of Christ, but preferring their part of it as better
cleansed and washed than the other. But now Christ's garment is torn by them
into I know not how many rags, all plucked entirely from one another, and this
with such violence and injusitice, as Mahomet himself would have abhorred.

5. But to return to Perjury, a most useful and necessary engine in Schism;
certainly never any Carthaginian or Barbarian has given such prodigious
Examples, as the Presbyterian Calvinists. For Persons, who make it a foundation
of their Sect to acknowledge a private spirit to be the only judge of Scripture
and points of Religion, renouncing all external Ecclesiastical authority as
to such a purpose, for such men, I say, to force other men without any new
information or instruction to forswear whatsoever the law of God (as they
believed) and most certainly the laws of the Kingdom then in force obliged
them to, is an attentat most horrible: But by a new oath, and that explicitly
commanding persons to preserve their loyalty to their Prince, and to maintain
the Laws and Religion of the Kingdom, by such an oath I say, to oblige the
same Persons at the same time to seek the destruction of their Prince and of
the same Laws and Religion, and to spend their fortunes and lives in the
defense of a Religion not yet in being, but promised to be contrived no man
knows when, nor by whom, and to swear that that unknown Religion yet in the
forge was true and only conformable to the word of God: What name can be found
out for such(...)an execrable renouncing of God, as this? And yet all this has
been in the face of the sun, and this must in England be styled a Reformation,
and such an one as might deserve to be purchased with that Sea of blood which
has lately flowed there.

5. Surely this one example alone may suffice to advertise all those who have
separated from the unity of Christ's Church, what are and probably will be the
dire effects of Schism. Let them not cast their eyes so much upon those
frequent seditions and Rebellions, and those rivers of Christian blood, which
under a pretense of Reformation have been shed in Christendom since Luthers
Apostasy: But let them rather consider this as a judgment more terrible then
all the former, namely that for a punishment of Schism, and such crimes as are
the natural fruits of it, Almighty God has given up England to this more then
Atheistical, wanton, petulant contempt and defiance of his heavenly Majesty.

7. Therefore such abominations as these, Sacrilege and Perjury, then which no
Heathen could imagine any more abominable, and these so great abominations
exalted to the utmost degree and circumstance of aggravation, having thus
universally infected and envenomed all the several Orders and degrees of men
in England, could I possibly, remaining a Christian, or not becoming a professed
A^heist, escape fearful apprehensions that the end of such things would be
yet more terrible, and that such execrable crimes would require a long time for
expiation?

CHAP. V.
The sanguinary laws, and cruel execution of them upon Catholic Priests in
England.

1. THere was one sin more of which the English Government since the Schism
there was guilty, which God seldom leaves unpunished, and for which, even
during the time of my being a Protestant, I apprehended some time or other as a
sharp visitation; which was the enacting and putting in execution those bloody
laws against poor Catholic Priests, against most of whom there was not the
least pretense of any charge of sedition or Treason? But for this only crime of
being of that heavenly Vocation, to which the Spirit of God had called, and the
sacred authority of the Church had exalted them; And for a conscionable
discharge of that calling, they were arraigned, condemned, dragged to the place
of execution, there ignominiously hanged (among thieves and murderers) and
their half-living bodies most inhumanely quartered, and exposed to the sun and
weather.

2. This crime was the more inexcuseable, because committed by Englishmen, who
(though violent enough in their passion when it is provoked, yet) are apt in a
short time to relent, and by English Protestants, a Sect pretending above
ordinary to moderation and clemency. But the truth is, the Calvinisticall
Spirit has been working in that state and government ever since the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth's reign; for the Calvinists were the Counselors that first
suggested, those cruelties, which their descendents have since eagerly pursued
and acted by the hands of others, till (their so long projected designs
succeeding) they might have the pleasure to glut themselves with Christian
blood even to vomiting, as they have of late done.

3. Now that this is no false character of that Calvinisticall Spirit, (besides
many woeful experiences in other countries) our great Presbyterian contrivers,
and managers of the late war have given several testimonies irrefragable, who
(whenever they were pressed with want of treasure, knowing the complexion and
temper of their own faction in London, how delightful a spectacle of blood
would be,) had no readier ways to extort supplies of money from them, then by
feasting and regaling them with the cruel execution of a Catholic Priest, or
shedding the blood of their own Archbishop, or of some other considerable
Royaltist. I beseech almighty God, that when the time shall come that he will
make inquisition for blood, he would sever the innocent from the guilty, and
not impute to the whole Nation the cruelty of that one bloody Faction there.

CHAP. VI.
The Authors sadness for the sins and miseries of his country.

What remedies and lenitives he found for this sorrow.

1. A Sad meditation on such arguments as these was the exercise of my thoughts
at my departure out of England, and a good while after, during my first abode
in France. And though, God be thanked^ I could not accuse my self of having
contributed any thing directly, or otherwise, then all other sinners before
Almighty God do, to the present desolations of my poor beloved country, and
there ought to have contented my self with an entire resignation of the whole
matter into the hands of a most merciful, however infinitely provoked God,
praying for the peace of that Jerusalem, without unnecessary afflicting mine
own soul: Yet I willingly deceived my self into a kind of pleasure of
greiving, with this false belief, that in such circumstances to do any thing
but grieve were to renounce not only humanity, but likewise that duty which
the Law of Christ obliged me to perform in the behalf of his Church.

2. But time and better instruction from spiritual Persons, especially
Catholics (whose councels in matters of practices in such cases I thought it
not unlawful to hearken to) did at length reduce my mind into a more calm
temper, toward the tranquillity I was much advanced by an obstinate resolution
not only not to be inquisitive after news good or bad, but to avoid those
conversations where I might be in danger of such a mortification, and withal
by employing my time and thoughts in that charge which I had undertaken, and in
mine own private studies.

CHAP. VII.
A Scruple suggested to my mind, viz. To the Communion of what Church I should
adhere upon supposition that the Church of England should fail.

1. NOt long after this there was, I know not how, suggested to my
understanding a thought, which I could not at pleasure silence, and which
interrupted much my extreme eagerness of reading; it was this, A supposition
being made that it should please Almighty God to put a period to the Church and
Ecclesiastical government in England, to what Churches Communion I should then
adjoyne my self!

2. It was not any reason I had to despair of the Kings condition that
occasioned such an inquiry (for at this time he was in a state to dispute upon
even terms the victory with his enemies) nor any jealousy of the truth of the
English Religion: But knowing that the English Church, considered as distinct
not only from the Roman, but from all other Sects in separation likewise from
it, was not, nor ever pretended to be either indefectible or infallible: Nay
more, considering that the Ecclesiastical government in England depended
absolutely upon the firmness or weakness of the Kings authority there, by
whose absolute power only and according to whose interests it was framed at
first; And perceiving but too well that for many years there had been a
powerful, malicious, contriving faction of Calvinists, equally enemies to
Monarchy and Episcopal Government (as they have given proof to the full) and
which had intruded themselves and were generally incorporated both into the
inferior Clergy, Universities, chief Bourgeosies, and places of Judicature,
whose design received from their forefathers it had been to omit no occasion
to ruin both the civil and Ecclesiastical State, whereto the whole Kingdom
of Scotland would be sure to give their brotherly assistance: Lastly, being
assured that the maine thing, and to me the most considerable advantage which
the English Church had above all others pretending to a Reformation, namely a
succession and authority of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Orders received
from the Roman Church, was never confidently and generally taught in England to
be of divine right, and by consequence took no firm rooting in the
consciences of English subjects; Upon which ground I easily foresaw that though
perhaps many would adventure far to support the Real authority, yet if ever
the title of Episcopal Jurisdiction should be separated from the Rights of the
King, there would but very few appear that would hazard their fortunes or
lives for that which though they preferred infinitely before the Presbyterian
Tyranny, yet they had never been taught that it was an essential condition of
a Church. Yea on the contrary they had seen both King and Clergy, and
generally the whole Kingdom look upon the Calvinist and Lutheran Churches, as
brethren of the same Religion in substantialls, sending Bishops and other
Ecclesiastiques to sit with them in their Synods, maintaining their quarrels,
commending their principal Authors, harboring, releeving and preferring their
exiles, In a word, upon the title of Brotherhood assisting them with treasure
and forces in their Rebellions.

3. Upon such grounds as these, considering the unsure foundation of the
English Church, I thought it not unreasonable to spend some thoughts upon that
enquiry, viz. To what Churches Communion I should adjoyne my self upon
supposition that the English Church should come to sail. I thought my self the
rather obliged to pursue such a provisionary enquiry, because I remembered that
M. Hooker, one of the most learned judicious writers that ever that Church had
upon such grounds as are before mentioned, especially having an eye unto the
sacrilegious spirit of Calvinisme, his great and almost Prophetical prudence,
(for Prudentia est quaedam divinatio) Corn. Nep. in vit. Pompou. Attice. In
those very books which he wrote to defend the Church, said that the English
Church was in probability a Church not to continue above fourscore years at
most. Hooker Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 79.

CHAP. VIII.
A Reflection upon several Sects.

And first upon the Socinians.

1. NOw in pursuing this inquiry, it scarce entered into my thoughts to admit
into debate the Roman Church, because the maine foundation thereof, namely
infallibility, I verily believed I could (powerfully armed with Mr.
Chillingworths reason) evidently and demonstratively destroy.

2. Of Sects in separation from the Catholic Church, those which I thought
most considerable, and therefore represented them to my understanding, to
examine which of them would best approve it self to my choice, were 1. the
Lutheran, 2. the Calvinist, 3. the Socinian. For as for those fanaticall Sects
of Auabaptists, Famulists, etc. they being only confused troops of ignorant
dreaming spirits, which hitherto have never been able to convert one Parish or
Village entirely to themselves, and the very dregs of all other Sects, where
those that were discontented or craised in their understanding ordinarily
settled; I could not obtain from my self the patience to examine seriously
their grounds, or to put it to the question, whether I should adjoyne my self
unto them or no. Add hereto that I could not hitherto understand all their
grounds distinctly, by reason that I could never meet with any of their
writings, so obscure they are, and afraid of the light.

3. Concerning the other three Sects, the temper and morallity of the Socinians
was much more agreeable to me then that of the other two. But their
inexcusable boldness of trampling under foot all authority of Fathers and
Counsels, and their licentious introducing blasphemous and long-since-buried
Heresies against the fundamental Mysteries of Faith was to me intolerable.
Besides, neither France nor Italy being able to afford me books of Socinian
doctrines, I was forced to content my self with that curiosity, which I had
had a few years before in England (where such books were but too frequent,
notwithstanding the care of the late Archbishop of Cant. to hinder the
importing them) at which time I read over almost all the considerable treatises
of that Sect, both of controversy, and exposition of Scripture. The effect of
which my curiosity was only an esteem of the excellency of their natural
parts both for the subtilty, and clearness of disputation, and an
acknowledgment that though their principles were of all others most fallacious,
and their peculiar distinctive doctrines most horrible and intolerable to
Christian ears, yet they were far more constant to such their principles, and
less encumbered with difficulties and contradictions then the other two: In a
word, that the frame of their building was with all its deformity more
uniforme, then that of other H^retiques of these times, and as strong as a
building could be that had no better foundation then the moving sand of
natural reason: Whereas the other two Sects of Calvinists and Lutherans (to
whom I had some jealousy that the English Protestants might be joined) relying
principally indeed upon private interpretation of Scripture, but challenging
likewise the suff^ages of the Ancient Fathers, (especially in some doctrines of
mere Tradition, as Baptising of Infants, etc.) by reason of the inequality in
the foundation, the building could not choose but have many rents and
declinations in the walls, some parts continuing stable, and others sinking by
reason of the yiedling of the Foundation: which difformities and inequalities
the Socinans avoided. This was all the change that the reading of those
Haereticall blasphemies wrought in me, none of their subtle wrestings, and
Chymicall extractions of new senses from fundamental Texts of Scripture
prevailing against the constant universal authority of Gods Church
interpreting the same Texts.

4. I conceive it unnecessary, if not very inconvenient to set down here the
exceptions I had against the several peculiar doctrines proper to the
Socinians, for fear lest by undertaking to confute I should endanger to
distill the infectious poison of them in a country, where, God be blessed,
they are utterly unknown: remembering how subtly and maliciously the
Scholars of Sibrandus Lubbertus in Holland are reported to have abnsed their
unwary Master: for they having an extreme itch of reading one of the most
pernicious Treatises of Socinus, which was forbidden to be dispersed, knew no
better a means to satisfy their unlawful and dangerous curiosity then by
persuading their cred^lous Master that it was expected from his eminent
abilities to confute so pernicious a book; which he having, as he thought
sufficiently performed; they further told him that it would be injustice, and a
kind of confession of guilt to publish his confutation without the adversaries
Text, and by that means they made their Master a sower of Haeresy, for every
one almost bought up the book for Socinus his sake only, scarce any
vouchsafing to cast their eyes upon the heavy unskillful confutation.

5. Thus I make but a small stay upon the Socinians, on whom I looked rather
with pity then resentment: Considering withal that they were the almost only
Sect which made profession against violence, and active disobedience,
condemning war absolutely and upon whatsoever pretenses. Notwithstanding
observing that one essential mark of that Sect was resolutely to hold no
opinion, but in every Synod to give leave to the questioning or altering of
whatsoever Articles of Faith had been before decided, I found that seemingly
calm and quiet spirit of theirs less alluring; because from their own
peculiar complexion and grounds, I thus Argued; Who can tell whether (if they
increase in numbers and power) they may not think fit to begin with the
alteration of that doctrine? For I have known when even the Calvinists in
Holland and the Puritans in England, being in low estate, have preached liberty
of Prophesying, and pretended only to desire a freedom of enjoying their
Consciences in particular, promising never to molest any others; As by their
first published writings, and by several Remonstrances and Petitions by Q.
Eliz. to K. James, in the beginning of hisreigne, and to Parliaments in those
times; And yet the same men being afterward become numerous and powerful
enough to gain the effect of their Petitions by force, never yet allowed any
moderate qualification or tolleration to any other.

CHAP. IX.
Reflection upon the Calvinists and Lutheran Churches.

Their first disadvantage in comparison with the English Church.

1. HAving passed with so much speed the Socinian Churches, I fixed my thoughts
more seriously upon the Lutherans and Calvinists, to the end to resolve my
self whether those points of doctrine, discipline or practice, wherein they
differed from, and apparently came short of the English Church, were indeed of
so high a nature as to dishearten me from embracing their communion any other
way, then by allowing them my Charity, in not condemning them, which I also
afforded even to the Roman Church it self.

2. Now among the differences, (where in all other Sects pretending to a
Reformation were distinguishable from the English, as wanting certain
privileges and commendable qualities which she enjoyed) some I found to be
commune to all those Sects, (especially the Lutherans and Calvinists:) Others
to be proper and peculiar to each. Concerning these latter, I found it to
little purpose to spend much time in examining them, because the former commune
ones did more then sufficiently dishearten me from adjoining my self to their
Communion. And those were especially these five, viz. 1. Their grounding their
belief both of the books of Scripture, and the true sense of them, not upon
the universal Tradition of the Church, but their own private Spirit, which,
as they pretended, assured them that the Apostles and Evangelists were the
Authors of them, and that the senses, which they collected from them, were the
true undoubted senses of them. 2. Their apparent want of a lawful succession
of Ecclesiastical Governors and Teachers, joined with an unsufferable
presumption in condemning of Tyranny, that Government of Bishops, which had
been apparently settled in the universal Church without contradiction since the
Apostles Times. 3. Their Doctrines and practices of Sedition and Rebellion. 4.
Their professed hatred of peace and Reunion with the Catholic Church. 5. The
prodigious personal qualities of Luther, and Calvin, which showed them to be
persons extremely unfit to be relied upon, or acknowledged for Apostles, and
Reformers.

3. Concerning the first commune difference, namely, The Calvinist's and
Lutheran's grounding their belief of Christian Doctrines, and their sense of
them, and generally of the books of Scripture, not upon the authority and
Tradition of the Church so much as upon a private Spirit, testimony or
suggestion pretended to be infused from the Spirit of God, by which they took
upon themselves to be assured of the truth of Christianity, of their
expressions of several Articles of Faith, and of their persuasion that the
Apostles and Evangelists were the Authors of those Divine writings: what
little satisfaction I found in this maine Foundation of their Religion I shall
reserve to demonstrate hereafter. For the present I desire that to be mistaken
when I call this one of the differences and disadvantages which the Lutherans
and Calvinists, etc. have in comparing them with the English Church. For though
it be true that by rational consequence from the grounds declared of the
English Church, the former position will evidently follow: notwithstanding she
has been more moderate and wary then publicly to pretend to such a Private
Spirit, and by consequence has left a latitude and liberty for them in her
Communion to renounce it, as many of the most learned among them have done.

CHAP. X.
Apparent want, yea renouncing of a lawful succession of Ecclesiastical
Governors and Teachers among Lutherans and Calvinists.

I. A Second thing wherein the Lutherans and Calvinists agreed to disagree with
the Church of England, was their want of Bishops, and by consequence of a
lawfully ordained Clergy. This was an inconvenience so much the more hard to be
digested by me, and which deserved neither excuse nor commiseration, because
by reason of their want of Bishops, at their first pretended Reformations they
came to that shamelessness as to seek to palliate this defect by a desperate
condemning of the Order it self, as a tyranny and usurpation crept into the
Church against the express Order of Christ and his Apostles: And though they
(especially the French Calvinists) might afterward have in some sort remedied
this defect by receiving a Clergy by the Ordination of the English Bishops
(whereto they have been earnestly follicited, as namely, by Bishop Morton)
notwithstanding they utterly persisted in the utter refusal of suffering this
important disadvantage to be cured: which perverse Spirit of theirs, Arnobius
(cont. Genesis lib. 6.) elegantly describes in these words, Quod semel fine
ratione fecistis, ne videamini aliquando nesciisse, defenditis, that is, That
thing, which ye once unreasonably did, to avoid the imputation of having been
ignorant, ye still maintain. Yea, to that ridiculous impudence have they
arrived in Scotland, not many years since, as to admit one to public Penance
in the Church only for having been a Protestant Bishop.

2. I cannot forbear to give a taste of Luthers Spirit with reference to this
subject, lively represented in a Bull by him published to this Tenor, Anno
Domini M. D. XXIII. Ostand. cent 16. page 87. page 102.
Nunc attendite vos Episcopi, imo larvae Diaboli; Doctor Lutherus vult vobis
Bullam and Reformationem legere, quae vobis non been sonabit, Doctoris Lutheri
Bulla and Reformatio. Quicumque opem ferunt, etc. That is, Now be attentive O
ye Bishops, or rather disguises of the Devil, Doctor Luther will read to
you a Bull, which will not sound pleasingly unto you. The Bull and Reformation
of Doctor Luther. Whosoever brings assistance, spends Body, Life, and Honor
to the end that Bishoprics may be wasted, and the Government of Bishops
extinguished, such are the beloved children of God, and true Christians,
observing the Commandments of God, and resisting the Ordinances of the Devil.
Or if they be not able to do thus much, let them at least condemn and avoid
that Government. But on the contrary, whosoever maintain the Government of
Bishops, and obey them voluntarily, such are tho very Ministers of the Devil,
and resist the Ordinance and Law of God. Hitherto is Luthers Bull. And I desire
that any reasonable Christian would confess, whether he can choose but believe
that the very same whom Luther himself confesses to have been his
Counselor and perswader to leave Mass, was his Secretary likewise to write
this Bull? And that a man should not think that this was only one of Luthers
frantic extravagancies, the horrible effect will demonstrate the contrary,
which was a fearful insurrection and Rebellion of a World of Country people
combined by Oath to the ruin of several Ecclesiastical Princes in Germany,
who were content in that cause to stand to Luthers judgment. Who when he
perceived they were unfurnished of arms, and unl^k^ly to prosper in their
design, lest their Rebe^lion and the effects of it should be imputed to him,
was content to exhort them to obedience.

3. Calvin and Beza, etc. though more subtle, yet were not less malicious
against Episcopacy, as appears in several of their Treatises and Epistles.
Yea Calvin ascended to that height of arrogance as to profess that, that Order
and Discipline which he had forged in Geneva, and whereof not one single
pattern can be given since Christ's Time, was not only justifiable, but
necessarily obliging all Christians to conform unto.

4. Whether it may in some measure be attributed to my education in a Church
which challenged to it self a privilege beyond all other Sects from a
succession of Bishops, or to the evidence of reason and authority which
convinced me of the necessity of such a succession; However it came, I found
it was impossible for me to suffer my self to be persuaded that Episcopacy
was a Government condemnable; or that a legitimate succession of Holy Orders
was not necessary to the constitution of a Church; Or lastly, that the
supereminence of Episcopacy above Priesthood, the appropriating thereto of the
power of Ordination, Confirmation, and giving suffrages in Counsels was an
usurpation crep'd into the Church immediately after the Apostles Times, and
contrary to their intention, Considering that the Primitive Churches were
extremely and punctually scrupulous in maintaining the very phrases of
traditionary Doctrines, and Forms of customapractises; In so much as when the
least innovation in either was discovered, all men conspired to condemn the
innovatours; Witness the controversies about Easter, Rebaptization of
Heretics, etc. Was it imaginable, thought I that those first Bishops, who
even by their Officers were more peculiarly Canditati Martyrii, should so
suddenly degenerate from the Apostolical Spirit of Humility, as universally to
conspire to set up that pretended Tyranny over the rest of the Clergy, and the
whole Church? Or supposing that in the midst of such dire persecutions they had
the will and leisure to design such ambitious projects, is it credible that
the whole Ordor of B^esbyters would suffer themselves to be excluded from their
Privileges and Officers so very lately bequeathed them by Christ, and
conferred by the Apostles; and this universally through the whole World, and
not one single Presbyter appear that should protest against such an
usurpation? Certainly it was much more probable that Luther, and Calvin were
either deceive^s or deceived, then that all Primitive Bishops were Tyrants, and
all Primitive Priests fools, or rather betrayers of that power and duty left
and enjoined them by the Apostles.

5. But though I could have digested this, what arts or violence could I make
use of against mine own reason and conscience to persuade my self to live in
a Church, in which there were neither Bishops nor Priests, but a new Order and
Title of Ministers made by a conspiracy of ignorant laymen, a Church that took
upon her to degrade and annull the Orders of the whole Christian World, because
they had not been communicated to her, a Church which (notwithstanding the
express words of S Paul, Epb. 4. who tells us that one of the special gifts
which o^r Savior upon his Ascension received from his Father to enrich his
Church withal, was that subordination of several Orders of the Clergy, which
was to continue till the consummation of the Saints, or end of the World, yet)
professes that there is no such subordination, and that there were no lawful
Bishops or Pastors in the Church for many hundred years, before Luther broke
his vow of Chastity to make himself fit to propagate them, and before Culvin
escaped from Noyon to Geneva, there to maintain the gates against the Bishop,
and to create Ministers under himself and in his Princes place?

CHAP. XI.
Consent of Fathers against Calvinists and Lutherans.

1. UPon such grounds of Calvinists and Lutherans (if they could possibly
appear to be true) what impudence and folly must we needs impute to all the
ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, who never fail in disputing
against all sorts of Heretics or Schismatiques to insist unanimously upon
this Quere, By what lawful succession, from what Apostolic Seat their first
Teacher derived himself? And professing that it was necessary to insist upon
the point of succession, as to examine the truth of the Doctrines themselves,
according to that Speech of S. Chrysostom (Hom. 11. in Ephesians.) Suppose you
that it is sufficient to say they are Orthodox, and in the mean time
Ordination is lost and perished? To what purpose is the rest, this being not
made good? For we ought no less to contend for it then for the Faith it self.

2. Witness hereto S. Ireneus, Lib. 4. cap. 45. Where is it then that a Man
shall find such Pastors? S. Paul teaches us when he says, God has placed
in his Church first of all Apostles, secondarily Prophets, in the third place
Doctors. There then where the Gifts of our Lord are placed, in the same place
must we seek for the truth, among whom the succession of the Church since the
Apostles, and the purity of Doctrine is maintained in its integrity. Witness
S. Cyprian (in Ep ad Magnum.) Whereas some allege that they acknowledge the
same God the Father, the same Son Jesus Christ, and the same Holy Ghost; this
can nothing avail them ( viz. being a Schism.) For Core, Dathan and Abiron
acknowledged the same God that Aaron the High Priest and Moses did, living
under the same Law and in the same Religion: They invoked that one and true God
who is to be worshipped and praid to: Yet in as much as exceeding the limits of
their Ministry they assumed to themselves the license to sacrifice in
opposition to Aaron the High Priest, who by the ordination of God had before
obtained the lawful Priesthood, they being supernaturally stricken presently
received the just punishment of their unlawful attempts. And again,
Novatianus is not in the Church, neither can be accounted a Bishop, who
despising the Evangelicall and Apostolical Tradition, succeeding to no person
has been ordained by himself. And again, How can he be acknowledged to be a
true Pastor, who, (the true Pastor being alive, and by a successive
Ordination presiding in the Church) without succeeding to any one, beginns from
himself. And again (Ep. ad Flor.) Christ says to his Apostles, and by them to
all Prelates who succeed the Apostles by a substitute ordination ( Vicaria
Ordinatione) He that bears you hears me Witness S. Athanasius (de Synod.)
How can they be Bishops, if they have received their Ordination from
Heretics, even by their own accusation? Lastly, (to omit infinite passages in
Tertullian, S. Augustine Op^atus, etc) Witness S. Hierome, who speaking of H
lary the Deacon, author of one of the Sects of the Luciferians (in Dial: cont.
Lucifer.) says, Together with the man his sect likewise is perished, because a
Deacon could not ordain a Clearke to succeed after him. Now it is not a
Church which has no Priests.

3. Were such arguments as those, I would feign know, logical and efficacious
in the third and fourth century of Christianity, and are they of no force now?
When was it that they began to lose their virtue? Did all the Ancient Martyrs,
Bishops and Doctors of the Church, Champions of Christian Religion, confound
all the ancient Heresies by demonstrating that the Authors of them had no
personal legitimate, (nor Doctrinall) succession? And shall we be made
believe that such a succession now is not only not necessary, but that it is
rather a prejudice, yea that it is an argument for Heresy? That it is a proof
of a truly pure Reformation to abjure not only all the ancient Ceremonies of
Ordination, but even the Officers, yea the very names of all Ecclesiastical
Orders? For mine own part, I must acknowledge my want of courage: I durst not
range my self in such a Congregation, where I should be exposed point blanck
to receive all the shot which so many (by all acknowledged) Saints have darted
against the ancient Heretics.

CHAP. XII.
Seditious Doctrines universally taught by Calvinists, etc.

1. A Third important inconvenience, which I could not see any means to avoid
being adjoined to the Lutheran or Calvinist Churches, was the scandal of
Sedition and Rebellion. An imputation this was, which I could never perceive
that any of those two factions (and principally the Calvinists) took any care
to clear themselves of, any other way then by recrimination upon some
particular persons among Catholics: Never could I meet with, or hear of any
decree Synodicall, any treatise or writing by which they pretended to free
themselves from this charge, or to give security to Princes in whose Dominions
they lived of their intention to be loyal and obedient.

2. Indeed at the end of the Confession of Faith of the French Calvinist
Churches, there is a seeming plausible acknowledgement of obligation to
submission to laws and Magistrates, but with this express reservation,
moyennant que l' Empire Souverain de Dieu demeure en^son entier, that is, upon
condition that Gods supreme authority remain inviolated: a reservation so
large and so ambiguous, that they having both by writings and too frequent
practices declared that they conceive themselves in conscience and by virtue of
Gods law obliged to maintain the pretended-true Religion (not by suffering for
it, but) by active opposing whatsoever humane authority shall seek to destroy
it; Yea more, that they are obliged to use all endeavors to destroy Idolatry
(that is, say they, Catholic Religion) this restriction mentioned in their
Confession seems to have been intended on purpose to put them in mind of
their duty to rebel whenever they have opportunity to maintain or propagate
their own, or chase out and exterminate Catholic Religion. For mine ^owne
particular I profess I never yet conversed with any of them so ignorant, but,
when we spoke concerning this argument, was able to say some thing to any
objections, and many of them had arrived to the skill to allege the subtillest
reasons that that their infernal book styled Iunius Brutus (ordinarily
attributed to B^za) did suggest. And by one trial made since I came into
France, I am become confident that if the next Synod of Charenton were summoned
by such as might constrein them, to explain themselves, Whether incase of
Religion they might not actively oppose the pres^n: supreme authority, or
whether if in France they had the same advantage over Cotholiques, which
Catholics have over them, they would allow the same freedom? they would
endeavor to give an answer as unsatisfactory as their Confession of Faith.

3. It was not altogether the many seditious passages in Luther's and Calvin's
writings which scandalized me so far as to conceive my self by communicating
with them engaged to profess, at least not to profess against, such horrid
doctrines (for liberty is sometimes taken by them to renounce some particular
Texts even of Calvin) but the not seeing any one protesting against or
disavowing such scandalous assertions. I confess I wondered how they could hope
to make any Christians believe that their pretended Reformation proceeded from
the Spirit of Christ, when instead of those spiritual arms of charity,
humility, patience and most indispensable obedience even to Nero himself by
which Christ enabled his Apostles to conquer the world to the belief of the
Gospel; Calvin and Luther put into the hands of their Sectatours malice, pride,
hatred to suffer for conscience sake, active resistance against all authority,
in a word, the very same weapons that the Devil suggested to Mahomet.

4. Now to make this appear to be no wrongful imputation, besides the manifest
experience of all the blood shed in Germany, France, England, etc. and besides
such bloody treatises of Beza, Knox, Good Man, and others of these later times.
I will produce express testimonies out of the writings of Luther and Calvin,
First Luther (loc. com, class. 4. c. 30. directing his speech to one
Spalatinus, has these words, I will not endure that which thou say, viz.
that the Prince will not suffer that any thing should be written against the
Electour of Mentz, nor any thing that my disturb the public peace. I will
rather confound both thee, and the Prince: For if I have opposed the Pope which
is his Creator, why should I not oppose the creature? And, Is it not a pretty
opinion of yours that the public peace ought not nion of yours that the
public peace ought not to be disturbed, but the eternal peace of God may; No
such matter, Spalatinus, no such matter. And again, (cap. de Bapt.) We are
exempted from all humane laws by the Christian liberty given us in Baptism.
Then for Calvin, Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 20. p. 10. and com. in Dan. c. 2. v. 39.
etc. 5. v. 5. Id. in. Dan. c. 6. v. 2. and 25. it is observable first how in
several places he labors to discredit Monarchy in general: then how
seditiously he speaks elsewhere, as in this expression, Earthly Princes divest
themselves of their power, when they oppose themselves against God, yea they
are unworthy to be reckoned in the n^mber of men. And therefore it is fitter
that a man should spit in their faces them obey them, when they grow so sawey
as to^be willing to deprive God of his right. Lastly D. Bancroft Archbishop of
Canterbury (in his Book of dangerous Positions, page 9.) imputes to Calvin
this damnable position, openly both in writing and deeds defended by his
followers, viz That it is lawful for subjects, if Princes will not, to reform
Religion, and that by force and arms, if it can be done no other way.

5. I should have been willing to let such horrible speeches as these pass for
personal faults, and have attributed to them; Luthers frenzy and Calvin's
malicious spirit, if any of their party would have thought fit to disavow them;
or if the yet more horrid books of Beza and other of Calvin's disciples had not
justified their Masters to have been ^ modest in comparison of them; and
lastly, if I had not known that when any among them (I never heard that any
put it in a public trial, but one) to whom such damnable doctrines have
appeared odious, and were willing to publish their detestation of them, had not
been interrupted, and publicly silenced in such a dsigne. But to give a proof
irrefragable that this Sect especialy of Calvinisme is bred and nourished with
this poison of sedition, and that even in the infancy thereof not being able to
keep in the sting, when it was so weak as that it had no power of wounding,
as soon as it gets strength it fayles not to dart it out to the destruction of
never so many thousands that oppose it, I shall for proof only desire that
men would cast their eyes upon the condition of England since the late
Calvinisticall faction there got a fatal opportunity to discharge freely that
poison, which for a long time it was forced to keep closed up in it is entrals,
where after the best enquiry I could make, I could not find or hear of during
the time of these late bloody commotions so much as one single person of the
Presbyterian-Calvinist party but did actively oppose his King; Nor one single
Minister of that party but was a Trumpet io incite to war: And all this not to
free themselves from any danger they were in for their consciences (for before
the war broke out, his Majesty had offered them sufficient security) but to
destroy the present government of that Church, and to set up their own in
place of it. And as for their Brethren in France to this day it has been in
vain attempted to persuade them to signify the least dislike of these their
practices, the most infamous and scandalous to Christianity that ever were.

6. If all these considerations together do not more then sufficiently prove
that without partaking of the scandal, I could not adjoyne my self to the
communion of these Sects, let all the world judge: Especially I being before,
(and yet remaining) absolutely persuaded that it is utterly unlawful upon
praetence of defending Religion, or avoiding persecution to oppose actively
that peaceably settled Government under which I live; Much more to seek the
alteration or ruin of that Government, upon design of introducing that
Religion, which I think to be true. And truly I cannot but acknowledge it a
great blessing of God, that though I had the misfortune to be bred in Schism,
yet it was in such a Church, the form whereof having been molded by authority
(if not according to the interests) of the Civil Governors, in which
continuing it was, besides the obligation of my conscience, mine own secular
interests also to be loyal to the King, with whom that Religion did before
stand, and is now in great danger to fall: for by this means I had no
tentation at all to study ways to elude those express commands of Christ by
S. Paul, (Romans 13.) to be obedient not only for wrath but even conscience sake
to my worldly Governor; and of Christ himself immediately (Mat. 5.) to seek
for blessedness by suffering for the righteousness of the Gospels sake, not
by opposing with active violence the Governors that sought the ruin of it,
much less under present here of by persecuting and destroying others: Divine
Providence seeming on purpose to order the publication of these truly Christian
doctrines under the reign of Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, then which the
sun never saw more abominable Tyrants and enemies to Religion, to the end
that in future ages no pretense should serve to dispense from Obedience. And
this doctrine of Obedience, truly Christian, which I learned in England, being
now by Gods goodness a Catholic, I do and by the grace of God will to my
death retain; and the rather, because I shall now embrace it merely for the
authority of Christ, and in imitation of his Apostles and ancient Christians
afterward, whose heroical subjection to persecuting Emperors, even then when
it was in their power to revenge themselves: among other writers, Tertullian
most divinely expresses in his Apology and elsewhere, and that most victorious
Thebaean Legion gave an illustrious example. Whereas in England, that the
interest of state had: a great influence even upon this doctrine of obedience
appears in this, that when Q. Elizabeth conceived it convenient for her worldly
designs to take on her the Protection of the low-Countreyes against the King of
Spain, She employed D. Bilsou Bishop of Winchester one of her learned
Cleargymen to write his book of Christian subjection, in which to justify the
revolt of Holland he gave strange liberty in many cases, especially concerning
Religion, for subjects to cast off their Obedience. But that book which served
Q Eliz. worldly designs, by the just judgment of God has contributed much to
the ruin of her successor K Charles: For there is not any book that the
Presbyterians have made more dangerous use of against their present Prince,
then that which his Predecessor commanded to be written justify her against
the K. of Spain.

CHAP. XIII.
Protestants recriminating Catholics for Rebellion, answered.

1. I know well that the Lutherans, but especially the Calvinists triumph much
that they can find so few Catholics that have been as wicked in this nature,
as their best and most authentic teachers: most unjustly imputing to
Catholic Religion the most abhored desperate acts of a few Traitors, and the
seditious books of a few Authors: Whereas not only all Catholics in
general do abhor those Acts, renounce and condemn those Writings, but the
whole body of the French Jesuits in Paris, (to whom especially the Calvinists
declare war in this point) being in the year, 1625. met in a full Assembly,
have publicly and unanimously disavowed, condemned and detested such
seditious positions and writings, universally agreeing to condemn that
scandal, wherein I never yet saw them imitated by any one Calvinist.
Particularly for English Catholics, their innocence and clearness in this
point of Obedience was to me sufficiently apparent even before I left that
Kingdom, besides other proofs testified in a Petition offered to the
Parliament immediately before the late Commotions, as in the name of all of
that Religion in England, In which the profession of their loyalty, was
according to the tenor following.

The Catholics of England do acknowledge and profess K. Charles now reigning
to be their true and lawful King, supreme Lord, and rightful sovereigne of
this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's dominions. And therefore they
acknowledge themselves to be obliged under pain of sin to obey his Majesty in
all civil and temperall affairs, as much as any other of his Majesty's
subjects, and as the laws and Rules of Government in this Kingdom do require
at their hands. And that notwithstanding any power or pretention of the Pope or
See of Rome, or any Sentence or detraction of what kind or quality soever,
given or to be given by the Pope, his predecessors or successors, or by any
authority spiritual or temporal proceeding or derived from him or his See
against their laid King and Country, they will still acknowledge and perform
to the utmost of their abilities their faithful loyalty and true allegiance to
their said King and Country. And they do openly disclaim and renounce all
foreign Power, be it either Papal or Princely, Spiritual or temporal, in as
much as it may seem able, or shall pretend to free, discharge or absolve them
from this obligation: or shall any way give them leave or license to raise
tumults, bear arms, or offer any violence to his Majesty's Royal Person, to
the High Court of Parliament, to the State or Government. Being all of them
ready not only to discover and make known to his Majesty and to the high Court
of Parliament all the treasons and conspiracies made against him, or it, which
shall come to their hearing, but also to lose their lives in the defense of
their King and Country, and to resist with their best endeavors all
conspiracies and attempts made against their said King or Country, be they
framed or sent under what pretense, or patronized by what foreign authority
soever. And further, they profess that al absolute Princes and supreme
Governors of what Religion soever they be, are Gods Lieutenants upon earth,
and that Obedience is due unto them according to the laws of each Commonwealth
respectively in civil and temporal affairs, and therefore they do here
protest against all doctrine and authority to the contrary. And they do hold
it impious and against the word of God to maintain that any private Subject
may kill and murder the Anointed of God his Prince, though of a different
belief and Religion from his. And they abhor and detest the practice thereof
as damnable and wicked. And lastly, they offer themselves most willingly to
accept and embrace the late Protestation of union made by the High Court of
Parliament, excepting only the clause of Religion. Professing that they cannot
without sin infringe or violate any contract, or break their words and promises
made or given to any man, though of a different faith and belief from the
Church of Rome. All which they do freely and sincerely acknowledge and
protest, as in the presence of God, without any equivocation, or mental
reservation whatsoever.

3. Now I desire to know what security beyond this, any State can expect from
any Christian, or indeed any man? What jealousy can reasonably be given by
persons, thus clearly and ingenuously professing their consciences and
protesting their obedience; yet notwithstanding the English Catholics are
ready to give a security even beyond this^ the Catholic Bishop pro tempore,
formerly residing in England, having (as I have been credibly informed) offered
his own person and life, as a pledge of the loyalty of all his Clergy, etc.
under his obedience, in so much as if any of them shall be found guilty of
disloyalty, the Bishop will be obliged to produce such a delinquent to
condingne punishment, or pay the defect of it with the forfeiture of his own
life. These things considered I should not deny, even during the time that I
was a Protestant, but that it was with great impudence, and injustice that
Catholic Relegion was accused by those two Sects of disloyalty, a crime
universally and only adhering th themselves, and abhorred by all sorts of
persons, all Orders and degrees among Catholics.

CHAP. XIV.
A fourth scandal among Calvinists, etc. viz. their aversion from unity.

1. A Fourth great discouragement which I had to join in Communion with the
Lutheran or Calvinist Churches, was their manifest renouncing of Christian
Charity, and the peace of Gods Church, their unwillingnesse to abate the least
point of doctrine even to a very phrase, or to alter any thing in discipline
though to gain thereby the greatest good, which is unity and reconciliation,
in a word, the Spirit of Donatisme, a Spirit of Separation, out of the love of
Separation it self.

2. Whether it was a natural inclination in me to hate all quarrels unless
most extremely necessary and unavoidable: or my education in the English
Church, which of all other Sects does most profess moderation, I have always
dearly esteemed those writers whether Catholic or Protestant, which have
endeavored to lessen the number of differences between Christians, to give the
most moderate qualified senses to differing opinions, and to attempt all
probable ways of reconciliation, as Hofmeisterus, Wicelius, Franciscus a
Sancta Clara, etc. among Catholics; And Bishop Andrews, Montague, Grotius,
Monsicur de la Millitiere, Acontus, etc. among Protestants. I was moreover in
mine own understanding convinced that in very many points the differences
between Catholics and Protestants was only in words, while in the meaning
both parties agreed, as concerning Freewill, Predestination, Justification,
Merit of Good works, sins Mortal and Venial, etc. Nay further, that some
negative points of doctrine were maintained even by the Church of England
contrary to their own grounds, that is, contrary to the Universal consent of
Primitive antiquity, as denying Sacrifice and Prayer for the dead, and by
consequence, Purgatory, sacrifice of the Altar, Monachisme, Difference between
Evangelicall Councels and Precepts, vows, etc.

3. Hereupon it was that mine own reason, assisted by my love to Christian
unity, persuading me that for worldly respects, or out of fear of consequences
ungrateful, even the Church of England had divided it self from the
Catholic to a further distance, then justice, truth, and charity would
permit, I could not answer it to mine own reason and conscience, if, instead
of approaching to the Catholic Church, I should run quite out of sight from
it, by communicating with those Churches whose general design and study it is
to make the wound of division incurable, and the breach every day wider and
wider, among whom it is a crime to talk of Reunion, in a word who call it
zeal to profess division from the Catholic Church even in those very
points, wherein their consciences cannot but tell them that they do really
agree with it.

4. Manifest testimonies of this more then Donatisticall Spirit have been given
by Calvin in his most barbarous censure of that too too moderate condescending
book of Cassander D E OFFICIO PII VIRI, and by the CalvinistChurches in France
in their comportments toward M^ssicurs Grotius and de la Millitiere upon
occasion of those treatises by them published tending to union. Yea so in love
have they showed themselves with Schism, quatenus Schism, so zealous to
renounce that precious legacy of Peace, which our Savior at his last farewell
to the world left to his Church, that they multiply division upon division even
among themselves, making Frusta de frusto, of the seamelesse garment of Christ,
denying Communion to one another even for points in their own opinion of no
considerable importance. The Lutherans will not communicate with the
Calvinists, nor the Remonstrants, with the Contra-remonstrants, nor the
Separatists with the English Protestants, And whatsoever union the
French-Calvinist Churches boast of, they owe it entirely to the civil Power
there, for if that would allow them the liberty, they would fall into as many
devisions, as any of their brethren.

5. If sometimes an extraordinary fit of seeming charity have come upon them,
the Circumstances demonstrate, that it was not love of unity or conscience that
begat that good mood, but merely temperall hopes or fears. I remember S.
Augustine, (Ep. 50. ad Bonifas.) Speaking of those professed Masters of Schisms,
the Donatists, gives us this observation, Aliquando autem ficut audimus (says
he) nonnulli ^x ^ip^^^ volentes sibi Gotthos conciliare. That is, Time was, as
we are informed, that some of them, desirous to gain favor with the Goths,
when they began to be powerful, said that they believed the same things (in
substance) with them: but the authority of their ancestors confutes them, for
neither is Donatus affirmed to have so believed, of whose party they do
willingly boast themselves to be. This passage of S. Augustine might likewise
have been thus interpreted, In the year M. DC. XXXI. when the King of Sweden
(King of the Goths) had made a formidable progress in Germany, A Synod of
Calvinists at Charenton in France thought it fit ^^ admit into their Communion
the Lutherans, saying that they agreed with them in all substantial points of
Religion; But herein they contradict their ancesters, who renounced that
communion, and particularly Calvin, of whose party they boast themselves to be,
affirmed constantly, that the Lutheran absurdities touching Consubstantiation
were greater, then of the Catholics about Transubstantiation.

CHAP. XV.
The scandalous personall-qualities of Luther and Calvin.

1. A Fifth, and which for brevities sake shall be the last discouragement
forbidding my communicating with the Lutheran and Calvinist Churches, was taken
from the Personal qualities of Luther and Calvin the founders of those
Churches. Our Savior admonishes us to judge of true or false Prophets by
their fruits: not that Orthodox teachers may not sometimes live wicked lives;
and Haeretiques, laudably: But that those who take upon them to be Prophets,
that is, persons extraordinarily raised up in Gods Church to publish new
doctrines, or to reform general abuses, such men in their lives will signify
the spirit by which they are moved, God never sending such Prophets, but that
he indowes them with a more then ordinary measure of his spirit both of wisdom
and Holiness: On the contrary sometime or other discovering the Hypocrisy of
those who falsely pretend to his Mission.

2. Now to judge of these two great Reformers by their fruits, I would not
build so much, nor be directed by reports of their adversaires, that is the
Calvinist writers concerning Luther, nor the Lutherans or Hierom Bolsce
concerning Calvin: The Characters and pictures that themselves have made of
themselves will show them so unlike those, whose authority and doctrine they
pretended to assume, namely Christ and his Apostles, that they will rather
appear like persons that had agreed to divide between them the whole Stock of
Sin, Luther taking for his share carnal sins, as lust, gluttony, and all
manner of intemperance: and Calvin appropriating to himself the sins of the
spirit, Pride, envy, malice, contention, etc.

3. First for Luther, this testimony he gives of himself ( in Epist. ad Galat.
c v. 14.) before he was reformed, that being in the Monastery he (...) stened
his flesh with watching, fasting and prayer: that he reverenced the Pope with
great respect for conscience sake: that he observed chastiry, obedience,
poverty: this, I did, says be, with a simple heart, a good zeal, and for the
glory of God, fearfully apprehending the last day of judgment, and from my
heart thirsting after salvation. This character he gives of himself,
remembering the time that he was a Catholic: But being turned a Reformer, what
a strange reformation does he confess that that change made in him, he could
not for bear to tell the world such new doctrines as these, ( Luther. in
Proverb cap, 31. v. 9.) There is nothing in the world sweeter and more
desirable then the love of a woman, if a man can atteine to the enjoyment of
it. ( id. Tom. 7. in Ep. ad Wolfg. fol 505.) And again, If a man resolve to
want a woman, let him put off the name of a man, and put on the nature of an
Angel or Spirit. (id. in Ep. ad Phil. fol. 334. and 345.) And again, I burn
with a mighty flame of my untamed flesh. I which ought to be fervent in Spirit,
burn in the lust of the flesh, etc. Again, These last eight days now past I
can neither write, nor pray, nor study, being vexed partly with the tentations
of the flesh, partly with other troubles, etc. But says he, it is sufficient
for me that I know the riches of the glory of God, and the Lamb which takes
away the sins of the world, Sin cannot separate us from him, although we
should commit fornication or murder even a thousand times a day. Sleydan, a
very affectionate Scholar of his, ( Hist lib. 3. fol. 9.) reports that he
himself acknowledged his profession not to be of lifcor manners, but of
doctrine. And ( lib. 2. fol. 22.) that he wished that he were removed from the
Office of preaching, because his manners and life did not answer his
Profession. Now being reduced to this foul condition, he, forgetting his old
Catholic Monkish remedies of watching, fasting and prayer, and having before
renounced his vow of Chastity, and cast away his Religious habit, ( Luth. Tom.
2. in Colloq. Lat.) gave free scope to his lust, and privately, and (O
horrible,) incestuously married Katherine Borrhe, a vowed frofessed Nun: an act
that even he himself was ashamed of, and had remorse for. Then to give us a
taste of what satisfaction he found even in his belief of his new doctrines,
let us hear the report of Joaunes Mathesius a Lutheran; ( Orat. Germ. 12. de
Luth.) Antonius Musa the Parish Priest of Roclits, says he, recounted to me,
that on a time he heartily hemoaned himself to Doctor Luther that he himself
could not believe what he preached to others: and that Doctor Luther answered,
Praise and thanks be to God that this happens also to others, for I had
thought it had happened only to me. Now who cannot but admire the admirable
Providence of God by which this pretended Apostle was thus constreined to
discover himself to the world in such a shape, as if he had intended to fright
all men from harkening to such a monster so abandoned to all filthiness, such
an Apostate, and that against his conscience, not only from Faith, but even
humanity? I forbear to let him publish his other vices, of drunkenness,
gluttony, scurtility, etc. (for he has left none of his good parts
undiscovered in the world) But one thing I cannot omit, a passage not to be
paralleled in any story, excepting only his fellow-reformer Zuinglius, namely,
that he should not be able to for bear to tell the world (as if some body had
exercised him and forced him to confess) that the arguments which moved him to
leave Mass, (Luther. in lib. de Missa priva^a.) were suggested to him
immediately and visibly by the Devil himself, And all this described with
such particular circumstances as if he had taken care that men should not
ascribe it to his dreams or to his Melancholy, or frenzy; in a word, as if he
had been concerned in honor to tell who was his Master: a Master that he
himself said he was very well and frequently acquainted with, having eaten
more then one measure of salt with him, the Devil sleeping with him oftener
then his wife Katherine. Such mercy and goodness and care has almighty God
had over his Church to open the mouth of the beast, and by such a miracle to
discover the true Author of Schism.

4. Then for Calvin, (Conrad. Schluss^iburg^ in Theolog. Calvin. lib. 1. fol
72. and cap. 12. 4.) not to take advantage of the Character given him by a
learned Protestant, which will represent him so steyned even with fleshly lusts
also in a degree beyond Luther, lusts so horrible and unnatural, that I cannot
obtain from my self permission to defile this paper with transcribing his
words; and not to repeat his forementioned seditious, bloody positions,
befitting rather the Alcoran, then writings of Christian Institutions, or
Commentaries; to omit likewise any blasphemous Doctrines by which in immediate
consequence he destroys the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, the Justice and
Sanctity of Almighty God, making him formally the Author of sin; The only
reading of his books against his adversaries, and particularly against
Cassander and Castalio, will acquaint any man with what a spirit he was
possessed and agitated, a spirit that suggested to him words to express the
utmost extremity of Pride, Envy and Malice that a humane soul can be capable
of Certainly if that be true (as it is blasphemy to question it) which the
spirit of God tells us, That into an unclean soul the spirit of discipline
will not enter: and again, That God reveals his mysteries to the humble and
meek: it was not without a great care that God had of this part of the world,
that he suffered those two great Teachers of Schism to discover in themselves
all manner of uncleanness both of the flesh and of the spirit, as if on
purpose, to the end that the same persons while they were presenting to the
world the cup of their poisonous doctrine, should likewise at the same time
give warning that that could be no other then poison, which proceeded from such
hearts full of all uncleanness and the gall of bitternisse: For mine own part I
confess I had not the courage to follow him who professed that he followed the
Devil, and described himself an attendant befitting such a leader; Neither
could I be mistaken to such a point as to think that there was any resemblance
between the Spirit of Christ and that of Calvin. Though the Devil can sometime
transform himself into an Angel of light, and by that means circumvent those
whose sins have deserved that God should give leave to such an efficacy of
error: Yet here the Devil used not so much cunning, he appears like himself
with his natural ugliness and horror, and his Ministers wear his livery:
However I am sure it is impossible that Christ should transform himself into
an Angel of darkness. Vitium simulari non potest virtus potest.

CHAP. XVI.
The Authors unquietness not being able to communicate with Calvinists, etc.

Reflection upon the several Eastern Churches.

1. HAving proceeded thus far in my search of a Church, and finding after an
unpartiall disquisition that among all the Sects in the Western parts of the
world separated from the Roman Church, I could not find any Congregation, unto
the Communion of which I could without hypocrisy adhere, if that Church wherein
I had been bred should come to fail (a supposition not only possible, but, as
the case began to be e're this time, even very probable) I fell into a great
perplexity of mind, so great that I could not perceive any cure for it, no not
though God should bless the King of England so far as to give him an entire
victory over his enemies, and a power to restore that Church to its former
luster: For I now plainly perceived that hitherto my title of being a Christian
and a member of Gods Church, all my interests and hopes of blessedness
depended upon a Church, that never did pretend either to indefectibility,
infallibility or authority obliging any other then only those that live in her
Communion^, and those not in conscience, but only upon penalty of being
deprived of certain priviledgess and preferments belonging to English
subjects; upon a Church that never pretended to declare or decide Articles of
Faith, any other then some few negative ones against the Roman Church, or to
fulminate Auathemas against whosoever submitted not to her decisions, as the
Ancient Church was wont to do; lastly upon a Church that, as, God knows, it
appears now manifestly, has no surer foundation than the prosperity of the
King, and continuance of his civil authority.

2. To gain some ease to my mind, I applied my self to a re-examination of
the prejudices I had against the other Reformed Churches: None of which I could
clearly take away: and particularly concerning the want of a lawful succession
of Pastors, I assured my self it was not possible to be defended or excused,
nothing that I could invent my self, or learn from others having any show of
the least probability, or deserving to be confuted.

3. When this succeeded not, I traveled in my mind over the Eastern
Countries: (for still I was prepossessed that the maine ground of the Roman
Religion, namely the infallibility of that Church, was as demonstratively
confutable as any absurdity in Mathematiques: and therefore though in the
particular points of differences I approached as near unto its belief as
Monsieur Grotius, or Monsieur de la Millitiere, Yet that maine foundation
being, as I thought, ruinous, it was to no purpose to trouble my self with any
debate concerning that Church.) But as ill success I had in the East now, as
before, nearer home: For of those Churches, the Maronites I found, were in
Communion and belief agreeing with the Roman Church. The Abissiues were a
schismatic Church divided both from the rest of the Eastern and Western
Churches now almost twelve hundred years since, namely upon the anathematizing
of the Eutychian Heresy: the like may be said of the Nestorians, Iacobites and
other Haereticall Churches in the Eastern Countries: As for the Grecian
Churches they brought almost all the same difficulties that the Roman Church
did, For almost in all points wherein the English Church differed from the
Roman they agreed with it; in the Article of the Procession of the Holy Ghost
the English agreed with the Roman against them, and their assuming equal
authority with the Pope was apparently an usurpation.

CHAP. XVII.
Necessity of the Authors examining the grounds of the Roman Church.

Several advantages acknowledged to be in that Church.

1. THus like Noah's Dovo wearying my self in flying up and down, and finding
^^ rest for the soale of my foot, I was at last forced to return into the
Arc, seeing what ever became of the English Church, I Now found reason enough
not to think my self safe enough in it. Yet it was a good while before I got
any sight of the Arc, and after I saw it, I did not hastily suffer my self to
be received into it, till I saw there was no other way to escape drowning left
me.

2. My first thoughts after so successelesse a search of a Church were, not
doubtingly, but sollicitously expostulating in my mind, where is the effect of
that promise of Christ, that the gates of Hell should not prevail against his
Church? And, Behold I am with you till the end of the world? I wondered that
the Fathers should so unanimously interpret the Church to be that City seated
on the top of a mountain: For I had in vain sought both mountains and
Valleys, and could not get a sight of it. But I concluded that certainly the
fault was in mine own eyes, which some mist or disease had blinded, and not in
want of visibility in the Church, since all the Promises of God in Christ are
in him, YEA, and in him AMEM. And therefore that no preconceits of assurance or
demonstrations ought to hinder me from examining the pretentions of the Roman
Church, as well as the rest: That it was utterly impossible that the Promises
of Christ should fail, but that it was very possible that both my self and
Mr. Chillingworth might be mistaken in beleiving those arguments to be
demonstrations, which were not: That perhaps he did not understand fully the
mind of his adversary M. Knot: Or perhaps that the opinion and expression of
Infallibility combated by Mr. Chillingworth was but an interpretation given by
a private Doctor of his sense of the Churches doctrine, and so the arguments
against it not proceeding directly against the Church: However that it was very
reasonable, just and requisite seriously and diligently to examine the true
state of that question, which if the Roman Church could to my understanding
justify that she had not erred in, there would presently be an end of all my
travells and doubts about other particular controversies. For who will question
or suspect the truth of that Witness or Judge in particular speeches or
assertions, that has once in gross approved himself to be Infallible?

3. Had it not been for this point of the Churches Infallibility, and some
Philosophical Objections against the Real Presence, etc. I had not lived thus
long out of the communion of the Roman Church; for I always acknowledged that
there were in it very many advantages and excellencies, to which no other
Church had the confidence to pretend. As 1. I could not deny (having withal
the Confession of the most learned Protestants) that the Religion of the
present Roman Church is the very same Religion which Saint Augustine the English
Apostle by the Mission of Saint Gregory the Great planted in England, when he
converted it from Paganism; so that me thought it was somewhat an extravagant
thing to separate now from Rome for those very points, by the embracing of
which England became Christian; Especially considering what persons Saint
Gregory and Saint Augustine were, of what sublime holiness, and profound
learning, and how that Religion was confessedly conffirmed by Divine Miracles.
2. I could not but admire and infinitely approve the ingenuity of the Roman
Church in obliging all her children to interpret Scriptures, and to conform
their belief to the general consent of Fathers: Indeed the Protestants, in
England especially, made honorable mention of the Fathers, but none but Roman
Catholics proceed thus far. 3. That if we defined Haeresie and Schism
according to the general notion of the Fathers, viz. that Haeresie is a
misbeleife innovated in points of Faith contrary to the Doctrine universally
received in the Church; and Schism an uncharitable division of one part from
the external Communion of the whole; Of all Churches in the world the Roman
could with least reason and justice be accused of these two sins, for first,
She only receives and preserves the ancient practice, and all the Counsels and
Synods of the Church. Secondly all other Sects apparently broke from her
Communion, and all Haeretiques were of her Religion before they innovated and
introduced new opinions. 4. That the method by which the Roman Church decided
all emergent controversies, namely by the authority of the present Church,
however I was then persuaded there was some usu^ pation in it, yet de facto
ended all disputes, and produced an admirable unity in that Church. A blessing
which not only reason, but manifest experience shows to be impossible to be
a^ceiued in Protestant Churches, where scripture interpreted by private
judgment is the Rule and Judge, for hitherto never has there been made an
agreement in any one controversy among them: In so much as the proper
difference between Catholics and Protestants is; that if two Catholics be
in debate about any question, both of them will agree to be judged by a third,
namely, the Church; and till that be done they break not Communion: But if two
Protestants quarrel, each of them will interpret and judge both for himself
and his adversary too, there being no umpire between them, nor any thing to
oblige them to Communion. 5. That the sobr^st Protestants sometimes are not
without some suspicion of guilt in matter of Schism, acknowledging at least
that worldly interests had influence upon those Princes that begun separation
first: a case never to be found among Catholics. And when any such scruples
arise in the minds of Protestants, they never trouble themselves with seeing
themselves divided from the Greek or Abissine Churches, but only the Roman. And
very many among them, on their death beds at least, when all secular respects
are silent, desire reconciliation with the Roman Churches. Whereas I believe
there never was heard any one example of a Roman Catholic, which on his
deathbed desired to forsake that Communion to be incorporated into a
Protestant Church. And 6. There was a sixth advantage far more prevailing with
me then all the former (though at the first I had but an imperfect view of it)
namely, the eminent rules of sanctity and spirituallity taught by most prudent
and pious directors, and practiced after a manner, that nothing in any of the
Protestant Churches approaches near unto it. The story and Order of my
information in this particular, I will reserve till the Conclusion of this
Narration. For the present I will content my self with avowing that every day
the more near and fair a prospect I had of the beauty of Holiness, my
prejudices and objections against that Church, in which only such a jewel was
to be found, diminished, till in the end I could not free my self from
partiallity, at least so far as to wish that Truth might not be found
separated from so heavenly a Companion. This Treatise being a Story rather than
a controversy, I thought my self obliged not to conceal my actions, though
they might be obnoxious to be esteemed imperfect or faulty: and am content to
hear and thank whosoever will vouchsafe to reprove me for them.

4. I will not deny but that these seemed to me very specious and alluring
qualities, especially being of such a disposition, that is, one that above all
things in the world abhorred quarrelling, one who though he durst not betray
necessary truths by professing the contrary, yet in many cases would willingly
have purchased peace with silence: lastly, one that always suspected his own
reason, and that was desirous to find out authority, which might deserve to
have his reason submit it self to it.

5. Yet notwithstanding all these invitations, so prepossessed was I with the
invinciblenesse of Mr. Chillingworth's arguments against the infallibility of
the Church, joined with an opinion that it was an essential requisite to
Communion with the Roman Church to acknowledge infallibility in the notion that
I apprehended it, that it was not without much violence to my self that I
could obtain from mine own reason permission to make a serious enquiry into
the grounds of it. But at last, because I would not accuse my self afterward of
want of ingenuity and fidelity in denying that to the Roman Church alone, which
I had performed in respect of all other Churches besides, even to the
Socinians, Nestorians and Eutychians: and besides, the affairs of England
growing every day in the greater decadency, I found that I was likely to be
forced to a real necessity of resolving that that Question, which at first I
reflected on only upon an imagined supposition, namely, Supposing the Church
of England should come to fail, to the Communion of what Church I should then
adjoyne my self?

6. A Question this is, which I am confident never any one person of any one
Sect of Christians before was effectively forced to determine: For never before
was there any Religion so wholly appropriated to any Kingdom or Government, as
that such a Government decaying, the whole frame of that Church sunk, the
professors thereof not being able to find in the whole world any Church into
which, without renouncing their maine distinctive principles, they could enter.
Since the time that it was Gods good pleasure to rejoyne me to the Rock from
whence I was hewn, leading me into the unity of his Church, I have conceived
that I might attribute this decay, and now almost vanishing of the English
Church to a double intention of almighty God, the first, To show that when
Religion, in substantial doctrines especially, is framed according to
interests of State, it does thereby as it were renounce, and exempt it self
from Gods Protection, and by consequence not deserving his care, is not likely
to be long-lived: the second, to the end to show the curse that lies upon
Schism in general, it may seem to have been Gods pleasure that that Church
which had more show of excuse than any other whatsoever, and that better
represented a form of the Ancient and most glorious Church than any other Sect,
should be the first that should be undermined, to the end that others seeing
what has been done to a tre^ which had some greenness in it, might thereby
prophecy what shall become of their rotten and dry ones.

CHAP. XVIII.
Preparations to the examining of the grounds of the Roman Churches authority.

1. Well, at last lifting up my heart in daily and almost hourly fervent
prayers unto almighty God for the direction of his Holy spirit (a practice
which, God knows, I never discontinued from the beginning of my search, but
now a more urging necessity sharpened the intention and fervor of my heart;)
and striving all I could to cleanse the scals, wherein I was to weigh this so
important a merchandise, from all external prejudices or allurements, or any
thing that might hinder my enquiry from being perfectly ingenuous and
unpartiall; and almost vowing that, if God would be pleased to set me on a rock
higher than my self, giving repose unto my mind, that only knew quid
fugeret, but not, quo fugeret, I would consecrate the remainder of my life to
bless and serve him in the best and strictest manner I could find; and
lastly, resolving to purchase truth at the dearest rate possible, though with
the loss of fortunes, hopes, friends or Country; I applied my mind earnestly
and diligiently to the examination of the authority, and, so much disputed,
infallibility of the Roman Church, to Catholics a rock of foundation upon
which all Religion relied, but to me hitherto a rock of offense, and the maine
considerable prejudice, which drove me back whenever I endeavored to make
any appoaches toward that Church.

2. My next preparation and provision for this business, was to inform my
self, not so much from particular Catholic Doctors, as from the Church it
self, in the decisions of her Councels, what was her doctrine in this point,
and in what manner and terms expressed: my design being to learn only what
was so necessary to be believed in this Article, as that without it, a man
could not call himself a Catholic, and with subscription to which alone, a
man might sufficiently justify himself against all exception to deserve that
title. For this purpose I applied my self to the Study of the ancient received
Councels, I perused diligently the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Universae,
Burchardus Wormatiensis, Caranza's sum of the Councels, but especially the
Council of Trent, and the Bull of Pope Pius quartus, desiring further
information from several learned Catholics. If I perused any particular
Controvertists, it was with intention to take notice of such unquestioned and
unsuspected Authors as had most retrenched from this controversy all
particular opinions, and had expressed their understanding of the Churches
meaning with the greatest condescendence and qualification.

3. Having made extraits pertinent to my purpose out of the forementioned
Counsels and Authors, and having digested them, I deduced corrollaries out of
them, importing what authority the Church assumed to her self, whence derived,
and how limited. And, distrusting mine own Collections, to confirm my self
further, and to assay whether those deductions would be allowable by
Catholics sufficiently informed of the true sense of the Churches doctrine, I
gathered out of my extraits certain Conclusions, which I digested into a form
of Questions; These I sent to a worthy and learned friend a Doctor of the
faculty of Paris, desiring his resolution, whether such senses as I had given
of the points mentioned, would be receivable among Catholics, or no. His
kindness and Charity moved him not only to take the trouble upon him of
answering my Questions, but likewise voluntary to publish in print the
Questions with his answers, to the end satisfaction might be given that he had
said nothing therein that any Catholic would question: Which resolutions of
his I thought fit to annex to this treatise.

3. Besides all this, for my further information, and because even during my
education in Protestancy I had been advised, and was consequently resolved to
embrace those doctrines, which were most conformable to the profession of the
Ancient Church, I conceived it necessary to study diligently such Fathers
writings especially as had been forced to maintain the Churches authority
against Heretics. Thereupon I betook my self to the rending of the
Ancient-Church History, and besides others, I perused exactly Tertullians
Praescriptions against Haeretiques, etc. S. Cyprian, S. Epiphanius, S.
Augustines Epistles and treatises against the Donatists, Manichaeans, etc.
Vincentius Lyrinensis, S. Hieroms Books against the Luciferians, Iovinian and
Vigilantius: I had recourse likewise upon occasion to certain treatises of
Saint Basil, and S. Athanasius, S. Hilary, S. Pacian etc. And lastly I judged
it an effectual way of atteining to the understanding the opinion of Antiquity
concerning the Church, to select the special Texts of Scripture, wherein
mention is made of the Church, and to examine how the Fathers interpreted those
Texts; and what inferences they drew from them in their Sermons and
Commentaries, in which I might be sure they spoke without interest and passion,
as having no adversary in sight to combat withal, and therefore were not
likely to streine themselves in their expressions. Such Texts of Scripture were
these, and the like, Die Ecclesiae, etc. Tell the Church, and if he will not
bear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican. And, Tu es
Pertus, etc. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And, Ecclesiae, quae est
firmamentum fidei, etc. The Church which is the ground of Faith, and Pillar of
truth, etc.

CHAP. XIX.
What prejudice the Author received by receiving the doctrine of the Roman
Churches Authority expressed in School-language.

Success of his enquiry into Councels and ancient Fathers.

1. THe answering of the Questions, and especially the perusing of those books
was the business of a good space of time, above twelve months, or more. The
excessive pains and diligence employed by me, which otherwise would have
brene tedious, was much sweetened by the discovery every day of new light. And I
could not but observe the strange effects of education and prejudice, which
made me believe my self to be saparated in my belief from the Catholic
Church at a distance unmeasurable, when indeed I was even at the doors: and I
am certain I had been much sooner a Catholic, if I had thought or rather
indeed if I had considered (for if I had considered it well I might have found
sufficient ground to think so) that the belief of the Churches doctrines
nakedly as she proposes them, and in the latitude allowed by her, had been
sufficient to have gained that title. But I took those to be the necessary
doctrines of the Catholic Church, which were only the private opinions and
expressions of particular Doctors, And the simplicity of the Articles of
Christian Faith was clowded by Scholasticall Metaphysicall terms, which being
abstruse, nice, and unknown to Antiquity rendered the doctrines themselves
obscure and withal new and suspected to me.

2. And all this by a very pardonable fault of mine: For from whom should I
receive the doctrines of the Roman Church when a Controversy is raised, but
from the learned Masters of Controversy? And how few among them propose the
points to be disputed between them and the Protestants in the language of the
Church? Besides how few among them are there, who in disputing will allow that
latitude which the Church apparently does? There is scarce any Point of
Controversy, which is not severally interpreted, streitned, or enlarged by
several Catholics of several Orders and education: and most of them in
confuting the Protestants seem very earnest and make it almost their whole
design to impose their particular interpretations and expressions for
Catholic doctrines. But with very little or no success: For a Protestant
will be very ready, and may with good reason say, Though by being persuaded by
you I shall become a Roman Catholic, yet I might deny all that you maintain,
and yet be a Roman Catholic too, for I can produce Authors which you dare not
deny to be good Catholics, that will not receive nor subscribe to your
expression and stating of this Point: Therefore seek to convert them first, and
then come and dispute with me: Dispute like a Catholic, for the question is
not now whether I shall be a Dominican, Jesuit, Scotist, etc. But whethe I
ought to be a Catholic, or no. The truth is by these means, disputations are
endless, Catholics themselves affording answers and objections to
Protestants against Catholics. Whereas if particular Controvertists as were
indulgent as the Church is, and would be content to think that the terms
wherein She expressed her mind were the most proper, their adversaries would
quickly be silenced, Controversies abated, and, by Gods assistance, union in a
short time happily restored.

3. The great ha^me which I received by judging of the Churches Faith by
particular new expressions of it, puts me into this fit of liberty in censuring
thus far the method of those men by whom I have been so long a time so far from
being persuaded, that I was rather hindered from my reunion to the Church: And
on the contrary, this happy success in following the direction of some few
Catholic authors, who separating particular opinions of Doctors from
necessary Catholic Doctrines, and urging nothing upon me, but without
assenting to which, I could not be a Catholic, makes me judge by mine own
experience as well as reason, that that which healed me of my errors and
Schism, would not by Gods blessing want the same effect in others also,
especially among English Protestants; and the rather if (following the advice
of the most Reverend the Lord Archbishop of Roven,) Protestants, in stead of
wearying themselves with particular debates, would resolve this in the first
place, why they made the Schism at first, and continue in it still: What
dispensation they have from the authority and unity of the Church, so
unanimously and affectionately reverenced and obeyed by the ancient Fathers?

4. I cannot without ingratitude, in this place and occasion omit a profession
of that great obligation I have with thankfulness to almighty God, and respect
to his happy instrument, to acknowledge the efficacious influence that one
Treatise in special manner had to the furtherance and facilitating of my
Conversion, written in French by that skillful and authorized Controvertist,
Francis Veron Doctor of Divinity, and entitled by him Reigle generale de la
foy Catholic: In which he delivers the pure Catholic Doctrine in the words
of the Counsels, streined and separated from all particular opinions or
authorities not absolutely obliging. And this exemplified throughout almost all
the considerable points of Controversy, bewteen Catholics and the several
Sects of Protestants. Which method of proceeding is approved by several learned
Doctors of the Faculty of P^^is, and the general design of it by his late
Holiness Gregory the fifth, as was signified to the Author by his Nephew
Cardinal Ludovisi^; yea God himself has approved and recommended the same
Method by his numerous blessings on it in the Conversion of a world of
wandering perverted souls. From his ground it is especially that I in this book
both take this fashion and Latitude of stating doctrines of faith, and
recommend it to others, when they treat with Protestants: And particularly from
him did I receive Information, that the very express term of Infallibility
was not of obligation to be made use of in Disputation concerning the Churches
Authority: As likewise that the Doctrines of Faith promulgated by the said
Authority in the Decrees of general Counsels, did admit of many more
qualifications and restrictions then popular Controvertists do think good to
make use of. So that if in this or any other point any expressions found in
this book shall seem new or not so relishing to any, I must refer them to the
said Author and his Approvers, who no doubt will ease me of the trouble of
making Apologies.

5. But leaving this digression, I will at last relate the success I found in
reading the Canons of the Church, the forementioned books and treatises of the
Fathers, etc. Which was, that I thereby gained a distinct knowledge both of the
faith of the present Church, and what those Ancients believed concerning the
Churches Authority: and this not by relying upon a few select passages and
Texts picked out by late Controvertists, but by observing the maine design and
intention of those Fathers, when the very like Controversies in their times
constreined them to consider and unanimously declare what they themselves
thought, and what they had received from their predecessors concerning the
Church, Haeresie, and Schism.

6. That therefore which I learned from them pertinent to my present purpose I
will set down in four Conclusions, relating to four principal heads of
controversy, namely, 1. Of the Rule of Faith, that is, Scripture and
Traditions unwritten. 2. Of the Judge of Controversies, that is, the Catholic
Church. 3. Of the unity of the Church and the danger of Heresy and Schism. 4.
Of the perpetual Visibility of the Church. To all which Propositions
respectively I will adjoyne the doctrine of the present Roman Church, contained
especially in the Council of Trent; And likewise the belief of Protestants;
Concluding with an examination whether the Roman or Protestant Churches do best
conform themselves to the universal Ancient Tradition concerning the Church and
her authority, etc.

7. When all this is done, at their peril be it, if any imputing to me
sinister intentions, of which they cannot be judges, shall say it was either
worldly discontent or ambition, and not an evident conviction of truth, and
resolution to save my soul that moved me finally to declare my self rather a
follower of that part which, to my understanding, follows an universal and
uninterrupted agreement of such Teachers, as both sides agree not only to have
approached nearest to the fountain of truth, Christ and his Apostles, and
therefore to have had means of informing themselves in Apostolical Tradition
incomparably beyond us; But also to have been extremely cautelous and learned,
and so not easily obnoxious to be mistaken or deceived, And likewise
unquestionably pious and virtuous, and therefore abhorring any intention of
seducing others for temporal respects: Rather then three or four new
teachers, in whom there is not only a visible want of all these good qualities,
but on the contrary such as have not been able to forbear to declare
themselves to be worse men, more polluted with Lust, Gluttony, Sacrilege,
Pride, Malice, Envy, etc. then without their own confession their adversaries
could with a good conscience have accused or but suspected them; And the effect
of whose innovations has manifestly been nothing but Atheism, profaneness,
bloodshed, confusion and ruin.

The second Section.
Containing a stating of four fundamental points of Controversy, in four
Conclusions.

CHAP. I.
The first Conclusion, concerning the Rule of Faith.

Testimonies of Fathers acknowledging Doctrines Traditionary, as well as
Scripture, to be a Rule of Faith.

1. ACcording to my promise in the last Chapter of the former Section, I will
consequently set down the fundamental truths of Catholic Religion, in four
Conclusions, respecting four general points of Controversy: The sense of
which Conclusions I found evidently and uniformly delivered by the ancient
Fathers; and by the light of the said truths, through Gods grace and goodness,
I became entirely undeceived, and by their direction, I was led as it were by
the hand into the Gates of that City, which is set on a hill, the holy
Catholic Church of Christ. Now of those, this is the

I. CONCLUSION.

The entire Rule of Faith, comprised in the Doctrines delivered by Christ and
his Apostles immediately to the Church, is contained not only in Scripture but
likewise in unwritten Traditions.

2. FOr the former part of this Conclusion, viz. That the Rule of Christian
Faith (and obedience) is no other then the Doctrines (and Praecepts) delivered
immediately by Christ and his Apostles to the Church, And by consequence that
the present Church pretends not to any new Revelations, or Power to make any
new Articles of Christian Faith, or to propose any Doctrines under that title
other then such as She has received by Catholic Tradition, it will be
unnecessary pains to prove out of the Fathers, since I do not know any
Christians, who deserve that title, that doubt of it. Indeed the Calvinists
(earnest to find all occasions to heighten their Schism) charge the Catholic
Church, as if she admitted within this compass other Doctrines, Decrees and
Decretalls, etc. But most unjustly, since there is no warrant or ground given
them to lay this aspersion upon the Church, and all Catholics generally
renounce it.

3. But as for that which follows in the Conclusion, viz. That this Rule of
Faith is not contained entirely and expressly in Scripture alone, but likewise
in unwritten Traditions: In this lies the maine difference betweeen the
Catholic Church and all other Sects both ancient and modern; They all and
always conspiring in this, that the Scripture is to be the only Rule, and
themselves judges and interpreters of the sense of it, at least for themselves,
or if not they, no body, however not the present Church: and on the contrary
Catholics in all ages unanimously joining in the contradiction of that
ground, and affirming that all Doctrines of Faith were not indeed, no^ ever
were intended to be entirely expressed in Scripture; And that Scriptures ought
not to be interpreted by any private spirit or reason, any other way then
according to the line of Ecclesiastical Tradition.

4. Concerning the Rule of Faith therefore, let us ask our Fathers that were
before us how they were instructed in this point, and among them the first
testimony will be afforded us by S. Ignatius to this effect quoted by Eusebiu^:
(Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 35.) Ignatius says he, exhorted the Churches to hold
themselves inseparably to the Tradition of the Apostles, which Tradition for
surenesse sake he thought good to reduce into writing. Again, S. Polycarpus,
says the same Author, ( l. 5. c. 19.) taught his Disciples many Traditions not
written. Again S. Dyony. Arcop. (Hier. Eccl. c. 1.) at least even by
acknowledgment of the most learned Protestants, an Author of the second or
third age, Those prime Captains and heads of our Hierarchy thought it necessary
to deliver unto us those sublime and supersubstantiall Mysteries both in
written and unwritten instructions. Again S. Fab. Pope ^^ Martyr, (Ep. 1. ad
Episc. Orientis.) speaking of holy Chrisme to be renewed every year (of which
no mention is in Scripture) adds, These things we received from the Holy
Apostles and their successors, which we require you to observe. Again
Tertullian (de Cor. Mil. cap. 4.) discoursing, as he often does, of several
rites and practices not mentioned in Scripture, concludes in one place thus, Of
all these and other disciplines of the like nature, if thou shall require a law
out of Scripture, thou shall find none: Tradition shall be alleged to thee
for the Author Custom the confirmer, and Faith the observer. Again S.
Irenaeus, ( Cont. Haer. lib. 3. c. 4.) What if the Apostles had not left us
Scriptures, ought we not to have followed the Order of Tradition, which they
delivered to those to whom they committed the Churches? to which ordination
give proof many nations of those Barbarous people who believe in Christ,
having salvation written in their hearts by the Spirit, without characters or
ink, and diligently observing the ancient Tradition. Again the Fathers
assembled in that ancient Council of Gangres (Can. 21.) We desire that all
those things which have been delivered in divine Scriptures, and by Tradition
of the Apostles should be observed in the Church. Again S. Basil, ( de Spir.
Sanc. to cap. 27. 29.) of the dogmes and instructions ((...) (...)) preserved
in the Church, some we have by written institutions, others we have delivered
by the secret Tradition of the Apostles; Both which sorts have the same
authority for as much as concerns piety: and there is no man will contradict
this that is never so little experienced in the law of the Church. The same
Father in the same Chapter, The day would fail me if I should produce all the
Mysteries which the Church observes without writing. And a little after, I
account in an Apostolic thing to persist constantly in observing Traditions
not written. Again, Eusebius Caesariensis, ( de them. Evang. lib. 1.) who
having said that Christ did not as Moses, leave his Law written in Tables or
Paper, but in the hearts of his Apostles: who likewise following the example
and intention of their Master, Have consigned their doctrines, some indeed in
writing, and others they have delivered to be observed by laws unwritten.
Again S. Chrysostom (2 These. cap. 2.) From hence it appears that the
Apostles have not delivered all things by Epistles, but likewise many things
without writing: now both those and these deserve to be equally believed.
Again S. Epiphanius, ( haer. 61.) We must likewise make use of Tradition, for
all things cannot be taken out of Scripture: And therefore the Holy Apostles
have given us some things in writing, and others by Tradition. Again S.
Augustine ( de Bap. cont. Don. lib. 5. cap. 23.) speaking against those that
maintained that Haeretiques ought to be rebaptised, The Apostles, says he,
have prescribed nothing concerning this thing: But this custom which was
opposite to S. Cyprian ought to be believed to have taken its original from
their Tradition, as there are many things which the uniuersall Church observe
^^h, and for that reason are rightly believed ^^ have been commanded by the
Apostles, although they are not found in their writings. These quotations
seemed sufficient to me to show the general Opinion of the Fathers to be
consonant to the Conclusion before mentioned.

CHAP. II.
The Roman Church agreeing with Fathers in the same Rule of Faith.

All Sects of Protestants disagree with the Fathers.

1. NOw to the end to confront with Antiquity the present Roman and Protestant
Churches, that it may appear which of them are the true legitimate children of
those Fathers: We will begin with the Roman Church, whose mind we find
clearly expressed in the Decree of the Council of Trent Sess. 4. concerning
Canonical Scriptures, in these words, Sacrosan^^a, etc. Tridentina Synodus,
etc. Perspiciens hanc veritatem, etc. that is, The most holy, etc. Synod of
Trent, etc. Clearly perceiving that this truth and discipline ( namely, the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles) is contained in books, written, and
unwritten Traditions, which were received from Christ's Mouth, or delivered as
it were from hand to hand from the Apostles, to whom the Holy Ghost dictated
it, has arrived even to us: Following the Oxthodox examples of the Fathers,
receives and venerates with an equal affection of duty and reverence all
books as well of the Old as New Testament, since one God is the author of
both, as likewise the Traditions themselves whether perteining to Faith or
Manners, as dictated either by Christ's own Mouth, or by the Holy Ghost, and by
a continued succession preserved in the Catholic Church. Thus far the
Council of Trent.

2. Whether the Roman Church has indeed made good this her profession, viz.
That in this decree she follows the Orthodox examples of the Fathers, besides
so many formal proofs before alleged, the confession of many learned
Protestants will justify her: As Cartwright (Cartw. Witgift Def p. 103.)
speaking of the forementioned or like quotations out of S. Augustine, says, To
approve this speech of Augustine is to bring in Popery, etc. So likewise
Whittaker, Fulk, Kemnitius, etc. ( Whit. de Laec. Ser. p. 678. 681. 690, etc.
Fulk^ con. Purg. p. 362. 397. Kemnit. Exam. part 1. p. 87 etc.) for such like
assertions of the Fathers condemn then generally; and by name Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Eusebius, Baesile, Leo, Maximus, Theophilus, Damascene. etc.

3. In opposition to this decreed Doctrine of the Roman Church, and by
consequence to the Orthodox examples of the Fathers, a^^ manner of Sects that
have separated from the Church, or from one another since Luthers ^^me, agree
almost in no other point unanimously except in this, That the Scripture
conteins in it expressly all things both concerning belief and practice, which
are necessary or but requisite to salvation. And by consequence that no man is
or ought to be obliged to submit to any Doctrine or precept any further then as
it can be proved manifestly to him to be contained in the written word of God.

4. The Church of England (Art. 6. of English Church) in particular makes this
one of her peculiar Articles, That the Holy Scripture contains all things
necessary for salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as
an Article of Faith, or to be thought requisite necessary to salvation. But
withal professes that The three Creeds, Nicene Creed, Athanasius Creed, and
that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed ought thoroughly to be received
and believed. Moreover that she receives the four first General Counsels:
yet not saying that she thinks her self obliged to the one or other for the
authority of Tradition or the Counsels, for if so, she would be obliged
likewise to accept of and submit to many other Traditions and Counsels, as
likewise many points and practices confirmed in those Counsels, besides the
Mysteries of the Blessed Trinity, many of which notwithstanding she
relinquishes, if not condemns: Yea on the contrary for those three Creeds she
gives this reason for her admitting of them because they may be proved by most
certain warrants of holy Scripture. And how little or no authority she allows
to the Church, or General Counsels shall be shown in the next Conclusion. For
the present therefore, taking those words of accepting the three Creeds and
four Counsels rather for a complement of Civility to Antiquity, then as
importing any real intention to admit any judge or Rule of Faith, but only
Scripture and that interpreted by her self, for her self at least: Come we to
consider how rational and safe a ground this is, That nothing is to be
believed but only Scripture.

CHAP. III.
English Protestants unwilling to Justify this Position: and Why.

Mr. Chillingworths late book against the Catholic Church: and the Character
given of it.

1. THis Position of Scripture being the only Rule of Faith, though it be the
main foundation upon which all Heretics and Schismatiques^ almost that are
and ever were do rely, and therefore in all likelihood, since so many millions
of people of all Sects and in all ages have been concerned to study and make it
good, should in reason be best upheld: Yet to my apprehension of all other
controversies, this is the most weakly grounded, and guiltily maintained.

2. The experience I have of the particular disposition of English Protestanats
(properly so called) and the happiness I have enjoyed in the acquaintance and
friendship with very many the most considerable persons for Learning, Prudence,
and Piety in that Church, gives me warrant to say this of them, that there is
no point of Controversy that they are more unwilling to touch upon then this of
Scriptures being the only Rule, and no visible Judge to interpret it, I mean,
as to the positive maintaining thereof (for as concerning the disputing against
the infallibility of the Church, there is none more ready to make Objections
then they.) One reason hereof may be, because the English Church, out of
gratitude to the Ancient Church and Fathers, which have hitherto maintained
their Ecclesiastical Government against the Calvinists, till they came to
dispute with fire and sword, professes therefore greater reverence to antiquity
and Tradition then any other Sect whatsoever; And therefore her children are
unwilling to renounce or oppose that great army of Saints and Martyrs of the
Primitive times, who unanimously acknowledge that besides Scriptures they had
received from their Ancestors Traditionary Doctrines and Ritts, and these so
universally spread through all Churches Eastern and Western, no man being
able to name any particular fallible Author of them, that they were as firmly
assured that they proceeded from the Apostles, as that the books of Scripture
proceeded from the same Authors. Yea, for many of these Traditions greater
proof might be made of their authentic and Divine Original, then of most
books of Scripture, in as much as they were from the beginning universally
apparent in the Practice of the Church, visibly shining in their Public
liturgies, for example, Prayer for the Dead, and by consequence, Purgatory,
that is, a State of deceased Christians capable of being bettered and eased by
the Charity and Devotions of the living, Sacrifice of the Mass, and Offering
it for the Quick and Dead, Adoration of Christ really present there, Baptism
of Infants, Non-rebaptization of Heretics, Observation of Ecclesiastical
Feasts, Lentfasts, etc. Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Relics, Images,
etc. Practice of Crossing themselves, Rites in administering Sacraments, etc.
Whereas the books of the New Testament, especially the Epistles and
Apocalypse, being written upon emergent occasions, and for the present need of
particular Persons and Churches, were a great while before they could be
generally dispersed, and great caution and circumspection used before they
would be admitted into the Cannon: and being all, except some few that have
perished, received there, it was impossible to prevent infinite corruptions in
the writing, since every one had leave to transcribe the^.

3. A second reason why English Protestants (I speak knowingly at least of my
self and not a few others) dispense the more easily with themselves for
examining the sufficiency of this Rule of Faith is, because there being but two
ways imaginable of assigning such a Rule, that is, either express Scripture
alone, or that joined with Ecclesiastical Tradition, which is to be received
upon the authority, or (as the Schools call it) the infallibility of the
Church; and Protestants being persuaded that they can unanswerably confute this
fallibility, they take it for granted that the former is the only Rule, and
therefore surcease from undergoing the pains of diligent enquiry how firmly
their foundation is laid, and what course to take for the answering of those
inextricable inconveniences which follow upon that ground, for fear, lest if
both these foundations should come to shrink, Christianity it self would
become questionable, and a way made for direct Atheism. Hereupon it is that
generally their writers have proceeded the destructive way, willingly
undertaking to contradict the Churches infallibility; and it is not without
extreme violence that they can be brought to maintain their own grounds;
Which when the earnestness of Catholics extorts from them, though they must
conclude, for only Scripture, and No-judge, yet either shame or remorse makes
them defer somewhat to the ancient Churches authority, as it were excusing
themselves that they dare not suffer themselves to be directed by her; For if
by her as a visible Church, then by all Churches succeeding her to these our
times.

4. In these latter times since that great unfortunate Champion against the
Churches infallibility, Mr. Chillingworth published his book in defense of
Doctor Potter, this guilt of English Protestants has been far more
conspicuous. His objections against the Church, that is, his destructive
grounds are avowed and boasted of as unanswerable in a manner by all: but his
positive grounds, that is, the making only Scripture, and that to be
interpreted by every single man's reason, to be the Rule of Faith, this is at
least waved, if not renounced by many: But most unjustly: since there is no
conceivable means how to find out a third intelligible way of grounding
belief and determining controversies besides divine revelation proposed and
interpreted authoritatively by the Church, or mere Scripture without any
obligatory interpretation, as shall be demonstrated hereafter. Hence the
general Character given of himself and his book is, That he has had better
luck in pulling down buildings, than raising new ones, and that he has managed
his sword much more dexterously than his buckler. And yet as if there were no
need either of house or buckler, or as if Protestants did think themselves
secure from weather and danger, if Catholics were expulsed and wounded, No
man appears with any design to provide himself of any safer way of defense,
then that which Mr. Chillingworth has afforded. Yea Mr. Chillingworth himself
(his friends know the reason of it) ^utterly refused to answer those
unconquerable confutations of his positive grounds, and those fearful
consequences charged upon them: being satisfied, or at least making a
countenance before those that knew him not inwardly, that he was satisfied of
the firmness of his Rule of Faith, as long as an exact particular answer to
all his objections against the Churches infallibility was not published.

Those who have had a particular acquaintance with that extraordinary sublime
wit and judgment, will, or at least, can, witness with me that thus much as I
have said in a seeming censure of him is true. Considering the long and inward
friendship, and the many obligations I had to him, I had absteined from this,
but that the cause in hand obliged me thereto; and but that his book alone had
the principal influence upon me to shut up my entrance into Catholic unity:
I shall therefore have frequent occasion hereafter in this Narration to weigh
both his proofs and objections, at least such of them as were most powerful
with me: yet resolving to be extremely tender of his reputation: But to
return to the Story of my self.

CHAP. IIII.
Inconveniences following Protestants Position of Only-Scripture.

Fathers refuse to dispute with Haeretiques from only Scripture.

1. When I was forced to weigh with circumspection and fidelity this maine
fundamental Position of Protestantisme, viz. That the Scripture is the only
Rule of Faith, or, That all things necessary to be believed are contained
expressly in Scripture, what a world of unavoidable inconveences did presently
throng into my understandiog, and upon how mere sand did it appear to be
laid! For the inconveniences. 1. It is impossible upon this ground that ever
there should be found a way to end any controversies, as shall be demonstrated
in the next Conclusion. 2. There can scarce be named one Haeretique but took
the same for a ground of his Haeresy, and generally the Fathers protest against
this ground, reducing them to Ecclesiastical Tradition, and the authority of
the present Church.

2. For a proof whereof we may consider the particular Treatises and books of
the ancient Fathers which they wrought directly for this purpose, namely to
show what method and grounds their Ancestors and reason it self dictated to be
used and proceeded upon in disputing with any Haeretique whatsoever: and we
shall find that the Catholics of these days do show themselves indeed sons
of those Catholic Fathers, exactly treading their steps in appealing to
Scripture and general Tradition from which there lies no prescription or
appeal: And on the contrary, that the Haeretiques and Schismatiques of our
times have been as exact in pursuing the traces of their Ancestors, pretending
only Scripture, but relying upon the Pride of their own hearts, and thinking
that their interpretations and wrestings of Scripture ought to prevail against
all present and past authority how universal soever for place, and how
uninterrupted soever for succession: The treatises anciently written for this
purpose are S. Irenaeus against Haeresies, Tertullian de Praescriptionibus, S.
Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae, S. Augustine de unitate Ecclesiae, contra
Epistolam Fundamenti, de utilitate credendi, etc. S. Vincentius Lerinensis his
Commonitorium, etc.

3. In particular may be witness of this Tertullian, (Tert. de Praescrip. cap.
19.) There is no good got by disputing out of Texts the Scripture but either to
make a man sick or mad. And again, There ought therefore to be no appealing to
Scripture, nor disputing out of them, since by that means either neither side
will be victorious, or it is a hazard whether. And again, But hitherto we have
in general proceeded against all Heresies, proving by assured, reasonable and
necessary prescriptions against all Heresies, that they are to be excluded from
all disputation out of Scripture. Witness likewise S. Augustine, Haeresies and
doctrines of perverseness ensnaring souls, and sinking them into Hell have
risen from no other fountain, but this, that Scriptures which are good, are
understood not well, and that which is not well understood in them, is rashly
and impudently maintained. Again, the same Father brings in the Arian Bishop
Maximinus thus challenging a Catholic, (id con. Maximin. Ar. Episcopum lib.
1.) If thou will produce any thing out of divine Scriptures which are common to
all, it is necessary we should hearken to thee: But these speeches which are
not in Scripture are in no case receivable by us. The same Father in the
conclusion of the same books brings in another Heretic using these words, I
desire and wish to be a Disciple of the Holy Scriptures, etc. If thou shall
affirm any thing out of the Scriptures, if thon shall produce a quotation of
any thing written there in any place, We desire to be found disciples of the
Holy Scriptures. Again several other passages to the same purpose may be seen
in several other parts of his works as in Epist 222. and in lib. de Genesis ad
lit. lib. 7. cap. 9. and de fide and Symb. cap. 9. and in Joan. Tract. 18.
Lastly, the same Father disputing against Cresconius the Grammarian, says,
(id. lib. 1. con. Cresc. Gram. cap. 33.) Yet notwithstanding although there is
produced no example of this out of Scriptures Canonical, we do nevertheless
observe the truth of the same Scriptures, when we do that which is approved by
the Church, whose authority the Scriptures recommend. See suitable passages in
l. 5. de. Bap. cont. Donat. cap. 23. and de Unit. Eccl. cap. 19. Witness
again S. Hierom, (S. Hieron. dialog. cont. Lucifer.) Neither let them please
themselves, if sometimes they seem to make good their assertions out of some
Texts of Scripture, for the Devil likewise sometimes quoted Scripture, for
Scriptures consist not in the bare words, but in sense. It is true indeed the
Fathers sometimes commend the fullness of Scripture, as S. Basil saying,
whatsoever is without the Scripture is sin, but withal he gives us a Rule to
know his meaning, showing that according to the last quotation out of S.
Augustine against Cresco^^us the Grammarian, that may be said to be virtually
contained in Scripture, which is delivered by the Church, whose authority is
recommended to us in Scripture, so says S. Basil likewise, (id. lib. de
Spiritu sancto.) It is an Apostolic thing to persist constantly in Traditions
not written, for says the Apostle, I praise you in that you are mindful of
whatsoever thing came from me, and observe the Traditions which I have given
you. Besides in some cases there may be controversies about points, which are
not grounded upon Orall Tradition but only Scripture.

4. A third inconvenience following the Protestants position is this, That
since undoubtedly there were in the Primitive Church Traditions in great
number, besides what is expressed in Scripture, I could not imagine what was
become of them, or how it should be possible they should come to be lost having
been received generally through the whole Church, and most of them shining in
the practice of it. To salve this inconvenience, Protestants either impudently
give the lie to all the Fathers, and say without the least proof that there
were none at all: Or in England there being under-Sects which by Scripture
alone could not be confuted, as Puritans, Anabaptists, Sabbatarians, etc. they
are forced to acknowledge some few Traditions of such a nature, although
thereby they destroy their maine foundation of Only-Scripture; For by the
Traditionary doctrine of Non-rebaptization they conclude the Anabaptists to be
Heretics, that is, erring in a necessary point of doctrine: Yet themselves
renounce doctrines and practices delivered by a far more full Tradition; So
great effect has interest in that Church. But what will become of S. Basils
saying before quoted, That the day would fail him if he should undertake to
enumerate all the Traditions left by the Apostles in the Church, not mentioned
in Scripture? For all, that even the most condescending Protestants will allow
for such, may be reckoned five times over in a minute of an hour. Considering
therefore that such Traditions being visibly manifest for the most part in the
practice of the Church, are far more easily preserved then any writing can be,
it will necessarily follow that the rest of that great number are extant in the
Roman Church, as may be proved of most of them before reckoned by testimonies
of Ancient Fathers. (Vid. sup. c. 3.)

5. A fourth inconvenience to my understanding, unavoidable by Protestants, and
a great proof of the truth of the Doctrine of the Roman Church is this: Though
Protestants generally deny that the points of Controversy debated between them
and the Roman Church were universally received by the Ancient Church, as
Invocation of Saints, adoration of Christ, as present in the blessed Sacrament,
Prayer for the dead, etc. Yet they cannot deny but that in many of the Fathers
proofs of these doctrines may be found to show that such was at least their
particular opinions: Now if generally the Ancient Church had agreed with
Protestants both in denying such doctrines and practice, received now in the
Roman Church, and likewise in making only-expresse-Scripture the Rule to judge
by; it could not be avoided but that some Synods or Fathers would have taken
notice of such pretended errors in the writings of other Fathers, and likewise
would have produced some of those Texts of Scriptures now made use of by
Protestants for that purpose: a thing they are so far from, that on the
contrary we find that many of the Fathers infer the same doctrines from the
same Texts that Catholics now do. And Protestants, though they allege some
passages of Fathers, by which they may seem consequently to destroy such
doctrines, and to contradict their own formal assertions in other places, yet
are not able to produce so much as one Text of Scripture interpreted by any
Father to confute any one such pretended error. Which is a thing very
remarkable, and will argue either that no man in the Ancient Church took notice
of such pretended dangerous speeches of so many Fathers, or that they
understood not the plain Texts of Scripture, if Protestants grounds be true:
or upon Catholics grounds, since it was impossible, but they must have taken
notice of such opinions, and since they certainly did understand plain Texts
of Scripture, that therefore not disputing out of Scripture, as Protestants
do, they were so far from believing such opinions to be errors deserving a
Schism, that they all of them agreed in receiving them as Catholic Truths.
Other inconveniences which without hope or possibility of remedy do arise from
making Scripture alone (secluding not only Traditions but likewise any visible
obliging interpreter) to be the only Rule and Judge of Controversies, shall be
reserved to be examined in the next Conclusion concerning the Authority of the
Church in this business.

CHAP. V.
Weakness of Protestants proofs for only-Scripture.

Texts of Scripture alleged by Catholics vainly eluded by Protestants.

1. AS I said before, since Protestants and all other Sects do against their
nature and custom so unanimously conspire to forsake the old^ and good ways,
by traveling wherein, even themselves being judges, so many glorious Saints,
Confessors, Martyrs, Bishops, etc. were renowned not only in their own, but
all succeeding times, dissipated armies of Haeretiques, propagated the Kingdom
of Christ over the world, subdued Idolatry, and made it utterly to vanish
though supported with the force of the whole Roman world, and in fine arrived
to a supereminent degree of glory in Paradise; And since in stead of this so
successful a way, they have chosen to walk every man in a several path
through those narrow, crooked and at least very dangerous, (because new) ways
of a proud selfe-assuming presumption in interpreting only-Scripture each man
according to his own fancy and interest, following the example of no antiquity,
but only ancient Heretics; in all reason they should have taken order to have
justified themselves herein after a more then ordinary manner, they ought to
have contributed all the invention and skill of all the best wits in each Sect
to fortify this common foundation of only Scripture, and no visible judge,
beyond all other points of difference.

2. And so no doubt they have to the utmost capacity of the subject: But no
skill can serve to build a firm secure edifice upon sand: and private reason,
or fancies of inspiration are more weak and sandy then even sand it self. For
proof hereof let us consider the pretended proofs and reasons which they
allege to assert this their fundamental position, viz. that the entire Rule
of Faith is the written word of God, of which there is not extant any visible
authoritative interpreter. Proofs hereof produced by them are 1. Negative,
invalidating such Texts of Scripture as are alleged by Catholics, and
expounded by Fathers to prove Traditions unwritten: and 2. Positive, drawn
from other Texts expressing the sufficiency and perfection of Scripture.

3. Some Texts by Catholics produced to prove Traditions, and those
concerning points of Doctrine as well as practice or ceremonies, besides what
is written in the Evangelicall books, are among others these following out of
S. Paul, (2 These. cap. 1. ver. 15.) Observe the Tradititions which you have
received from us, whether by word, or by Epistle, And again, (2 Timothy c. 2.
ver. 13.) Have before thine eyes the pattern of sound words, which thou have
heard of me in Faith and Jesus Christ: Conserve that good thing committed to
thy charge by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us. And again, (1 Timothy cap. 2.
ver. 2.) The things which thou have heard of me in the presence of many
witnesses consigne them to faithful men, which may be capable to teach oth^^
also, And lastly, (1 Timothy cap. 3. ver. 15.) The Church (is) the pillar and
ground of truth.

4. To elude such Texts as these so express in themselves, so stringent and
convincing without any leave given to any rational contradiction, so
unanimously acknowledged by the ancient Father^ in the plain importance of
them (for there was no need to call their commentaries interpretations, there
being not the least difficulty or obscurity in them to be cleared) Protestants,
especially the Calvinists (for the Church of England has been more ingenuous)
have been forced to make use of the poorest guiltiest shift imaginable, which
is, to translate the word(...)enseignements, instructions, or by any other
word, but what reason and rules of Grammar would require, namely, Traditions.
That which moved them hereto was apparently a resolution to seduce the people:
for nourishing them up in the hatred of the Church, in contempt of her
authority, in rejecting all her Traditions, so far that whatsoever is proposed
under that title of Tradition is not only not accepted, but scornfully rejected
by them as supposed most certainly false and superstitious; if it should
appear that the Scripture it self should refer us to Christian doctrines
under the notion of Traditions, the very sound of that word in Scripture would
perhaps make them suspect that their Ministers had abused them.

5. But moreover for a help, if this poor subtility should come to be
discovered by their Proselites, it is further answered by them, that S. Paul
might very well refer Timothy or the Thessalonians to the sum of Christian
doctrine by him before preached, and not yet reduced to writing, because the
entire Canon of Scripture was not yet completed and sealed up; but when that
was finished, afterward Christians were not to trust to their memories, but to
have recourse to express Scripture, as is employed by several Texts of
Scripture denoting its abundant sufficiency for all uses and necessities.

6. For answer to this way of arguing it will be sufficient to say, that
whatsoever is here alleged by Protestants is merely gratis dictum, there being
not the least intimation given by S. Paul, or any other Evangelicall Author,
that the Apostles had any intention to write among them a body of the Christian
law, searce any book of the New Testament having been written, but only upon
some particular occasion, and for the use of some particular person and Church:
and on the contrary it appearing expressly both by Scripture and Tradition that
the Apostles, in all the Churches founded by them, left a depositum both of the
doctrines and discipline of Christianity uniforme and complete, not relating
at all to any thing already, or afterward to be written.

CHAP. VI.
Two principal Texts of Scripture alleged by Protestants to prove it is
sufficiency, and against Traditions; answered.

1. COme we now to consider a while those Texts of Scripture pretended by
Protestants to be so express, uncontrollable and pressing, as to justify them
from blame in not only opposing the former evident quotations for Traditions,
but in dividing from and condemning all Antiquity that taught the contrary, and
not only so, but relied upon Tradition alone in several points confessed by
them not to be visible in Scripture, and yet condemned, anathematized and
utterly vanquished several Heretics, who thought it a sufficient warrant to
be dispensed from several doctrines taught, and practices continued in the
Church, because the Scripture was silent in them.

2. Of all others the most considerable Text of Scripture alleged by
Protestants, and most prized by them as efficacious to prove its perfection,
and sufficiency to be an entire Rule of Faith is this speech of S. Paul to
Timothy, (1 Timothy c. 3. v. 16. 17) Omnis Scriptura divinitius inspirata, utilis
est, etc. All Scripture divinely inspired is profitable for teaching, for
arguing, for reproving and for instructing in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect, instructed to every good work. Here, say they, it is
apparent that S. Paul acknowledges Scripture to be profitable for all kinds of
spiritual uses, teaching, arguing, etc. and moreover in such a perfection that
by it not only ignorant persons but even the man of God, that is, he who is a
Teacher of Gods people, who by his office is obliged to a higher perfection of
knowledge, may be made perfect, and that, to every good work.

3. To this it is answered 1. That by reading the verse immediately going
before, we shall be informed both of what Scriptures S. Paul there speaks, and
in what sense and with what conditions they are profitable for the
forementioned uses and ends: the words are, Tu vero permane, etc. Do thou (^^
Timothy) persevere in those things which thon have learned, knowing of whom
thou have learned them, and because from thy childhood thou have known the
Holy Scriptures, which may instruct thee to Salvation, by faith which is in
Christ Jesus: For all Scripture divinely inspired is profitable, etc. By the
connection of these words it appears that those Scriptures to which Saint Paul
gives this testimony and glorious character were the same in which Timothy, now
a Bishop, had been instructed from his childhood, that is, the Scriptures of
the Old Testament: For how few of the Evangelicall writings were published even
now that he was a Bishop, and certainly scarce any at all when he was a child.
S^ Paul's design therefore in this passage is evidently this, viz. to exhort
Timothy to remain constant (in iis quae ei tradita fuerant) in those Christian
verities and precepts by the Apostle delivered in trust to him not in writing,
but orall Tradition: For which purpose he uses these motives, namely 1. the
consideration of the sublime Apostolical Office of himself his instructour,
immediately and miraculously called and enabled to that employment by Christ
from heaven, therefore he says, knowing of whom thou have learned these
Evangelicall truths. 2^ The conformity of these new revelations to those
ancient ones of the Old Testament, in which Timothy had been instructed from
his childhood, in which he might perceive, though obscurely traced, certain
marks and Prophecyes of the Gospel, and so be easilier inclined to believe
what S. Paul had plainly delivered to him. 3. Upon this occasion he declares
the great profit which a Christian may find by having recourse to the old
Testament, as having great efficacy to make a man wise unto salvation; but this
not of themselves alone, but joined with the Faith, which is in Christ Jesus,
and perseverance in believing the Christian verities delivered by orall
Tradition. So that the Apostles might very well conclude, All Scriptures (of
the Old Testament giving testimony to the Gospel) being inspired by God are
very profitable (not entirely of themselves sufficient) for teaching, arguing,
reproving, instructing in righteousness; And that by them the man of God,
(even a Christian Bishop) may be made perfect or enabled to every good work
(that is, as he expresses the same sense in the former verse, wise unto
Salvation; but upon condition that they be joined with the Faith (or Gospel)
of Christ Jesus, and perseverance therein.) This to my understanding seems to
be the proper natural importance of this Text of S. Paul, so far from evincing
what the Protestants would collect from it, that it confirms the quite
contrary.

4. But let it be supposed (which is impossible to be evinced) that the Apostle
speaks here by way of Prophecy of Evangelicall Scriptures not yet written, but
with respect to the time when they should be perfectly completed; he says
only they are profitable, not sufficient, to produce the mentioned effects and
end; He excludes not the Church interpreting them; in a word, He referres
expressly to orall Tradition; And by consequence he is far from saying any thing
that may warrant the Protestants upon pretense from these words, to relinquish
the way which all ancient Christians and Fathers of the Church walked in, and
to walk in that which, as has been showed by irrefragable testimonies, has
been traced by all and only Heretics. So far is he from saying, or giving
warrant to any to say, Reject all things that you find not expressly contained
in Scriptures, though the whole world upon whose only testimony you receive
Scriptures affirm that they received other things from the same authority,
Keep your selves close to that sense of Scriptures which your own fancies or
interests shall suggest unto you, and admit neither fathers nor Church to
interpret them to you, believe your own understandings only, which you may
call the inspirations of the Holy Ghost, if you please, And content not your
selves with deceiving your selves alone with such fancies, take authority upon
your selves to destroy all public authority, and to^ obtrude per sas and
nefas your interpretations and glosses upon the consciences of others. This S.
Paul ought to have said, if he had purposed to justify the grounds of
Protestantisme: But this I could not conceive to be his meaning, and therefore
I took it to be my best course to be misled by Fathers, Counsels and the
whole Catholic Church.

5. A second proof for the sufficiency of Scripture alone to be an entire Rule
of Faith, and of great moment among many Protestants is that speech in the end
of the Revelation, (Rev. c. 22. v. 18. 19.) Contestor enim omni audienti, etc.
I do protest to every one that hears the words of the Prophecy of this book:
If any one shall add unto these, God shall add unto him the plagues written
in this book. And if any one shall diminish from the words of this Prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the Holy
City, and out of those things which are written in this book. The weight of
this Text is much more pressing in their opinion by reason of the situation of
it in the close of the whole body of Evangelicall writings; and likewise by the
advantage of a Parallel place in the end of Moses his law.

6. Hereto it is answered that this Text is so far from obliging us to
understand it in general of Evangelicall doctrines, that expressly and in
terminis terminantibus it restreines it self only to the Prophecies contained
in this particular book, for bidding any one to presume to make any change in
it, either by addition and interpolation of other Prophecies pretended to be
written by the same Divine Author (a thing practiced by Heretics in other
Evangelicall writings when this book was published) or by razing out any
Prophecies herein contained, (as some Heretics likewise had done in other
Apostolical books.) So that this author is so far from forbidding any other
revelations of divine doctrines besides those already published, that
notwithstanding any thing here said, Agabus and Saint Philips daughters might,
if they had pleased, have set forth their Prophecies, so they had done it
without injury or disparagement to the Apocalypse. Even as Moses by such like
words signified that in his writings were contained the sum of that law
delivered by God on Mount Sinai, at least as much of it as was fit to
communicate for the present to the people, and therefore forbad any man to
change his writings any way: Yet notwithstanding, it is apparent that not only
the Jews, but likewise the Ancient Fathers believed that besides this written
law, Moses himself delivered to the Priests and Sanedrim many unwritten
Traditions relating to the law it self, some of which are mentioned in
Evangelicall Scripture, as the institution of the order of Exorcists, the
mingling of water with the blood of the Testament wherewith Moses sprinkled
the people, Skarlet wool and hyssope to be used in all aspertions, the
sprinkling the book of the Covenant with blood, The names of Jannes and
Mambres the antagonists of Moses, and the combat between an Angel and the
Devil about Moses, his body, etc. Besides, many Holy men published books
among the Jews acknowledged of divine authority, wherein were many Mysteries
of Faith not only more expressly, but de novo contained, and not at all
declared by Moses, many writings of devotion, Precepts of Piety and manners,
etc. Only Moses his books have been received to this day under the notion
of the fundamental law of the Jewish Commonwealth, a title that other
writings never challenged.

7. As concerning the advantage taken from the position of the forementioned
Text in the close of the Evangelicall writings, it will be of no force at all
to any man that shall consider how it came to pass that the several books
were placed in the order as we at this day find them viz. That certain men
unknown to us now, but followed by a tacit agreement of the Church, when after
the decease of the Apostles they had sought out all the writings that remained
and had been occasionally published by them, compiled them in one volumne in
this order; They begun with the Gospels or history of our Saviors life and
death, as reason was, placing them it may be in the order as they were written,
however assigning the first place to S. Matthew, because he having written his
Gospel in Hebrew for the use of the Jews and Jewish Christians to whom Christ
commanded his Gospel should first be preached, and upon their refusal, to the
Gentiles, even for that reason alone his Gospel might be thought to have
deserved the first place, the rest following in the order as they were written.
Then follows the Story of the Apostles, especially S. Paul, written by his
companion S. Luke, and continued till their separation by S. Paul's voyage to
Rome. After books of Story follow doctrinall writings, namely Epistles,
containing particular doctrinall controversies and precepts of manners, written
upon occasion, when false Teachers had sown tares of particular Heresies in
the Churches, founded by the Apostles, Among these Epistles, those of S. Paul
both for the number, importance and length of them obtained the first place,
but disposed not according to the order and dates of time that they were
written, but according to the privileges and advantages of the Churches and
Cities to which they were sent; the Romans having obtained, as reason was, the
first place, then the Corinthians, etc. and after all such, followed his
particular Epistles to particular persons, as Timothy, Titus, etc. In the last
place, the whole volume was concluded with this single book of Prophecies, as
being last written, most difficult, and less necessary. These things being
apparent, let all reasonable men judge what just advantage can be taken by
Protestants thus to build their maine foundation of difference from the
Catholic Church upon so inconsiderable, so casual a thing, as the order
wherein the bookos of the New Testament have been ranged, no man knows by whom.

CHAP. VII.
Rnasons and Texts produced by Mr. Chillingworth to prove only Scripture to be
the Rule of Faith.

1. BEsides these two so much by many Protestants magnifyed proofs of the
Scriptures pretended sufficiency to determine all controversies of Religion
with exclusion of unwritten Traditions: There are other arguments, which had
greater force with me, produced by Mr. Chillingworth; and which that he might
more advantagiously enforce, Mr. Chillingw. C. 4. 40. 41. 42. 43, etc. and
alibi passim.
he lays this first for a ground, viz That no man ought to be obliged upon
pain of Excommunication to believe any thing, but what God has revealed to be
necessary to eternal salvation, which is the substance of the New Covenant
made by God in Christ, containing points of necessary belief, and precepts of
necessary Evangelicall Obedience; For, (says he) why should any error (or
ignorance) exclude him from the Churches Communion, which will not deprive him
of eternal salvation? Why should men be more rigid then God?

2. These grounds thus laid, and supposed unquestionable: In the next place to
prove that this Covenant is entirely contained not only in the whole Scripture
but also in the lower Gospels, yea sufficiently in any one of the former, he
first alleges these reasons, Because the Evangelists having, as they profess,
a purpose to write the Gospel of Christ, or New Covenant, no reason can be
imagined why they, who have set down many passages unnecessary, should neglect
any necessary: For what supine negligence and indiscretion must that needs be;
such, verily, as no man in these days undertaking the same design, would
commit? Again, with what truth could they style their books the Gospel of
Christ, being but a part of it?

3. After such discourses he brings, in his opinion, two evident and
unanswerable Texts out of the Gospells to prove, that whatsoever is necessary
for a Christian to believe or practice is contained in every one of them
severally: The first Text is the conclusion of S. John's Gospel, ( cap. 21)
Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his Disciples, which are not
written in this book: But these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is
Christ the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name. For
the enforcing of which quotation, he adds. By these words (these are written)
may be understood either, These things are written, or These signs are
written: Take it which way you will, this conclusion will certainly follow,
That either all that which S. John wrote in his Gospel, or less then all, and
therefore all much more, was sufficient to make them believe that which being
believed with lively faith would certainly bring them to eternal life.

4. The second proof is from those words in the Preface of S. Lukes Gospel, (
cap. 1.) Forasmuch us many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
Declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us, even as
they delivered unto us which from the beginning were eye witnesses and
Ministers of the word. It seemed good to me also having had perfect
understanding of things from the first, to write to thee in order, most
excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the certainty of those things
wherein thou have been instructed. To this quotation he adds a parallel
passage of the same S. Luke in his entrance to his History of the Acts of the
Apostles, ( Chap. 1.) viz The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus of all
that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day that he was taken up,
etc. Lastly he adjoynes twelve questions serving to enforce to the uttermost
the strength and energy of these Tex^s: Which Questions after I have first
prepared a way by consideration of a few principal terms in this controversy
to a satisfaction what is here concluded from these Texts quoted by Mr.
Chillingworth, I will likewise set down, adjoining to each of them its answer.

CHAP. VIII.
Preparatory grounds for the answering of these reasons and Quotations.

That Christian Religion was settled in the Church by Tradition especially.

The advantage of that way beyond writing.

1. THe whole weight of this Controversy concerning the Rule of Faith (viz.
Whether all truths and precepts, etc. of Christianity necessary to Salvation be
to be sought for in Scripture alone, or any one or more of the Gospels, as
expressly contained in them (as Protestants affirm) or likewise in the
Tradition of the Catholic Church, as Catholics maintain?) relying upon the
true understanding of these three things especially, viz. 1. The way whereby
Christianity was settled in the Church, which will appear to have been by
Orall Tradition and external uniforme practice, as being more secure from
error and mistakes than writing. 2. The occasion of the writing of the Gospels
and other books of the New Testament, and the benefit which the Church reapes
by them. 3. The meaning of this Phrase, things necessary to salvation, and the
freeing of it from ambiguities and misapplications. I conceived it therefore
necessary to meditate seriously, and as exactly, as I was capable, to inform
my self distinctly of these particulars, to the end that I might be able to
judge, whether these difficulties and objections alleged by Mr. Chillingworth
would approve themselves as unanswerable, as at my leaving of England I
supposed them, Here therefore I will set down in order the effect of my enquiry.

2. To begin therefore with the first particular to be premised, namely, the
way whereby Christian Religion was settled and continued in the Church: By
diligent reading of the writings of several Fathers especially, and ancient
Ecclesiastical Historians it manifestly appeared, at least to mine own full
satisfaction, that it was not the purpose of Christ to deliver his new law, as
Moses had done his in Tables or written characters, but in Orall Tradition: or
to write it indeed, but, as Eusebius Caesariensis before quoted expresses it,
not with ink on paper, but by his Spirit in the hearts of his people, according
to the ancient Prophecies concerning him in the Old Testament: And hereupon the
Fathers observe, that our Savior left nothing at all in writing, neither did
he lay any injunction upon his Apostles to write books: And therefore the same
Eus^bius (Hist. Ecel. l. 5. cap. 8. and 24.) expressly affirms, That the
Apostles had the least regard to writing. The like is noted by Saint
Chrysostom in his frist Homily upon the Acts, where he gives the reason why
the book of the Acts does only or principally contain the occurrences
concerning S. Paul, and not those neither to the end of his life. But an
assurance of this irrefragable is given by Saint Paul himself, who in several
places of his Epistles referres to the doctrine settled by orall instruction, as
when he says, Gal. c. 1. If any one shall preach otherwise then ye have
received, let him be Anathema. And again, ( Phil. cap. 4.) Those things which
ye have been taught, and received, and heard and seen in me, do ye. And again
to show the uniformity of the doctrine every where, he calls it (...) a form
of wholesome words. And again, We write no other things unto you then what you
have known. And again, (1 Cor. cap. 14. 15.) As I teach in all Churches. And
again, So we have preached, and so ye have believed. Hence S. Augustine makes
this rule, The Scripture is wont for brevities sake to be silent of many
things, which are to be learned from the order of Tradition. For this reason it
was, as antiquity observes, that S. Paul kept his residence so long a time in
many Cities after he had settled Churches there, to the end to inculcate into
their memories the substantial doctrines preached over and over unto them, and
to establish an uniforme order and discipline among them, which by that means
continued in an exact conformity for several centuries of years in the
Catholic Church all the world over, as Tertullian, S. Basil, S. Augustine,
etc. observe.

3. Now this way of settling Religion by Tradition and outward practice was much
more secure and lasting, and far less subject to corruptions then writings
(without unappealable interpreters especially) could possibly be. If it be
objected, that memory is not so safe a depositary as written records, which are
made use of to supply the defects of memory. It may be answered, that that is
true of preserving doctrines merely speculative, but not so of such as may be
made as it were visible by practice, as almost all Evangelicall doctrines are.
For as for books, we see by experience that those which of all other in the
world ought to have been preserved with the most exact care, and wherein the
most scrupulous curiosity was commendable, I mean the Sacred Evangelicall
writings, have not been able to escape the inevitable fate of all books,
especially such as every one almost will think himself concerned to
transcribe, that is, to have infinite variety of readings, much more then any
other books that I know of whatsoever, and principally in in the original
tongues, which were not read in Churches: Insomuch as in my hearing Bishop
Usher, (one of the most learned Protestant Prelates in England) professed that,
whereas he had had of many years before a design to publish the New Testament
in Greek with various lections and Annotations, and for that purpose had used
great diligence and spent much money to furnish himself with Manuscripts and
Memoires from several learned men abroad, yet in conclusion he was forced to
desist utterly from that undertaking, lest if he should ingenuously have noted
all the several differences of readings, which himself had collected, the
incredible multitude of them almost in every verse should rather have made men
Atheistically to doubt of the truth of the whole book, then satisfy them in
the true reading of any particular passage. An evident sign this is that the
ancient Governors of the Church did not suppose that Christian Religion did
only or principally rely upon what was in writing: For if they had, they would
doubtless either have forbidden such a multitude of transcribers, or have
preserved the Original copies, or at least have imitated the exact diligence
and curiosity of the Jewish Masorites in their preserving the Old Testament
entire for the future, namely by numbering all the letters and points, and
signifying where and how often every one of them were found in Scripture: None of
which preventions and cautions notwithstanding have been used in the Christian
Church: Yea so far is it, from that, that at least one whole Epistle of S.
Paul to the Laodiceans, and that most ancient Gospel in Hebrew, secundum
Nazaraeos are at this day utterly lost: not to speak of several books
mentioned in the Old Testament, not now to be heard of.

4. Well, but how casual soever books may prove to be yet it does not
hitherto appear how Orall Tradition and Practice can demonstrate it self a
way more secure and free from hazard than they. I will therefore endeavor to
resolve this seeming difficulty by asking these Questions. Can any one
reasonably say that, for example, the doctrines of Christ's death for mankind
commemorated in the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, and of his real
unfigurative presence there have been, or could possibly have been more
securely propagated and more clearly and intelligibly delivered to Posterity
in books written, which may be lost and will be corrupted by some transcribers
(and every transcribers copy is as authentic as any others) or, as they have
been, in the Tradition and universal Practice of the Church, and in a
continual visible celabrating of those divine Mysteries, where every action
they did perform, published the truth which they believed; where their
thanksgiving for Christ's Passion daily renewed the memory, manner and end of
it; where their prostrations and adorations demonstrated their assurance of his
real Presence, where every man's saying Amen at the Priests pronouncing Corpus
Domini nostri Jesu Christi, expressed their confession of that Presence with
exclusion of all Tropes and Metaphors in the business? Again, is not the true
inward sense of these Christian Doctrines conveyed more intelligibly, and
represented more exactly, lively and naturally by such practices and solemn
spectacles, than by bare words, though they had been never so eleare, and of
never so studied a perspicuity? With relation to which express, impossible to
be mistaken way of propagating the Mysteries of Christian belief, and
reflecting in his mind thereupon S. Paul in all probability thus reproved the
Galatians for their inconstancy, in these words of wonder and indignation Gal.
c. 3 v. 1. O insensatiGalatae. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that
ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been (lively)
represented, being Crucified among you? As thinking that nothing of less power
than a charm could deceive persons, or blind their eyes, after they had been
visible spectators, as it were of the passion of Christ.

5. This admirable way of conveying saving truths as it is say more express
than words alone, the natural sense of the Mysteries being as it were
construed and interpreted to the people thereby, or (according to the Prophets
expression foretelling this way of Tradition of the Gospel) being not written
with ink and on paper, but by the Spirit in men's hearts, by which means the
sense sunk into their souls, far more effectually than if words only had
swom in their brains: So seems it to me also far more lasting, then books,
being scarce possibly obnoxious to be either extinguished or adulterated. The
rage of Persecutors without an extraordinary vigilance of Divine Providence had
failed but little of abolishing the whole Bible, I am sure it made them very
scarce and precious, and not every ordinary Christians penniworth for several
ages together, and effectively destroyed many most useful precious monuments
of the Ancient Church; The same rage, or negligence or some other misfortune
have actually been the loss of an Epistle of S. Paul to Laodicea, and other
Apostolic writings, And some merely speculative, not very necessary
Traditions have perished because not apted to be conveyed by practice, as What
that was which hindered the revelation of the man of sin, which S. Paul says
he told the Church of the Thessalonians; that world of miracles which S. John
says our blessed Savior wrought; and likewise the true sense of all obscure
passages in the New Testament which the Primitive Churches, no doubt,
understood; Yea moreover many ancient Liturgies and Missals are now wanting, by
reason that the particular Churches, in which they were in use, have failed:
But to take out of the way, or adulterate the Mysteries of Faith through the
whole Church, which have been thus continued and daily every where preached not
so much in Sermons (though so too) as in visible practice, and not so much
written in books (though so too) as in the hearts of all Professors of
Christianity, This is beyond the reach of either secular or infernal Powers,
for to effect this, Persecutours must first have dostroyed all Congregations of
Christian mankind, and by some impossible charm, all men must have agreed
together to forget to day what they said and did yesterday: here neither
transcribers negligence, nor particular innovating fancies of Heretics,
neither adulter sensus, nor corruptor stilus could obstrepere veritate, (Tert.
de Prescript.) none of such either negligences or cunnings could interrupt or
out-clamour the truth.

6. Now what has been here exemplified in two particular points, namely the
Mystery of Christ's Passion, and of the Blessed Sacrament may and ought
rationally to be extended likewise to the whole body of Divine Revelations,
pertaining to the substance of Christian Religion, how abstruse, sublime, yea
how seeming a speculative soever. What points more sublime, more speculative
then those of the Blessed Trinity, the equality and consubstantiallity of the
Son with the eternal Father, the union and yet distinction of the two Natures
in one person, etc.? And yet all these might and were continued in the Church,
not so much by writings delivered, or Sermons reiterated, as by the outward
Practices of the Faithful in their public uniforme Devotions: Hereupon when
troubles and contestations arose in the Church about those Mysteries, and
thereupon Synods assembled, the several Bishops being demanded how they had
been instructed in them each one respectively in their Diocesses, they had no
need of stroining their wits to find out the sense of obscure passages of
Scripture concerning such Mysteries, or to invent ways of reconciling Texts
seemingly clashing together: they might say, for example concerning the article
of the Blessed Trinity, we following the instructions and practices of our
Predecessors do baptize in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and in
our Devotions we pray unto, give thanks, glorify each of these three persons
in the same language, with equal expressions of duty, without preferring one
before the other, thereby acknowledging their glory to be equal, their Majesty
coeternall. So likewise for the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father,
the union and distinction of the two Natures, they might say, We adore only
one God, and yet we adore the Son with adoration equal to the Father, by which
we acknowledge them both to be one only God; We do likewise celebrate and
give thanks to the same Son of God for vouchsafing, being God, to take our
Nature upon him and in that to dye, by his death redeeming us from sin and
death eternal, Therefore we confess two distinct Natures united in one
Person. etc.

7. Now if such sublime Revelations might, and indeed were really conveyed not
in formal expressions of words and phrases, but, which was far more
efficacious, in the true natural sense and importance of them incapable of
ambiguities by such a way of Tradition so impossible to be interrupted as long
as Christians begot Christians, and so free from danger of corruptions, that
they could not be feared, unless all Churches would conspire to alter their
whole frame of Devotions; A thing they have been so far from intending, that at
this day if we compare all the Liturgies extant from S. James' (which has
received testimony from above 600. Bishops in the second Council of Nice) to S
Basil'^, S. Chrysostom's, S. Gregorie's even to the present Roman Liturgy,
adjoining the Ethiopian, Maronite, Coph^ite, etc. we shall find an admirable
uniformity in all the substantial parts, yea in many manners of expressions,
to the very circumstances of Crossings, and postures, etc. although these
Churches have had no communication together of many ages: How much more easily
and perspicuously might other points of Doctrine relating to practice be
continued in the Church? as Invocation of Saints to be our Intercessours,
Veneration of Relics, Images, etc. Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, a
belief of a capacity in them to be eased and benefitted by such Prayers, etc.
How was it possible that such Doctrines once delivered should be forgotten,
being so visibly every Day by all persons acted in the Church? And if no such
Doctrines were at first consigned and deposited in the Church, how was it
possible they should so chance to mee^e in the Public Devotions of so many
Churches and ages, among Persons not only strangers, but for a long time
enemies to one another, yea enemies to such a point, that if they had not had
irrefragable testimonies of the universal Tradition of such doctrines and
Practices, the conformity of their adversary Churches would have been an
argument sufficient to have made them to relinquish such Practices and condemn
them? Could the Heathen-Graecians ever forget their pretended Deities Baccus or
Ceres, or the benefits supposed to have been received by their means, though
they had had nothing else to put them in mind of them but their Dionysiaca or
Eleusinian Mysteries? Or among the Romans did not the Palilia, Suo vet^urilia,
Ambarvalia, Lupercalia, etc. keep fresh in their minds the Deities, in whose
honor and ingratitude for whose favor those solemnities had been instituted?
How infinitely more securely and unfailably has almighty God provided for the
continuance of Truth and Piety in his Church, since those Heathen-Solemnities
were repeated but once a year in one City or Country, but Ours every day by
numbers of people in all Countries, Cities and Villages?

CHAP. IX.
A further demonstration of the firmness of Tradition.

Certain objections answered.

1. BUt it will objected, who knows but there may, yea who can deny but there
have crept in alterations even in these Liturgies and forms of Public
Devotions? For answer, It is confessed there have, for the first Liturgies, as
S. James and others ascribed to Apostolic Persons were brief, simple, less
ceremonious: and as the Church grew more large and splendid, so Gods service
became more extended, solemn and majesticall. But that any substantial part
of Devotion, any expressions implying or instilling new bred errors have been
introduced into the public forms of God's service, that is utterly denied:
And they that lay this imputation upon Gods Church are obliiged to produce
examples and visible proofs thereof, which it is impossible for them to do
with the hundredth part of that assurance that Catholics by showing those
which are now extant of the Ancient Liturgies, by alleging irrefragable
testimonies of the extreme punctual curiosity of the ancient Fathers in
exactly and unalterably preserving Tradition according to the Apostles
direction, Formam habe, etc. Keep the form of sound words, will demonstrate
the contrary. I cannot forbear on this occasion, among many other examples
which may be produced to specify that extreme niceness of S. Augustine,
showing not only his care to deliver Traditionall truths themselves, but the
terms also in which those truths were conveyed to his times, Ne me ineptum
putes. Do not think me foolish (says be to Honoratus, lib. de util. cred.
cap. 3.) for using Greek terms, my chief reason is, because I have so learned
these things by Tradition, neither dare I deliver them to thee any other way
then as I have received them. So the same Father ( dequant anima cap. 34)
Divine ac singulariter in Ecclesia Catholica traditus, etc. It is a Doctrine
divinely and singularly delivered by Tradition in the Catholic Church, that
no Creature is to be worshipped with an internal worship of the Soul. For I
do the more willingly express my self in these terms, because the Doctrine
was taught me in the same. This he says, because the word Creatur^ did not
seem so pure and proper a Latin word. From the like grounds proceeded those
frequent speeches in Synods, which silenced all Haereticall innovation,
Servetur quod traditum est, and, Vetus Traditio obtineat, and, Desin^t
incessere novitas vetustatem, etc. Let that which is delivered by Tradition be
observed. And, Let Tradition prevayle. And, Let novelty forbear to oppose
antiquity, etc. This care certainly was more curiously observed in the public
Devotions of the Church.

2. For proof whereof, besides the confronting the Ancient Liturgies of the
Eastern and Southern Churches, let Protestants, if they please, examine the
Ages, against which they believe they have the justest arguments of suspicion
of any other, viz. since the time of S. Gregory the Great. There are to this
day extant his own Missalls in Print, and Breviaries in Manuscript in several
Libraries, let them examine what changes such ignorant superstitious Times (as
they think,) and so many wicked Popes (as they say, and not always untruly)
have made in these public Devotions of the Church: They will blush certainly
to have had the least suspicion in this nature of the Primitive Times, when
they shall see evidently that in the Canon of the Mass there has scarce been
one word altered for above these last thousand years, And in the Breviary not
any that will afford them contentment answerable to their pains of comparing
them.

3 Now whereas some Protestants demand (and particularly Mr. Chillingworth, in
several places) where are we to seek for these Traditions of which the Roman
Church talks so much? where is the Cabinet and Magazine wherein they are
stored? And when will she empty it that we may see all the treasure that
Christ lest unto his Church? Hereto it is answered, that M. Chillingworth said
well, that, To say a secret Tradition is as absurd as to say a silent Thunder,
since Traditions are obvious to all Men's Eyes, and sound aloud in all Men's
Ears, shining in the public visible practice and profession of the Church:
The Church is so far from pretending (as Protestants would feign seem to fancy)
that she has certain secret conservatories of these Traditions out of which
upon occasion she can draw some special ones to determine emergent
Controversies, and much less that the Holy Ghost suggests unto her in time of
need any formerly vanished Apostolic Revelation; that whatsoever is not
expressly in Scripture, or satisfactorily apparen^ in the publicly received
professions and practices of the Church are not perhaps determinable as points
of Faith, that is, as Traditionary Divine Revelations In so much as some
learned Catholics are of opinion (how justly or no I examine not) that
certain Questions now ventilated in the Church, as concerning the Conception
of our Blessed Lady, and some of the more subtle and scholasticall
Controversies between the Jesuits and Dominicans, concerning Grace and
Freewill, Predetermination and Contingency, etc. have not light enough either
from Scripture, Tradition, or the public Profession and Practice of the
Church, so as to be capable of a precise decision, at least so far as to make
such a decision to become properly an article of Faith; unless perhaps such a
one, as was that of the Council of Vienna touching Grace infused into Infants
in Baptism, which is set down in this form. Nos attendentes, that is, We
heedfully considering the general efficacy of the death of Christ, the which
by Baptism is applied equally and indifferently to all that are baptized by
the approbation of this Holy Council, have judged that the second opinion is
to be chosen as the more probable and more consonant and agreeeing to the
sayings of the Holy Fathers and of the modern Doctors, which opinion
asserteth, That informing Grace and virtues are as well conferred upon Infants
in Baptism, as on persons of ripe age. See Clementin. de sum Trin. and fide
Cath. And thus the Council of Basil (Sess. 36.) determined the point of the
imaculate conception of our Blessed Lady, not as an article of faith in the
present strict and proper sense, but, tanquam doctrinam piam and consonam
fidei, that is, as a pious doctrine and consonant to faith. See more in the
learned treatise of Franc. as Clara called Systema fidei, Cap. 35.

4. Indeed it cannot be denied but that in some cases it is within the power of
the Church to invent de novo some word or phrase proper to signify and express
a Traditionary doctrine, namely in contradiction to any Haeresie arising and
opposing Apostolic Revelations, shining in the public profession and
practice of the Church. So to condemn the Arians denying the Divinity of our
Savior, the Fathers of the Council of Nice, made choice of the
term(...)though new, yet answerable to the sense and notion of that mystery,
which was received by Tradition in the Church, a term directly and
specifically opposite to the Arian Position. In like manner the Church of late
devised a new, or rather borrowed of some particular ancient Father the word
((...)) Transubstantiation as most proper to express the notion which in all
ages has been received in the Church concerning the Real Presence of the body
of Christ in Blessed Sacrament, a term which like the flaming two-edged waving
sword of the Cherub cuts assunder on all sides whatsoever new Heresies do, or
probably ever shall devise to oppose that Mystery.

5. Notwithstanding some certain Traditions there were which in the Primitive
times were kept secret among the principal Ecclesiastical Governors, as
certain sublime Doctrines, the ceremonious forms of conferring some
Sacraments, of making the holy Chrismes, Oil, etc. which seems to have been
done partly to gain a reverence to the Clergy, as more nearly approaching to
the Divine Light, But principally not to expose such Mysteries to the scornful
and profane interpretation of the Heathens, or to the weak understandings of
the ignorant, and not yet sufficiently instructed Christians, according to the
practice of S. Paul himself, (1 Cor c. 2.) who says, Sapientiam loquimur
inter perfectos, We speak (sublime) wisdom among those that are perfect:
Hence those earnest adjurations in the writings of some very ancient Bishops,
whereby they conjured others of their own rank, when they communicated to them
certain sublime mysteries to preserve in a deep secrecy what they so received;
a memorable instance we have of this caution in the Books of S. Denis
Areopagite (Hier. Eccl. c 1.) Hence those disguisings of other Mysteries in
Books which were to pass publicly abroad: Hence those sudden interruptions
when they were ready to discover unawares somewhat above the capacity of their
hearers, Pagans, or Catechumens, Frequent examples I could allege out of S.
Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine. end others: But Cui^ bono in this
placed Since Paganism has been utterly abolished, and means of instruction
more common and promiscuous, especially since the invention of Printing
(whether happy, or not it is doubtful) this cautelous reservednesse has been
out of use, perhaps with no little prejudice to the Church: in so much as
nothing is reserved now in the breasts of the ChurchGovernours, even the
anciently most secret Ceremonies are divuled to all Men's knowledge: So that now
Tradition is far more loud and visible, then ever it was before, and no ground
for Protestants to pretend to any suspicion that under a show of Tradition the
Church has a mind to exercise either Tyranny or cunning to gain authority to
her determinations.

6. Now from this general Traditionary way of conveying Christian Doctrines,
etc. it came to pass that many Fathers being assured of the truth and
authenticknesse of such Traditions, and willing to assert them out of Scripture
also, have interpreted many Texts, as containing such Doctrines, which either
did not at all afford such a sense, or at least not necessarily, though perhaps
the outward sound of the words might put a man in mind of such Doctrines:
Examples of this are not a few, particularly in the points of Purgatory, Prayer
to Saints, etc. So that whereas Protestants cry Victory when they can prove. or
at least make probable that such Fathers have been mistaken in such
interpretations, as if the doctrines thence deduced were confuted, in my
opinion it is without any ground, since on the contrary the less force that
such Texts of Scripture have to evince such doctrines, the greater and stronger
proof have such Traditions, seeing the Fathers, prepossessed with a belief of
them from the public practice of the Church, accounted them so apparent, that
they thought they saw them even where they were not at all. And therefore, when
the Church commands us not to oppose the interpretations which the greatest
part of Fathers unanimously make of Scripture, I conceive she does not a ways
oblige Catholics thereby to give the same sense to Texts which the greatest
part of Fathers do, but rather, not so to interpret any Text as to contradict
the Traditionary doctrines believed generally by the Fathers upon this safe
ground of Tradition, though perhaps not Logically enough deduced from such
special passages of Scripture: so that though perhaps their commentaries there
may be questioned, the doctrine in the commentaries ought to be embraced.

CHAP. X.
The second preparatory ground: viz. Occasion of writing the Gospells, etc.

1. IT may now be demanded, if this way of conveying Christian doctrines be so
much clearer and safer than writing books, or any other way of transmitting
records, to what purpose were the Evangelicall books written? and why were
the necessary points of faith reduced into such a prescribed form in the
Apostles Creed?

2. To say something for answer, and first concerning the Creed. The end why
that was compiled seems to have been to bring into a short and clear
abridgement the principal points of Christian Religion to be repeated at any
ones initiation into Christianity by Baptism, being as it were an enlargement
of that form of Baptising prescribed by our Savior, viz. Baptizo te in nomine
Patris and Filii and Spiritus sancti (Now in what sense^ and in respect of what
Persons in what State or Order the Creed may be said to contein all points of
faith necessary to Salvation shall be showed hereafter.) As to our present
purpose we may observe. 1. That the Creed seems to be of a middle nature
between written books and Orall Tradition: as a prescribed form of words, so
it approaches to the former: but as committed by all to memory and actually
repeated at Baptism and other public Devotions, so it partakes much of the
latter. 2. What extreme advantage Tradition has for its preservation beyond
any writing, seeing the Creed after it was enlarged by partaking thereof has
preserved it self from any variety or corruption all the Church over to this
day It is true indeed that insome Churches, viz in Af^ica in the first
beginning of Christianity there was a small difference, their Creed wanting
these words, Communion of Saints, the sense whereof notwithstanding may
probably be supposed to have been included in the Article concerning the holy
Catholic Church, as may be observed in the Creeds extant in the African
Fathers, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Optatus and S. Augustine: Which difference
it is not imaginable should have come by neglect or forgetfulness: it is
rather probable that that Apostolic Person who taught Christianity first in
those quarters, brought the Creed with that small defect; for the very first
Creed of all seems to have been much shorter then that now current, as
containing only a profession of Faith in the three Persons in the Blessed
Trinity in whose names only Baptism was administred^ to which the Apostles or
Apostolic persons might afterward adjoyn the other Articles following: which
addition being made successively, it is possible some persons might carry away
in their voyages into Africa the breifer C^ee^s before they were so enlarged.

3 In the next place, concerning the Occasion and end for which the books of
the New Testament were written, we ought to consider the books of History apart
from the others of Doctrine and Prophecy, as being distinguishable both in
their occasion and end, For the Gospells therefore, the whole subject of them
is a narration of several passages of our Saviors Life, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension; likewise some of the most considerable miracles which he
wrought; a sum of the principal points of his Doctrine, both moral, and
mysterious in parables concerning his Church, etc. Now though the memory of all
these (excepting perhaps only the several miracles, prophecies, etc.) as much
as was suficient for particular persons, might and actually was in substance
preserved by practical Tradition (as 1. the Mysterious and to us most useful
passages of his Life, etc. in the public solemnities appointed from all
antiquity, in the solemn Fasts and administration of Sacraments. 2. Moral
duties in the public Confessions, and most ancient Penitential Canons,
Love Feasts, etc. Yea some of them receiving force almost only from Tradition,
as not being at all in Scripture, at least not so expressly as Mr.
Chillingworth requires to points of necessity, as unlawfulness of Polygamy,
incestuous marriages in some particular degrees, etc.) Notwithstanding it could
not but be infinitely acceptable and satisfactory to all good Christians to be
informed as particularly as might be in any thing that concerned so Blessed a
Master and Savior, and therefore were these divine books received with all
imaginable reverence and joy, and preserved with all possible care, so far as
thousands willingly exposed themselves to Martyrdom rather then deliver them
up to the fire; they were read in Churches, discoursed on in Sermons,
illustrated by Commentaries, in a word esteemed divine and infallible by all
Christians. But yet no general Tradition has come to us that all that is
necessary for all persons of all degrees, whether single or in Society to bring
them to heaven is contained expressly in these Gospells: Which is a certain
proof that the ancient Church did not think so, or however that they did not
think it necessary to think so, for no one thing generally thought necessary
to salvation, but has been conveyed under that notion by Tradition orall, as
well as writing, Besides, it is clear there is nothing express for assembling
Synods, ordeining several degrees of Ministers, no forms or directions for
public service, no unquestionable prohibition of Polygamy, incest, etc. So
that although no doubt to some persons in some sudden desperate circumstances
there is in the Gospels to be found enough, yea more then enough of mere
necessity, yea in any one of them, yea in two or three verses of any one of
them: Yet therefore to deduce a general conclusion that all things simply
necessary are contained in the Gospels, is surely very unreasonable: and much
more, thence to infer a general Conclusion, so as to make it the
fundamental ground of all Sects of Religion, and a sufficient excuse for that,
which (if that Conclusion be not only not true, but not so evident as that
there can be no show of contradiction, is a most horrible sin, namely Schism
or Haeresie) this to me seemed to be somewhat that deserved a name beyond
unreasonablenesse it self; and that joined with infinite danger in a point of
the highest consequence imaginable.

4. Now the same inconveniences will follow though the books of the Acts,
Epistles and Apocalyse were added to the Gospels to make them altogether to be
an entire perspicuous Rule of Faith without any need of an authoritative
interpreter. For first, for the Apocalyse, it is a mere obscure Prophecy, and
can contribute little or nothing to the instruction or discipline of the
Church. Then the book of the Acts though it relate some particulars of our
Savior after his Ascension, as his Sending the Holy Ghost, etc. together with
a very few passages concerning any of the Apostles, excepting some few years
of Saint Paul's travells: yet it will prove but a very imperfect model for
settling of the Church in such a posture and with such qualifications both for
doctrine and practice as unquestionable antiquity represents unto us the
Primitive Apostolic Church. And la^^ly for the Epistles of S. Paul, etc. it
is confessed by all, and the Text it self justifies it, that those Epistles
were never intended to be written as institutions or Catechismes containing an
abridgement of the whole body of Christian Faith for the whole Church: For,

1. They were written only to some particular congregations, yea many of them
to single persons, and no order is given to communicate them to the whole
Church, I am sure no necessity appears that they should be so divulg^d.

2. They were written merely occasionally, namely by reason that some
particular False teachers sowed certain false doctrines in some particular
Churches founded by the Apostles, in the confutation of which Haeresies all the
doctrinall parts of those Epistles are generally employed; So that if those
Heretics had not chanced to have broached those particular opinions, those
Epistles had never been written.

3. These Epistles especially of Saint Paul the most and the largest, are
written in a style so obscure, such intricacy of arguing, with such digessions
interwoven, the Logical Analysis is so extremely difficult, that that gift of
interpreting was in those days a necessary attendant of the Apostles
preaching, and I am confident that if an hundred men, and those generally of
the same Sect and opinions, were oppointed to resolve the order and method of
S. Paul's arguing, there would not three of them agree for three verses
together. Now upon these grounds, how improper such writings are to serve for
the only Rule of Faith (which even in Mr. Chillingworth's opinion must be so
clear and evident in points necessary, that there can be no rational
possibility of diversity of opinions, and by cosequence no need of an
authoritative interpreter) let him that can believe it; and let him that dare,
put it to the trial, when his souls eternal estate depends upon it.

CHAP. XI.
The third preparatory ground, viz. the clearing of the ambiguity of these
words, necessary to salvation.

1. THese words ( necessary to salvation) being applied to several objects and
subjects admit of great variety in the application and use: therefore before
they be affirmed or denied of any thing, Vid. Card. Perron. Ep. ad Casaub.
or to any person, he that intends to express his mind distinctly and to the
purpose must necessarily and expressly before hand declare in what sense, to
what degree, in respect of whom, and for what end such things are, or are not
necessary.

2. Therefore first for sorts of necessity, There is necessitas medii, when a
thing is of it self necessry to salvation: and necessitas praec^pti, when it
is only therefore necessary because it is commanded. Again necessitas fidei
specialis, that is, of things to be believed expressly and distinctly, as the
Articles of the Creed: and necessitas fidei generalis, of things which some
persons are only to believe. Again, necessitas actus, that is of things to be
performed by all, as Confession of Christ's name, pardoning of offenses,
restitution, etc. and necessitas approbationis or non contradictionis, when men
are at least obliged not to condemn certain things, as vow of Virginity,
Voluntary poverty, etc.

3. Then with respect unto objects or things necessary to salvation, some are
so absolutely, that is, so as no circumstance of person, time or place, no
ignorance, no defect how irremediable soever can excuse the absence of such
things: other things on the contrary are necessary only conditionally, which in
some cases, to some persons may be excusable. Of the former sort, there are but
extremely few things necessary. For, for example, if a Heathen at the point of
death upon an effectual exhortation of a Christian should embrace in general
the Religion of Christ, not being able to attend particular instruction, nor
perhaps actual Baptism, it is very probable that the only believing of
Christ to be the Savior of the world, and relying upon him for the pardon of
his sins, and profession of his resolution to obey whatsoever should appear
to him to have been Cbrists will though death should cut him off from a
particular information in other doctrines of Faith, the Sacraments, particular
duties of Christian morality, etc. would be sufficient to such a man to
salvation. Of the later sort, viz things necessary conditionally, it is
impossible to tell how many or how few they are, till all conditions and
circumstances be expressed.

4. In regard of persons, that is, necessary to one which is not to another, as
more to a teacher than a Disciple; to a Governor, then to a person
subordinate. Again, that is necessary to a Congregation, which is not to a
single person, to the settling of a Church in good order, which is not to every
Congregation: to the well-being of a Church, which is not to its simple being:
some persons are obliged to know many things explicitly, which others are
only not to dis believe, it being sufficient if they oppose them not, not
necessary that they know them.

5. Having considered such an ambiguity and variety of things necessary (to
which many other distinctions might yet be added) I presently judged that
whatsoever was the reason that Mr. Chillingworth thought it not necessary to
make a distinct application of these several kinds of necessity according to
the exigence of the objects and persons; whether it was neglect or want of
memory, or whether intending only to repel his adversaries present
objections, he thought fit to say no more then he was for that purpose
necessarily obliged: What ever was the cause, I am sure that for want of such a
distinct application, whatsoever he has said to confirm his maine position is
little to the satisfaction of any third person, as, I think, shall presently
be demonstrated.

CHAP. XII.
After what manner I judged it necessary for my purpose to examine Mr.
Chillingworth's reasonings and arguments.

1. TH^se preparatory grounds being thus premised, way was made for the nearer
approach to the examination of Mr. Chillingworth's reasons and proofs before
alleged, for the maintaining of the maine foundation of all Schism, viz. That
the Scripture, yea any one Gospel, conteines in it expressly all things
necessary to salvation, either for belief or practice. In the examination
whereof (as likewise of other Protestants grounds which follow, and are set
down and prosecured more clearly, more subtily, and I am sure more to the
satisfaction of English Protestants, by Mr. Chillingworth, then by any other) I
must profess that my intention is not to consider Mr. Chillingworth's
discourses as precisely opposed to his adversaries, for I have neither the
vanity to believe that so learned and practiced a Catholique-controvertist
should be willing to accept of any one, and much less of such an ignorant
Neophyte as my self to defend his excellent book; neither have I the
impudence without leave from him to undertake such a task: But since upon mine
own knowledge Mr. Chillingworth believed that his book, as concerning the
Positive grounds, contained as much as any Protestant could reasonably say; so
for the destructive part, that it was an unanswerable conviction not only of
what his adversary in particular had said, but of what any Catholic could
allege concerning either the Rule of Faith, or Judge of Conteoversies: Seeing
likewise I found it not only very reasonable in it self, but absolutely
necessary for me, considering the condition in which I then was, for finding
repose unto my mind to inform my self, not what some particular learned
Catholics taught to be their sense of the Churches belief in these points
(for that would have been a labor insupportable to me, who was much pressed
with a desire to be no longer alone without any Church to join withal) but to
enquire what the Roman Church her self believed, and in what language, and
with what latitude She her self expressed her thoughts and belief: Upon these
grounds I conceived it requisite to exact and apply M. Chillingworth's
positions and arguments to the simple doctrines and decisions of the
Catholique-Church; Resolving that if I found that what She said, and in the
latitude that She expresses her self, was just and reasonable, and withal
able to stand firm notwithstanding any of Mr. Chillingworth's oppositions, to
rest contented therewith; For, for the present it would be happiness enough for
me to get only within the precincts of a Church, though no farther then the
door-keepers place, I might afterward, if need were, at leisure make choice
there of what rank or company I would range my self unto.

2. Coming therefore to the consideration of M. Chillingworth's conclusion,
together with the reasons and proofs of it which he believed of force
sufficient to destroy the doctrine necessarily to be believed by all
Roman-Catholiques, I must needs say that this his Conclusion, ( The Scripture
conteines all necessary points of belief and practice, and the Creed all
necessary points of belief) is so expressed, that in several respects it may
and ought to be assented to by any Catholic: For (as I showed before) if the
word necessary in respect of the object, relate to necssity absolute, and in
respect of the subject, to any person though considered in a desperate estate
for want of means or space to inform himself further, then not only the
Scripture, or the Creed, or one Gospel, but perhaps this one verse in a
Gospel. This is eternal life to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent, may be instruction sufficient to salvation: and so arising
proportionably to other circumstances, in respect of other single persons more
truths and instructions are necessary, and more yet to persons enjoying
sufficient means to information, to Clergymen, to Congregations, to
well-ordered Churches. Besides, if the same Conclusion be considered in another
sense (without altering the expression) a sense obvious enough and not
improper, in which among other ancient Fathers S. Aug. explaines it as he was
before quoted cap. 38. viz. that the Scripture here (as likewise the Creed) is
to be taken as joined with the Churches authority, to which, says he, we are
expressly referred in Scripture, then it not only conteines whatsoever is
necessary to salvation in some qualifyed degree of necessity, and to some
certain persons considered in some certain circumstances, but likewise in the
most exalted importance of the word necessary, and to all persons considered
either as single, or in actual Communion etc. Lastly if the same Conclusion be
so understood that the words of Scripture may be (I do not say, supplied, but
even) interpreted by the Tradition of the ancient Church and authority of the
present, so many Catholics will subscribe to it.

3. This conclusion therefore being so variously applicable, and by consequence
capable of being orthodox or erroneous according to several applications: in
the next place I was to reflect upon my present condition, to try whether it
befitted me or no. Now for the present I was in quest of a Church, that Church
wherein I had been bred e're this time being almost ready to expire: I lived in
an age wherein there was no want of means of learning and instruction, even to
excess, for the overmuch light made many men too too wanton and curious: I had
been bred after such a manner that I was capable in some reasonable degree not
only of information, but likewise of an ability to judge what instructour could
approve himself to be the fittest to be followed and believed, and for that
purpose I endeavored all I could to free my mimd from all prejudices and
partiality: in these circumstances, two parties invited me to their communion.
(and a Communion some where or other I knew was necessary:) The one said, You
may without inevitable danger perhaps take your choice of either, but certainly
your best and safest way is to come to us, for we will propose to your belief
nothing but the acknowledged written word of God, and that we have for this
hundred years believed to contain all things necessary not only for your
salvation, but any man's else: You shall have the satisfaction to be freed from
all visible authority interpreting that Word, The Spirit will teach you to
interpret it as truly as we do, for otherwise we shall not suffer you in our
Communion. The other party on the contrary protested aloud, that if I joined
not with them I was utterly lost; that they would propose to me nothing but
Divine Revelation contained not only in books written, but Traditions
unwritten; both conveyed by the same hand and with the same authority, and
therefore if either, both to be received; that the former inviters were a new
faction for worldly interests divided from the whole world, and apparently from
a Church, which had continued ever since Christ's time in an un-interrupted
succession of instructers and Doctrine, of Teachers appointed for Guides not
only by testimony of all ages, but likewise of the same Scriptures upon which
their adversaries pretended to ground their Schisme^ that these Guides had
continually preserved the Church in a perfect unity of belief; whereas the
other party within one age that they have appeared, have been torn into near
an hundred Sects, All of them with equally-no^ Justice pretending to the same
Rule, and with the same Rule fighting with one another without the least effect
of union, not one controversy among them having been to this day cleared.

4. In these circumstances coming to the examination of this fundamental
ground of Protestantisme That the Scriptures contain all points of belief and
practice necessary to salvation, I found it necessary, without any change made
in the words, to apply the terms necessary to salvation not to one or more
persons ignorant, destitute of means of knowledge, and in some particular
unavoydable exigence, but to my self considered in the conditions before
mentioned, yea further, to all Christians in general, and to the exigence of
Churches well ordered and settled, as on all sides they pretended to be: And
having done thus, I found that no Antiquity ever delivered this Conclusion in
so large a sense; yea on the contrary that generally all Antiquity protested
against it: I found that no reason could require that writings evidently
intended for sepciall uses, and confuting three or four Haeresies should be
made use of, or however should be accounted sufficiently and expressly
convictive against Opinions not named in them, and not them thought upon by the
Authors, as if they had been entire Systemes of Christianity: In a word, I
found that after I had applied this conclusion to the present use and
Hypothesis, the arguments and reasons produced by Mr. Chillingworth, etc. d^d
not evince or conclude that which would give me, in the case I was, any
satisfaction at all: especially considering that if the Protestants had gained
the better in this particular concerning a Rule, yet I should be far from being
at rest in their Churches, unless they could further demonstrate, that the
Scripture contained all these things so expressly and clearly to all eyes,
naming those particular necessary doctrines in contradistinction to others
unnecessary, or but profitable, or perhaps requisite only and applying them to
the persons respectively to whom they are necessary, and all this after such a
manner that no honest reasonable man could remain in doubt, or be in danger of
quarrelling with others (a thing which mine own eyes confu^ed, since I
apparently saw earnest contentions and separations about points not only by my
self, but by the whole Christian world for above thirteen hundred years
together esteemed necessary, And since by my small reading, I had found that
there was not one Article of the Creed which had not been questioned and
contradicted) Or unless they could demonstrate that there was no particular
point at all necessary; Or lastly that there was some visible authority to
decide unappealeably what was to be acknowledged for the true sense of
Scripture, and in it, what was only true, what useful, what requisite, and
what necessary: But these were conditions such as that the Protestants had not
confidence enough to promise the former, and they were too proud and confident
of themselves to allow the latter.

CHAP. XIII.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's discourse and reasonings premised before his
proofs out of Scripture.

1. BUt to come at last to Mr. Chillingworth's reasons and quotations out of
Scripture to prove that all things necessary to salvation are not only
sufficiently contained in the books of Scripture in general, but even in any
one of the Gospells, mentioned before cap. 26. And first for the examination of
that which he lays as a ground of his enforcing the said quotations, viz. That
no man ought to be obliged upon pain of Excommunication to believe any thing,
but what God has revealed to be necessary to eternal salvation, which is the
substance of the New Covenant made by God in Christ, containing points of
necessary belief, and precepts of necessary Evangelicall obedience. His
reasons being, Why should any error or ignorance exclude him from the Churches
Communion, which will not deprive him of eternal salvatio? Why should men be
more rigid then God? etc.

2. In stead of answering to this, I acknowledge the foundation to be very
substantial, and the Reasons very concluding. Only I must take leave to
explain one phrase in this discourse, viz. Things which are of the substance
of the New Covenant. For if his meaning be, that only those things are
necessary to be believed explicitly which are essential substantial parts of
the New Covenant, and that directly and of their own nature, I must then deny
it: and so does himself elsewhere, although in this place that which follows
in consequence to this foundation does seem to require such a sense of the
words. And to prove the reasonableness of my denial (he being now
unfortunately dead) I desire any Protestant to resolve these questions, To
believe that our Lord was descended according to the flesh from Abraham or
David, is it of the substance of the New Covenant directly and of its own
Nature? We shall both of us answer, No. Nor by consequence is it necessary to
salvation to know or believe it. I ask then further: But suppose a man find,
that proposition expressly in Scriptures sufficiently proposed to him and
acknowledged to be the word of God, is it not then necessary to salvation to
believe it? I will answer again as both of us should do, Yes, without any
question: the reason being evident, because though to believe Christ to be the
Son of Abraham be not in it self of the essence of the Covenant, yet to
believe that whatsoever God says is true, is: and by consequence an accessory
may by some circumstances be made essential, and, a man may come to be damned
for not believing that, which without any the least prejudice to him he might
never have known or heard of. So likewise, for any one who believes, that the
Church is the depositary of divine Revelation, and that she is endued with
authority from Christ to command things though in themselves not necessary, yet
such as she thinks helpful to piety; for such a man I say to refuse to
believe the unlawfulness of Rebaptization (for example) acknowledged by the
whole Church both in her universal practice and profession, that it was a
Tradition unwritten which came from the Apostles, and confirmed by the
authority of a lawful Council: or again to refuse to abstain and fast in
Lent, Fridayes, Quatuor-Temporibus, etc. the Church commanding him: both these
refusalls (though the former be of a doctrine of it self not of the essence of
the New Covenant, and the later, of an action little more then circumstantiall)
are mortal sins, and the Church may justly excommunicate, and by consequence
God will assureedly condemn such as persist obstinately in such refusalls; And
this for a reason more effectual then the former, because namely obedience to
the Chnrch is not only commanded expressly in Scripture (as in the former case)
but commanded under this very penalty of Excommunication (which the former was
not) for says our Lord, If any one hear not the Church, let him be to thee as
a Heathen and a Publican.

3. But to proceed, Mr. Chillingworth to prove that this New Covenant is
entirely contained not only in the whole Scripture, but also in the four
Gospells, yea sufficiently even in any one of the four, he first alleges
these reasons, Because, says he, the Evangelist's having a purpose to write
the Gospel of Christ or new Covenant, no reason can be imagined that they, who
have set down many passages unnecessary, should neglect any necessary: for
what a negligence must this needs be? such an one surely as no man in these
days undertaking the same design would commit. Besides, with what truth could
they style their books the Gospel of Christ, if they were only a part of it?

4. Hereto I answer, that if by the Gospel of Christ he had meant the story of
the life, acts, discourses, sufferings, death, Resurrection and Ascension of
our Savior (as I mentioned in my preparatory grounds) I should willingly grant
that the four Evangelists jointly have written the Gospel of Christ entirely,
not omitting any passage thereof necessary, or very requisite to be known: I
say the four Evangelists jointly, for of each severally I cannot say so: For,
for example, S. Mark (either because S. Matthew had done it sufficiently
before, or for what other reason I will not trouble my self to divine, but) S.
Mark omitting the Incarnation of our Lord of a pure Virgin, his birth, and all
things that followed till he was thirty years old, begins his Gospel with S.
John Baptists mission to preach: now I suppose these Mysteries omitted by S.
Mark are at least in a high degree requisite to be known and believed
generally; yea I will add, necessary; since they are expressed in the Apostles
Creed, as short as it is: yet not necessary absolutely and indispensably to
every person in what state soever, but only to those that live in the Church,
much more to persons of ability and parts, yet more to Teachers, and most of
all to Congregations and Churches: and if so, then that which Master
Chillingworth would conclude from hence, cannot be satisfactory in this
controversy, among such persons, and Sects, and at this time, as I showed
before. So likewise the Evangelist, S. John, besides almost all the miracles,
Sermons and parables mentioned by other Evangelists, omitt's the Blessed
Sacrament, and the Story of our Saviors Ascension. Now I desire any Protestant
to say whether (what ever would become of some particular person ignorant of
these things by an excuse of an impossibility of instruction) a man living, as
now, in sufficient light, and much more one obliged to be a teacher of others
could be saved with ignorance of these things omitted by S. John? I further
desire him to say whether a society of men desiring to be joined and ordered so
as to be made a Christian Church, if they had only S. John's Gospel for their
Rule and pattern, yea though they had all the four Evangelists, yea all the
Evangelicall writings, whether they could settle themselves according to the
frame of the Apostolical Churches, with the same orders, Liturgies, customs,
etc. as apparently were in the Ancient times universally, while some writers
lived, who might have seen the Apostles themselves? If not, as it is most
evident that not: I ask, whether those Churches were so settled by the free
liberty and fancy of the Apostles, so as it had been no great matter though
they had ordered them any other way? or whether by the express command of
Christ, either immediately, or by the intervention of his Holy Spirit? By the
latter way, no doubt: and by consequence some thing necessary for the frame of
the Church, because commanded by Christ, is not contained in the Evangelists,
neither severally nor together, no nor in union with all the other Evangelicall
writings.

5. Again, our Savior in his life-naturall among them told his Disciples that
he had many things to tell them, but he would not tell them then, because as
yet they were not able to bear them: But when the Paraclete, the Spirit of
truth came, they should then be fully instructed. Now will any man say that all
these many things were unnecessary? no certainly, on the contrary they were of
such extraordinary great moment, that the Apostles themselves could not then
bear them. Or were these so weighty things written in the Gospells, where our
Savior says he would not discover them? If not there: can it appear that S.
Luke had a design to set them all down in the book of the Acts, where his
principal design was to write some passages especially of S. Paul's Travells
only, and that during the time that himself was a witness? Lastly, (for as
for the Revelation that being nothing but obscure Allegory or Prophecy, needs
not therefore to be enquired of about this matter) is it likely that a few
Haeretiques broaching certain errors, which caused the writing of almost all
the Epistles, should light so fortunately for us as to give the Apostles
occasion in consuting them to publish all those many things which our Savior
would not tell them in his life time? Credat Iudaeus.

CHAP. XIV.
Answer to the Texts produced by Mr. Chillingworth out of the Gospells of S.
John and S. Luke.

1. AS for those passages produced by Mr. Chillingworth out of the Gospells,
and, as he thought, fully to his purpose, and first to that taken out of the
conclusion of S. John's Gospel, where it is said, these things were written
that ye might believe in the Son of God, and that believing ye might have
life. Besides the former demonstrations that S. John writ only of our Saviors
life and death, and even therein omitted many things of extreme moment, which
are mentioned by the other Evangelists, and all things revealed after Christ's
Ascension by the Comforter, which were far from being unnecessary: And besides
the so necessary distinction of things necessary in respect of the object and
subject so often applied before; I answer particularly to the phrase of this
quotation that it does not prove that these things alone are sufficient for
such an effect, but only that these are some of the principal ones necessary:
For it is ordinary in Scripture to ascribe the effect of a concatenation of
causes to some more especial ones alone, either thereby to show the
extraordinary virtue and necessity of them above the rest, or to imply that
such virtues cannot be, at least in perfection, alone, but are always
accompanied with the rest. So our Savior (Mat. cap 5.) promises Beatitude to
each single Christian virtue, which indeed is the effect of them all meeting
together. And so that speech of S. Paul (Romans 10.) is to be understood, If thou
shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And again, Whosoever
shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. Indeed nothing is more
ordinary in Scripture then such Phrases, I will therefore abstain from an
unnecessary multiplication of such passages, concluding this with two like
expressions of the same Evangelist, the first in the same Gospel, This is
eternal life that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. The other out of his first Epistle, which may with as good
reason prove it self alone, even without the Gospel, to be sufficient
instruction to salvation. These things we write unto you that your joy may be
full.

2. To the double quotation of S. Luke in the Prefaces to his Gospel, and the
History of the Acts of the Apostles, both in effect saying the same thing,
namely that in his Gospel he he had written(...)of all things that Jesus did
or taught, it is already answered. And besides that this speech is
hyperbolicall appears not only from S. John's Gospel, which relating both the
facts and speeches of our Savior, speaks notwithstanding, but very briefly
and of a very few things mentioned by S. Luke or any other Evangelist: but
likewise from another passage of the same, S. Luke immediately following the
quotation out of the Acts, where he says that during the forty days that our
Savior remained on earth from his Resurrection to his Ascension he appeared to
them and instructed them in the things concerning the Kingdom of God, very few
of which instructions are mentioned by S. Luke.

CHAP. XV.
An answer to twelve Questions of Mr. Chillingworth, in pursuance of the former
Quotations.

1. AS concerning the twelve Questions which I said before ( cap. 26.) that Mr.
Chillingworth adjoined to these Quotations to the end to press the force of
them more efficaciously as thinking them unanswerable, which notwithstanding I
found nothing at all difficult, I will according to my promise set them down
in order, and adjoyne to each an answer.

2. To the 1. Question therefore, viz. Whether S. Luke did not undertake the
very same thing which he says many had taken in hand? I answer, Yes.

To the 2. Whether this were not to set forth in order a declaration of those
things which are most surely believed among Christians? I answer likewise, Yes.
But then I must add, not all those things but the principal; and the
principal only among those which concerned our Savior in Person while he
lived on earth till his Ascension, as all the Evangelists expressly say: for a
further proof whereof I add this, It will not surely be denied but that among
the Mysteries of Christianity that of Pentecost holds a principal place, at
which time was the Sealing, as it were, of the Apostles Commission by the Holy
Ghost visibly descending and enabling them to perform that for which our
Savior was borne, preached, prayed, wrought miracles, dyed, rose again and
was glorified, that is, the promulgation and propagation of the Evangelicall
law (as the Jewish Pentecost was appointed to commemorate the Promulgation of
the Mosaicall law:) Surely then this Mystery is a principal one, and necessary
to be believed and commemorated, at least by most Christians capable of
instruction, however by a well ordered Christian Church. Yet merely because
this Mystery of the descent of the Holy Ghost happened ten days beyond the time
that all the Evangelists fixed to their Gospells not any of them relates it:
far was it from them to agree in the omitting of it upon this opinion that it
was not necessary.

To the 3. Question, viz. Whether the whole Gospel of Christ, and every
necessary doctrine of it were not surely believed among Christians? I answer,
Yes. Yea more, that not only the Gospel, that is, the Historical narration
of Christ's life, Sermons, etc. but whatsoever the Holy Ghost afterward taught
and ordered in the Church, was the object of Christian faith, as perteining to
the Gospel, that is, the New Covenant.

To the 4. Whether they which were eyewitnesses and Ministers of the word from
the beginning delivered not the whole Gospel of Christ? I Answer, Yes, in this
sense, that all this Gospel, as far as concerns our Saviors personal
actions and passions during his abode among men has been delivered
sufficiently in the(...)by the four Evangelists all together; but in
particular, S. Mark omi^s the Incarnation, birth, etc. of Christ S. John, the
Lords Prayer, the Blessed Sacrament, etc. very substantial things in Christian
Religion surely.

To the 5. Whether S. Luke does not undertake to write in order those things
whereof he had perfect understanding from the first? I answer still, Yes.

To the 6. Whether he had not perfect understanding of the whole Gospel of
Christ? I answer, Yes: yea more, that if by the Gospel of Christ we mean, as
he does, the story of Christ, he could have added many more particulars, not
unconsiderable, if he had pleased, and if he had not thought that that which he
did write was sufficient for his purpose, and many more particulars, yet he
could have written of the Gospel of Christ, if by that be meant Christian
Religion in general.

To the 7. Whether he does not undertake to write to Th^ophilus of all those
things wherein he had been instructed? I answer, Yes, keeping within the limits
of his design.

To the 8. And whether he had not been instructed in all the necessary points
of the Gospel of Christ? I answer, Yes, viz. understood as before.

To the 9. Whether in the other Text (of Act. c. 1.) those words, all things
which Jesus began to do and teach, must not at least imply all the principal
and necessary things? I answer, Yes, keeping to his subject.

To the 10. Whether this be not the very interpretation of your Rhemish
Doctors in their annotations upon this place? I answer, I know not.

To the 11. Whether all these Articles of the Christian Faith, without the
belief whereof no man can be saved be not the principal and most necessary
things which Jesus taught? I must answer by parcells. 1. I cannot assent to
that, that no man can be saved without the belief of all these Articles, viz.
contained in the Creed, of which he treates in this Chapter: for I doubt not
but some particular man in some cases and extremities may be saved without
having received information of our Saviors being borne of a Virgin, of his
being three days in the Grave, his Descent into Hell, etc. 2. I am assured
that now Christians (having means of more sufficient illumination) are bound to
believe more then the simple bare twelve Arti les of the Creed; for the four
first General Councels do much enlarge the signification of them, and besides
p^opose other points, at least indirectly objects of our belief. 3. To the
following words I answer that though those points were the principal and most
necessary things, which Jesus taught, yet this makes nothing against Catholic
doctrine. 1. Because many men are necessarily bound to know more then what is
in it self simply necessary: and, 2. Our Savior himself says expressly that
besides those points which himself taught them, there were others more sublime
and surely necessary to some, which till the Comforter came, and enabled them
further, they were not able to bear.

To the 12. and last Question, viz. Whether many things which S. Luke has
written in the Gospel be not less principal, and less necessary then all
and every one of them? I answer, Yes, and good reason for it; since his intent
being to write a History and not a Catechism, it was fit for him to relate (
gross modo) all things that Jesus said or did, whether necessary, or not: for
as every circumstance and action of Christ (though worth the knowing) was not a
mystery necessary to be related; so neither were all his words articles of
Faith necessary both to be known and believed.

3. Whereas for a Corollary and Appendix to these Demands, Mr. Chillingworth
adds this Prosopopaea, to his adversary, When you have well considered these
proposalls, I believe you will be very apt to think (if S. Luke be of any
credit with you) that all things necessary to salvation are certainly contained
in his writings alone: If his learned adversary would give me leave, I would
answer; That truly I have according to the capacity of my weak understanding
well considered these proposalls, and S. Luke is of very great credit with me,
and yet I do not find in my self any aptitude at all to believe that all
things necessary to salvation, (that is, with respect to all men and all
Churches as the present controversy requires) are certainly contained in his
writings alone; and this for several reasons before alleged: to which I will
add this one more for a close of this whole conclusion, viz. Because I judging
Mr. Chillingworth's opinion to be very reasonable, that upon this hypothesis
(that all things necessary are contained in Scripture) it must follow that they
are contained there most clearly, expressly and so as no reasonable honest man
can doubt of the sense of them; I am notwithstanding most assured that no man
can find in S. Lukes writings express words sufficient to confute all
Haeretiques that ever taught any thing destructive to salvation. It may be
indeed so excellent a wit as Mr. Chillingworth's by the advantage of Logic and
diligent reading of Fathers, etc. may out of S. Lukes Gospel draw conclusion
after conclusion, and so at last infer propositions contrary to Socinian
doctrine, for example: yet he should deny his own principles, if he should
call that doctrine a Haeresie, or so much as an error of the least danger,
which contradicts perhaps the fifth or sixth consequence drawn from an Article
of Faith it self. Let any man therefore for trial take S. Luke, or all the
four; Gospells, yea the whole Bible, and I am persuaded he will find it a more
then Herculean labor out of all to frame such a Creed as the Nicene or
Athanasian, and much more, all the points concluded in the four first General
Counsels, which truly I believe necessary to be believed, and I do not begin
to believe so now, I was taught so when I lived in England.

CHAP. XVI.
The second Conclusion out of the Fathers, concerning a Judge of Controversies.

The Authors confession of his willingness that his opinion against the
Churches infallibility might appear to have been groundless.

II. Conclusion.

The second Conclusion out of the Fathers, etc. was this, viz. That it belongs
alone to the Catholic Church, which is the only depositary of Divine
Revelations, authoritatively and with obligation to propose those revelations,
to all Christians, etc. to interpret the Holy Scriptures, and to determine all
emergent Controversies; and this to the end of the world, in as much as the
Church by virtue of Christ's promises and assistance is not only indefectible,
but continually preserved in all truth.

1. IN this conclusion there are several parts, as 1. That the Catholic
Church is the depositary of all Divine Revelations written and unwritten. 2. By
consequence that it belongs to her to propound them to all persons. 3. That she
has authority and that such as requires submission from all, not only to
propound, but also to expound these Revelations, and finally to determine all
emergent controversies. And 4. That this authority is sufficiently grounded
upon the great promises of our Savior made unto his Church. Now of these
several Propositions, the two former not being questioned by me when I was in
England, I conceived it not suitable to my design (which was a narration
especially of mine own doubts and resolution with as much brevity as possibly
I could) to fill paper with quotations of Fathers or other proofs to resolve
that of which I was resolved before. My only scruple was concerning the third
and fourth Propositions, Or, to speak properly, it was not a scruple, for I
was on the contrary fully resolved, and, to my thinking, satisfied that there
was not upon earth any visible authority that could so interpret. Scriptures or
determine Controversies, is that all men should be obliged necessarily to
embrace her interpretations and determinations: And therefore my purpose is to
insist principally upon his Architectonirall controversy, not neglecting in
the mean time to examine likewise the other propositions, but briefly and
quasi aliud agens.

2. It may be believed, and, since this treatise is intended by me for an
Exomologesis or public Confession, I will not forbear to confess it, that
when the progress of my enquiry after a Church led me at last to take into
debate even those grounds, of which before I had not the least scruple at all,
namely, Whether, as the Roman Church professed, there were extant in the world
visible any such authority, I could not free my self from so much partiality
against my own understanding, as to wish that it could be made appear unto
me, that there were to be found any tribunal whose decisions I might believe
my self obliged to follow without any scruple or ^ergiversation: For then I
should not only in a moment be free from all scruples and doubts in particular
points proposed by that authority, in which they would all be swallowed up; but
likewise from a world of inconveniences inevitably attending upon my position,
viz. That in doubts of Religion we had only a Rule of it self indeed
infallible, but challenged by all Sects, and no Judge to apply that Rule when
necessity required, every man being left to his own reason, at his own peril
to take heed that he wrested not that Rule according to his own interests or
prejudices.

CHAP. XVII.
The Calvinists, etc. presumtuous renouncing of the Churches authority even in
proposing of Scripture: And pretending to an immediate Revelation.

1. BUt before I proceed further to show how and upon what grounds I found
satisfaction in this point of the Churches authority, after which I could not
long remain unsatisfyed in all other points beside: I have somewhat, though
not much, to say concerning the first part of this Conclusion, namely of the
Churches being depositary of divine Revelation. I do not remember that the
Church of England has said any thing of it, more then what may be inferred
from those words in the 6. Article, In the name of the Holy Scripture we do
understand those Canonical books of the Old and New Testament, of whose
authority was never any doubt in the Church. By which expression She seems to
make the Churches authority the only ground that may ordinarily be relied upon
for the discerning which books are Canonical, and which not. And this Mr.
Chillingworth acknowledges in several passages of his book.

2. But as for the Calvinist Churches in France (whether the Lutherans agree
with them or no, I had not means to inform my self) I could not without both
indignation and shame read how they have declared their minds touching this
Point in their public Confession of Faith: Where, after the premising what
particular books of Scripture they received as Canonical, they add these
words, Nous recognoissons, etc. that is, We acknowledge these books to be
Canonical, and a most certain Rule of Faith, not so much for the commune
agreement and consent of the Church, as for the Testimony and inward persuasion
of the Holy Spirit, which makes us able to discern them from the other
Ecclesiastical books, upon which, although they be profitable, cannot be
grounded an Article of Faith. By which expression they do clearly tell the
world, that their meaning is (not to ascribe to the assistance of the Holy
Spirit this their belief, for generally all Christians do acknowledge a
necessity of such an influence upon the soul, whereby the understanding is
persuaded to captivate it self to the belief, and the will inclined to the
love and acceptance of all divine revelations proposed by the Church: But)
that they have a new immediate, distinct revelation and testimony of the Holy
Ghost inwardly informing them what books are Canonical and what not: And this
not only more certain then the testimony of the present Church, but likewise
contrary thereto, inasmuch as thereby they renounce several books: which the
Church proposes as divine and Canonical.

3. Was it possible that reasonable men could write such things, and ever hope
to find any other men foolish enough to believe them? There seems to have been
many persons conspiring to the writing, or at least the signing of this
Confession: Had all these this testimony of Gods Spirit revealing to them, and
so enabling them to judge and discern which particular writings are
Canonical, and which not? And does this testimony (which certainly, if not
falsely pretended to, is infallible) extend to all the particular passages and
Texts in these books, without which the believing of the books in gross would
be useless? Well, since they may say what they please without fear of being
silenced, and so may all their Offspring; For what other way is left to
silence him that says he has the Spirit, but only Exorcismes? Yet for those
that wrote this Confession to say this both for themselves and in the name of
all their faction to the worlds end, and this without consulting any of them to
know whether they had received such an immediate revelation or testimony, and
without pretending to such an eminent gift of Prophecy, as never was example of
the like since the world began, this exceedes all wonder. Good Lord! to what
strange times are we reserved, to see a Sect so numerous, so powerful (as they
have showed themselves upon many sad occasions) and not one of them but is a
Prophet? What a stupendous thing is this that there should not be found one
Calvinist destitute of this so certain, so divine a testimony, beyond the
assurance of all Churches since Christ, and yet not one Englishman or Frenchman
unless of that faction, nor any Christian that I know of besides that knows
any such thing of himself, or dares pretend to it? For surely if any one had
it, some would profess it, since a man cannot have a Testimony, but he knows
he has it. This is a miracle beyond all that Christ and all his (Apostles ever
wrought in the Church. But is it not more probable, nay is it not beyond all
probability most certain, most palpable that all these men knowingly and
wilfully deceive themselves, and would fain but cannot deceive others? Is not
this apparently a lying against the Holy Ghost? Why may it not as well be
expected that in their next Confession (or rather, their Presumption) they
should pretend (as at least most particular writers among them do) for
themselves and their heirs a discerning infallible Spirit to judge of the
sense of Scripture, as well as the books? Indeed, what may not be expected from
such as having had a hatred to charity, and therefore no true love to the
truth, God has justly given over to strong delusions to believe such palpable
lies?

4. But leaving these men miserably pleasing themselves in pretended
inspirations, and by that means attributing to the Holy Ghost not only all
their errors, but likewise their renouncing of Christian Charity and Unity,
which is impossible as long as they take upon them to believe that it is from
the Spirit that they have divided themselves from Gods Church both in opinion
and practice: I will return to my enquiry concerning the authority of the
Church.

CHAP. XVIII.
Importance of the Controversy concerning the Churches authority.

Means for satisfaction in it abundantly sufficient in Antiquity.

This Controversy before all others ought to be most diligently studied by
Protestants.

1. PRoceeding therefore for mine own satisfaction to read the Fathers upon
this argument, and resolving to read them as unpartially as possibly I could,
that is, silencing mine own understanding, when it would interpose that no
discourse or Rhetorique ought to have force against those demonstrations, which
I thought I had against the Churches infallibility, or when it would invent
forced senses to that world of passages which I found in the Fathers
inconsistent with my pre-assumed assurance; Proceeding I say, in the best
manner I could to the reading of the Fathers upon this point, I found that as
this controversy was of so infinite importance that upon the decision thereof
eternal peace or war in Religion among Christians depended, the most wise
and merciful Providence had suitably furnished us with means of satisfaction
in so important a point, infinitely more copious, evident and powerful, then
in any other besides: For in other special points of Controversy we must be
content to inform our selves of the mind of Antiquity therein only by
particular dispersed passages of the Fathers, commonly spoken en passant, they
having no occasion ordinarily to combat with Heretics about them: But in
this business of the Churches authority I found Epistles, Treatises, Books,
yea volumnes full of almost no other subject; I found (that I may here before
the proper season declare the success of so many months labor) that the
maintaining of the authority of the Church against Heretics alleging only
Scripture as a Rule, and disclaiming all Judges of that Rule but themselves as
to themselves, had been the business of many Ages, the principal employment
of many the learned holiest Fathers of the Church: I found that such an
authority of the Church had been a Tradition of all others most Universal, not
any one book of Scripture being so often testified of in Antiquity as this: I
found that if this authority of the Church were not to be preserved inviolable,
all Synods and Councels that ever were in the Church fell to the ground, yea
more, became not only of no validity, but were to be esteemed the most unjust
Tyrannical conspiracies that ever were, as presuming without sufficient
warrant to accuse and anathematize whosoever opposed or accepted not their
determinations even in such points as were not in Scripture at all, or at most
only there in consequence to their interpretation: Lastly, I found to my
infinite satisfaction, and for which I think my self obliged to spend the
greatest part of my life in glorifying Almighty God for it, a full, effectual
and experimental satisfaction by acknowledging this authority, and suffering
my self to be taken out of my own hands, to be conducted by her that Christ
had appointed for that office; in a word, I found, that that saying of S.
Hierome was most true, viz. That the Sun of the Church presently dryes up all
the streams of error and Schism.

2. For these reasons I cannot choose but adjure all Protestants, especially
English (who think satisfaction and repose of mind upon earth, and glory to be
revealed in heaven to be things desirable) that, omitting, or at least
deferring all particular disputes with Catholics, they would in the first
place without prejudice and partiallity examine what the present Catholic
Church says, and in what words She says it when She comes to declare her
necessary doctrine concerning this her authority: and that having found what it
is that She requires to be believed, they would (without altering her
expression, and without applying thereto any particular Schoole-man's or
Doctors interpretations, as by an obliging necessity to be subscribed to or
received) compare what the Church defines, with what the Fathers and Councels
do generally and purposely agree in: And if this method produce not in them the
same effect, which, by the blessing of God, it did in me, yet at least they
will have this contentment, after an ingenuous, and, to my knowledge, not-much
by them-practised way of examination, to conclude, that they find that their
own single judgment and interpretation of Scripture deserves rather to be
relied upon and to be preferred above all manner of visible authority of all
persons and ages, how sacred soever esteemed by others; they will either become
Catholics, or remain in their own (then not very unreasonable opinion)
Protestants still, but persons meriting from themselves the highest esteem for
infallibility that the Church ever enjoyed since the Apostles times.

CHAP. XIX.
Passages out of Fathers concerning the Churches Authority.

1. BUt I will no longer defer the testimonies which Antiquity affords to the
third Proposition contained in the second Conclusion forementioned, viz. of the
Churches authority to intepret Scriptures and define Controversies. I confess
I might have contented my self, considering the superabundance, to omit single
passages, when so many Fathers have written whole books to witness it, as
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Vercentius Lirinensis,
etc. mentioned before, and whereas all Counsels in whatsoever they have
determined have virtually determined this, otherwise their determinations were
to be esteemed any thing else but determinations. Notwithstanding I will not
refuse the trouble of selecting a few passages more expressly declaring what at
large most of the books wherein they are found, endeavor generally to prove,
whether Logically and rationally or no, let the world judge, I am sure they
proved it so effectually, that they have thereby utterly destroyed the Heresies
that opposed them.

Let the first witness therefore be S. Irenaeus, (lib. 3. c. 4.) Where the
Church is there is the Spirit ( of God) and where the Spirit of God is there is
the Church and all grace. The same Father again, lib. 4. c. 43. We must obey
those Priests that are in the Church: those that have succession from the
Apostles, who together with Episcopal power have according to the good
pleasure of the Father received the certain gift of Truth. And all the rest who
depart from the original succession, wheresoever they be assembled, to have
suspected either as Haeretiques or Schismatiques or Hypocrites: and all these
do fall from the truth. Again, lib 4. c. 62. The spiritual man shall judge
them that be out of the Church, Which Church shall be under no man's judgment:
For to the Church all things are known, in which is perfect faith of the
Father, and of the dispensation of Christ, and firm knowledge of the Holy
Ghost teaches al truth. Again, l. 5. c. 4. What if the Apostles had not left
Scriptures, ought we not to have followed the Order of Tradition which they
delivered to those to whom they committed the Churches? To which order many
yield assent, who believe in Christ, having salvation written in their hearts
by the Spirit of God without letters or ink, and diligently keeping ancient
Tradition. It is easy to receive the truth from God's Church, seeing the
Apostles have most fully deposited in her as in a rich Storehouse all things
belonging to truth: For what! if there should arise any contention of some
small questions, ought we not to have recourse to the most ancient Churches,
and from them to receive what is certain and clear concerning the present
question?

3. Witness Tert. ( de Preser.) Therefore we must not appeal to Scriptures,
neither is the controversy to be settled upon them, in the which there will be
either no victory at all, or very uncertain, etc. Again, Order did require
that that should be proposed in the first place, which ought now to be only
debated, viz. Which of the parties is possessed of that faith to which the
Scriptures agree, from whom, and by whom, and when, and to whom that discipline
was delivered, by which men are named Christians: For wheresoever it shall
appear that the truth of the Christian discipline or Faith is, there will also
be found the truth of Scriptures, and expositions, and all Christian
Traditions. Witness Origin, Since there be many who think they believe the
things which are of Christ, and some are of different opinion from those who
went before them, let the doctrine of the Church be kept, which is delivered
from the Apostles by order of succession, and remains in the Church to this
very day. That only is to be believed for truth which in nothing disagrees
from the Tradition of the Church. And again, in our understanding of Scriptures
we must not depart from the first Ecclesiastical Tradition, nor believe
otherwise then as the Church of God has by succession delivered to us.

4. Witness S. Cyprian, (de unit. Eccl.) There is one head and one Source and
one Mother, by the Issue of her fruitfulness copious: by her increase we are
born, we are nourished with her milk, with her Spirit we are quickened: The
Spouse of Christ cannot be defiled with adultery, She is pure and chaste: She
knows one house and with chaste bashfulness keeps the sanctity of one bed.
This preserves us in God: This advances to the Kingdom the Children that
she has brought forth: Whosoever divides from the Church and cleaves to the
adultresse, he is separated from the promises of the Church: He cannot have
God to his Father, that has not the Church to his Mother. Witness,
Lactantius, (l. 4. c. ult.) It is only the Catholic Church that has the
true worship and service of God: this is the wel-spring of truth, the
dewlling place of Faith, the temple of God: into which whosever enters not,
and from which whosoever departs is without all hope of life and eternal
salvation. Witness S. Basile and S. Gregory Naz. who ( as Ruffinus (Hist.
Eccl. l. 2. c. 29.) relates took the interpretation of Scripture not of their
own sense but from the Tradition of the Fathers. Witness S. Cyril of Jerusalem,
(lat. 18.) The Church is called Catholic because it is spread over the
universal world from one end to the other: and because it teaches
Catholiquely and entirely all doctrine which are to be known. Witness S.
Ambrose, Faith is the foundation of the Church: for it was not spoken of the
flesh of Peter, but of his faith, That the gates of Hell should not prevail:
His Confession overcame Hell: and this Confession excludes many Haeresies: for
seeing the Church like a good Ship is beat upon by many waves, the Foundation
of the Church must prevail against all Haeresies. L. de incarn. d^^.

5. Witness ( Dom. in Psalm. 37.) In the Church the truth resids, Whosoever is
separated from it, it is necessary that he speak false things. Again, Ep. 54.
The height of all authority, and all the light of reason for the reparation
and reformation of mankind consists only in the saving name of Christ, and in
his only Church. Again, (Ep. 56) The supreme Emperor of our Faith has
fortified his Church with the cittadell of authority, and by means of a few
persons piously learned has armed it with copious provisions of unconquerable
reason. That therefore to him is the most right discipline, that especially the
weak should retire into this cittadell of Faith, to the end that for their
defense being placed most securely, others should combat with most strong
reasons. Again, (de util Cred. c. 16) if the Providence of God does not precide
over humane affairs, no care is to be had concerning Religion. But if the
several variety of creatures, which ought be believed to have flowed from some
fountain of most perfect beauty, and by certain inward instinct does exhort
both publicly and privately those who are naturally better disposed,
attesting that God is to be sought and worshipped: we ought not to despair but
that there is some authority placed by the same God, upon which we raising and
settling our selves as upon a most firm basis, may be exalted up unto God.
Again, This is the providence of true Religion: this is commanded us from
heaven, this is delivered unto us by our Blessed ancestors, this is preserved
even to these our times: to be willing to disturb and pervert this, is nothing
else but to seek a sacrilegious way to true Religion. Again, (de unit Eccl c.
19.) Neither thou nor I do read this evidently and expressly ( viz in the
Scriptures) But if there were to be found in the world any one endowed with
wisdom and recommended by the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, and if such
an one were consulted with by us touching this controversy, we should in no
wise doubt to observe whatsoever such an one should say unto us; and this for
fear of being judged to have opposed not so much such a person, as our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, by whose testimony such an one is recommended: Now Christ
gives testimony to his Church. Again, (de Bap. l. 5. c. 23.) To speak the
truth, the Apostles have prescribed nothing concerning this, but this custom
ought to be believed to have taken it is original from their Tradition, As
there are many things which the universal Church observes, the which in good
right ought to be believed to have been delivered by the Apostles, although
they be not found in Scripture. Again, (lib. 4.) That which the universal
Church holds, and it is not ordained by Councels, but has been always
retained and observed is most justly believed to have been delivered no other
way than by Apostolic Tradition, etc. We must observe in these things that
which the Church of God observes: the Question therefore between you and us is,
Whether of the two, Yours or Ours is the Church of God? Again, To omit
therefore this sincere wisdom which you will not allow to be in the Catholic
Church: There are many other things which most justly keep me in her bosom,
The consent of Peoples and Nations keep me there; The authority begun by
Miracles, nourished by hope, augmented by charity, confirmed by Antiquity keep
me there; The succession of Prelates ever since the Seat of Peter, to whom our
Lord after his Resurrection committed the feeding of his sheep, to this present
Episcopate keep me there; And finally the very name of Catholic keeps me
there, the which name this Church alone not without cause has retained among
so many and great Haeresies, insomuch as when any stranger demands where the
assembly is, wherein a man may communicate with the Catholic Church, there is
not any one Heretic has the boldness to show him his Temple or house, etc.
These so many, and so strong, and most dear ties of the Christian name with
good right retein a believer in the Catholic Church, although that by reason
of the slowness of our understanding, or want of merit in our lives, the truth
does not as yet show it self unto us with perfect evidence. Again, the same
Father in the same book, (ca. 5.) I do not believe ( says he) that Manichaeus
is the Apostle of Christ, I pray you be not angry, neither begin to give ill
language: For you know that I have resolved not to believe rashly any thing
produced by you. I ask therefore, Who is this Manichaeus? You will answer, the
Apostle of Christ. I do not believe it. Now thou will find nothing what thou
should say or do; for thou did promise me a science of truth, and now thou
forcest me to believe a thing that I know not. It may be thou will read the
Gospel unto me, and from thence wilt endeavor to assert the person of
Manichaeus. But what if thou should light upon one that does not yet believe
the Gospel, what would thou do to him when he tells thee, I do not believe?
And truly, I my self would not believe the Gospel, were it not that the
authority of the Catholic Church moves me Now why should I not believe the
same persons saying to me, Believe not Manichaeus, to whom I gave credence,
saying, Believe the Gospel? Choose what thou will: If thou shall say, Believe
the Catholics: they move me to give no credence to you, therefore if I
believe them, I must of necessity not believe thee. If thou shall say, Do not
believe Catholics, Thou shall do unjustly compelling me by the Gospel to
believe Manicheus, because the same Gospel I believed upon the ^reaching of
Catholics. But if thou (...) say, Thou did well to believe the Gospel upon
the commendation of Catholics, but ill in believing them discommending
Manichaeus: Do thou think me so very a fool, as that without any reason
rendered I should believe what thou please, and dis-believe what thou likest
not? So that surely I do much more justly and warily, if because I am already
a believer I do not forsake the Catholics to come over to thy party,
unless thou command me not to believe, but undertakest to show me something
that may be known most manifestly and apparently. Therefore if thou will afford
me reason, quit the Gospel: if thou hold thy self to the Gospel, I must hold
my self to those upon whose command I believed the Gospel: and upon the same
persons commandment, I must by no means believe thee. But if by chance thou
should be able to find in the Gospel some passage most evident concerning
the Apostleship of Manicha^^, thou will thereby weaken indeed unto me the
authority of Catholics, who command me not to believe thee: which authority
being invalidated I would no longer believe the Gospel it self, because it
was for their sakes that I believed it. So that whatsoever thou shall allege,
will have no force with me. To the same purpole the same Father, ( lib. de
util. cred. c. 14.) Why should I not most diligently enquire what Christ
commanded of them before all ^^hers, by whose authority I was moved to (...)
that Christ commanded any good thing? Can thou better declare to me what he
said, whom I would not have thought to have been, or to be, if the belief
thereof had been recommended by thee to me? This therefore I believed by fame
strengthened with celebrity, consent, Antiquity. But every one may see that
you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce nothing deserving authority.
What madness is this? Believe them [Catholiques] that we ought to believe
Christ; but learn of us what Christ said. Why, I beseech thee? surely if they
[Catholiques] were not at all, and could not teach me any thing, I would more
easily persuade my self that I were not to believe Christ, then that I should
learn any thing concerning him from any other then them by whom I believed in
him. Lastly the same Father, (con. Cres. I. 1. c. 33.) Although (says he)
there cannot be produced out of the Scriptures any example of such a thing, yet
the truth of the same Scriptures is held of us in this matter when we do that
which pleases the whole Church, the which the authority of the same Scriptures
does commend, that because the holy Scriptures cannot deceive us, whosoever
fears to be deceived with the obscurity of this question, let him require the
judgment of the Church, which the Holy Scriptures without any ambiguity do
demonstrate: to the end that because the Scriptures cannot deceive us,
whoseover is afraid to be deceived by the obscurity of any question, may have
recourse to the Churches judgment concerning it, the which (Church) the Holy
Scriptures demonstrate without any ambiguity.

6. Witness S. Vincentius Lyrinensis, (c. 2.) Inasmuch as all do not take the
Scripture in the same sense by reason of it is profundity, but some on one
fashion, some on another, so that almost as many senses may seem to be drawn
from it as there are men: for Novatianus expounds it one way, Photinus another,
Sabellius another, Donatus another, Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius another,
Apollinarius and Priscillian another, Iovinian, Pelagius, Caelestius another,
And lastly Nestorius another: For this reason to avoid the labyrinth of so many
contrary errors, it is very necessary that the line of Prophetical and
Apostolical conceptions should be drawn according to the rule of
Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense, or intelligence. Witness lastly S. Leo,
It is not to be doubted but that all Christian observance is of divine
institution, and that whatsoever is received by the Church into the custom of
devotion does come from Apostolical Tradition, and from the doctrine of the
Holy Ghost: who does also now preside over his own institutes in the hearts of
the Faithful, that all both obediently observe, and wisely understand them.
Sermon. 2. de Ieiun. Pent.

CHAP. XX.
Quotations out of Antiquity for the authority of Counsels.

A contrary character of Heretics.

1. TO the former quotations so express, so efficacious to assert the Churches
authority in points of Religion, from which there lies no appeal. I will
adjoyne other testimonies of Antiquity to demonstrate the veneration given by
all Orthodox Fathers to the Counsels of the Church, their acknowledgement of
their obliging authority, and how in obedience to them they submitted their
own particular opinions. Witness hereof may be either the Apostles themselves
or Apostolic Fathers at least, in those most ancient Canons (whereto S
Clement also gives testimony) who appointed that Bishops should twice in the
year keep Counsels, Can^ Apost. 36. 37 etc. Clement. Constable. Apost l 2. cap. 30.
and among themselves examine the decrees of Religion, and compose such
Ecclesiastical controversies as should arise? the first in the fourth week
after Pentecost, and the second on the twelfth day of (Hyperberitaei) October.
Witness S. Ignatius, (Ep. ad Smyrn.) Do you all follow the Bishop, as Christ
did his Father. Without the Bishop let no man praesume to do any of those
things which belong to the Church. The same Holy Father ( Ep. ad Policarp)
testifies that it was the order in his time that Sy^ods and assemblies of
Bishhops were frequently celebrated. Witness Tertullian, (cont. Psych. cap.
13.) In those countries of Greece there are assembled in certain appointed
places Counsels out of all Churches, by which both things of higher importance
are agitated in commune, and the representation of the whole Christian name is
celebrated with great veneration. Witness that glorious Emperor Constantine,
in his Epistle to the Churches mentioned by Socrates, Hist. Eccl, lib. 1. cap.
6. where he says, Whatsoever is decreed in the Holy Council of Bishops, that
is, universally to be ascribed to the Divine Will. Witness S. Gregory
Nazianzen, (Ep. ad Chelid.) Those that agree with Apollinards say that they
were admitted by the Council of the West or Roman Bishop, by whom it is
manifest they were once condemned: Let them show this and we will yield: for
then it is manifest that they assent to the true doctrine, for it cannot be
otherwise, if they have obtained this. Witness S. Ambrose, (de Fid. ad Great.
lib. 3. c 7.) who calls the decrees of the Council of Nice, haereditari^
signacula, not to be violated by the rash boldness of any man: And many
expressions to the same effect are extant in S. Hilary in his book addressed
to the Emperor Constantius.

2 Witness S. Augustine, (con. Don. lib. 7. and con. Crescon. lib. 1.) It is to
us a safe thing, not to rush forward in any rashness of opinion concerning
those things, which neither have been agitated in any
Catholique-National-Synod, nor determined in any Occumenicall: but to maintain
that with the assurance of a secure voice, which in the government of our Lord
God and Savior Jesus Christ has been strengthened with the consent of the
universal Church. And again, In the former ages of the Church before the
Schism of Donatus. (Id. de Bapt. con. Don. I. 1.) The obscurity of that
Question (viz concerning Rebaptization of Haeretiques) compelled great persons
and endued with great charity to dispute and debate among themselves however
without any breach of peace: In so much that in several Countries for a long
time the decisions of several Counsels did vary and clash among themselves,
until in a Plenary Council of the whole world that which was soundly
believed, was without all manner of doubt confirmed. Again, (Id. con. Parm Ep.
lib. 2) the question being whether Baptism can be given by those men also who
never have been Christians; we ought not to affirm determinately any thing
therein without the authority of a Council so great as may be answerable to
the greatness of the matter. But concerning those who are separated from the
unity of the Church, there is no question at all but that they do both retain
it, and communicate it, and that they do both perniciously retain and
perniciously communicate it without the bond of Peace: for this has been
already agitated, considered; perfected and confirmed in the unity of the whole
world. And again, (Id. de Bapt. con. Don. lib. 2. cap. 4.) Neither durst we
affirm any such thing if we were not well grounded upon the most uniforme
authority of the universal Church, unto which undoubtedly S. Cyprian would
have yielded, if in his time the truth of this question had been discussed; and
declared, and by a General Council established. Lastly, (to omit many express
testimonies of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Facundus, etc.) the last witness shall
be S. Gregory the Great, (Ep. 24.) who professes that he receives and
venerates the four first General Counsels no otherwise then the four
Gospells: as likewise that he does in like manner embrace the fifth Council.
This was the language of the Catholic Fathers, when they wrote many of them
purposely upon this very Question: And besides these testimonies, other will be
produced occasionally in the following discourse.

3. On the contrary, Haeritiques (as S. Basile observes) do generally agree
(...) (...) to raise an altar in opposition to the altar of the Fathers. And
Vincentius Lyrinensis, (cap. 16.) gives us a proper character of their Spirit
and language, bringing them in thus speaking, V^nite o insapientes and miseri,
qui vulgo Catholici vocitamini, etc. Come now O ye foolish and miserable
wretches, who are commonly called Catholics, and learn the true faith, which
besides us no man understands; which has lien hid for many ages past, but has
bin of late discovered and made known: But you must learn it by stealth and in
secret, for it will be delightful unto you. So of old spoke the Heretics:
Whether of late they have changed this style, or no, yea how much they have
changed this (to be accounted modest) language into a new one full of
arrogance, pride and fury, will sufficiently appear in the treatises
Polemicall of Luther, Calvin, etc.

CHAP. XXI.
The doctrine of the Roman Church concerning the Churches authority.

The great and apparent reasonableness of it.

1. I will now subjoyn to the doctrine of the ancient Church that of the
present Roman Church, that being set in view the one of the other, we may
better judge how well they resemble, or what unlikenesse there is between them.
The substance of what the Church has defined concerning this point is contained
in this decision of the Council of Trent (Sess. 4.) viz. Praeterca ad coercenda
petulantia ingenia, decrevit (Synodus) Ut nemo, etc. that is, Moreover to the
end to restrein petulant wits, this Synod decrees, That no man relying upon
his own skill, and wresting Holy Scripture to his own senses, shall presume to
interpret the Holy Scriptures in matters of Faith and manners pertaining to the
edification of Christian doctrine against that sense which has been and is
held by ( our) holy Mother the Church, to whom it appertains to judge of the
true sense and interpretation of Holy Scriptures, and against the unanimous
consent of Fathers, although such interpretations were never at any time to be
published abroad. The substance of this decree is repeated in the Bull
published by Pius IV. concerning the Oath of the Profession of Faith.

2. This decision, considered simply as the words import in their plain direct
sense, seemed to me so strangely reasonable and equal, requiring only due
reverence to the present Church, and implying with a strange ingenuity and
assurance a conformity with the doctrine unanimously maintained in the ancient
Church, that I could not believe but that some where or other I should find a
far greater burden laid by her upon her childrens shoulders: for according to
that information, which I received from the learned Doctors of Controversy
among Catholics (who for the most part do dress this point in
School-language, and exalt that language to the utmost importance, deducing
likewise the most rigid consequences from it) I thought the bonds and fetters
wherein the Roman Church rest^eined all in her Communion were far more
stringent and painful, cutting even to the very bones; So that this newly
discovered great equity of the Church made me suspicious, and thereupon
inquisitive: therefore I searched my self, and begged of others to search for
me into former Counsels for somewhat more rigorous and unreasonable: and after
all, I could not find in any declaration or Canon in any Council universally
received any higher or more hardly-to be digested expression of the Churches
authority, then what is set down in this decree of the Council of Trent.

3. Then I perceived that it was that (as it fell out through mine own
unwariness, to me unfortunate) word of infallibility, and that word understood
by me in the most rigorous sense that the term could import, that above all
other things made me despair of ever being able with a good conscience to
enter into the Communion of the Catholic Church: And yet no such word could I
find in any Council, no necessity appeared to me, that either I, or any other
Protestant should ever have heard that word named, and much less pressed upon
us with so much earnestness and rigor as of late it has generally been in
disputations and books of Controversy. Against this word of infallibility
that (so much by all English Protestants exalted) book of Mr. Chillingworth
especially combats, and this with too too great success, by reason that the
Author makes his advantage of that word, affixing thereto a sense far more
strein'd and exilted, then, I am sure, Catholic doctrine, yea or even his
learned Antagonist do require. Truly if Mr. Chillingworth would have thought
it for his purpose to have proceeded with the ingenuity he professes, and have
examined how much latitude might have been allowed him in this point,
concerning this expression of the Churches infallibility in her Conciliary
decisions, he would have found that he had much less cause to triumph in the
furious batteries that he pretends to make against it. For first of all, the
forecited Doctor Veron says expressly, That no mention is found of the word
Infallibility in the decrees of the Council of Trent, nor any other received
Council, and by consequence according to the design of his Method, that word
cannot be, as of necessity, imposed upon any one: A Method commended and
authorized by three General assemblies of the Clergy of France: without
contradiction insisted on, and prosecuted more then 40. years together by him,
both in Sermons, Disputations and writings, and the Author of it enabled to
pursue it, both by letters Patents of the King of France, by the quality of a
Catholic Doctor, and by Episcopal Mission. Again, Bellarmine treating of
the comparison between the Infallibility of a General Council, and that of
Scripture, gives the preeminence to Scripture in five several respects, among
which the third is, That in Scripture there can be no error, neither in points
of Faith nor manners, nor likewise whether any thing be affirmed pertaining to
the whole Church, or only to some few or one particular person, whereas
Counsels may err in particular judgments. And the fowrth, That in Scripture
not only all sentences, but al and every single word belong to Faith, whereas
in Counsels neither the disputations premised, nor the reasons added, nor
illustrations nor explications adjoined do belong to Faith, but only the
simple naked Decrees, and not all those neither, but only such as are proposed
as of Faith, etc. Hereto may be added that even those naked decrees also are
not always necessarily to be understood according to the latitude of the
significations of the words and expressions in themselves, but only so far as
they are intended to contradict the special Heresy condemned by them. Hence
that famous Carmelite, who modestly disguises himself under the common title
Salmanticensis (the miracle of this age both for subtility, perspicuity, and
profound solidity of judgment, in that part of his Theological discourse,
where he treats largely of Angels) being to answer an Objection out of the
Council of Lateran, has these words, Ad dignoscendu^ an aliquid sit desinitu^
ab Ecclesia, etc. that is, To be able to give a judgment, whether any thing be
defined by the Church, we must (as Cajetan well observes) attend unto the
errors, which the Church proposes to condemn, and not to those things, which
she speaks incidently, for such things do not remain defined, neither is it
erroneous in Faith to opine against them. Now the intention of the Council of
Lateran in that decree was only to exclude the error of Origin, who affirmed,
That this visible world was not ( per se) directly intended by God; but only
occasionally and by accident, to be a prison in which the Devils should be
punished: and hereupon the Council defined, That it was Gods pleasure and will
directly and out of his primary intention, by his divine Omnipotence to create
both the Angelical and Humane Nature: Whereas in that Decree it only says
incidently that he created at once from the beginning both these Natures. And
therefore this last assertion is not by virtue of the said definition become an
Article of Faith. Hitherto Salmanticencis. De Angel. p. 364.

4. Hence it will appear what ill use Mr. Chillingworth makes of the term
infallibility, either unwillingly forgetting, or willingly concealing the great
latitude that is allowed generally, and by unsuspected Catholic Authors to
the sense and notion of it: which latitude I am assured his learned Adversary
would have been very willing to have allowed him. But it was not for his
purpose to accept, nor so much as take notice of such allowance, it would have
spoiled and abated the edge of many of his flourishing and seemingly subtle
discourses. So that it is apparent that Mr. Chillingworths arguments against
the Churches just authority, as he pretends, (which to most English men, and I
am sure to me once appeared unanswerable) If that the word infallibility were
but laid by for a while, yea if the unquestionably allowable qualifications if
its sense were but expressed, would (I am confident by mine own experience)
lose the greatest part of their strength, and however appear not to endanger
the Catholic Church at all.

5. I do not speak this (being now, as I am, by Gods grace a Catholic) to
the end either to show my self foolishly forward to take part with any one
Catholic writer or opinion against another: (for the truth is, my resolution
was, that, if my mind disquieted with scruples of Religion should chance to
find rest in the Catholic Church, to submit my self in all simplicity to
her doctrine, to avoid as much as might be the interessing my self in Disputes
and Controversies, and the entertaining all unusual, suspected, devious, and
rash opinions, and to spend the remainder of my life more to the benefit of my
soul, then by engaging my self in particular factions and partialities,
either about Doctrines or practices.) Nor secondly, to censure at random all
those that make use of that term in disputations. For I know that before any
of our late Schisms, that word was used perhaps without any inconvenience by
the School men; and if it were confined to that place where it was bred, there
would be still no inconvenience. But since by manifest experience the
Protestants (I speak of England) think themselves so secure, when they have
leave to stand or fall by that word, and in very deed have so much to say for
themselves, when they are pressed unnecessarily, abruptly and too too rudely
with it, the sense thereof not being mollified and sweetened by just and
allowable qualifications: Since likewise it is a word capable of so high a
sense that we cannot devise one more full and proper to attribute to God
himself, insomuch as Mr. Chillingworth, when he could prove that the Church
was not in so high a degree infallible as the Apostles (shall I say?) no not as
God himself, thought he had gained the victory: Whereas, besides Bellarmine
before quoted, S. Aug. (lib. 2. de Bapt. com. Don. cap. 3.) expressly allows to
holy Scripture a place and preeminence before the decisions of Counsels;
Lastly since the Church (which Catholics in this controversy do pretend to
maintain only) obliges no man to that word, which is not found expressly in any
of her received Counsels, as Mounsieur Veron professes: yea since she almost
desivers the victory into their hands when they urge only her decisions, and
when they urge them in the latitude that she allows; Can I be blamed, if my
duty to the Church, my affection to mine own country and indeed to all that
call themselves Christians, and the remembrance how, if I had not perceived
that it might be permitted me in this Controversy concerning the Church, to
wave that word of infallibility, I should perhaps never have had occasion to
speak this of it in a writing of this nature, Can I (I say) be blamed, if such
reasons move me to wish that the Protestants may either never be invited to
combat the authority of the Church under that notion? Or however that when the
term of Infallibility is used, it may not be pressed in a sense more rigorous
and comprehensive, then the Church her self has expressed.

6. Now here by the way I think it fit, to the end to prevent any mistake or
misconstruction of what has been said touching the words Infallible and
Infallibility, to express my meaning to be this ( viz.) That I am so far from
dislikeing the words themselves so generally made use of, both by School men
and Controvertists, that I profess I cannot devile any other single terms by
which to express the Churches just and necessary Authority. For if it be true
(as infallibly it is, I am sure) That God has endowed his Church with an
Authority to which all Christisns are obliged to submit their understandings
and captivate their wills; then it must necessarily follow from the infinite
wisdom and goodness of God, that his divine providence will preserve his
church in all truth, so as to secure all believers that they cannot be misled
by following her, nor walk safely when they follow any other direction: And by
consequence, that she can neither deceive them, nor be deceived her self; all
which is clearly imported in the distinct Grammatical sense of those single
terms, Infallible and Infallibility. Notwithstanding since the same terms may
possibly be misconceived, because they are capable of comprehending a more
extended notion, then is here expressed, as evidently they do, when they are
attributed to God and to his immediately inspired word. And since Protestants
have, especially of late, entertained and drunk in a notion and conception from
these terms far more rigorous and comprehensive, then either the church her
self, or most of the most learned and approved Controvertists do conceive any
one to be obliged unto; which notion it is as yet very difficult to efface out
of their imaginations: Upon these grounds it is, that both from mine own
experience in my self, and knowledge, that I think I have of the peculiar
temper of English Protestants; I judged it convenient, and even requisite, to
exhort Catholics treating with them, especially in such times as these, that
the fields are even white unto the Harvest, and that very many more may
probably be won by a charitable compliance (yet still without wrong to
necessary Catholic doctrine. God forbid else) then perhaps by the most
convincing arguments of reason, That they would condescend so far, either to
the misunderstandings, prejudices, or infirmity of Protestants, as, since the
Church her self obliges no man to those very express terms, for a while
either to abstain from them in disputes, or using them, to do it with a
qualifying preface, urging and fastening no stricter a sense on them then the
Churches own Decision of her authority does require. Certainly the receiving of
a soul from Heresy and Schism is a work so infinitely precious and
meritorious before Almighty God, that it will deserve that we should employ in
it, not only all our strength of wit and learning, but all our charity likewise;
so imitating the great example of that great Conductor of souls S. Paul, who
told the Corinthians, Astutus dolo vos cepi, that is, being crafty I caught you
with guile, namely, by instilling Christian Doctrines into their minds
leisurely and seasonably, neither out of time enforcing unnecessary truths upon
them, nor hastily and abruptly urging even necessary, but perhaps unwelcome
ones, till he had prudently prepared a way for them. Now if we, entreating with
well minded, but seduced souls, would, imitating S. Paul, only propose to them
at the first necessary doctrines, and those represented with all the lawful
inviting advantages, and most easy constructions, we should no doubt, make
many points, from which for the present through misapprehension they have a
strong aversion, very receiveable, and very easily digestable to them. And by
these means, having been happy instruments of restoring them to the Church, we
may at leisure, if we have a mind, seek to induce them to adhere unto, and
declare themselves for our particular opinions, and distinctive interpretations
of common points.

7. But to return from this digression, I most affectionately entreat the
Protestants, that they would heedfully cast their eyes upon this decree of the
Council of Trent, that they would peruse and turn it as they please; and when
they have done this, let them consider if a Synod of Charenton, or Dort, or Gap
do not, even while they renounce all visible obliging authority, usurp
notwithstanding more then the Catholic Church here challenges: Would any of
them give leave to any among them to interpret Scriptures against their sense
established by them? Nay, do not they command men to interpret Scriptures
against doctrines unanimously consented to by Fathers? Lastly, would they
suffer a French Protestant to interpret Scriptures, but even as their brethren
Protestants in in England (heretofore during their prosperity graced by them
with that title) do ordinarily interpret them (for example) about Episcopacy,
real Presence, etc? If therefore such fragments of churches do allow
themselves so much, let Protestants try if they can be unreasonable enough to
impute tyranny to the Catholic Church, for forbidding any in her communion to
invent new senses of Scripture, contrary not only to the doctrine universally
embraced through the whole Catholic world, but to this doctrine as professed
to be the same which all Churches before, and all Fathers unanimously consent
in?

CHAP. XXII.
The method whereby the Author arrived to an entire satisfaction concerning the
Churches authority.

1. I Will now proceed in my narration, how and by what means (after I had
informed my self of the Roman Churches established doctrine concerning her
authority, and after I had been assured by very learned Catholics, that I was
not obliged to build upon any other expression of this doctrine, but that of
the Church it self) I in ashort time arrived to a full satisfaction of all the
difficulties and prejudices, that before I was incombred withal.

2. The objections and difficulties by education and many years study settled
in my mind against the Churches infallibility or authority, and which were not
suddenly cleared, after I knew that the Church was more moderate and
condescending then I had before believed, respected not only the substance of
this doctrine, but likewise many particulars and circumstances of it, as
likewise the immediate consequences of it, forexample, How it could be
justified with certainty sufficient to support a supernatural faith, that the
Church was legally possessed of this authority; Where this authority was
scated, whether in the whole Church, or some special members of it; Upon what
grounds it was challenged; How far it was extended; And after all these, what
might appear to me to be the most rational way for a Catholic to express
his resolution of faith, so confidently by all Protestants charged with circles
and absurdities?

3. To gain satisfaction in these points, as, for the foundation, I resolved
only to consider what the Church her self said, so for an information more
particular since the church had not descended to so punctual an expression of
her mind, conceived it my best way to have recourse either to the writings or
verbal resolutions of such Catholics of unsuspected Opinions, as had
expressed themselves the most moderately, intelligibly, with allowing the
greatest latitude, and lastly, most approaching to the grounds which I thought
before to be most reasonable. The particular persons whose speeches or writings
contributed most to my satisfaction, I shall occasionally name or reflect upon
in the pursuance of this Narration.

4. Now I do not vainly pretend to, or so much as trouble my self with wishing
that any man, Catholic, or other, should believe that the method according to
which I proceeded, or the grounds which in mine own reasoning I laid, were more
rational then others; for my intent is only to make an Exomologesis, or
account of that particular order and progress whereby I attained repose of
mind in the authority of the Church, and great contentment in abasing and
captivating my reason: It will be sufficient for me if the grounds by me laid,
and inferences from them deserve not to be condemned by Catholics, to prevent
which, I may with confidence say that I took very good advice, and used very
great circumsp^^^ion. Let them be accounted as imperfect as any man shall
please, I am very well contented that others should tell me that they could
have furnished me with better: This only I have to say, that purposing to write
mine own story, and not directions for others, I am resolved to tell it freely
and ingenuously, without concealing whatsoever defaults or wickednesses may by
others be imputed to it.

CHAP. XXIII.
Grounds laid to prove a certainty of Tradition. Several degrees of it.

1. SOme of the grounds laid by me in preparation to a distinct conception and
satisfaction concerning the Churches authority founded upon Tradition, and the
certainty thereof, have been already occasionally, though somewhat before their
due season, mentioned in the former conclusion, cap. 8. and 9. The substance of
which, together with others pertinent thereto, I will here, as in their proper
and natural place, orderly set down.

2. In the first place therefore, since all information of things past before
our age can no other way be had (excepting only extraordinary or divine
inspiration, not to be expected, or relied upon, if pretended, unless it be
attested by miracles) but by Tradition from the times when such things happened,
yet arriving at us by the testimony of the present times and persons living
with us: By consequence I had no difficulty, but that in the present hypothesis
of Christian revelations the only immediate witness of them was the present
church, and this either by orall profession, that thus she had received by
information and practice of the precedent age; Or by writings of antiene times
continued and daily transcribed, but all preserved and conveyed to us by the
present church.

3. In the second place I considered that these divine Revelations, and
doctrines of Christian Religion being of such a particular nature as that,
besides the believing them to have been, we are obliged to assent unto and
embrace them, as the only necessary means of avoiding eternal misery, and
attaining to eternal happiness. Hereupon it is, that the present church, our
only witness of them, represents them to us, not only as the present age does
the actions of Caesar, or books of Cicero, that is, with so much assurance that
we cannot be reasonable men and doubt of them, yet by doubting or disbelieving
them there is no loss to be feared, but only of our reputation. But she
proposes them to us as necessarily to be submitted to, and her self as an
authorized witness, having received commission from the divine Author to
oblige all men to believe her, as a proponent. Which double capacity of the
church, viz. 1. Simply a proponent. 2. As an authorized proponent, I conceived
it very requisite for me to distinguish, and, at least, in my understanding, to
separate the one from the other: For though Catholics, who from their infancy
have been brought up in acknowledging the grounded authority of the church,
have no need to distinguish this double capacity for themselves, yet in
disputation with those Sects, which accept of Tradition, simply at least for
books of Scripture, but deny such an obliging authority, and especially in
explaining the manner of Resolution of Faith, I conceived and found, as to my
self, great profit in this distinction.

4. In the third place, for simple Tradition I enquired whether, and upon what
grounds it could be made to appear to be certain and absolutely convincing. And
upon mature consideration, I was satisfied that they were extremely mistaken,
who thought that there was no absolute certainty in any knowledge, excepting
only such as we receive either immediately by our senses, or by evident
discourse and demonstration of reason. For on the contrary I found that
knowledge from report of Tradition might in some cases be as truly certain, as
that from sense or demonstration. So for example, before, I saw the City of
Rome, I was most assured that there was such a place, and the reason was,
because it was impossible that such a world of writings and persons, all which
could not be led by interest to frame a lie, should conspire to witness such a
thing, and not one person be found that contradicted them. The like may be said
of Tradition, or report of things past, when a whole age agrees universally to
acknowledge a Tradition under that notion, neither friends nor enemies
contradicting, it is impossible that such a report should be false: Yea I may
add further, when there are in the same age two Traditions of two considerable
parties directly contradicting the one the other, it may fall out, yea
sometimes it may be most assured, that both of them must in some respect be
true. As for example, the whole Nation of the Jews dispersed all the world
over, do agree that they have received as a most sure Tradition, that our
Savior was an Impostor, and wrought all his pretended miracles by Magic and
help of the Devil; on the contrary, all Christians through the whole world
agree that they have received a Tradition, that our Savior was the true
Messiah promised, and that he wrought all those true miracles by the power of
God, and for confirmation of his divine doctrine: In this case these two
Traditions being in respect of the parties respectively universal, must
necessarily be true, though in some sort contradicting, yet not in that wherein
they contradict. For it is as certain that the Jews received, and have
continually propagated such a Tradition, though false in the root, as that the
Christians have received the contrary: Notwithstanding reason may judge
infallibly between them concerning the root of these Traditions, namely by
demonstrating that such miracles (acknowledged by both sides to have been
wrought) were many of them of such a nature, as that they did exceed all
created power, and that the doctrine was so divine, so destructive to the
devil, as that he was obliged in interest to endeavor the annibilation of it:
and lastly, that nothing was either done or taught by our Savior, but what was
agreeable to the ancient Prophecies, received by the Jews concerning the
Messiah, etc. upon which grounds it will evidenly appear, that the Jews, who
first received such a Tradition, were abused by the malice and perfidiousnesse
of their ancestors, etc. And this is the only proper way of determining and
deciding the controversy between these two Traditions. But of this more
hereafter.

5. In general therefore I found that a full unquestionable certitude might be
had of some Traditious; as to give one example more, that there was such a man
as William Duke of Normandy, who conquered England, is most certain, not any
Englishman or other that ever heard of it, but believes it, and would impute
frenzy to any man that should call it in question. Now the reason why this is
so certain to every one, is this; because all men living at this time, who
either are inquisitive into times past, or c^pable of information do agree;
that this particular was told them by their Predecessors, as a thing come to
them by Tradition, and so the men of the former age of that before them, thus
ascending, till we come to the age wherein he lived, and was personally known
and seen by his Subjects. Now it is impossible that all men of any age should
both agree together, and actually effect that complot, to deceive their
children with a lie, under the notion of Tradition, Add to this; that the
present age affords us books and Records descending from hand to hand, and
written in several ages between that time and us, which testify the same
thing. As likewise there are in the general practice of England, Laws,
Customs, Privileges, etc. all which are acknowledged to have had their
Original from the same Author. This is an example of one of the highest
degrees of Traditionary certitude that may be of a thing passed so many ages
since, being confirmed by Orall Tradition, Universality, Records, language, and
practices or customs.

6. An inferior degree of certainty in Tradition (yet certainty however) is,
for example, that there was such a man as Alexander the Great. This is a thing
most certain, and yet it wants many of those arguments of assurance in the
former example. There is indeed a kind of Orall Tradition of this likewise, yet
not arriving unto this age and climate of the world by such a general
succession as the former, by reason that Alexander having lived in a quarter of
the world remote from us, we are not descended from the men of his age, who
knew him; yet, it may be, some of them or their children coming to Rome
delivered this, and so some Romans conveyed it among these Western parts of
the world. There are no customs or practices among us relating to Alexander;
so that the main arguments of certainty are, 1. Positive, that is, writings
dispersed abroad, made by ancient Grecians and Romans, all testifying the same
thing. 2. Negative, not one man appearing in this age, nor to be heard of in
the former, that denied it, or so much as called it in question.

7. A yet inferior degree of certainty in Tradition may be exemplified in some
writings, as in S. Clements first Epistle to the Corinthians, lately published
and printed in England. For that there was such an Epistle written is testified
by all Antiquity, and was assuredly believed by all learned men in this age
before the publishing of it: But it is, now near eight hundred years that it
has been missing in the world, for Photius, I think, is the last writer that
takes notice to have read it. Of late this Epistle was found in an ancient
Manuscript in the King of England's Library, sent him for a present out of the
Eastern countries. Now the certitude that this is the same Epistle anciently
acknowledged and read in the Church, appears in this: 1. That the characters of
the Manuscript are very ancient, (yet I do not believe it to have been written
by that glorious Virgin Martyr S. Tecla, as the credulous Grecians would
pretend;) so that if it had been counterfeited, it was done in times, when the
falsity might have been discovered by unquestioned copies. 2. That the style is
agreeing with the ancient simplicity and gravity of Apostolic writings. 3.
That the subject is the very same that those ancient Fathers, who speak of it,
do mention. 4. That all the extraits and passages, which the Fathers of the
Church do quote out of S. Clements true Epistle, are found in this. Upon which
grounds it may be truly said, and I believe no man will contradict it, that
this is certainly S. Clements Epistle.

8. It is likely that besides these degrees of certainty, more upon
consideration might be found out: but these I esteemed enough for my present
purpose. Now by certainty I intend not certitudinem rei, for so nothing that is
or has been is in it self more certain then another, for even a thing that
has its existence from free or casual causes, when it is, is as certain as
any other thing produced by causes never so determinate, efficacious or
necessary: But certitudinem quoad nos, that is, our assurance that it has
been: And a thing I call more certain, in this notion (not which has less
doubt or suspicion of not being, for if there be any rational suspicion, there
is no certainty, no not in the lowest degree: but) that which has more ways
to prove it self to be certain then another.

CHAP. XXIV.
Divine revelations proved to be certain beyond humane story.

1. I Will now proceed by way of comparison to demonstrate the high degree of
certitude; which we may have of divine Revelations, testified by the present
Church, considered as a simple proponent, setting aside the authority which she
challenges to oblige all men to submit to. In which discourse we are to
consider four things especially in Christian Religion, coming to us by
Tradition, but in subordinate degrees of certitude, viz. 1. Doctrines merely
speculative, and which hardly could be testified in the practice of the church.
2. Books of Scripture. 3. Ceremonies and external practices not mentioned
expressly in Scripture. 4. Doctrines and customs shining in the practice of the
Church, and likewise more or loss clearly expressed in Scripture.

2. First for speculative doctrines, which could hardly be expressed in the
practice of the Church, the Tradition of them seems to be very difficult, and
the certainty not so demonstrable. As for example, there are in the Catalogue
of Heresies made by S. Epiphanius, S Augustine and Philastrius, certain
opinions called Heresies in a large notion, which seem not to have been in
themselves of any dangerous consequence, but yet have been condemned by Popes,
etc. and ever since by a tacit consent of the Universal Church avoided; as the
opininions of the Millenaries, Melchisedechians, etc. Now whether these
Heresies were condemned as contrary to a Tradition, or only by a judgment of
discretion, by showing, that the grounds pretended for such opinions out of
Scripture are not concluding, but rather the contrary, (as the second Council
of Orange seems to condemn some doctrines of the Semipelagians) is not very
certain. However they rest condemned, and more probably the former way, as
contrary to Tradition; which may rather be believed of the Millenaries, because
they pretended for their doctrine a Tradition derived from Papias a scholar of
the Apostles, and it was very far spread in the church, and maintained by great
Saints and Doctors, as S Irenaus, S. Justin Martyr, etc. It might very possible
be, that the Traditionary doctrines contrary to these Heresies (however
speculative, and which could not be conveyed by any outward practice of the
church) might have continued in men's memories to the times, when these opinions
were confuted; For no doubt can be made, but that the Apostolic churches,
together with the books of Scripture, received the true sense and
interpretation of the most difficult passages, which might continue by a
successive instruction, but of which, by reason they were no necessary
doctrines of Christian Religion, many are lost, as I exemplified in the former
conclusion. So that the certainty of such Traditionary speculative doctrines is
very hardly demonstrable; and thereupon many learned Catholics conceive, that
several lately controverted opinions in the church, as concerning Grace and
Freewill, Molin in S. Tho. p 1. q. 1. a. 2. disp. 1. and 2. ad. 3. Can. in loc.
Theol. l. 12. Ca. 3. Fr. a S. Cla. in Syst. fidei. Ca. 2. 8. 14.
the immaculate Conception of our blessed Lady, etc. have been so much agitated
without any decision of the church; and it ever any of the said opinions come
to be decided by a Council, that the decision will at least oblige to
obedience and non-contradiction, but not, perhaps, as an article de fide, that
is, as a divine revelation, delivered by universal Tradition: Since it is
generally confessed, that they want such a Tradition. See above in this
Section: 1 Cha. 9.

3. As concerning books of Scripture, the Tradition of them may appear certain
in a high degree, at least for the substance of the books: For though at first
they were written for the use and necessity of particular Churches and persons,
and no Obligation appears expressly to have been imposed to disperse them
through the whole Church: Notwithstanding the infinite reverence, which all
Christians bore to the Apostles, made every church desirous to possess
themselves of whatsoever writings proceeded from them: Yet this not out of any
extreme necessity, for from their first foundation all churches were instructed
in all points and doctrines of Christianity, as likewise the same orders of
government, public worship, etc. and this after an uniform manner, as
appeared to me evident, not only from the ancient Liturgies, but several
testimonies out of Tertullian, S. Epiphanius, S. Augustine, etc. But there was
required a long time e're such writings could be universally spread, yea
several ages were passed, before they were all of them received, even at Rome
it self, as appears out of S. Hierome. For before they were admitted into the
Canon, we may be sure that great caution and exact information was used. So
that after all this they having been now many ages acknowledged by the whole
church for divine writings, we may have a greater assurance of them, then of
the books of Aristotle, Cicero, etc. which, by reason men were not much
concerned, whether they were legitimate or supposititious, have not been
examined with so much advice and caution; and yet that man that should pretend
to a doubt of them, would be suspected of all men to be tainted in his
understanding. But this high degree of certitude we have only of the divine
books considered in gross, not of the true reading of particular Texts, as
appears by the infinite variety of readings in Manuscripts, yet even in this
respect also we may assure our selves that there is no corruption very
considerable, or of very dangerous consequence, by considering not only Gods
providence and promises to his church, but likewise by comparing the original
Texts with such a world of Translations, Syriake, Arabic, Ethiopian, Latin,
etc. many of which were made in the very infancy of the church, long before the
Archetype or Original copies were lost, some of which Tertullian says,
remained in his days.

4. In the third place, reason told me that such ceremonies, as were
universally practiced through the whole church from the first times, though not
mentioned in Scripture, might justify themselves to be derived from the
Apostles with a greater certainty, then even the books of Scripture themselves;
according to that saying of S. Augustine, (Ep. 118.) Those things which we
observe, and are not written, but delivered, and are practiced all the world
over, are to be understood to have been commanded and appointed either by the
Apostles themselves, or by General Counsels, the authority whereof is most
healthful in the Church. Which Tertullian before him thus expressed, ( de
Praesor.) This custom certainly proceeded from Apostolic Tradition; for how
could that come into (general) practice, which was not delivered by Tradition?
Now of such kind of rites many examples are extant in ancient Liturgies, and
many more mentioned, as universally received by Tertullian, S. Cyprian, etc.
who wrote before there had been in the church, any plenary Council, and
therefore, by S. Augustines rule, argue such rites to have come from the
Apostles. The reason is, because it is not imagineable how it could be possible
that such rites should be received by all churches through the world, and that
so immediately after the Apostles times, and in such a season, when there had
never been any general meeting of Bishops, yea when by reason of the
horriblenesse of the persecutions it was extremely difficult for the Bishops of
one Province to meet together to settle particular necessary affairs (in none
of which Synods notwithstanding is the least mention made of ordaining such
ceremonies) if together with Christian Religion, they had not been introduced
by the Apostles. Let now any reasonable man judge if the books of Scripture,
which he acknowledges only upon the ground of general Tradition, however
certainly and unquestionably divine, yet do not want some of these arguments of
demonstration, and enjoy some of the rest in an inferior degree.

5. But fourthly, Doctrines or customs shining in the general practice of the
Church, and withal more or Less clearly expressed in Scripture (that is,
indeed the whole substance and and frame of Christian Religion, as was showed
before, and therein many points now in controversy between Catholics and
Protestants, etc. and above all other, this point of the Churches authority)
may prove themselves certain in a degree beyond all these, and with as much
assurance, as Tradition is capable of, I am confidently persuaded, beyond the
highest degree that I mentioned for secular Tradition, in the example of King
William the Conqueror of England. For first, all the persons living in the time
of Luthers Apostasy in all Provinces, not of one Kingdom, but of the whole
Catholic Church, agreed in testifying that their ancestors had delivered
such things to them, as of Tradition Apostolical, and by consequence, since
the contrary cannot be made apparent, we are to judge the same of all precedent
ages ascending upwards, till the first times, not one Catholic expressly
dissenting, and much less any one age: So that unless in some one age of the
church all Catholics should should have conspired to tell a lie to their
children, and not only so, but should have been able to have seduced them, not
one appearing that would have the honesty to discover the deceit, I could not
conceive it possible, that a Tradition of such a nature could be false. Add to
the confirmation of the same doctrines the testimonies of Histories and
Records, yea even of enemies for many doctrines and practices: Moreover the
laws continually in force through the Catholic Church, lastly the public
forms of Devotions, Feasts, times of mortifications, etc. All these arguments
of certainty conspire in a far more eminent manner to prove these kind of
doctrines and rites, then in the example of William the Conqueror.

5. But beyond all these something may, be added, to which that secular example
does in no visible distance approach: For, did William the Conqueror ever
appoint any persons about him to write all the considerable particulars of his
story, supplying them with all things for the enabling them to that purpose?
Did he work miracles himself for the confirming his authority, and give power
to his servants and their successors for several ages to do the like? Did he
appoint a succession of Teachers to the worlds end sufficiently instructed,
commanding them to keep warily the depositum of that Religion, both from
mixture and perishing, and so to deliver it to their successors, and this upon
great penalties of disobeying? Did he, besides solemn days for several uses,
institute outward rites and practices to be by all men in all times and places
solemnly either seen or practiced, and these with prescribed forms, postures,
and actions, on purpose that the weightiest passages of his acts or sufferings
should continually be celebrated in the world, leaving an impossibility of
their being forgotten without a deluge? Nay lastly, to secu^e all men from the
least apprehension, did he engage an omnipotent power to perform a promise that
those orders, ceremonies, and laws should continue to the worlds end in
despite of the gates of hell it self? Not any of these things have been done
by Will. the Conqueror, (or any other but our Lord) to propagate his memory;
and yet, notwithstanding all these defects, we are most assured of the
Tradition, that such a person there was, that he conquered England, brought in
new laws, customs, etc. What shall we then say of the testimony of the
present church for the substance of Christian Religion, even while we consider
the church only as a bare witness or proponent of such things to us? Is any
confirmation stronger then all this requisite to beget an assurance in us? Yea
is it possible that more secure order could have been taken, then that which
the Son of God has used to make that which was past now above sixteen ages to
remain always, as it were visible before our eyes?

CHAP. XXV.
The reason of considering this double capacity in the Church.

Certainty of belief, compared with certainty of knowledge.

1. THe reason why I enquired into the proofs of the certainty of universal
Tradition proposed by the Church, considered antecedently to her authority,
was, because I found it necessary, as to my self, for a distinct understanding
the Resolution of Catholic Faith, that grounds of certainty of Tradition
should first be laid, before the authority of the church interpose to oblige us
to believe Christian doctrine for the prime authors sake finally, which is God.

2. Since then Tradition in general is in it self credible, and some
Traditions certain, and above all others that ever were; or, I believe, can
possibly be, the Tradition of the church, especially in necessary doctrines of
Faith universally believed, and all rites universally practiced, and among them
this particular Tradition of an obliging authority in the Church, is the most
certain; we may conclude that the belief and assent thereto approaches the
nearest to knowledge of sense, that belief possibly can do. But it is
impossible, ordinarily speaking, that it should arrive to all the degrees of
assurance that sense cum debitis circumstantiis may have; by which means it
becomes meritorious, that is, capable of a reward, which, I conceive,
experimental immediate knowledge is not: And hereupon it was that our Savior
told S. Thomas, who would not give credit to any reports concerning his
Resurrection, till his eyes saw him, and hands felt him, Thomas, because thou
have seen me thou have believed, blessed are those who have not seen, and yet
have believed. (John 20. 29.) But it may be objected, if manifest vision take
away meritoriousnesse by reason of such an apparent certitude, as inforces the
understanding to assent; why should Faith, which is, or may be built upon
grounds demonstrably certain, though indeed not in the utmost degree of
experimental knowledge, have blessedness annexed to it? I answer, the reason
seems to be, 1: Because before a man arrive to an assurance in Faith, there is
required a great exercise of his understanding to search all the arguments
conducing to a firm grounding of his belief, which cannot be done, unless
there be in those persons inquiring some degree of love to the things inquired
after, which travel proceeding from love, is a thing proper to be rewarded. 2.
Add to this, that such persons after such a love, and inquiry proceeding from
that love, will be forced to submit and captivate their understanding, to the
belief of many mysteries infinitely beyond the natural capacity of their
comprehensions, a thing extremely acceptable to God.

3. And this is the state requisite in Christians endued with abilities and
learning in the Church, especially the teachers and governors; And however it
is most necessary in general for the settling of a Church, that there should be
means of assurance of Tradition praerequired to supernatural Faith, because
discoursing men, especially if they be propossessed with prejudice, or a
contrary belief, would hardly or never be brought without it to captivate their
understandings in such a manner. But as for silly ignorant Christians, to whom
God is pleased to give a certainty of adherence beyond a certainty of evidence
(as M. Chillingworth says) and who seem rather to believe with their wills,
then their understandings, an immediate and simple captivating of their minds
to Christian Verities, without searching arguments of assurance, may be
conceived acceptable to God, supposing notwithstanding that they live in a
Church, where it may be made appear, that what they believe is not a lie, nor a
doubtful truth, but on the contrary certain and infallible. To which purpose
S. Augustine (cont. Ep. Fund. c. 4) says, As for the other r^ut of common
people, it is not the sharpness of their understandings, but the simplicity of
believing that makes them secure. And again, If Christ be dead only for those
who are enabled by a certain comprehension to discern these things, we do
labor in the Church almost to no purpose. And therefore the Calvinist
Ministers etc. (who profess an undervaluing of Tradition in comparison of
pretended inward revelations and assurances from God's Spirit, and who teach
their followers to hate the very name of Tradition) may do well to consider
what will become of them and their faith of Scriptures in general, when they
shall begin to doubt that such pretentions are either apparently false, or at
least impossible to be proved, or however no arguments at all to persuade a
third person.

4. Lastly it is observeable^ that such Traditions as we now speak of, are
always capable of being proved to be certain, yet are evidently so, the nearer
they come to their foun^aine or times, whence they take their original. And
therefore, for example; though at the beginning the whole Nation of the Jews
were eyewitnesses of the stupendous manne^ of delivering the law in the
wilderness, yet their successors (immediately after that generation was dead)
fell into Idolatry and infidelity; the reason whereof was, not because they
wanted means, assuring themselves of the divine authority of their law, and the
curses attending the breach of it; but because of this there was requisite some
meditation and exercise of their understanding and besides, those curses were
future, and therefore present temptations of fleshly and secular lusts
presently enjoyed by them, had so much power over them as to keep them in
negligence or busying their understandings, and in a presump^^ion that those
curses which were future might perhaps never happen, or not upon themselves in
person, or however by a ^epentance some time or other might be prevented. In
like manner, and upon the same grounds the Christians of the first times were
more holy, more unmoved in their faith, more zealous for the glory of God then
in following ages; because the grounds of assurance and other motives did more
immediately, and so more strongly, make an impression upon their minds.
Notwithstanding the faith and holiness of the times further distant from the
Apostles (caeteris pa^ibus) is perhaps more acceptable to God, and more
meritori us, as having more of the will in it, as our Savior implies in the
forecited speech to S. Thomas.

CHAP. XXVI.
Grounds pre-required to the Churches Authority.

1. HAving showed the certainty of Tradition in general, and some several
degrees of it, and withal the incomparable advantage, which the Church, as a
simple proponent, has to prove the certainty of her Tradition of those
doctrines which concern the substance of Christian Religion: In the next place
I proceeded to make some nearer approaches to the consideration of the
Authority, which she challenges to her self, and whereby she obliges all in her
Communion to believe receive, and embrace whatsoever she thus proposes, that
is, to ^cknowledge the Verity and divine original of all those Christian
revelations deposited in her hands, and several ways both by orall
instruction, practice, or writing delivered by her to all Christians, to be by
them believed, practiced and obeyed. The Church, as a simple proponent, only
tells us, that such doctrines, books, and rites were anciently delivered as
divine, and attested by divine miracles, believed most assuredly to be such by
all Christians: And in respect of this way of proposing, even her enemies may
join with her to confirm this Tradition; proofs thereof we find in Jewish and
Heathen Authors: The Jews all confess that the Religion (by Christ and his
Apostles preached in the world) was (at least pretended) to be of divine
authority; That strange wonders, (pretended likewise to be wrought by a divine
omnipotence) gave testimony hereto. But yet neither Jews nor Heathens assent to
what Christians infer from hence, namely, that these were indeed divine
miracles, and by consequence the Doctrine confirmed by them, divine also.

2. This being so, the Church (before she can interpose and make use of her
authority to oblige any to submit to the particular doctrines and practices by
her proposed, and by her likewise, where need is, explained and interpreted)
must give a firm unquestionable assurance of these two things. 1. That the
Religion in gross (which Tradition on all hands agrees to have been delivered)
is divine, and has been more then sufficiently proved to be so. 2. That one of
the special doctrines of this Religion, is her authority so far extended. I
say this assurance must be firm, and unquestionable in both these points; for
if it be only probable, though in never so high a degree, I was not able to
comprehend how that which is built upon such a ground, could be absolutely firm
and unquestionable.

3. To demonstrate therefore the former point; viz. concerning our assurance of
the divine original of Christian Religion, I suppose this for a ground, That
from sufficient principles, reason can conclude certainly and necessarily:
which not being to be denied by rrason, I add that the principles to be laid
by reason as a ground of this our assurance are, 1. The consideration of what a
nature those miracles were, (which that they have been wrought we have from
Tradit^on not only assurance, but the highest degree of assurance that
Tradition can almost afford.) 2 Of what a nature Christian Religion (delivered
by an equally assured Tradition) is, for the confirmation whereof such miracles
were wrought. These two principles, as they give mutual virtue each to other,
and both of them together do necessarily conclude all that we desire to
demonstrate, so they ought not easily be disjoined. For first, some of the same
effects, which in Christianity we call true miracles, no doubt, have been
wrought in places where a false Religion has been professed. And on the other
side every Religion wherein there is no impiety is not necessary to be esteemed
of divine original. But when can it be demonstrated that true miracles have
been wrought for the asserting of a Religion; and that that Religion teaches
supernatural doctrines of holiness, piety, justice, etc. then nothing can in
reason be objected against it.

4. In the present case therefore; 1. Concerning Miracles wrought by Christ and
his Apostles etc. (to the end that I may only point at these things, since it
is not my present purpose to speak of this argument, but only as a preparation
to my information concerning the churches authority and Resolution of Faith) we
may consider as in this number of miracles, 1. Propeecies in the Old Testament
brought to us by most assured Tradition, wherein we find expressly foretold,
that the Messiah should come before the Scepter was departed from Judah, that
is, before the particular Commonwealth of the Jews was destroyed; that he
should teach a new Covenant to be written not in Tables of Stone, but in the
hearts of Gods people; that he should confirm this Covenant by the same
Miracles which our Savior actually wrought; that the Gentiles, (after the
death and glorification of the Messiah) should be received into this Covenant,
and the Jews for their infidelity rejected, etc. 2. Stupendous miracles
apparently wrought by Christ and his Apostles; to which, because they were but
a few persons, end therefore, lest the narrowness of the scene should
prejudice their authority, we may ad a continuance of the like miracles
performed by the successors of the Apostles in all the parts of the Roman
Empire, and by a world of persons, learned and unlearned; men and women, etc.
None of which could have been performed by any inferior natural agent known
of us, and therefore either by God himself immediately, or by good
supernatural spirits at least.

5. In the second place for the doctrines and precepts of Christianity, the
former are indeed many of them above the reach of natural reason, but not
directly against it, conducing very much to the glory of the divine
incomprehensible Majesty; and the latter directing mankind in the most perfect
manner imagineable to glorify God, to renounce, de^ie and contemn wicked
Spirits, teaching men to perform all duties of justice and charity to all
manner of persons respectively, to preserve peace and tranquillity in the world,
and lastly to perfectionate every single person in sobriety, chastity, etc.
after a manner more then humane; so that if man be capable of being elevated to
a ^elicity beyond nature, this is the only Religion worthy to bring him to it.

6. From these principles, reason may conclude most assuredly. 1. That such
miracles were certainly wrought, many of them, immediately by an omnipotent
power; and the rest at least by good Angels, as Gods Ministers; since it is
impossible that wicked Spirits should be willing to strain themselves so far on
purpose to teach mankind to love and glorify God so hated by them, to
encourage them in the learning and practice of virtue and holiness, and, in a
word, to induce them to hate, renounce, and destroy the Kingdom of Beelzebub,
the Prince of Devils. 2. That such a Religion, which most assuredly has been
attested by such miracles, is most true. 3. That by consequence, since this
Religion expressly says so, it is most necessarily to be embraced, being
proposed by such a witness and proponent, as God in that Religion has
declared to have received commission from him, and authority for that purpose.
And this Proponent is (as after the spending of many thoughts and much time,
before I could free my self from many prejudices and misinformations caused by
education, etc. by the goodness and mercy of God I came at last evidently to
perceive to be) the present Catholic Church.

CHAP. XXVII.
Proofs ^ut of Script^ure etc. for the Churches au^hority.

1. THe special grounds, from whence to mine own full satisfaction, J
collected this assu^ance, That the Church alone was that divinely authorized
proponent, from whom I was to receive divine Revelations, and these in the
sense that she received and proposes them; as likewise the method and manner
according to which, as distinctly as I could, I first gave an account to mine
own understanding, and now to others, were as follows.

2. It having been before declared, and conformably testified by all kinds of
ancient Ecclesiastical writers, 1. That the doctrines and forms of practice
of Christian Religion were by the Apostles with great care and assiduous
inculeations firmly settled in all Churches by them founded and established: To
which form other Churches, by their successors converted, generally conformed
themselves, as Tertullian (de Prescrip.) says, The Apostles founded Churches
in every City, from which (Churches) other Churches afterward did borrow the
Faith delivered, and the seeds of doctrine. 2. That Religion was thus settled
chiefly, and indeed only by Tradition, the books of Scripture having been
written only occasionally, and though they comprehend in general the
principal points of Christianity, yet it is very briefly, obscurely, with
seeming contradictions, and dispersedly; whereupon it is that they do often
refer us to the profession and practice of the church. Hence in evidence of
reason it will follow, that he that would inform himself of Christian Religion,
must have recourse thither where it ^a's been d^posited, and that not simply in
words, but withal the sense of those words, and the very life of them in
practice; and this depositary is by all acknowledged more or less, to be the
Catholic church: For even those, who make it a part of their Religion to
oppose the authority of the Catholic church, yet acknowledge that they have
received the Scripture (that is, all the Religion which they have) from her and
her authority.

3. Hence it will follow, that that man that should either look for Christian
religion where it is not, or expect to find it entire where there was no
intention to include it in its whole latitude, or hope to ^ssure himself of the
clear sense of it, where it is set down often obscurely, almost every where
obnoxious to variety of interpretations, would certainly not follow the conduct
of his reason.

4. Notwithstanding, if the imputation of unreasonableness were the only effect
of such an indiscreet way of information, there is no proud man (and pride, or
impatience to submit to authority is the root of all heresy and Schism) but
would easily persuade himself to despise such an imputation; yea he would take
a pleasure in opposing himself and his own reason single, not only to one, but
many ages of men, that should it more reasonable to rely upon authority for
that, which cannot be believed, but upon the only motive of authority. There is
therefore another effect far more considerable, then point of reputation, which
is the utmost danger of eternal perdition in renouncing one main doctrinall
foundation of Christian Faith, which is the authority of the one, holy,
Catholic Church of Christ: which authority consists not only in delivering
books of Scripture, or Traditionary doctrines, but in obliging all men to
unity, both in faith and love, which is impossible to be had, except all men be
obliged to the sense and interpretation which she proposes, as received from
her by the same authority from which she received the books or doctrines
themselves.

5. A doctrine this is the most express in Scriptures, the most constantly
asserted by Fathers, the only business of all Counsels, the most freely
without any contradiction embraced by all Christians before these times,
(excepting only those, whom even the Sectaries of these times will call
Heretics or Schismatikes) and in these times by all that enjoy the name of
Catholics. In a word, a doctrine this is beyond all other traditionary
doctrines propagated from the Apostles to these times, with the fullest
universal consent of all Catholics in all places, and of all times, of any
one point in Christian Religion, or any one book of Scripture.

6. Among proofs out of Scripture, we will begin with the Old Testament
(concerning which S. Augustine (in Psalm. 3. chapter 2.) professes that the
Prophets foretold more often, and more plainly of the Catholic Church then of
Christ himself, and the reason, he says, was because many Heretics would
arise that would perhaps spare the person of Christ, but none could be a
heretic without withdrawing himself from the authority and unity of the
Church. Now the particular Texts which especially S. Augustine makes use of to
assert the churches Authority are these, In the last days the mountain of the
Lord shall be on the top of all mountains, and all hills shall flow unto her.
And she shall judge every tongue that resists her in judgment. And, Kings
shall walk in the light of the Church, and people in the splendor of her East.
Again, That every Kingdom and Nation which does not serve her shall perish.
(Isa. c. 2. 54. and 60.) That of the Kingly Prophet David, Glorious things are
spoken of thee, thou City of God. That of the Canticles, Thou art fair, and
there is no spot in thee. And that of the Prophet Ezechiel, Thou shall no more
be called forsaken, Psa. 86. Cant. 4. Ezech. 37.

7. Proofs out of the New Testament are, Behold I am with you always unto the
end of the world, Mat. 8. upon which S. Augustine in Psa. 70. and 10. thus
infers, The Church shall be here unto the end of the world. For if it shall not
be here unto the end of the world, to whom was it that our Lord said, Behold I
am with you always unto the end of the world? And what was the reason that it
was necessary that there should be such speeches in the Scripture? Because
there would in times to come arise enemies of the Christian Faith, which would
say, Christians will continue for a certain space, after that they will vanish,
and Idoll^ shall return, that shall return which was before.) Again Mat. 6.
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it; And again, Joh. 14. The Spirit of truth
shall remain with you for ever. And again, Let both grow together unto the
harvest. And again, Mat. 18. If any man will not hear the Church, let him be
to thee as a Heathen and a Publican. ( Upon which S. Augustine (lib. 5. de
Bapt.) thus descants, the which house likewise has received the keys, and a
power of loosing and binding. Whosoever shall contemn this house, reproving
and correcting him, let him, says he, be unto thee as a Heathen and a
Publican.) And lastly, The Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth. 1 Timothy 4.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The validity of such Texts, etc.

1. UPon these and other such Texts of Scripture, joined with Tradition and
uninterrupted practice, the ancient Church grounded upon her authority, the
ancient Counsels their power of anathematizing all gainsayers, and the
ancient Fathers all their arguments and discourses against all sorts of
Heretics; arguing thus, That if the promises of Christ were true, that his
Church should continue for ever, and so continue, as that she should always be
preserved in all truth, so that the gates of hell should never prevail against
her; then whatsoever Heretics opposed, or Schismatiques separated themselves
from the present Church, either gave Christ the lie, or acknowledged themselves
to be a Congregation exempted from these promises; concluding that no pretense
could be sufficient to warrant any man at any time to separate from the Church,
to which such promises have been made. Hence that great Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, (Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 4.) We acknowledge one only Church
Catholic and Apostolic, which, as she can never be rooted out, although the
whole world should attempt to fight against her, so she surmounts and
dissipates all the impious assaults of Heretics. Hence likewise S.
Athanasius, The Church is invincible, although hell it self should oppose her.
Hence lastly Theophilus^ God at all times affords the same grace unto his
Church, namely that the body should be preserved entire, and that the poisons
of heretical doctrines should have no power over her. V. S. Hierom. Ep. 67.

2. Now if these promises of Christ be not both infallible, and likewise
absolute: and unless the Church, to which such promises belong be not only
visible, but by the weakest understandings discernable from all other factions
and Congregations: and lastly, unless upon the same grounds that all the
Fathers took advantage from such promises to condemn all Schisms and Heresies
against the Catholic Church of their times, all succeeding Catholics might
with as much reason and justice from the same promises conclude as
efficatiously against all following Heresies and Schisms; whatsoever has been
said by all these Fathers, especially the writings of S. Augustine against the
Donatists, will prove to be the most foolish, impertinent, juggling discourses
that ever were; yea that were too mild a censure; I should say, the most
blasphemous and pernicious to Christianity: For by ascribing to the present
Church respectively such sanctity, authority, and indefectibility, if such
titles could not be warranted from Scripture and Tradition, all possible means
of taking away scandalls and errors among Christians would be utterly lost; it
would be unlawful for any men to preach truth and piety, or reform vice: in a
word, that fearful comminatory curse in the Revelation would be converted into
an Evangelicall precept, Qui nocet, noceat adhuc, and qui in sordibus est,
sordescat adhuc. Let him that does mischief, proceed to do more mischief
still, and let hi^ that is filthy, be filthy still, ( Apoc. 22.) I might ad, Et
qui incredulus est incredulus maneat. Let him that is a disbeliever, take care
that he continue a disbeliever still, for whosoever reforms these things are
Heretics and Schismatiques.

3. But such promises are too express in Scripture, the Tradition of them too
constant and universal, the Fathers too good Christians to leave any suspicion
in men's minds, that they should either lightly, imprudently, or wickedly make
use of arguments to destroy heresies, which in future times would be as proper,
yea far more efficacious to destroy truth. Therefore if all antiquity conspired
to argue thus; Christ has expressly promised and foretold that his Church
shall be as a City set upon the top of a hill: and that he by his Spirit will
be with this his Church to the end of the world, in which Church
notwithstanding there shall be a mixture of good and bad till the day of
Judgment, but however the Church it self is without spot or wrinckle:
Therefore it is a blasphemy in you Manicheans, Donatists, Pelagians, etc. to
say the Church of Christ was perished or invisible, or a harlot, till you
revived, reformed and purified it: I say, if the Fathers had reason from such
promises to argue thus in the second, third, and fourth Centuries, their
Successors had as good reason to make the same deductions from the same
principles in the fifth and sixth ages, and so downward till these very times.
For, as Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, so likewise are
his promises, and by consequence so likewise is his Church, since he has
engaged his omnipotence to make good such his promises to his Church until the
worlds end.

4. If not, Let those that forbid such a method of arguing, name how long a
time, and how far those promises are to be extended: Let them name the
Climactericall year when the effect of them is to cease, or what constellation
has overruled the operation of Gods holy Spirit. To conclude, let them give
some reason why the Donatists, (who though in all points of Christian Doctrine
agreed with the Catholic Church, yet because, for I know not what pretended
misdemeanour of one Bishop, they separated from his Communion, and afterward
from all those that communicated with him, that is, the whole Church,) are
therefore so highly condemned by the Fathers for this their Schism, that they
professed the same heaven could not hold them both, yea that Martyrdom it
self could not blot out that crime: What privilege can all those Sects of
this age allege for themselves, that the same arguments and judgments of the
Fathers should not be applied to them, who, to their Schism from charity, have
added a division from, and contradiction to not only the Catholic Church, but
all manner of Congregations praeexistent in so many points of doctrine and
faith of so high importance?

5. I confess I could not imagine what could be opposed to this; and therefore
I could not but conclude that the ancient Fathers Logic was concluding; yea
that such unanswerable arguments of theirs, were powerful means preordained by
Christ for the accomplishing of his good promises to his Church, inasmuch as by
them the gates of Hell, that is (as several Fathers expound) Heresies have
been so far from prevailing against the Church, that they are utterly vanished,
and the Church built upon that Rock which gave Peter that his new name,
continues firm and unmovable, and no doubt will do so to the end of the world,
whatsoever engines of cunning, malice, or rebellion, the Calvinists and other
bloody Sects do raise against it, to batter it with greater violence then ever
before.

6. I am the more confirmed in joining thus with the Fathers, because I
perceive that they, yea that one single Father of the first magnitude ( S.
Augustine) has already answered all the most considerable arguments which the
Protestants of these times are ready to borrow of their Fathers the Donatists,
etc. to destroy the authority of the Church: He has already cleared the
objection from the example of the Jewish Church reduced to such an almost
invisible estate, that there were left no more then seven thousand men (and
those hidden) which had not bowed the knee to Baal. And from that speech, When
the ^on of Man comes, shall he find faith upon earth? and, Come out of Babylon
my people, and from the example of that great Eclipse in the Catholic Church,
during the interregnum of Arianisme. S. Aug. collat. post. con. Don. cap. 20.
id. l. 81. quaest. qu. 61. id d^ Un. Eccl. S. Hier. con. Lucif. S. Aug. Ep. 48.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Objection from the overflowing of Arianisme in the Church, answered.

Mr. Chillingworth's objection, That Christ's promises are conditional,
answered.

1. THis last objection concerning Arianisme, because even
the-now-English-Protestants think they have great advantage from it, I am not
in so much have to draw toward an end of this conclusion, but I can be content
to set down S. Augustin's answer to it, with a short Appendix. It seems the
Donatists took the advantage from some hyperbolicall language of S. Hilary
concerning the great deluge of Arianisme upon the Church, to enervate the
promises of Christ, concerning the extension and duration of it. To this S.
Augustine, Ep. 48. thus answers, That time, concerning which Hilary wrote, was
such, that thou have thought that thou might privily assault such a number of
divine testimonies, as if the Church were perished out of the world, etc.
Hilary therefore either blames only the tares, which were in the ten Asian
Provinces, and not the wheat: or he thought fit therefore the more profitably,
by how much the more vehemently, to blame the wheat, which by some default was
in danger. For even the Canonical Scriptures have this custom^ in
reprehensions, that the word seems to be addressed to all, when it reaches home
only to some few.

2. For confirmation of this answer of S. Augustine it may be observed, 1. That
the violent brunt of that Persecution of the Catholics by the Arrians lasted
scarce four years, namely from the Council of Ariminum to the death of the
Emperor Constantius. 2. That during that time the Western Churches felt little
change by that Persecution. 3. That those who subscribed the cunningly
contrived Creed at Ariminum did not intend to prejudice thereby the faith of
the Council of Nice, since the new Creed was capable of a Catholic sense. 4.
That even in the East very many glorious Catholic Bishops survived the fury
of the Arrians 5. That the succession of Catholic Bishops was so far from
being interrupted thereby, that S. Hierome who lived near those times,
professes that in his days there was not one Bishop in the Catholic Church
that was not a legitimate successor of those glorious Prelates of the Council
of Nice. From all which considerations we may rationally collect, that our Lord
in this example gave a warning to the Rulers of his Church to be vigilant to
prevent the like dangerous Heresies for the future; but withal to be confident
in his promises, since he had been so careful to perform them, that when
Heresy had all imagineable advantages, yet he provided so for his Church, by
putting an end to those tentations, that the succession of lawful Bishops was
not at all interrupted by them.

3. Beside these, Mr. Chillingworth produces an engine (his friends know from
what forge) to invalidate, as he believed, all manner of advantage, which
Catholics reap from the promises of Christ, concerning a perpetual
succession of his Church, by saying, that those promises are only
conditional, viz. If Christians would make use of, and improve those means
that Christ had left for the propagation of his Church; otherwise not.

4. But hereto the answer is very ready, For 1. All that is alleged is spoken
merely gratis, there being no warrant from any circumstance in those Texts,
wherein such promises are contained, for such an interpretation; and therefore
when plain Texts are, and have been interpreted in a sense absolute by all
Catholics of all times, a new unnecessary interpretation will certainly find
no entertainment with any, unless it be such as make antiquity a prejudice to
truth. 2. M. Chillingworth applies this interpretation to future times only,
not to passed or present; so that thereby it shakes only our hope for
succeeding times, not our faith for the passed or present; and therefore it is
not availeable in the dispute in hand, concerning the Roman Catholic Church,
which all English Protestants acknowledge to be a true Church of Christ,
defective in no necessary truths, all the fault being her superabundance.

5. And for this reason it was that generally he was blamed, and I my self
have often taxed him for serving himself of so scandalous, and as we thought,
so useless an interpretation. But upon more serious consideration, I judged
not him unreasonable for it, but my self, and others not quick-sighted enough
to perceive the necessity he had (though he never discovered himself plainly
to any man, as far as I know) to make use of so desperate a gloss: For
doubtless he saw clearly, that if there were such absolute Promises of
indefectibility and divine assistance to the Catholic Church, none could with
any justice challenge them, but the Roman Church, since she only appropriates
them to her present Communion, all others laying down their claim. The special
allegations which she may produce, to prove her self in a special manner
interessed in these promises I shall take notice of in the last conclusion.
Lastly S. Augustine will afford us a satisfactory answer, who, to the like
objection of the Donatists (viz. Men would not persevere, and therefore
Christian Religion has failed out of all Nations, except only the party of
Donatus:) Answers him, As if the Holy Ghost was ignorant what would be the
future wills of men, which yet foreseeing notwithstanding foretold that the
Church of Christ should endure for ever. De unit. Eccl. c. 12.

CHAP. XXX.
The general ground of the Churches authority, viz. Christ's promises.

The several subjects and acts thereof.

1. TO return therefore to the authority of the present Catholic Church, by
virtue of which she obliges all men in her communion, not only to receive the
Scriptures from her, as a depositary of them, but the true interpretation
likewise of them preserved by her, together with all other Traditions, as much
as concerns the substance of Christian Religion: This authority seems to be
grounded especially upon the promise of indefectibility: an indefectibility, I
mean, of the Church considered as one body composed of parts ruling and
obeying, teachers and persons instructed, as S. Paul describes the Church, as
it is to continue to the perfecting of the Saints: (Ephesians. 4.) Not as Mr.
Chillingworth, who would make our Saviors meaning to be no more, but that till
his second coming his Gospel should not be so utterly rooted out of the world,
but that somewhere or other there should be some that should profess it.

2. By virtue of this promise, the Church is assured 1. not to be deprived,
neither of any necessary truths, nor of lawful Pastors to teach those
necessary truths: when I say necessary, I mean not absolutely necessary to
every single person, considered in any circumstance, exigence, or extremity (as
Mr. Chillingworth and Doctor Potter etc. through their whole books understand
it, whether mistaking their adversaries, or no, I thought it unnecessary to
trouble my self to examine; but I am sure, without any prejudice to the
established doctrine of the Church, which remains untouched, though all the
inferences which they would make from such a notion of the word necessary were
allowed them,) but I mean truths necessary to the constitution of a glorious
visible Church, which must be furnished with a world of Doctrines and Orders,
which to all single persons are far from being necessary to be believed or
known, much less to persons wanting abilities, or means, or time to be
instructed. 2. She is secured from Schism or Heresy; for remaining to the
worlds end, one holy Catholic Church (as we profess in the Creed) how can
she be divided from her self, either in Faith or Charity? For unless all
Bishops in Counsels Oecumenicall, and indeed all Christians should conspire to
renounce that truth to day, which they believed yesterday, how can novelty or
heresy enter universally into the Church, under the notion of Tradition?

3. Concerning the subject of this authority, the principal subjects are
indeed the Governors and Pastors of the Church, with whom Christ has
promised that he will be to the end of the world: But the adequate subject are
all Catholic Christians, as well instructers as instructed: since Tradition
is continued by them both, shining in the doctrines taught and received, in
devotions exercised, and in outward practices and ceremonies celebrated by all
Christians.

4 Now of this authority of the Church there are, generally speaking, two acts,
1. An Obligation lying upon all Christians to acknowledge that doctrine to be
true and necessarily to be believed, and those practices necessarily to be
conformed to, which are taught and received by the whole Church: and all this
upon penalty of being accounted Heretics, that is, no members of the Church,
and therefore by consequence divided from Christ the head of the Church, which
inspires life into it here, and will glorify it hereafter. 2. A coerzion, or
infliction of spiritual penalties and censures, as suspensions, deprivations,
excommunications etc. on those that persist stubbornly in opposing those truths
and practices. And this belongs to the Teachers and Governors of the Church,
more or less, according to their several qualities: For every Parish Priest
has some degree of this coercive power over his stock: every Bishop over both
Priests and several congregations within his Diocese has more: every
Metropolitan a yet larger power: A Provincial Synod above a single Bishop or
Metropolitan etc. And in conclusion, the supreme Ecclesiastical tribunal is a
Synod Occumenicall lawfully called, See Bacon Analys. sid. and Cellot. de Hier.
Eccl lib. 4. c. 10. and 12. Syst. fidei ca. 23. and infr. ca. 33.
confirmed, and some add, universally received by all Catholic Churches,
that is by their Prelates, from which there is no appealing, for if there were,
all authority would be vain, enjoying the name, but without any effect, or use
at all, as shall be showed hereafter.

5. Concerning the former act of Ecclesiastical authority, (viz. an Obligation
lying upon all Christians under pain of Heresy to receive the doctrines and
practices of the universal Church) that it is in the Church antecedently to a
general Council, appears by this, namely, that there were in the Church very
many Heresies taken notice of, acknowledged for such by all Catholics, and
dissipated before any general Council had been called, as the Ecclesiastical
history and S. Epiphanius will assure us. And this is grounded ^ Upon evident
reason, for what is heresy ((...)) but a relinquishing of a former received
opinion or practice, and the choice of a particular new one? an act this is
which implies an extreme contempt of the whole mystical body of Christ, and a
preferring ones own single judgment or wilfulness before whatsoever else is
prudent or sacred in the world. 2 Upon express Scripture, for S. Paul commands
the Thessalonians, and S. John all Christians to abstain from the conversation
of, and not so much as to bid God speed to all disordinate walkers, swerving
from the rule established, and all introducers of novelties in the Church: Yea
S. Paul says, that an Heretic, even before the Bishops censure, is ((...))
condemned by himself, that is (as several Fathers expound it) voluntarily and
by himself separated from the body of the faithful; so that the solemn
excommunication of the Bishop against him may seem to be only a ratifying of
that man's censure against himself: For I conceive it can hardly be affirmed of
all Heretics in general that they are ((...)) self-condemned, that is
professing and maintaining errors against their own conscience and knowledge.

6. Now this authority residing in the whole body of the Catholic Church (I
must add, of the present Catholic Church) has been in all times preserved so
inviolable, that besides the forecited testimonies of the Fathers, this
observation will sufficiently justify it, viz. That there was never in any age
of the Church (as far as I have been able to inform my self) any one single
person esteemed a Catholic, that ever either spoke against, or in the least
degree censured, or seemed to render suspicious any doctrine or practice
universally believed or received by the Catholic Church during the time that
he lived. Many Fathers have been very bold and eager against abuses and errors
particular, some of them perhaps too largely dispersed; but never any of them,
whether private person or Governor, learned or unlearned, taxed the Church
either of error in doctrine, or of superstition, profaneness, or any other
enormity in practice: Many of them have earnestly called for a free Council to
reform particular disorders and errors in the lives and writings of both
Clergy and Laity (sometimes not sparing Popes themselves) but never to have the
Church it self to alter any of her doctrines, or to change any of her
practices, upon pretense that they were condemnable.

7. I know the several Sectaries of this present age are in this occasion
always ready to object the only one blameable action of that glorious Father
and Martyr S. Cyprian, I mean his contestation with the Pope, and opposition to
the general Apostolic Tradition and practice of the Church in
non-rebaptization of Heretics. They neglect, forget, and by their practices
condemn that most Christian Spirit of Unity and Charity, which shined in him
toward those that differed from him in this point, and (as if his error had
been his only virtue) acknowledge him only an example to be imitated in his
fault, not considering what probable excuses there are to qualify that single
fault of his, to which qualifications, they in none of their so many rebellions
can pretend to: as 1. That the general practice of the Church against him did
not appear to him so evident, but that he could allege examples, not only of
the African Churches, but several in the East likewise, as Cappadocia,
Phrygia, etc. as he was informed by Firmilianus in his Epistle to him. 2. That
he himself begun not this novelty, but conld justify the Tradition of it for
several successions, at least as high as the times of Agrippinus one of his
Predecessors. 3. That no general Council had determined any thing against
him. Yea S. Augustine (before quoted) confidently professes, that if S.
Cyprian had survived to the time of the Council of Nice, he would no doubt
have relinquished his opinion, and submitted to the Council.

8. By this objection borrowed from ancient Heretics, it appears, that as in
the Catholic Church there is a Tradition and Succession of truth, so in
heresies likewise of error, the latter Heretics borrowing from their
Predecessors (though not Predecessors in their particular opinions) the same
arguments and pretenses that formerly have been without success made use of
against the Catholic Church: so zealous do such men show themselves to use
all endeavors to renounce that precious legacy of unity and peace, which our
Savior, ready to relinquish the world, so tenderly bequeathed to his Church.

9. Then for the second act of Ecclesiastical authority, (viz) a power
coercive and judiciary residing in the Church Governors respectively, and
supremely in general Counsels, lawfully convened, approved, and accepted:
this authority the primitive times, and all ages ever since have acknowledged
to be grounded upon the institution and promises of Christ, and practice of the
Apostles mentioned expressly in Scripture, Act. 15. and delivered likewise by
universal Tradition, both orall and practical, v. g. Tell the Church, and if
he will not etc. And, wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my
name, I am in the midst of them. And, The Apostles and Elders were gathered
together to consider about the matter, viz. in the first general Council,
concerning the controversy about Moses his law etc,

10. And here likewise may be verified a like observation to the former; viz.
That never any one of the Fathers of the Church did ever censure, much less
contradict or disobey the decisions, orders or decrees of any legitimate
Council in their own or former times. Yea I think I may hereto add something
to the utter shame and confusion of the contrivers and propugnators of the late
Heresies and Schisms, viz. That though most of the ancient Heretics, after a
Council had condemned their opinions, did indeed refuse to submit to their own
condemnation: Yet^ I think, there cannot be found in Antiquity the example of
one Heretic that ever began to publish a Heresy against any doctrine that
had formerly been declared by a general Council. Such a supereminent degree
of Rebellion we must acknowledge to be due, and to be appropriated to Luther,
Calvin, etc. viz. to tread under foot all kind of Ecclesiastical authority,
not only of the present, but all former times likewise.

11. I shall defer the consideration, how admirable and only effectual a means
of unity among Christians is the authority of the present Church, and reverence
of general Counsels, so unanimously acknowledged by all the ancient Worthies,
Fathers, Doctors and Martyrs; insomuch as the more eminent in learning and
sanctity that any of them have been, the more earnest Champions have they been
of the Churches authority But the proper season to enlarge my self upon this
subject, will be when I have taken into consideration the contradictory
doctrine of Protestants, concerning power of interpreting Scriptures, and
judging controversies.

CHAP. XXXI
Authority of the Christian Church compared with that of the Jewish.

1. BEfore I leave this argument of the grounds of the Churches authority (and
the foundation thereof, viz. Christ's promises of indefectibility etc.) because
objections against it are frequently taken out of the Old Testament, namely
from a comparison with the Jewish Church, which though it enjoyed great
promises, did notwithstanding fall into a general corruption, both in faith
and manners: It will not be amiss to set down for what reasons I rested
satisfied, that none of those arguments ought to have any effect upon me, to
shake my acknowledgement of the authority of the Christian Church so
unalterably grounded, and so universally submitted to.

2. The first reason was, because the Jewish Church had not such promises of
indefectibility and security from Heresies, as the Christian Church apparently
has. It is true, the Patriarch Jacob prophesied, that the Scepter should not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his knees till Shiloh came. But
this promise; I assured my self, respected only the outward policy of the
Jewish Nation, which was to remain in a distinct government, not swallowed up
by other governments, but openly governed by its own laws, as a Commonwealth,
plainly distinguishable from others till the coming of the Messiah. 2. They
were not furnished with those means of preventing and condemning of Heresies
that the Christian Church enjoys. For the understanding whereof, I conceived
that the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law of Moses was to be considered in two
respects, first in the plain litterall sense, and so it differed not much from
the laws of other Kingdoms, the end thereof being worldly happiness, which
is only in express words proposed in that law. Secondly in a spiritual,
allegorical and typical sense, and so it had Immediate influence upon the
conscience and inward acts of the soul, which later sense was taken notice of
only by extraordinary persons, as Prophets etc. Now for the execution of this
law in the literal outward sense and notion of it, God left sufficient
authority in the Priests and other Magistrates, threatening every one with death
that opposed their sentences and decrees. And for the explication of any
emergent difficulties, God left the Sanedrim together with a succession of
Scribes, from whose lips the people were ordinarily to seek knowledge: Insomuch
as our Savior speaking of such Scribes says, They sit in Moses his Chair;
whatsoever they command you to observe, observe and do it, Mat. 23. But if we
observe the dependence and limitation of that speech, the meaning will appear
to be, that for the outward practices of Moses his law, the Jews were to
submit themselves to the established authority, yea even when they interpreted
that law to the peoples disadvantage, as they did in the case of tithes
mentioned by our Savior in consequence of the former speech, including herbs'
as Mint, Commyn, etc. among the Species tythable, which Moses his law did not
express, not necessarily imply.

3. Such authority the Priests, Scribe^ and Pharisees had to explain the
Precepts of his law for outward practice: But as for spiritual points of
belief, Prophecies or internal sanctity, it does not appear that they much
meddled with them, not one decision of the Sanedrim can be produced concerning
such matters. Indeed who should be the interpreter of such doctrines? There
were among them two principal factions, the first of the Nobility, that is,
Priests, and those were generally Sadduces, as Josephus informs us: the other
that popular faction of the Pharisees. Now I suppose the Sadduces, who denied
the immortality of the soul, the existence of Angels etc. were very
incompetent Judges in spiritual matters, and yet the authority was principally
in their hands: As for the Pharisees, they were the more Orthodox of the two,
but wanted authority. And to show that neither party pretended that points of
such a nature were within their cognizance, it is observeable, that neither of
them extended their power to the condemnation or excommunication of the other
for such differences; For for such trifles as heaven or hell, etc. they gave
free liberty of conscience to every one to believe what and how much any man
thought fit. Therefore surely our Savior never intended to extend the
forecited Text to such decisions of the Scribes: For then the people had been
obliged to have submitted to that decree of theirs, viz. that he should be
excommunicated that confessed Christ to have been the Messiah. Which Decree of
theirs, though it seems to be about a principal point of Faith, yet the ground
of making it was not to determine points of that nature; but because they
believed, or at least said that they believed, that our Saviors design had
been to destroy the law of Moses and the Temple, and all the Rites which
Moses gave to the Jews, therefore as external Magistrates, they provided by
such a decree against sedition and rebellion.

CHAP. XXXII.
Enquiry concerning the extent of the Churches authority.

How Stapleton states this point.

1. AFter the having examined the grounds of the Churches authority, which
appeared to me both as firm in themselves, as the express word of God, the
promises of Christ, and the Prophecies of the Old Testament could make any
thing firm; and likewise as evidently certain to my understanding as the
universal acknowledgement of all Christians in the Catholic Church, attested
by the continual profession and practice of all ages of Christianity, the
quotations, yea whole volumes of Fathers, and the concurrence of all Counsels,
Provincial, National, and O^cumenicall, could render any thing that was
delivered before our times assured to any man: In the next place, I took into
consideration the extent and latitude of this authority, how far it did
necessarily oblige all Christians to submit to it; and what manner of
submission is required respectively to the doctrines, Rites, Reformations, etc.
decided by the Church.

2. Now this enquiry I made, not with any design to make choice of any
particular opinion among learned Catholics to adhere to in opposition to any
others (for being a Catholic, I was resolved to be an obedient son of the
Church, and only of the Church) but to the end, that by instructing my self,
how much more easy some Catholic Doctors of unquestionable integrity had
made the bonds, whereby the Church restrained all in her Communion (contrary to
that conceit which I, whilst I was a Protestant had entertained, when I opposed
the Churches authority under the School-notion of infallibility, and that
notion extended to the utmost importance of the word) I might clearly perceive
my self, and if occasion were, discover to others (especially of my own
country) that the exceptions and advantages which we have against the Roman
Church, proceed only from our misunderstanding of her necessary doctrines, or
at most, that all the efficacy they have, is only against particular opinions
and inferences made by particular Catholic Writers.

3. I did not search for the most qualified sense of the Churches authority in
the writings of Occham, Almain, Major, no nor of the most learned spiritual
Gerson, etc. partly because some of those Writers are obnoxious to be excepted
against, and all of them wrote before the new Schisms gave Catholics the
opportunity to study this controversy more exactly. I had recourse therefore to
writings published since the Council of Trent, and abstaining from relying
upon the suspicious moderatenesse of Cassander, Padre Paulo Veneti, Picherellus
etc. I fixed upon the judgment of our learned Stapleton, a man seldom cited,
either by Cardinal Bellarmin, Pe^ron, etc. without a testimony of his
profoundnesse, perspicuity, and integrity, and without the least suspicion from
any Catholic of tergiversation, partiality or unsoundnesse.

4. This so approved Doctor in those books which he wrote purposely upon this
subject, Stapl. lib. de Pri^^. Fid. doc. Contr. 4. Qu. 2.
being to determine this Question, viz. An Ecclesiae vox and determinatio sit
infallibilis? that is, Whether the voice and determination of the Church be
infallible? gives an exact explication of the true state of the controversy in
seven observations (called by him Notabilia) which are in brief, as follows.
1. That the Church does not expect to be taught by God immediately by n^w
revelations or enthusiasmes, but makes use of several means and diligent
enquiry, as being governed not by Apostles, who received immediate revelation,
but by ordinary Pastors and Teachers. 2. That these Pastors in making use of
these several means of decision, proceed not as the Apostles did, with a
peculiar infallible direction of the Holy Spirit, but with a prudentiall
collection, not always necessary. 3. That to the Apostles, who were the first
Masters of Evangelicall Faith and founders of the Church, such an infallible
certitude of means was necessary: not so now to the Church, which pretends not
to make new Articles of Faith, but only to deliver what faithfully she
received, and in some cases to add explications. 4. That in conclusions
notwithstanding, though drawn from means and arguments sometimes of reason and
humane documents, the Church is infallible, Prophetical, and by the holy
Spirit's assistance, in some sense divine. 5. That the ground of this
difference is, because the Church teaches not Philosophically, and by rules of
art, but by an authority conferred by Almighty God. Hence in Counsels we see
their Decrees and Conclusions, but not always their proofs and arguments. 6.
That this manner of deciding in Counsels was necessary, first in respect of
ignorant persons, because they being rude and infirm, could never be secure of
their belief, if it were to depend on medium's and principles which they could
not comprehend: and secondly in respect of the learned, among whom there would
be no end of disputing, if it were permitted to them to examine, whether the
Principles upon which Counsels build their Conclusions were firm and
concluding enough. In a word, otherwise Religion would not be faith, but
Science and Philosophy. 7. ( To set down his words at length) We must observe,
that to the Churches infallibility in teaching, it is sufficient that she be
infallible in the substance of faith, in public doctrine, and things
necessary to salvation. This is manifest, because this is the end of the
infallibility given, viz. For the consummation of the Saints, and the
edification of the body of Christ, that is, to the public salvation of the
faithful. Now God and nature as they are not defective in necessaries, so
neither are they superabundant in superfluities, neither is the special
Providence of God to be deduced to each particular: The which Providence as it
does permit many particular defects in the Government of the Universe, and this
for the beauty of it, as S. Augustine (de Civ. lib. 11. cap. 18.) observes: so
likewise does it permit many private errours^ in the Church, and even in the
most learned men an ignorance of many things not necessary, and this not only
to show a beauty in opposltion, but for the salvation of the Teachers, to whom
it is expedient to be ignorant of many things; that in this regard power may
perfected in weakness, that is, may be repressed from pride. Thus Stapleton
with great solidity, and likewise with much becoming wariness states this
Question.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Upon what grounds Stapleton may be conceived to have stated this question,
with more then ordinary latitude.

1. TO this determination of Stapleton, I will subjoyn the thoughts I had
during my ^^b^te with my self about this great and most important controversy;
together with the grounds upon which I believed that he had been more moderate
and condescending in this point, then generally other Catholic Controvertists
are.

2. But first by the way it may be observed, that when he speaks of the voice
and determination of the Church in the question proposed, he means the decree
of the Church speaking in a general Council representatively, in which, says
he, the Church is infallible, namely with that restriction expressed by him in
his last observation, viz. in delivering the substance of Faith, in public
doctrines, and things necessary to salvation. Other Catholics there are which
in this matter speak more restrictively then Stapleton has expressed himself:
as, to name one Panormitan, Panorm. C. signif. ext. de Elect.
(whose words and opinion, though for the most part disclaimed by Catholic
Writers, yet not hitherto consured by any that I know, as heretical,) they are
these. Although a general Council represent the whole universal Church, yet
in truth the universal Church is not truly there, but only representatively,
because the universal Church is made up of a Collection of (all) believers,
and that is that Church which cannot err. Panormitans meaning (to make his
words tolerable) I conceive is, That the decrees of a general Council are
not absolutely and necessarily to be acknowledged the infallible Doctrines of
Faith, till they be received by all particular Catholic Churches, because
till then they cannot properly be called the Faith of the universal Church, or
of the body of all faithful Christians, to which bod^ the promise of
infallibility is made. And this was the doctrine of Thomas Waldensis, and some
other Schoolmen etc. An opinion this is, which though not commonly received,
yet I do not find it deeply censured by any, yea the Gallican Churches reckoned
this among their chiefest Privileges and liberties, that they were not obliged
to the decisions of a General Council, till the whole body of the Gallican
Clergy had by a special agreement consented to them: yea, which is more, till
out of the said Decrees they had selected such as they thought good to approve,
the which they reduced into a Pragmatick Sanction, and so proposed them; and
them only to the several Churches there: My Author from whose credit I received
this, is Thuanas, Thuan. de Vita. sua lib. 6.
who protests in a discourse to K. Henry the IV. related by himself, that it
could not be found in any Records of that Kingdom, that ever any General
Council had been any other ^^y received in France. This were a privilege
indeed to the purpose, if it could be made good, as it is much to be doubted.

3. But as for the Opinion of Waldensis, it has found many abetrours in these
latter ages, for Fr. Pious Mirand^la in his eighth Theoreme de Fid. and Ord.
^red: says, Those Decrees may justly be ^^lled tho the Decrees of the
universal Church, which are either made by the Pope the Head thereof, or by a
Council, in which the Church is represented in matters necessary to Faith, and
which are approved by the Church her self. In like manner Petrus a So^^ Soto
Asser. Ca. cit. de Concll.
instan^ing in the second Council of Ephesus corrected by that of Chalcedon,
manifestly implies, that Counsels, even General, before they be received and
approved by the Universal Church, may be repealed by a following Council, but
a Council once received can never be altered. And therefore, says he, God by
his providence over his Church will so order, that whatsoever is erroneous or
defective in one Council, shall be corrected in a following one, before it be
received in the Church. The same Author repeats the same Doctrine again in his
observations upon the Confession of Wittenberg. Id. in Conf. Wittenb. Cellot.
de Hier. Eccl. l. 4. c. 10. 8. 12.
cap. de Council. Consequently hereto Cellotius a learned Jesuit professes,
That the infallibility promised to the Church is twofold. 1. Active, by which
the Prelates in Counsels proposing points of Faith, are secured from error. 2.
Passive, whereby the Universal Body of the Church under all the Prelates in
all the several Provinces respectively is preserved from assenting to, or
believing an error. Now that in the whole Church, whether represented in a
Council, or dispersed over the world, both these kinds of infallibility are to
be found, says he, no Catholic can deny. He adds, In case there has been
any thing decreed by Counsels, which either has not been generally admitted,
or by general disuse has ceased, that the present Church is not thereto
obliged, appears clearly by the Decrees of the first Council of the Apostles,
in the prohibition of things strangled, and blood.

In the last place, our learned Countreyman Bacon Bacon Anal. Fidei. n. 113.
(alias Southwell) a very ingenuous and acute Jesuit, does plainly enough
signify, That it was the opinion, not only of S. Augustine, but generally of
all the Writers of that age, that the resolution of Faith had its utmost
complete effect in the reception of the whole Christian world; grounding his
assertion upon such like passages of S. Augustine as these, Those are only
Plenary Counsels which are gathered out of the universal Christian world.
Aug. de Bap. l. 2. c. 3. id ibid.
Again, The letters of Bishops may be corrected by National Counsels, and
National Counsels by Plenary ones, and former Plenary Counsels may be
corrected by others that succeed. And again, We should not have the boldness
to affirm any such thing, were it not that we are confirmed by the most
unanimous authority of the universal Church. Now I suppose their intention is
not to refund all authority finally upon the ignorant people, but upon the
whole Body of the Prelates, admitting and attesting what was decreed by a few
in Counsels, by which means the universal Government of the Church sets their
seal to the Doctrine of Faith, and vertually, or by consequence, in and with
them, all Christians universally in their communion and under their charge. By
this means indeed all possible objections will be taken away, and the Decisions
of Counsels will be the Acts, not of ten Bishops representing a hundred, and
perhaps giving suffrages to Doctrines never questioned or debated by them, but
of all the Bishops of the Christian world. Now it is not necessary, according
to these Authors grounds, that there must be such a Reception of conciliary
acts by particular P^^^^^s ^^prossely, f^^mally, and directly, it being
sufficient that it be done interpretatively, that is, when such Doctrines are
known, and permitted to be published ^emine reclamante. And till this be done,
shy they, the Council, though in it self it be very legitimate, and deserving
the ^itle of Oecumonicall, yet it does not sufficiently and evidently appear to
be so: whereas a Provincial Council, yea a Private Fathers or Doctors
opinion so received, has in it the virtue of a General Council.

4. Now this opinion maintained by such considerable learned Catholics, and
not apparently contrary to any decision of the Church, though I did not intend
to subscribe to, as undoubtedly true; for my resolution always was not to
engage my self in any private Sects or topicall opinions, and least of all in
such as appeared to be exotic and suspicious, notwithstanding I was very well
contented to perceive, that it was at least an allowable opinion; For I found
it of great convenience to my self, to free me from many difficulties: For
thereby, 1. Here is no entrenching on the points of controversy between
Catholics and Protestants, since they are all, not only decided by the
authority of Counsels, but likewise actually assented to and embraced by all
particular Catholic Churches; neither (as matters of controversy do now
stand) is it necessary to require any more from Protestants, then what has
been so both decided and received. 2. Hereby all the objections, which
Protestants make from certain (real or imaginary) contradictions which may be
found in decrees of Counsels about other points not now in controversy, are
apparently rendered ineffectuall; for if that be to be only necessarily
accounted an article of Catholic Faith, which is actually acknowledged and
received by Catholics, and since contradictions cannot be actually assented
to, it will follow, that whatsoever decisions of Counsels may seem to oppose
such articles, are not necessarily to be accounted Catholic Doctrines, and by
consequence not obligatory. 3. That so much objected speech of S. Augustine (de
Bapt. Dom. l 2. c. 3.) (viz. The letters of Bishops may be corrected by
National Counsels, and National Counsels by Plenary ones, and former
Plenary Counsels may be corrected by others that succeed) though it be
understood of points of Doctrine (as it seems to require such a sense, because
S. Augustine speaks it upon occasion of rebaptization) yet makes nothing
against Catholics, who upon the forementioned grounds and authorities, need
account that only to be Catholic Doctaine, which is actually embraced by
Catholics. Yea upon the same grounds the like may be said of that yet more
bold speech of Cardinal Cusanus, viz. It may be observed by all experience,
that an Universal Council may fail. (Cusan. concord. l. 2. c. 14.)

5. But to proceed to the several grounds; upon which I conceived Stapleton
determined this question, with a greater latitude and indulgence then most
other Writers, and yet notwithstanding he has escaped the censure of any,
being commended even by those who use much more rigor in it then he has done.
The first is, That no Doctrine can be called an Article of Faith, but what was
in the beginning revealed and delivered to the Church by Christ and his
Apostles. 2. That these doctrines have been preserved and continued to these
times by Tradition, that is, not only in books approved and delivered
Traditionally, but rather in an orall practical Tradition from one age to
another. For the Church pretends not to any new immediate revelation, though
she enjoys an effectual assistance of Gods holy Spirit. 3. That there is a
double obligation from decisions of General Counsels, the first an obligation
of Christian belief, in respect of doctrines delivered by General Counsels,
as of universal Tradition: the second only of Canonical obedience to orders
and constitutions for practice, by which men are not bound to believe that
these are enforced, as from divine authority, but only to submit to them, as
acts of a lawful Ecclesiastical power, however not to censure them as unjust,
much less to oppose and contradict them. 4. That many (I may say, most)
constitutions of Counsels in order to practice do yet vertually include some
degree of belief; as that of Communion under one kind, of the use of Images in
Churches and upon Altars, etc. of residence of Bishops, of authorized
Translations of Scripture, etc. And that in such cases we are not obliged to
believe that Christ or his Apostles gave order that such practices should
follow, but only that considering Christ's continual care over his Church so
clearly promised, neither these nor any other orders universally established
and practiced are destructive to any substantial doctrine or practice of
Christianity; and that the authority left by Christ in his church was so large
and ample, as that when she shall judge it fit, considering the various
dispositions of succeeding times^ she may alter external practices and forms
not essential or^ of the substance of Christian Religion, even in the
Sacraments themselves, as we see acknowledged in some cases by all Christian
churches, as about the altering of the time and posture of receiving the
Eucharist, the triple immersion in Baptism, abstaining from things strangled,
and from blood, etc. 5. That doctrines determined by National Counsels lay no
obligation at all upon any other churches, but only those whose Bishops meet
together: and all the obligation even of those Christians who live within such
Provinces, is only not to contradict; they are not bound to receive such
decisions as Articles of Faith; the reason being evident, because one Nation
cannot be a competent judge of Catholic Tradition, and there neither is, nor
can be any Article of Faith but what is delivered that way. 6. That the
authority of the Pastors of the present Church is not of so absolute and
sublime a nature as that of the Apostles was, though it be sufficient to
require obedience from every man: as likewise consequently that they are not in
all degrees so powerfully assisted in their determinations as the Apostles
were, so that some difference is to be made between Canons of Counsels, ^^
Apostolic writings, as has been showed before out of S. Augustine,
Beltarmine, and other Authors. 7. That some difference may likewise be made
between the present and primitive Churches: For they having received Christian
doctrines more immediately and purely, and besides the true sense of particular
passages of Scripture, which are difficult (which is now in a great measure
utterly lost) they were able to speak more fully of many particular, not
necessary points in Christian Religion, then the present church now can, though
perhaps the advantage of tongues and sciences, the benefit of so many writings,
both ancient and modern, long study and meditation, etc. may in some sort
recompense those disadvantages of the present church 3 yet however these are
but acquired and humane perfections, whereas the former were Apostolic
Tradition. 8. That even of points of doctrine decided by Counsels a difference
may be made between such as are of universal Tradition, and others: for those
former being capable to be made evidently certain (as I proved before) such
decisions are to be the objects of our Christian Faith, and no more to be
rejected then any other divine revelations: But other points of doctrine there
are sometimes decided in Counsels, rather by the judgment and learning of the
Bishops, considering Texts of Scripture, wherein such points seem to be
included. And weighing together the doctrines of ancient. Fathers and modern
Doctors, an example whereof I gave before in the Council of Vienna, touching
inherent grace infused into Infants in Baptism, and in the Council of Bazil,
concerning the immaculate conception of our B. Lady: NOw such decisions many
Catholics conceive, are not in so eminent a manner the necessary objects of
Christian Faith; because not delivered as of universal Tradition: But however
an extreme temerity it would be in any particular man to make any doubt of the
truth of them, and unpardonable disobedience to reject them, I mean the
conclusions themselves, though if the Texts of Scripture be set down, from
whence such conclusions are deduced, or the said authorities produced, it may
perhaps not be so great a fault to enquire and dispute, whether from such a
Text, or such authorities, such a conclusion will necessarily follow. 9. If in
such decisions, as these later are, there should happen to be any error,
(which yet we may piously believe the assistance of Gods holy Spirit promised
to the Church will prevent) but if this should happen, since it must
necessarily be in a point not pertinent to the substance of Christian Religion,
(for all substanciall points are univ^rsall Tradition, as we showed before) it
were far better such an error should pass, till (as S. Augustine says) some
later Council amended it, then that unity should be dissolved for an
unnecessary truth, since as Irenaeus says, There is no reformation so
important to the Church, as Schism, upon any pretense whatsoever is pernicious.

5. Upon such grounds as these, I supposed, it was that our learned Stapleton
stated this question of the churches authority (or as he calls it,
infallibility) with so much latitude and condescendence; And him I have quoted
not with any intention to prefe^ him with the disparagement of any other, but
to show that thereby I perceived my self not to have sufficiently considered
the necessary doctrine of the Roman Church in this so fundamental a point of
faith; and likewise how (when I heard the Church speaking in her own language,
and moderately interpreted by Catholic Doctors.) I found what she said so
just, so reasonable, so impossible to be contradicted by any thing but passion,
or interest, or pride, or hatred of unity, that there was no resisting the
attraits of it. Then at last I found what I had all my life time in vain sought
after, namely a firm foundation, whereon I might safely and without any scruple
rely; and more glad then of all worldly treasures to see my soul taken out of
mine own hands, and placed under the conduct of her whom Christ had appointed
to be my guide and conductresse, to whom he had made so many rich promises, and
with whom it is his pleasure to dwell, then I took up a Psalm of Thanksgiving
and said, Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi, in domum Domini ibimus:
Stantes erant pedes nostri in atriis tuis Jerusalem: Jerusalem quae aedificatur
ut civitas cujus participatio ejus in id ipsum: Illuc enim ascenderunt tribus,
tribus Domini etc. Psalm. 121.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Unsatisfactory grounds of the English Church, concerning the Ecclesiastical
authority.

Calvinists Doctrine, concerning the Spirit's being judge of controversies,
etc. answered.

1. BEing thus satisfied of the firm grounds of the Churches authority, the
only bullwark against all Heresy and Schism, a sure preserver of unity,
without which no Commonwealth, no society of men can possibly subsist, much
less of churches; in a word so necessary, so consonant to reason, that even
all sorts of sects and congregations, whilst they deny it to the Catholic
Church, usurp it to their own conventicles; to which yet they have not
assurance enough to apply our Saviors promises in contradiction to other
Seets, with whom they will not communicate; yea even those who make a liberty
of prophesying a differencing mark of their Sect, yet will not allow their own
partisans this liberty of prophesying, unless they prophecy by their rule, and
against their enemies. In the next place I took into consideration the
unspeakably happy effects of this authority, which immediately represented
themselves to my mind.

2. I will notwithstanding a while defer an account of those effects, till I
have briefly set down and examined the grounds which Protestants lay for
interpreting Scripture, and judging controversies in Religion, in opposition to
this authority of the Church and her General Counsels; as likewise their
principal objections against the said authority: For then comparing both these
doctrines together, and the consequences together, it will be more easy and
commodious to decide whether of them is the more advantageous, and whether or
no I have made a prudent choice in forsaking a Church, where all unity was
impossible, but only such an outward unity, as worldly hopes and fears can
produce, and in betaking my self to a church where Schism is impossible.

3. All Protestants, and other Sects, agree in this against the Catholic
Church (for Schismaeest unit^s ipsis, as Tertullian. de Prascrip^ c. 42.)
says, Their unity is an agreement in Schism, that the Scripture is the only
sufficient Rule of Faith, and that there is no visible Judge of the sense of
it. But yet to the end that Gods church may not become a very Babel, since a
Judge visible or invisible must needs be had, some disagreement there is among
among them, what invisible judge to pitch upon.

4. All that I can collect from the sense of the English Church in this point
is, that which results from these articles of hers compared together, viz. Holy
Scripture contains all things necessary for salvation, so that whatsoever is
not read therein, is not to be required of any man that it should be believed
as an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite necessary to salvation. Again,
The three Creeds etc. ought thoroughly to be received etc. For they may be
proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture. Again, The visible Church of
Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the pure word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered etc. As the Church of
Jerusalem etc. so also the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living
and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith. Again, The Church has
power to decree rites or ceremonies, and authority in controversies of Faith;
and yet it is not lawful for the church to ordain any thing that is contrary to
Gods Word, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture that it be
repugnant to another: wherefore although the church be a witness and a keeper
of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the fame, so
besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity
of salvation. Again, General Counsels may not be gathered together, without
the commandment and will of Princes. And when they be gathered together
(forasm^^h as they be an assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the
Spirit and Word of God) they may ^rre, and sometimes have erred, even in things
pertaining unto God: wherefore things ordained by them as necessary unto
salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared, that
they be taken out of Holy Scriptures. From which Articles it is apparent, that
the Church of England, though in words she seems to ascribe some kind of power
to the Church and General Counsels, yet in very deed, since she makes her
self at least, if not each particular man, a judge, whether the Catholic
Church proceeds according to Scriptures or no, the thereby utterly deprives the
Church of all manner of authority: yea de facto the Supremest authority, which
is in the Church, is actually censured as a Delinquent, both in having made
decisions beyond, and against the Word of God. But after these destructive
determinations, the English Church names no other visible or invisible
authority, not laying her self any claim thereto, although in effect she
takes upon her to do more then she claims: So that a primo ad ultimum, all the
judgment that I could make of the English Church was, that since worldly
interests constrained her to separate from the Catholic Church, by the just
judgment of God, she had only a power given her to destroy the Temple of God,
but not so much as to lay one stone toward the raising up another in the place
of it.

5. As for the Calvinist party in England, they follow the example of Calvin,
and most of his followers that I had read, as likewise the Lutherans, etc. all
which make the Holy Ghost, testifying to every man's conscience, the infallible
interpreter of Scripture. Now concerning this their pretense to such a Judge,
all I had to say upon it, during that very small time that I had the patience
to take it into debate, was; 1. That I could not believe that they believed
themselves, when they laid claim each man, or each Sect to such an infallible
Judge. 2. That if they did indeed believe it, as I could not hinder them, so
till I had some good experience I durst not pretend to the like infallibility.
3. Since all those Sects pretend to so more-then-miraculous an infallibility,
and yet not any of them work any other miracles, it proves of no effect to end
controversies, which is the proper office of a Judge, especially such a Judge
as the Holy Ghost, which is the Spirit of unity. 4. That if such a pretense was
indeed false (as it must be in all Sects differing between themselves, but
only one) it is in all the rest a most horrible presumptuous lying against the
Holy Ghost, and most justly punished by him with implacable and eternal
divisions both among themselves, and from Catholic unity, divisions; I say,
impossible to be remedied, till all but one Sect agree in the same confession,
or acknowledge, since a Judge is requisite, and the invisible one will not
serve the turn, that therefore they are to have recourse to the only visible
one, viz. The present Catholic Church, which in Spirits so envonomed against
the Church, as those Sects are, how without a miracle it cannot be expected,
fearful experience shows. 5. That since this pretending to the Spirit is
effectual only so far, as by a seeming divine warrant to make them hate one
the other, but not to oblige one the other to submit to their so eanonized
interpretations, it is of no use at all in this business of finding out a
Judge to end controversies among dissenting Christians. Lastly, That that rule
of Tertullian (de Praser.) being unquestionable, viz. That whatsoever is new is
Religion, praejudges it self to be false, it will undoubtedly follow, that
this ground of so many Sects, is of all others most apparently untrue, since no
example can be found for it in all Antiquity: Here the Tradition from the
ancient Patriarchs of Merefies fails them, for excepting some fanaticall
Heretics, as the Montanists, etc. none ever pretended to the Spirit against
the church.

CHAP. XXXV.
Mr. Chillingworth's new^ found Judge of Controversies, viz. Private reason.

His grounds for the asserting such a Judge.

1. SInce the publishing of Mr. Chillingworth's book, there has appeared in
England a new Judge of controversies, and much deferred unto there, which is
every man's private reason interpreting of Scripture. From what country this
new Judge came, is very well known, and I willingly forbear to discover. The
truth is, if Christ had made no promises to his church, if it had not by God's
own Spirit been called the Pillar and ground of truth; if universal Tradition
were a fable; if all Councello, conspiracies of Tyrants, and lastly, if unity
in the church were unnecessary or unprofitable, reason might have much to
allege for it self, that it should be raised into this tribunal.

2. But before I examine particularly the pretentions of reason to this Office,
I will set down the State of this controversy, as Mr. Chillingworth (c. 4.
parag. 93.) has very perspicuously and yet very briefly expressed it in these
words; Believe the Scripture to be the word of God, use your true endeavor to
find the true sense of it, and live according to it, and then you may rest
securely that you are in the true way to eternal happiness. These are the
directions which he professes that he would give to any man desirous to save
his soul, and requiring whose instructions to rely upon for that purpose, and
this in opposition to a Catholic, that would advise such a man to have
recourse to the Catholic Church etc.

3. Now for a more orderly examining of Mr. Chillingworth's direction for
finding out the true sense of Scripture, and judging controversies; I will yet
more distinctly set down his grounds in several propositions collected out of
his book, in such a method, as may show the respect and dependence of the one
on the other, together with the chief reasons which he alleges for the proof
of them; and afterward I will subjoyn thereto the reasons which moved me to
judge such grounds of his, insufficient, and his reasons unconcluding; and in
conclusion I will declare how I satisfied mine own reason, that all the
several objections which he makes against the Churches authority, under the
notion of infallibility, have not that force that both he and I my self once
imagined.

4. The abridgement of Mr. Chillingworth's whole discourse, I conceived might
be reduced to these Propositions following, viz, 1. That Christian Religion
having been planted so many ages since, the only ordinary way that we can
arrive to the knowledge of it is Tradition: and the only assured way,
universal Tradition of all ages and Churches, which is of it self credible,
and admits not of any proof. 2. That for himself he could find nothing
delivered by such an universal Tradition, as of divine authority, but only
books of Scripture; for if he had, he would have embraced it with equal
submission, since the being written makes not any thing more credible. 3. That
the Scripture is a most sufficient, and the only rule of Faith (most
sufficient) because it self says so (the only rule) because nothing else can
be proved to be of universal Tradition. 4. That by consequence, the Scripture
contains in it all things necessary to be believed and practiced by all sorts
of persons, and this so plainly and expressly, that no reasonable man can
doubt of the sense thereof, much ^esse be mistaken; for otherwise God would not
have provided sufficiently for the salvation of mankind. 5. That concerning
those passages of Scripture, wherein are contained doctrines of Christianity,
but not so plainly, men are not obliged necessarily to understand or believe
them, since it cannot consist with the goodness of God, that men should be
bound to have an express knowledge or belief of that which God himself has
purposely delivered obscurely. 6. That since no proof can be made, either out
of Scripture, or universal Tradition, that there is any authoritative visible
Judge of the sense of the Scripture; and since each man's understanding or
reason is the only faculty capable of judging; that therefore it only is to
judge of the sense of the Scripture as far as concerns each man's particular. 7.
That fince every man's reason may possibly be deceived, (especially proceeding
upon objects not immediately offered to sense) therefore an infallible faith is
not required; such a probability will serve tqe turn, as is sufficient to
produce in a man obedience to the precepts of holiness commanded in the
Gospel. 8. That since all Christians cannot but agree in necessary doctrines
(which are express) they ought not to deny communion to one another for other
doctrines, not expressly contained in Scripture. And that this is the only
affectuall means of reducing^ and preserving unity among Christians.

5. These are in brief the grounds of Christian Faith, and of the means
afforded us to attain to the true sense of as much of it as is necessary, and
likewise to beget charity and unity among Christians as they lie dispersed up
and down in Mr. Chillingworths book, and which I have set down faithfully and
ingenuously, in the most rational method that I could devise. I will now with
as convenient dispatch as I can, adjoyn likewise in the same order respectively
the reasons why I could not content my self with them, but was forced to
relinquish them, to abase mine own reason, and to have recourse to a
foundation, as I thought, more firm and rational, and I am confident far
more safe, viz. the Catholic Church.

CHAP. XXXVI.
An answer to the three first grounds of Mr. Chillingworth.

1. TO the first ground therefore, viz. That there is no other way to be
assured of a Religion established many ages since, but universal Tradition, I
grant it; But whereas it is added, A Tradition of all ages: If the meaning be,
that it is required to such an assurance, that a man should have precisely from
every age a sufficient testimony of this universal Tradition, this is u^terly
impossible any other way, then as including the testimony of former ages in
that of the present; for though there may be preserved a few writings in every
age, all which may contur in this testimony, and so make it indeed very
probable; yet the testimony of three or four Writers is not equivalent to the
testimony of the age. Add to this, that such a way of proof (though it may give
good satisfaction to learned persons, and is practiced more by Catholics then
any other, who yet rest upon the present Church for the certainty of Tradition)
yet it is very laborious and uncertain, and whereof very few persons are
capable, and therefore not to be made a ground for all men to build all Religion
upon. The testimony therefore of all former ages is always most safely
included, as to particular men, in the testimony of the present age, if that be
universal for place, and grounded upon Tradition, as I showed before, and made
the proof of the assurance of it to be, because it was impossible it should be
false, unless some one whole age should conspire to deliver a thing as of
Tradition, which was not so and not only conspire, but should actually deceive
their children, no man discovering the imposture, a thing beyond all
imagination of possibility. I will therefore add no more here, but only the
confession of a learned Protestant in his own words, viz. Field of the Church.
l. 4. c. ^14.
When a Doctrine is in any age constantly delivered as a matter of Faith, and
as received from ^^ ancestors, in such sort as the contradictors, thereof were
in the beginning noted for novelty, and if they persisted in contradiction, in
the end charged with heresy, it is impossible but such a doctrine should come
by succession from the Apostles.

2. To the second, where he says; That he could find nothing as of divine
authority delivered by universal Tradition of all ages, but only books of
Scripture. I answer, that any one that will search with a willingness to find,
shall doubtless have better fortune then Mr. Chillingworth. For I desire any
one to consider with himself, ^^ Whether the Apostles did not in all churches
established by them, settle the whole doctrine and form of Christian Discipline
uniformly? and whether this doctrine and discipline was not carefully preserved
in the Primitive churches all the world over? if these things be granted, as
plain Texts of Scripture for the former, Act. 20. 20. 27
and an agreement of most of the Fathers, within the time of the four first
General Counsels will testify for both. Then I desire to know, whether from
the fourth Council till S. Gregory the Great's days, any substantial part of
either has perished? If any one say it has, he will find it a labor beyond
Hercules his forces to prove it; for to this hour I could never see one
pressing testimony out of any Ecclesiastical Writer. Then from S. Gregory's
days to these, it is visible that not any the least substantial part of
either is lost, and this by the confession of several learned Protestants,
Vid. Brereleys Prot. Apol. tr. 2. Sect. 1.
by the agreement of all Catholic Writers, by S. Gregory's own writings, and
(which is a proof irrefragable) by comparing the Gregorian Liturgy and Missall
with those of the present age. In the next place, let him consider, that most
of the books of the New Testament were written by the Apostles and Evangelists
for the use of particular churches, some to particular persons, sent by single
messengers. Besides, that several ages were passed, before all the books were
communicated, and dispersed, and accepted as Canonical by the whole Catholic
Church. Now after a comparing of these two Traditions together, let any man
judge whether of them is the more universal, either for time or place.

3. To the third, viz. Of Scriptures being an entire Rule of Faith, etc. It is
already answered cap. 31, 32. etc. Whereto I shall for the present only add
this, viz. That Mr. Chillingworth (cap. 1. parag. 5. 6. 7.) takes great
advantage from a speech, as he says, of his adversaries, namely, That the
Scripture is a perfect rule, forasmuch as a writing can be a rule. I am
confident his learned adversary never intended to allow him all this in the
sense and extent that Mr. Chillingworth presses it, as if all points of Faith
were as fully set down in Scripture, as they could be in any writing. But I
have no commission to interpose between them two, and therefore all I have to
say is, that there appeared to me no kind of necessity, nor any probability
that it was his Antagonists intention, that such a large allowance should be
made to Protestants; for I would fain know, since evidence is one necessary
condition to make a rule perfect, could Mr. Chillingworth believe that the
meaning of his learned adversary should be, that for example, the doctrine of
Faith concerning the blessed Trinity is as evidently and intelligibly stated in
Scripture, as in the first Council of Nice? or all points in controversy now
adays, as in the Council of Trent? or that all Texts of Scripture are so
unquestionably evident, that no interpretations or Commentaries could make them
plainer? his meaning therefore surely was, that Scripture in regard of
evidence, and with relation to fundamental Doctrines, chiefly intended to be
published in it, is as evident as can be expected from any one single writing
standing alone. Not but that one writing explained by a second, and those
explanations further cleared by a third may be plainer: Or though it might have
been possible, that for example, the Doctrine of the Trinity might have been
declared so manifestly, that Photinianisme or Arianisme might have been
prevented, notwithstanding no plainness of writing can prevent malicious
spirits from extracting novelties of some kinds of senses or heresies, either
those or others as pernicious, since as our blessed Lord says, Necosse est ut
veniant scandala, that is, It is necessary that scandalls must come, Mat. 19. 9
And S. Paul, Oportet and haereses esse, that is, It is needful that there
should be heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19. both for the trial of those that love God,
and discovery of those that hate him. For unless God should quite change the
nature of mankind, it is impossible that any one writing should be so plain,
but that either the curiosity, or pride, or interests, or malice, or at least
the debility of men's wits may, and doubtless will find or extract obscurities
and difficulties out of it, especially such a writing as the Scripture is,
which being composed by men of several dispositions and spirits, moreover
belongs to all mankind, of all conditions and dispositions, so that if they be
let alone, every one will be forward, yea even take a glory to dig and search
into the treasures of it, and challenge an equal right to maintain his own,
and disparage the discoveries of any other; every Sect and Sectary will think
they see and read therein all their own distinctive opinions clearly shining,
and a confutation of all opposite tenants. Yea perhaps, the blind sensual.
Passions, worldly interests, and proud fancies of vain man, will have recourse
thither, and not want the impudence to seek for, nor blush to pretend that they
have found a covert and protection for the works of Satan in the divine Word of
God. In vain therefore does Mr. Chillingworth triumphantly boast of his
inferences, to his seeming advantageous to himself, since they are all
extracted merely from his own misunderstanding of that most reasonable and
prudent saying of his worthy Antagonist. 4. Yea this one consideration, that
the necessary mysteries of Faith are not, nor could be so evidently set down in
any one place of Scripture, but that other places may be found, which may
afford ground even to an understanding man to raise objections, will make any
man conclude, that either there are no mysteries necessary to be believed, or
that something besides Scripture must be made use of to clear all difficulties.

CHAP. XXXVII.
An answer to M. Chillingworth's fourth and fifth grounds.

Several Novelties introduced by him.

1. To the fourth, where it is said, That all things necessary to salvation are
contained in Scripture so plainly, that no reasonable man, desirous to find the
true sense, can doubt or be mistaken in the sense of them; so that for such
matters there is no need of any interpreter. An assertion this is, which is one
of the main foundations, upon which all manner of Sects that withdraw
themselves from the Churches authority, do and must rely; therefore I thought
it necessary to spend more thoughts in examining the firmness of it: and after
all, I profess I found it of all others most weak, most contrary to reason,
and every days experience.

2. For demonstrating the justice of this censure of it, and that I may
express my self more clearly, I will lay down certain positions, to which I
conceive all rational men will assent. As first, touching the word necessary,
(besides what has already been spoken of the ambiguousnesse of that word,
which is relative, and variable according to it is application to several
objects and subjects, which I will not now repeat) I suppose that all men will
call that necessary, for which being either denied or affirmed, they being of a
contrary opinion would break Communion from, and deny it to other Churches: for
Schism about unnecessary things, is by all Christians acknowledged a sin
almost unpardonable. 2. That rationally to affirm a doctrine to be expressed
plainly in Scripture, it is not sufficient to say it appears so to me, for so
almost every one will be forward to say of all his Opinions, which he pretends
to be grounded on Scripture: But that is to be called plain and express, which
has not been controverted by men of reason, pretending to piety and
impaertiality, especially if they be in any considerable number; so that it
will not be satisfactory to say, this appears plainly to me, and I am sure I am
not led by interest or faction, as others are; for this may be every ones plea
against another. 3. That where two senses are given of any passage of
Scripture, the one extremely probable and natural, the other not wholly
absurd, and whereof the words may possibly be capable: in this case one
Protestant cannot upon their own grounds condemn or impute heresy to another.

3. These positions thus premised, in the next place I conceived it very just,
that before any Sect of Christians did build upon this foundation of the
Scriptures, containing expressly and evidently all things necessary, that they
should all conspire to make a Catalogue of points necessary, and this with
relation to several states of persons, or at least to Communions and Churches:
(I add this limitation, because to multiply several distinct Catalogues for
all persons would be of extreme labor: and on the other side, to make one
Catalogue for all men, would (as Mr. Chillingworth (Cap. 3. parag. 13. says)
be like the making a coat for the Moon, which is continually in the wain or
increase.)

4. Now to show the reasonableness of this, and that Mr. Chillingworths
adversary required most justly such a Catalogue from Protestants, let but any
man consider with himself what satisfaction any man can have from a Protestant
Minister, when he shall tell him, You have the Bible of our Translation, in
which we affirm all necessary truths to be contained, but mixed with a world of
unnecessary, you are not absolutely bound to study, or to be able to read this
Bible, yet you shall be damned if you be ignorant of those necessary truths
dispersed here and there in it; to say definitively how many, and which are
those especial necessary truths, we are not able, neither have we authority;
therefore at your own peril be sure you mistake neither in the number nor
sense of those truths: we can indeed afford you Articles and Catechismes, to
which as long as you live with us you must be forced to subscribe, but we have
no authority (for there is none visible upon earth) to propose our collections
or determinations, as obliging in conscience, etc. In what a miserable case
would that Protestant be, that should give himself leave to examine upon how
mere a quicksand all his pretentions to eternity are built.

5. And whereas Mr. Chillingworth would seem to conceive himself secure in the
midst of these uncertainties, because, as he thinks, Catholics also are
encumbred with the like: I found that conceit of his altogether groundless;
for the promises of Christ remaining firm, and appropriated to the Catholic
Church, it will follow; 1. That in the Catholic Church shall be taught to the
worlds end all necessary and profitable truths to all sorts of persons; so that
every man respectively receiving and believeing what the church appoints to be
proposed to him, cannot fail of being instructed with things necessary, etc. 2.
The same Church being endued with authority to determine the true sense of
divine truths, a Catholic submitting to the Church, cannot be in danger
through mistakes or errors; so that he who hearkens to the Church, has his
catalogue of fundamentalls made to his hand, the Church, like the wise Steward
in the Gospel out of that store of provisions given her by Christ,
proportioning to every man his dimensum panis quotidiani, his own befitting
allowance.

6. And here by the way will appear; 1. The vanity of that ordinary calumny,
which Protestants impute to the Catholic Church, as if she taught that it
were sufficient to ignorant men only implicitly to believe what the Church
believes, without an explicit belief of any thing: for there is none so
ignorant, but is obliged to know and assent to what the Church teaches him by
his Pastor suitable to his estate and education. And secondly, an usual
mistake among Protestants, who think that all the credenda in Catholic
Religion, are comprised in the definitions of Counsels: for before ever any
General Council sat, the Church was furnished with her full measure of
divine truths, necessary to be believed, which were by her publicly professed
and proposed; which have been occasionally declared, and distinctly expounded
in her Counsels. But to return to Mr. Chillingworth.

7. He by his sharp understanding, and long meditation, coming to perceive
those inconveniences, and considering that no Protestant or other Church could
upon their generally acknowledged grounds authoritatively define either the
number or sense of Articles of Faith, so as to oblige any man, even within her
Communion, in conscience to assent and submission (For, for example, if an
Englishman would not subscribe to the sense of any Article of the Church of
England, all the penalty would be, he should not partake of the privileges and
preferments of that Church, but he might go over into Denmark or Holland, whose
sense in such an Article he liked better, and still be acknowledged even by the
English Church to be orthodox enough.) He therefore was forced to introduce two
Novelties among English Protestants which find great approbation: the first is
to alter the old manner and notion of subscription to the English Articles; for
whereas before, the Protestants there by their subscription testified their
belief of all the 39. Articles in the sense imported in the words; yea whereas
there was a Canon which denounced Excommunication ipso facto to all that should
say that any of them were not true, Mr. Chillingworth thus expresses his mind
in subscribing, Answ. to Dire. to N. N^par. 39.
I am persuaded that the constant doctrine of the Church of England is so pure
and Orthodox, that whosoever believes it, and lives according to it,
undoubtedly he shall be saved: and that there is no error in it, which may
necessitate or warrant any man to distrub the peace, or renounce the Communion
of it. This in my opinion (says he) is all intended by subscription.

8. His second novelty is, that whereas the Protestants always professed that
the publiqua Confessions of their Churches Faith, was indeed their own faith,
that is, such expressions plain and indubitable, as are in holy Scripture
concerning such points, or at least irrefragable consequences from Scripture,
and therefore were to them as Scripture, because their sense of Scripture: and
whereas they respectively divided themselves from the Communion of the
Catholic and other particular churches, because they would not join with them
in the belief of Scripture explained in that sense, which their several
Articles import (and not because they refused to submit to Scripture, which all
profess to do.) And lastly, whereas though they acknowledged S^ripture to be
the only Rule of Faith, yet because it not having being written in form of
Institutions or a Catechism, the necessary doctrines of Religion are dispersed
uncertainly in the several books, difficulty to be found out of them, and
withal not so plainly delivered, but that there is need of explication and
conciliation with other passages of Scripture that seem to contradict; for this
reason each church compiled abridgements and confessions disposed orderly and
methodically, by which they signify to the world how they understand
Scripture: Mr. Chillingworth on the contrary delivers their mind jointly for
them after a new way (which is his second Novelty) which I will set down in his
own words, ( cap. 6. parag. 56.) By the Religion of Protestants I do not (says
he) understand the doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Melanchion, nor the
confession of Augusta, or Geneva, (...) the Catechism of He^delberg, nor the
Ar^^ ^^ the Church of England, no nor the harmony of Protestant Confessions;
but that wherein they all agree, and which they all subscribe with a great^^
harmony, as a perfect rule of their faith and actions, that is the Bible, the
Bible, I say the Bible only is the Religion of Protestants: Whatsoever else
they believe besides it, and the plain irrefragable indubitable consequences of
it, well may they hold it as matter of Opinion, but as a matter of Faith and
Religion, neither can they with coherence to their own grounds believe it
themselves, nor require the belief of it of others, without most high and most
Schismatic presumption. Thus far Mr. Chillingwrrth. Now how far other
Protestants out of England will approve of this new shift, which he has found
out for them, and which, I am sure, he has published without any commission
from them, I know not: But if they also justify him in this, all I can say is,
that they will make their party much the stronger by it, and will likewise have
reason to pretend to almost primitive antiquity, for if all be of their body,
who, whatsoever their particular tenants be, build their faith upon only
Scripture interpreted by each man's reason, then not only all Heretics of
these times, but likewise almost all Heretics since the Apostles times, will
be united in the same corporation.

9. But once more to return to Mr. Chillingworth's 'Position, viz. That all
necessary truths are contained in Scripture so expressly, that no man can
rationally doubt of the sense of them, and by consequence there is no need of
an authorized visible interpreter. All that I shall say in answer hereto, shall
be the making a few requests to our English Protestants especially: As 1. To
consider this and the former speeches of Mr. Chillingworth, not as an
extraordinary invention of his excellent wit, but that which extreme necessity
forced him to: for though before him few Protestant Writers have so freely
discovered the arcana schismatis, as being unwilling to tell their followers
that they had no authority to oblige them to their opinions: Yet Mr.
Chillingworth deals more ingenuously, discovering, that this is indeed a
foundation most necessary to be laid by all those, who deny all visible
Ecclesiastical authority in expounding Scripture, and judging definitively of
controversies in Religion: for otherwise they may say, God has given us the
Scripture to be our only rule, this Rule is ambiguous and difficult, even in
necessary things; there is no judge to interpret it, men's understandings are
weak, and their wills strong, they are easily led away with prejudices,
education and worldly interests; so that it is a great chance if they light
upon the true sense of those difficult, yet most necessary mysteries,
considering besides, that they are very contrary to flesh, and blood, and
carnal reason. This were to deal with mankind worse then the Egyptian
Taskmasters did with the Israelites, to demand brick, and give them no straw.
Since therefore no Protestant would willingly lay such an imputation upon the
Father of mercies, it will follow, that he must of mere force acknowledge with
Mr. Chillingworth, that all truths necessary to salvation are contained in
Scripture so expressly, that no rational man can doubt of the sense of them.

10. My second request to English Protestants is, that they would take into
consideration how (after that a Catholic would be so liberal, as to allow
them this ground) they would be able, and by what rules, to distinguish points
unnecessary from necessary: for though it were true that all necessary points
are plain, yet all plain points are not necessary. 3. That for a more
particular trial, they would resolve with themselves, whether the Mysteries of
the eternal Godhead, and Incarnation of our Savior, be not necessary to be
believed; if so, (as the English Articles import) then they may do well to take
a survey of all the Texts of Scripture, which Volkelius and Crellius heap
together to combat these mysteries, and afterward conclude, whether only
Scripture being the Rule, and only private reason the Judge, these mysteries be
so plainly and expressly contained in Scripture, that no reasonable man can
doubt of the sense of them, and that there needs no interpreter to reconcile
them. 4. I would likewise desire them to consider the places of Scripture which
Catholics make use of, to build the authority of the Church, and the Real
Presence (I name these, because they are the principal grounds of their
separation.) Now when they have considered the Texts for the former point, let
them take notice that they cannot produce one express Text of Scripture against
the authority of the Church; and for the other point, whether the Texts which
Catholics produce for the Real Presence, do not in the literal grammatical
sense say all that Catholics believe; and whether all that Protestants labor
to prove be not, that though Hoc est corpus meum, as the words lie, be against
them, yet the sense hidden and figurative, which they desire to force upon
these words, is against Catholics. And having considered these two instances,
let them upon Mr. Chillingworths present grounds judge how they can satisfy
their own reason and conscience, without express Scripture for themselves, and
against at least express words of Scripture for Catholics, to make a
separation from the whole world.

11. In the last place I desire them to speak freely, whether if this be true,
that to be expressly and unambiguously set down in Scripture, be a condition
necessary to all necessary points of Faith, there be indeed any points of faith
necessary, since there is scarce any one article of the Creed which has not
been, and is not at this day questioned by many men, yea by whole churches, in
which are, and have been found persons of great learning, subtilty, and as far
as the eyes of men could judge, piety and virtue, as S. Augustine witnesses of
Pelagius, and S. Vincentius Lirinensis of other Heretics. Now if they say
they will not believe such testimonies of their adversaries probity, then the
controversies between Sects will become not disputations, but calumniations and
impleadments.

12. To Mr. Chillingworth's fifth ground, viz. That it cannot consist with the
goodness of God to oblige any man as of necessity to believe explicitly, or to
interpret clearly those places of Scripture which are obscure and ambiguous. I
acknowledge all this, and from their own grounds desire Protestants to
consider, whether any knowledge or distinct belief can justly be required to be
yielded to any special points of Christiantty, since there are scarce any that
have not been controverted.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's sixth ground.

Of the use of Reason in Faith.

1. TO the sixth ground, viz. That since no proof can be made out of Scripture,
nor out of universal Tradition, that there is any visible Judge of the sense
of Scripture: and since a man's reason is the only faculty and principle capable
of judging, therefore Reason is the only judge of the sense of Scripture; but
this only for each man's own self, etc. I answer; 1. That his supposition of no
visible Judge is so far from being true, that the contrary has all the proofs
imagineable, and in the highest degree of assurance imagineable, if Tradition
universal for time and place, plain Texts of Scripture interpreted by all
Fathers that have written upon them, the continual practice of the Church in
Counsels etc. can give a certain proof, as I have showed before. 2. For
private reason being a judge, I will show the impossibility for it to attain
the ends for which Christ appointed a government in his Church, (viz. unity of
minds and wills among Christians) together with the unavoidable absurdities
attending such a Judge; and this, after I have considered briefly the rest of
his grounds. 3. In this place I will take into consideration the general
foundation of this his foundation, viz. That no other judge, as to a man's own
self, besides his own reason, can be imagined, chap. 2. 11.

2. This foundation Mr. Chillingworth esteems so firm, that upon all occasion
he objects it to his adversary, and places his chief confidence in it; both as
a sword to wound his enemy, and a buckler to defend himself: for thus, and in
this order he argues. 1. Whatsoever I do in matter of Religion, I do it by mine
own particular reason, and resolve it finally into mine own reason. And this is
not only my method, but the same is done likewise by all sorts of men, even
those that deny private reason to be judge, deny this by their reason; and
because their reason tells them that it is more reasonable to rely upon
authority, then upon their private judgment or reason. etc. 2. The difference
between a Papist and a Protestant is, not that the one judges, and the other
does not judge, but that the one judges his guide to be infallible, the other
his way to be manifest. 3. To speak properly, says he, The Scripture is not a
judge of controversies, but a rule only, and the only rule for Christians to
judge them by; every man is to judge for himself by the judgment of discretion,
and to choose either his Religion first, and then his Church, as we say: Or as
you, his Church first, and then his Religion: but by the consent of both sides
every man is to judge and choose. This appeared to me to be the substance of Mr.
Chillingworth's discourses severally dispersed in his book upon this argument,

3. I confess this way of arguing of Mr. Chillingworth had a long time great
effect with me; and after considering it more attentively, I found that of
necessity there must be some Sophisme in it, because it makes all parties most
contradictory to one another, yet to resolve their beliefs into the same point,
which notwithstanding they utterly deny, it was long before, to mine own
satisfaction, I could discover the secret; and now after all, I find not the
least difficulty how to express my self distinctly and intelligibly in my
answer to it: notwithstanding I will endeavor to do it as perspicuously as I
can.

4. For preparation therefore hereto, I will first show what faith or belief
is, and the several kinds and manners of it, together with the order how it is
begotten in the soul, etc. Now I only speak of a rational and well grounded
faith, not such an one, as with which many ignorant or interessed persons
assent, that is, rather with their wills and passions, then their reason or
understanding. 1. Belief therefore in general is an assent of the
understanding to any thing related to us; and this for the authority of the
relator: So S. Augustine. (de util. cred. c. 2.) That we believe any thing, we
owe it to authority; that we understand any thing, to reason. 2. Belief is
immediate, or mediate: immediate, when the prime relatour reveals it
immediately to the believer: mediate, when by the intervention of others. 3.
Belief certain or probable is either, when we have a certainty or probability
of the prime relators authority or fidelity; or else, though we be assured of
the prime authors fidelity, when we have a certainty or probability of the
authority, fidelity and information of the subordinate relator. 4. Belief
supernatural is, when the prime relator is supernatural, and also when the
object is supernatural: I might add, and which is begotten in the soul by a
supernatural virtue (but that is not debated here.) 5. The order an manner
whereby an assured firm supernatural faith is begotten in the soul, is, first,
in immediate divine revelations, the prime relator reveals any thing to the
believers understanding, by the intervention of his outward or inward senses,
in mediate divine revelations; when this is done by means of some persons
endued with authority and ability; so that before firm faith in the thing
revealed, there must necessarily precede a certain knowledge that such a thing
has been revealed. 6. Discourse of reason may, and ordinarily does precede
belief; but belief it self is not discourse, but a simple assent of the
understanding. 7. In belief we are to distinguish between the causes, and the
motives of it: and when men speak of the last resolution of faith, they intend
to consider the last motive or authority into which it is resolved, not the
primary efficient cause of it. Therefore though faith be an act of reason, yet
it is not said to be resolved into reason, though produced by it, but into
authority. 8. It is a mere tantology to say, the act of faith is terminated in
reason, because reason judges that it is reasonable to believe God: For that
seems all one, as if a man should say; an act of reason is an act of reason, or
a reasonable act; and indeed otherwise it would be impossible to terminate
faith ultimately in God, but a man should believe God, not for Gods authorities
sake, but his own. 9. The use of reason antecedent to faith, and act of the
understanding, in assenting to a thing revealed for the authority of God the
revealer, do not prejudice neither the supernaturalnesse, nor certainty of
Faith; because the same things have place in any revelation, though made
immediately by God; for it is with my senses that I receive the thing revealed,
and convey it to my understanding; it is with my understanding that I assent to
it, and the reason why I assent to it is, because it is most reasonable to
believe God, yet none of these things diminish either the supernaturality, or
absolute certainty of this belief.

5. But to come to a more particular examination of Mr. Chillingworth's
Positions. 1. He argues that private reason ought to be acknowledged the Judge
of controversies, and interpreter of Scripture, because whatsoever we do in
Religion, we do it by our particular reason; yea, even those that deny private
reason to be a Judge do this, because their reason tells them this is more
reasonable, etc. It is confessed that Faith is an act of reason, that is, of
the reasonable faculty of the soul; and that it is the same faculty of reason
which submits and captivates it self to divine or Ecclesiastical authority;
for as to be Gods slave is the greatest liberty, so to renounce carnal reason
when God commands it is most reasonable. It is moreover confessed, that in such
a case, when reason with submission to God captivates it self, and renounces
all discourses of reason that would oppose such an a bnegation of it self, that
it does this from a rational principle, viz. that it is most reasonable to
believe and submit to God, who is veracity it self. But what will follow from
hence? Will any one therefore either be so unreasonable, as to conclude, that
divine faith is ultimately resolved into reason, as into the motive of
assenting? (it is indeed the efficient cause producing the act of assent, but
the last and principal motive is divine authority) or that divine revelations
are to be examined and exacted according to the rule and principles of natural
reason, thereby either to stand or fall? Or lastly, that when reason judges it
reasonable to receive the sense of divine Revelations from the Church endewed
with authority for that purpose, Reason in that case shall be called the
interpreter or judge?

6. In the second place, where he says, The difference between a Papist and a
Protestant is this, not that the one judges, and the other judges not: (Thus
far I grant;) But that the one judges his guide to be infallible, the other his
way to be manifest. To this I answer, that here are two judges, 1. a
Catholic, and his judgment is, that his guide is infallible, or rather
speaking in his guides language, that she has authority to direct him. This is
true, but not all that is true; for he judges of his way too, namely that that
way and rule, by which, and in which, his guide sets and directs him is
manifest. And he judges of this more rationally, then a Protestant can, because
the same that God appointed to be his guide, is both entrusted with this rule,
and an explainer of it likewise to him, having not only words, but sense
delivered to her. 2. A Protestant Judge; and his judgment is, that his way is
manifest: it is true he judges so, but how injudiciously, has been already
shown. But does he not judge of his guide? or has he no guide to judge of?
Yes, that is himself, or his own reason, and that he judges to be all
sufficient, both for authority and prudence. He that in interpreting an Heathen
Orator or Poet, would not trust his own judgment, or adventure his reputation
to the world, without alleging authorities, by which he might justify his
judgment: and much more, he that in a tenure of land would willingly submit his
judgment to the authority of those judges whom the Law has deputed, will
notwithstanding trample upon all authority, upon the traditionary
interpretation of many ages, he will despise Fathers and Counsels, and
adventure eternal happiness or misery upon his own single judgment: and when
all this is done, will call it a judgment of reason and discretion.

7. In the third place, To speak properly, (says he) the Scripture is not a
Judge of Controversies, but only a rule, etc. This I grant to Mr.
Chillingworth, and withal, that he is the first Protestant that I know of,
that has spoken properly in this point. But he adds, and the only rule to
judge them by. But the contrary I think I have already proved. Yet before I
leave this passage, I desire to be informed what controversies are here spoken
of; namely whether concerning points necessary or unnecessary? surely not of
necessary, for how can there be controversies about such points, as according
to his belief are set down in Scripture so plainly, that no reasonable man can
doubt of the sense of them? and if of unnecessary, why will they confess that
they quarrel unnecessarily? It follows, Every man is to judge for himself with
the judgment of discretion: This is true if the sense be, that it is by the
faculty of reason that he embraces and assents to divine revelations: not that
such revelations are to be admitted or refused, according as they are consonant
or repugnant to the principles of discourse of natural reason. It follows: And
to choose either his Religion first, and then his Church, as we say. But what
Church do Protestants choose, since (though in effect there are infinite
Churches among them separating from, and damning one another; Yet) if the
grounds of Protestantisme be true and reasonable, viz. 1. That the belief of
necessary fundamental doctrines is sufficient to make a true Church. 2. Since
all such points are so plainly contained in Scripture, that no reasonable man
can doubt of the sense of them, much less disbelieve them. And 3. Since no
Protestants will deny, but that in all Churches (even the Catholic also)
there are reasonable men; it will follow that they must say, that indeed there
is but one Religion and one Church, and so no choice at all. It follows, Or as
you Catholics, his Church first, and then his Religion. For my part; I know
no Catholic says so, nor any reason that should move Mr. Chillingworth to
put such words in their mouths. For if we speak of one that is yet to choose
Christianity, and is in pain to find a Congregation to join himself to, the
difference between such a Director as Mr. Chillingworth and a Catholic would
be this: Mr. Chillingworth would tell him, Search the Scriptures attested by
universal Tradition, as will appear if you peruse all the Records since
Christ's time; there you will find in it all things necessary to be believed and
practiced, but which, and how many such things there are, we cannot tell you:
besides, they are dispersed up and down in Gospells, Acts, Epistles, and
Revelation; so that it will cost you much trouble to collect all that are of
the substance of the new Covenant in yours and our opinions; but to make short
work, be sure to believe all in gross, and then you shall be sure to believe
all that is necessary, and then choose what Church you will, for there can be no
danger, since all cannot but agree in necessaries, only there is some danger in
the Catholic Church, for she will oblige you to believe other things as well
as Scripture for universal Traditions sake; and besides she will not permit
you to think your own self wiser then the whole world. Or if you have the
curiosity to live in the purest Church of all, then you must study all the
obscure unnecessary passages of Scripture likewise (for such only can be
controverted among reasonable men) and examine what every party has to say for
himself, and then descend from your tribunal of judging, and associate your
self with them that you think the wisest, that is, those that agree with you in
all your opinions, if there be any such, and there stay, till either they or
you change opinions. But as for Catholics, to such a man that was to choose
both Christianity and a Church, they would first tell him, that by his reason
he might most certainly judge that this Religion was taught by Christ and his
Apostles, since (besides Records) the universal agreement of the present age
was, that they received it from an universal Tradition of former ages, (which
is a testimony beyond all others most irrefragable.) 2. They would by the same
way assure him, that this Religion was by the first teachers confirmed with
miracles; and his reason upon examination both of those miracles, and the
sanctity of this Religion in general, would most assuredly conclude, that the
miracles were divine, and by consequence the Religion too, and therefore
necessary to be embraced, since it self said so. 3. They would upon the same
undeniable grounds of universal Tradition assure him, that among others, one
necessary duty of this Religion was, to live in the Communion and under the
authority of such a Church, as Christ had promised should be Catholic for
place, and never to fail until his coming to judgment, which Church was one
body consisting of a subordination of parts, among which by consequence, one
must needs be supreme, and from which to separate, was to be divided from
Christ himself; in this Church therefore he was to fix himself inseparably: And
here is to be an end of his judging and choosing. For 4. being in this Church,
his Reason had no more to do but to submit it self to the belief and practice
of the special doctrines and precepts, which this Church should teach him.
Liberty indeed he might have to search out interpretations of Scripture, yet so
as that he must not contradict any traditionary doctrines. And he might draw
consequences from doctrines, so that he would give leave to the church to judge
whether such consequences were rational and fit to be received, abstaining
from others that would not assent to his consequences. And this is the method
according to which a Catholic would advise such a man to proceed: thus much
liberty of judging he would allow to his reason before he did make choice of a
church; and only so much afterward.

8. To these discourses Mr. Chillingworth adds some proofs out of Scripture to
justify Private Reason's pretention to judge of the sense of Scripture: as
first, those words of S. Paul, 1 These. 1. 5. v. 20, 21. Try all things, hold
fast that which is good. But I answer, here is no mention either of Scripture
or church, much less of interpreting Scripture against the church: the truth
is, there were extant scarce any books of the New Testament when S. Paul wrote
that Epistle. But the words before speak of Prophecyings in the church, which
perhaps S. Paul would have to be tried whether they were consonant to the
doctrine which he had delivered to the church. Now who was to be the Judge of
Prophets he shows in another place, 1 Cor. 14. 32. where he says, The spirits
of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, not to the ignorant people. A
second proof is, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be
of God or no, 1. Joh. 4. 1. To which the former answer will suffice. A third,
Be ye ready to render a reason of the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3. 15^ I
cannot imagine how from this Text this conclusion can be inferred, Ergo it
belongs to all Christians to judge of the sense of Scripture, even against the
authority of the Church. A fourth, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall
into the ditch. All the inference that I could possibly draw from this Text
would be, therefore if men will not believe their teachers, but either will
rush forward themselves, or follow others, that neither have authority nor
ability to teach, they are likely to fall into the Ditch. For surely by blind
are not meant the lawful Pastors of the Church, which on the contrary are in
the Old Testament called Videntes, or Seers, and by S. Paul, eyes: when
speaking of such persons as Mr. Chillingworth here gives the office of judging
to, he says, If the ear shall say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the
body, is it therefore not of the body? If all the body were the eye, where were
the hearing, 1 Cor. 12. 16. Whereby S. Paul shows expressly that the hearers
ought not to usurp the teachers office, expressly contrary to Mr.
Chillingworths Position.

9. I will conclude this discourse of Protestants exalting private reason
against Catholic authority, with those memorable words of S. Augustine (Ep.
56.) Those, says he, who not being in Catholic Unity and Communion, yet
notwithstanding do boastingly usurp the name of Christians, are constrained to
contradict the true Believers, and have the boldness to seduce as it were by
reasons the ignorant and unskilful, although that our Lord is come with this
preservative to ordain faith unto the people. But this they are constrained to
do, as I said, because they perceive well, that without this there is nothing
more vile and base then they are, if their authority be compared with
Catholic authority. They endeavor therefore, as it were, to surmount the
most firmly settled and most stable authority of the most surely founded Church,
by the name and promising of Reason; for this is as it were an uniform and
universal temerity of all Heretics. But the most clement Commander and
General of our Faith has strengthened his Church with this bulwark of
Authority by the most famous Assemblies of Peoples and Nations, and by the
proper Sees Episcopal of the Apostles, and by a few learned and truly
spiritual men has armed it with a plenteous magazine of Reason invincible.

CHAP. XXXIX.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's seventh and eighth grounds.

1. TO the seventh ground, viz. That a certain infallible Faith is not
required, since reason, which is the only agent, is fallible, and the grounds
not evidently certain, such a probability will serve the turn, as can produce
in a mar obedience, etc. For answer hereto, I desire Protestants to consider.
1. Whether at the first planting of Christianity probable grounds of belief had
been sufficient? if not, as most certainly not, how come they to be sufficient
now? If it be replied, that we must either be content with probable grounds, or
none; I answer there is no such necessity; because for all the substantial
points of Christianity we have universal Tradition, and that with all
advantages for assurance imaginable: insomuch, as if all men would call him
mad, that should deny that there was such a man as King William the Conqueror
of England, which is yet attested only or principally by a National Tradition
there, that man would deserve a title worse then the former, that could doubt
of the universal testimony of the Catholic Church all the world over, that
such Traditions have come to them from their ancestors, etc. 2. I desire them
to consider, what course they will take to convert the now Jews, and Turks or
Heathens to Christianity, if they shall once tell them, that they can give them
no better then probable motives of our Religion? For they will doubtless
reply, that they will never quit their own Religion, in which they and their
ancestors have been bred, and of the truth of which they likewise have (at
least in their own opinion) a probable Tradition, for a new one not assured. 3.
To consider the example of the ancient Jews: For if those very persons, who
were eyewitnesses of the miraculous delivery of the Law, and by consequence
were most assured of the divinity of it, yet notwithstanding would not quit
temporal pleasures and allurements for the future rewards therein promised; is
it likely, that the Christians of these times will upon confessedly only
probable grounds and promises, and those not to be expected till after death,
renounce assured and present delights, and embrace assured and present
miseries, mortifications, and abnegations?

2. To the eighth and last ground, viz. That since all Christians agree in
necessary doctrines, which are express, they ought not to deny Communion the
one to the other, for other doctrines contained obscurely in Scripture; and
that that is the only effectual means of reducing and preserving unity among
Christians. I answer, that it is apparently contrary to experience what is here
said; For neither do all Christians agree in all necessary doctrines: nor in
all which themselves esteem necessary: neither will they allow Communion to men
differing in points by their own Confession nor esteemed so much as
substantial. Yea let England witness, if our Presbyterian Calvinists do not
think many thousand Hecatombs of Christian blood, a fit sacrifice to prepare a
tyrannical introduction of a few circumstantiall novelties: Therefore to say
men ought, and it were well if they would do otherwise; and in the mean time
destroy all Ecclesiastical authority to constrain them to what they ought to
do, is to destroy all Christian Communion, indeed all manner of policy and
society: For upon the same grounds we may as reasonably contend for an
universal Anarchy, since all men ought by the law of reason and nature to live
in justice, temperance, and peace; and therefore let laws be annulled, and
Judges deposed. But God (whose imprudence is wiser then the wisdom of men)
seeing our figmentum, our natural perverseness, has appointed Civil
Governors to overawe Delinquents with the whip, and with the sword; and
Ecclesiastical Magistrates likewise, into whose hands he has likewise put a
spiritual scourge and sword too, to correct or cut off putrified or mortified
members: the whole foundation of which Policy and order would be undermined by
such an allowance given to all sorts of Christians to become judges and
interpreters for themselves in matters of Religion, upon a groundless and
never-yet-accomplished hope, that they will all agree to use this power with
meekness and charity.

3. Besides, let all the world judge of the extreme partiality of English
Protestants, they say that no man ought to refuse Communion for differences in
points in themselves not necessary or fundamental; and they acknowledge that
Catholics agree with them in all points fundamental; and yet they not only
refuse to communicate with them, but call their Communion damnable and
Idololatricall: Yea moreover seek to justify the execution of the most bloody
laws against Catholic Priests performing their duties, that ever any
Christian Nation heard of.

4. Mr. Chillingworth indeed maintains this their partiality of refusing
Communion with Catholics upon this ground, because no man can be allowed by
the Council of Trent to ente^ into Catholic Communion that believes not all
doctrines of faith therein defined to be of universal Tradition, many of which
they disbelieving ought not, or if they would, cannot be received into
Communion. Hereto I answer. 1. That the Bull of Pius the fourth requires
subscription to the Council only from Priests, etc. 2. Can any ancient Church
be named that has not always done the same? 3. Do not the Lutherans,
Calvinists, yea the Church of England, both before and since the writing of his
book the same? 4. Does not the omission of requiring an uniform profession of
Faith, evidently destroy all Ecclesiastical authority, and leave every one in
a liberty (hitherto unheard of in Gods Church) of thinking, and believing, and
judging, and saying, and doing what he himself pleases? 5. The unappealable
authority of a General Council being once destroyed, would not Babel it self,
and the seventy languages of it (as some reckon them) be order and unity it
self in comparison with a Christian Church so confused and mangled, wherein not
seventy, but seventy thousand languages might be allowed? For as for this
fantastical Utopian way of Unity here first devised and proposed to the world
by Mr. Chillingworth, let even the most ignorant of his judges give sentence;
whether as long as men have passions, and as long as there is pride in their
hearts, and tentations in the world, it be not utterly impossible to be
compassed? and if upon an impossible supposition it were effected, whether such
a kind of unity would deserve the name of unity, and not rather of an
universal stupidity and Lethargy?

CHAP. XL.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's objection, concerning difference among
Catholics, about the Judge of Controversies.

1. HAving thus far considered Mr. Chillingworth's general grounds concerning
a Judge of Controversies dispersed in several places through his book, I will
proceed to take a view of his principal objections against the Catholic
doctrine concerning the authority of the Church; which objections are of
several natures; for some proceed directly against it, others only against
some consequences from it. I will therefore weigh first his objections grounded
upon the different opinions of Catholics concerning that point. 2. His reasons
directly proving (as he believes, that no church of one denomination can be
infallible) and therefore not the Catholic Church. 3. His proofs that
Catholics in their resolution of Faith are entangled in circles and,
absurdities. 4. His arguments to demonstrate that Catholics can have no
assurance, either of the authority of the church, or the validity of any acts
performed by the Pastors thereof, etc. But before I attempt a discussion of
these particulars, I may in general say of all his objections, that since they
proceed only against the word Infallibility, and that word extended to the
utmost height and latitude that it can possibly bear, Catholics, as such, are
not at all concerned in them, seeing neither is that expression to be found in
any received Council, nor did ever the Church enlarge her authority to so vast
a wideness as Mr. Chillingworth either conceived; or at least, for his
particular advantage against his adversary, thought good to make show, as if he
conceived so.

2. But come we to consider his arguments against Catholics, grounded upon
the different opinions among them in what subject this Infallibility or
authority is to be placed. The most pressing and pertinent passage in his book
concerning this subject is this which follows, viz. What shall we say now if
you be not agreed touching your pretended means of agreement? How can you
pretend to unity either actual or potentiall more then Protestants may? Some
of you say the Pope alone without a Council may determine all controversies,
but others deny it. Some that a General Council without a Pope may do so,
others deny this. Some, both inconjunction are infallible determiners, others
again deny this. Lastly, some among you hold the acceptance of the decrees of
Counsels by the universal Church to be the only way to decide controversies,
which others deny by denying the Church to be infallible. And indeed what way
of ending controversies can this be, when either part may pretend that they are
part of the Church, and they receive not the decree, therefore the whole Church
has not received it? Mr. Chil. c. 3. parag. 6.

3. Hereto I answer. 1. That there is indeed no need at all of an answer, since
the very objection answers it self: for by saying there are variety of opinions
among Catholics, acknowledged for such even while they differ, it follows
that the objector is not obliged to submit to that Judge which any Catholic
refuses. 2. None of these will deny that decision of the Council of Trent,
viz. Ecclesiae est judi^are de vero sensu sacrae Scripturae, (that is,) It
belongs to the Church to judge of the true sense of holy Scripture: And
Protestants will not be urged to submit to any more rigid or higher expression.
3. Yea moreover, this indulgence, I am confident, will be granted them, namely,
That no man will endeavor to oblige them further then to doctrines and
practices determined by one or more Counsels universal, confirmed by the
Pope, and actually received and accepted by all Catholics, that is as much as
to say, to believe that there is indeed an obliging authority in the Catholic
Church, to impose upon her children a belief of all doctrines proposed in her
Oecumenicall Counsels, let this authority be limited and straightened with as
many Proviso's, and the sense of these doctrines enlarged and qualified with as
many mollifying interpretations, as any approved Catholic Doctor has thought
good, that is indeed as any reasonable man remaining so can desire; only upon
condition, that they do not prejudice nor grate upon the pure simple language,
wherein the Church expresses her self, Christians are at liberty what
particular Doctors sense they like to embrace, or whether none at all, but will
content themselves with the naked decisions of the Church as they lie, without
making inferences, or building thereon further conclusions.

CHAP. XLI.
His reasons proving no Church of one denomination to be infallible, answered.

1. IN the second place we will weigh his reasons to prove that no Church of
one denomination is infallible, and by consequence no Church at all. His words
are, after he had said that he was willing upon courtesy to grant that Christ
made a promise (absolute) of indefectibility to his Church, Mr. Chil. c. 2.
parag. 139. etc. 3. per tot. etc.
but be interprets it only in this sense, viz. That true Religion shall never
be so far driven out of the world, but that it shall always have some where or
other some that believe and profess it in all things necessary to salvation,
and that such believers shall never err in fundamentalls, for if they did,
they were not a Church. But he denies utterly that there is any Church fit to
be a guide in fundamentalls, because no Church is fit to be a Guide but only a
Church of some certain denomination, as the Greek, the Roman, the Abyssine,
etc. For, says he, otherwise no man can possibly know which is the true Church
but by a pre-examination of the doctrine controverted, and that were not to be
guided by the Church to the true doctrine, but by the true doctrine to the
Church. Now, says he, that there is not any Church of one denomination
infallible in fundamnntalls is evident: for 1. If it were an infallible guide
in fundamentalls, she would be infallible in all things which she proposes and
requires to be believed. 2. That being a point of so m^^n consequence,
certainly the Scripture would have named that Church. 3. Because Catholics
themselves build the assurance of the churches infallibility only upon motives
very credible, but not certain. Lastly, beeause it is evident, and even to
impudence it self undeniable, that upon this ground of believing all things
taught by the present church as taught by Christ, error was held. For example,
the necessity of giving the Eucharist to Infants, and that in S. Augustines
time, and that by S. Augustine himself; and therefore without controversy this
is no certain ground for truth which may support falsehood as well as truth. The
same may be said of the doctrine of the Chiliasts, which S. Irenaeus and S.
Justin Martyr say was a traditionary doctrine from the Apostles times, etc.

2. To answer this discourse by parcells: And first concerning his exposition
of Christ's promise of indefectibility to his Church, it has been answered in
more then one place already. 2. Where he says, that there is no Church fit to
be a guide in fundamentalls: I desire to know whether those whom Christ has
appointed in his church to be Overseers ((...)) Teachers ((...)) Governors and
Assistants(...) etc.) be not fit to be accounted guides, at least in
Fundamentalls? Again, whether an agreement of all these Governors meeting in
a General Council be not the supremest authority? Thirdly, whether that
authority which is indeed supreme, be not unappealable from, and necessarily to
be submitted to by all particular subordinate persons? To say such persons have
no authority to be Guides, is to contradict express Scripture: And to say that
there can be a subordination of authority without one that is supreme: Or that
that which is indeed supreme, may by particulars (persons, or churches) be
opposed, or so much as appealed from, is to contradict not only what is
assumed, but evident reason, and all order. 3. Where it is said, That no Church
is fit to be a Guide in Fundamentalls, but only a Church of one denomination,
as Greek, Roman, Abyssine, etc. For otherwise no man can possibly know which is
the true Church, but only by a pre-examination of the doctrines, and that were
not to be guided by the Church to the true doctrine, but by the true doctrine
to the Church. I answer, That a Catholic Church there is (as we profess in
the Creed) and that this Catholic Church is visible and easily to be
designed, plainly distinquishable from new Sects and innovating congregations;
and that this body representatively united is the supreme authority on earth,
and that every particular Church or member of this Catholic Church, as such,
is a sufficient guide to those that live in her Communion. As concerning his
phrase, a Church of one denomination; I grant that God has not apparently
obliged himself to confine his Promises to any particular Dioecose, Province,
or Nation, no not perhaps even to Rome it self: Only this may certainly be
affirmed, that the Catholic Church shall by virtue of Christ's promises
continue to the worlds end a visible Church, teaching all substantial
doctrines of Christianity, guided by a lawful succession of Pastors, under one
visible Head, which visible Head has hitherto for above sixteen Centuries been
the Bishop of Rome; and that is a fair presumption that it will be so to
Christ's second coming: for I know nothing but a general earthquake there and
swallowing up of that place that is likely to hinder such a succession, since
it has already abidden all variety of oppositions and tempests, when the whole
power of the Roman and infernal Empire sought to extinguish it, and when all
sorts of Heretics and Schismatiques sought to undermine it. But I shall speak
more of this when I come to the last conclusion, concerning the perpetual
visibility of the Church.

4. In the fourth place, to his first proof, that no Church of one
denomination can be an infallible guide in fundamentalls, because if so, then
she should be infallible in non-fundamentalls also. I answer, that even by Mr.
Chillingworth's own confession it does not follow that if Christ has promised
to preserve his church from all error in fundamentalls, that therefore by
virtue of that promise she should be exempted from all error whatsoever, and
the reason given by Mr. Chillingworth is worth the marking. The Church, says
he, may err, and yet the gates of hell not prevail against her: for seeing
you (Catholics) do and must grant that a particular Church may hold some
error, and yet be still a true member of the Church; Why may not the
universal Church bold the same error, and yet remain the universal Church,
unless every the least error be one of the gates of hell?

5. And indeed many Catholic Writers there are, who, upon the same grounds
with Mr. Chillingworth, extend the promise of the holy Spirits assistance to
the church, not to all inconsiderable circumstantiall doctrines, but
substantial and traditionary only; And for a further proof we may add, that
there are some Fathers of great antiquity and authority, who hold (whether
justly and truly or no, I debate not, but they hold) that there are real
differences between the four Evangelists, in some circumstances of no
considerable moment related by them, and by consequence there must of necessity
in their opinion be an error, such as it is, in some one of them at l^ast: The
which inconsiderable differences, whether real or imaginary, there being an
exact demonstrable agreement amongst them all in points of Doctrine, do rather
in S. Chrysostomes judgment ( in Mat. Hom. 1) establish then invalidate, or
any way prejudice the divine infallibility of their writings; since thereby it
is apparent (says he) that they did not compose them by consent and
conspiracy; for then they would have been scrupulously punctual in all, even
the smallest circumstances, but in the ingenuous simplicity and sincerity of
their hearts. In like manner S. Hierome tells us, that in his time some learned
Catholics were of opinion, that the Apostles and Evangelists in the New
Testament quoted some passages of the old Testament, and the Septuagint merely
out of their memory, not looking into the books themselves, and that by that
means their memory failing, their quotations were not exactly true, yet
notwithstanding those Fathers were far from questioning the authority or
infallibility of any one of the Evangelists, as concerning any substantial
doctrine contained in any of their Gospells, etc. So likewise in the Latin
Translation of the Bible, there are not only differences of senses from
Originalls, Hebrew, or Greek now extant, not only great and uncertain variety
of reading in the ancient Latin Copies, but likewise, as the Protestants brag,
very great diversity between the Impressions published by the Authority of Pope
Sixtus Quintus and Clemens Octavus, since the Council of Trent (wherein
notwithstanding they are mistaken, for though Sixtus Quintus had designed an
Impression, and prepared a Bull for the authorizing of it, yet God took him
away before he effected his intent, thereby as it were, signifying that it was
his pleasure to take away from Heretics all seeming advantages against his
Church. But though this had been as the Protestants imagine, surely a more
corrected reimpression does not imply that the Church wanted the true
Scripture, since none of such differences are of such considerable moment, as
to cause any uncertainty in points of Doctrine. For I conceive it was never
heard that any error was grounded merely upon a various reading of any Text of
Scripture.) But to proceed, certain it is that there were much greater
differences between the ancient Italica and other Latin Translations of the
ancient Church and this of S. Hierome; as likewise yet greater between the
Septuagint and the Hebrew; and yet neither do the Apostles refuse to quote some
passages out of the Septuagint, wherein the Translation is manifestly faulty,
however in a matter inconsiderable: neither will any Catholic affirm that the
promise of the holy Spirits assistance did fail the ancient Church, although it
only made use of a Translation of the Scripture very imperfect, if compared
with S. Hieromes; no not though upon such differences of reading it were
possible to ground doctrines which might be circumstantially erroneous: It is
true, such doctrines would be of no considerable moment; but however they might
be erroneous, yet without any prejudice to Christ's promises to his Church. So
that the Church, even when she does upon supposition err, yet she does not
even then lead any man out of the way to heaven, or within the danger of hell
gates; seeing the promises of Christ are infallible that his Spirit shall
conduct, or rather preserve his Church in the belief and profession of all
truths, at least necessary: and as for points supernumerary or unnecessary,
neither unwilfull ignorance, nor unavoidable mistake shall be imputed as
sinful to any man.

6. To the second proof, viz. That if the promise of infallibility had been
made to any Church of one denomination, certainly the Scripture would have
named that Church, and have directed all Christians to have recourse unto her,
it being a point of so main importance. I answer, 1. The inference is not at
all concluding, as I showed before in the first conclusion. 2. The Scripture
has expressly mentioned such promises made to the Church, and if we will
follow either reason or Catholic Tradition interpreting Scripture, we must at
least apply those promises to the whole body and succession of the Catholic
Church united under one Head; since no particular man or Church, considered
only as a distinct member of the whole can pretend to these promises as
peculiarly applicable to themselves. Now this whole body was as apparent and
distinguishable from particular sects in the times of S. Augustine and S.
Gregory, as if it had been a Church of one denomination, since they framed all
their arguments and discourses from the apparent visibility of it: and surely
to any one that would not shut his eyes, would have appeared as clear and
demonstrable in Luthers time also.

7. To the third proof of Mr. Chillingworth, viz. That Catholics build their
assurance of the infallibility of the Church only upon fallible and uncertain
grounds and marks. I answer, that I have made the contrary appear in several
places before, demonstrating that it is grounded upon the most firm unshaken
foundation that reason can have, viz. Universal Tradition, by which it is more
effectually proved then any particular book of Scripture has been.

8. To his last proof against the Churches infallibility from his two examples,
wherein the Church is said to have erred universally in points pretended to be
of Tradition, as namely, about the giving the blessed Sacrament to Infants,
mentioned by S. Augustine; and the doctrine of the Millenaries; by S. Justin
Martyr and S. Irenaeus. For the first example, I refer my self to the
satisfactory answer given by Cardinal Perron to the same objection made by
King James. Perr. repl. l. 2. obs. 3. c. 11. 2. Concerning the other example of
the doctrine of the Millenaries, etc. I answer, that S. Justin Martyr (dial.
cum Trypho.) says not that it was a Catholic Tradition, nor received by the
whole Church, but only of himself, and many other Christians; but withal, that
there were many also who were of a pure and pious Christian belief which did
not acknowledge it. And when all that could be alleged to prove that doctrine
to have been an Apostolic Tradition, was said, the proof ended upon the
report of Papias, a very credulous man, one that loved to tell stories, many of
which could not find belief in the Church, a man meanly learned, and by
consequence one that might very probably mistake what he says S. John told him
concerning that point.

CHAP. XLII.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's objection of circles and absurdities to the
resolution of Faith of Catholics.

1. A Third rank of arguments with which Mr. Chillingworth combats the
infallibility of the Church, is grounded upon the absurdities, Meanders and
circles, which he says most unavoidably follow the resolution of the faith of
Catholics. Let us hear the sum of his allegations in his own words, (cap. 2.
118. 119.) For Gods sake (Sir) tell me plainly, in those Texts of Scripture
which you allege for the infallibility of your Church, do not you allow what
sense you think true, and disallow the contrary? and do you not this by the
direction of your private reason? if you do, why do you condemn it in others?
If you do not, I pray what direction do you follow? Or whether you follow none
at all? If none at all, this is like drawing Lots, or throwing dice for the
choice of a Religion: If any other, I beseech you tell me what it is. Perhaps
you will say, the churches authority; and that will be to dance finely in a
round thus; To believe the Churches infallible authority, because the
Scriptures avouch it; and to believe that Scriptures say and mean so, because
they are so expounded by the Church. Is not this for a Father to beget his son,
and the son to beget his Father? For a foundation etc. The Church you say is
infallible; I am very doubtful of it. How shall I know it? The Scripture you
say affirms it, as in the 59. of Esaias, My Spirit that is in thee, etc. Well I
confess I find there these words, but I am still doubtful whether they be
spoken of the Church of Christ: and if they be, whether they mean as you
pretend. You say, the Church says so, which is infallible. Yea but that is the
question, and therefore not to be begged, but proved: neither is it so evident
as to need no proof; otherwise why brought you this Text to prove it? Nor is it
of such a strange quality above all other Propositions, as to be able to prove
it self. What then remains, etc. But Universal Tradition (you say, and so do I
too) is of it self credible, and that has in all ages taught the churches
infallibility with full consent. But that it has, I hope you would not have me
take upon your word; for that were to build my self upon the Church, and the
Church upon you. Let then the Tradition appear; for a secret Tradition is
somewhat like a silent Thunder. You will perhaps produce etc.

2. For answer hereto: 1. If Mr. Chillingworth's adversary had grounded the
doctrine of the Churches authority merely and only upon Texts of Scripture
capable of contrary senses, there might have been just ground for Mr.
Chillingworth to have pleased himself, as he often does, in insulting thus on
him, and intangling him thus in his circles: But Mr. Chillingworth himself
absolves him toward the latter end of the former passage, where he says; But
universal Tradition (you say, and so do I too) is of it self credible, and
that has in all ages taught the Churches infallibility, etc. Whereby he shows
clearly that his adversary, though he serves himself, (as reasonably he may and
ought) of some Texts of Scripture to fortify the Traditionary doctrine of the
Churches authority, yet makes not those Texts understood in his own sense his
only foundation, but universal Tradition, which is the proper foundation even
of the credibility of Scripture it self; and therefore all Mr. Chillingworth's
inferences and retortions do not, even in his own opinion, in any degree wound,
nor so much as incommodate his adversary.

3. Secondly I answer, that whatsoever arguments have been or can be made by
Protestants against the manner of Resolution of Catholic Faith, do not touch
the Church at all; since she has not intermedled in that Scholasticall nicety
of the Resolution of Faith: If particular men to exercise their wits, and to
boast their subtilty, do busy themselves in this last inquisitive age about
such curiosities, undebated and unheard of among the ancient Doctors of the
church, what is that to the church her self, or her Traditionary doctrines,
which were proposed and believed before that new language of the schools was
invented?

4. But thirdly to demonstrate that Protestants do vainly flatter themselves in
supposed advantages against Catholics about this point of Resolution of
Faith, I will endeavor as briefly and as perspiouously as I can to set down
the state of that controversy, which when I have done, I believe that without
any further trouble, it will justify it self not to be obnoxious to those
circles and absurdities which Protestants charge upon it.

5. Now for a preparation thereto, I will lay down these grounds, viz. 1. That
that is the thing into which we say Faith is last resolved, which is the prime
motive or authority for whose sake we believe. 2. In all kinds of belief the
prime authority which deserves Faith must have two qualities, viz. Knowledge
and veracity. 3. In divine Faith the prime authority is always the prime
Verity, or God. 4. In divine Revelations we are to distinguish the faith or
assent which we give to the truth revealed from the knowledge or assent to the
Revelation, or act of revealing. 5. In immediate divine Revelations we believe
the truth it self for the authority of the revealer or relator himself, which
is God: and we assent to the revelation, having a certain knowledge thereof,
either by the help of our senses external and internal, or without them
immediately by our understanding. 6. But if divine revelations be conveyed to
us by a second hand, that is, by the report of others, yet then faith is not
resolved into the conveying authority, but into the prime. 7. To make faith by
virtue of the prime authority certain or firm, I must have assurance of the
certitude of this conveying hand, that is, not only that this conveying hand
did receive those revealed truths, but the true sense of them likewise, and
withal was not subject to error in the propagating of them.

6. Having laid these grounds, we will make application of them to the present
purpose in a few examples. The first shall be of a revelation made by God
immediately either by express language, or dreams, or visions, or the Oracle
of Urim, etc. (for all these are of the same nature, as much as concerns
certainty) as when God revealed to the Prophet Isaiah the mystery of the
Conception of the Messiah of a pure Virgin: In this case the Prophet (it is to
be supposed) was assured by a certain knowledge, that this revelation was
real, and not imaginary: so that he believed the truth revealed with a most
firm faith for the authority of God the prime verity, whom he knew to be the
revealer; for if he had not assuredly known this, he could not have adhered
firmly to the mystery; though in it self never so true and infallible. A
second example shall be of an immediate revelation also, but yet somewhat of a
different nature from the former, viz. Of our Savior teaching the Jews that
he was the Messiah, the eternal Son of God, and confirming this truth by
divine Miracles. In all outward appearance he seemed to be but a man, and
therefore what he taught could not be the object of divine Faith, neither could
his hearers have assurance of his authority, unless they were assured of the
truth of his miracles. A third example shall be of the same revealed truth,
viz. That Christ was the Messiah, etc. but proposed to persons living in the
second or third ages after that time, by those, who either were themselves
eyewitnesses, or received it from those that were. In this case the persons,
living in the second or third age, if they had not certitude that those that
told them this did not lie, could not with a faith rationally firm and
certain, assent to those truths. But certain they might be, and most
undoubtedly were: and the grounds of this certainty were, as I have largely
showed before, a certain knowledge both that they all heard these and all other
substantial truths of Christianity from their Ancestors, as a Tradition
Universal (whether written or no, it matters not) and that it was as
impossible, that all their ancestors all the world over should conspire to
seduce them with a lie, as that their own eyes and ears should deceive them In
all these examples there is the same resolution of Faith; for both the
immediate witnesses of these revelations and their successors do resolve their
faith in these supernatural truths finally and only into the authority of the
prime verity; For if any of them should be asked, Why do you believe that
Christ is the eternal Son of God? They would all answer, because God has so
revealed, neither could they proceed any further: But if they were asked, how
are you certain that there was such a divine revelation? the immediate
witnesses would say, We saw and heard Christ himself publishing these truths,
and with a world of stupendous miracles confirming them: And their successors
would say, we receive the same truth by an Universal Tradition, not only in it
self, and of it self credible, and in a high degree certain, but such an one as
has more advantages to demonstrate its certainty, then any other that ever
was. Now what has been spoken of the second and third ages, may upon the same
grounds be verified of the fourth, fifth, and all following to the worlds end.
And likewise what has been exemplified in one or two supernatural truths
revealed, may be extended to all the substantial points of Christianity, all
which, as I before demonstrated, arrive unto us by the same conveying hand of
Universal Tradition by several ways, as writing, public profession and
practice propagated.

7. Now among these truths or doctrines coming by Universal Tradition, (and
for that reason believed most assuredly by all Catholic Christians, and by
consequence most certain and indubitable) one principal one is the authority
of the present Church, considered not as a relator only, but as authorized by
Christ to teach this and all other doctrines, so as to oblige all men to belief
and obedience: Which special doctrine, though it were only testified in
Scripture (as it is evidently enough) were sufficient against those that
acknowledge only Scripture for their rule: yet we are certain of the truth of
this doctrine by the former Rule, which can neither fail us, neither can we be
mistaken in it, viz. Because it is universally believed in the present church,
as a doctrine Traditionary; and moreover it is attested by all ancient Records
of the Fathers of the church, nemine explicit contradicente, and it has been
practiced by Counsels in all ages, not one Catholic renouncing his
obedience; In so much as to my understanding there is not one Christian
doctrine delivered with so full an assurance, nor in the sense and meaning
whereof it is less possible for a man to be mistaken. Now by virtue of this
special truth of the churches authority Universal Tradition (which of it self
is most credible and certain) being believed and attested by the present
church, becomes most necessary to be believed by us, the Church supplying the
place not only of a witness, but of an Ambassador likewise instructed and
employed by Christ himself (as S. Augustine most effectually maintains) so that
in believing and obeying her, we believe and obey Christ himself, according to
Christ's own expression, He that hears you hears me, and, If any one hears
not the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican. And therefore
they that believe Christian doctrines only, because they think they find them
in the Scripture, and believe the Scripture only, because their reason or fancy
(which they miscall the testimony of Gods Spirit) tells them that it is the
Word of God, though the doctrines themselves believed by them be true, yet it
is a hazard, as to them whether they be so or no, or however whether that be
the sense of them or no, it being all one, as if a man by some casualty had
found a transcribed copy of some part of an Ambassadors Pattent or
instructions: Whereas Catholics receive the commands of their heavenly King
and Master from his Ambassadors own hands, which not only will not conceal
any thing necessary or requisite from them, but likewise will be able upon
occasion to clear all manner of difficulties that may arise about the sense of
the said instructions or Patent, having received glorious promises of
continual residence among us, and of divine assistance to preserve him from
any, at least dangerous error.

8. These things thus supposed, Mr. Chillingworth's pretended circles and
absurdities in the Resolution of Catholic Faith do clearly and evidently
vanish: For a Catholic does not only or chiefly believe the Churches
authority, because to his priva^e understanding and reason the Scripture seems
to say so: but because he knows that the present Catholic Church teaches so,
both by profession and practice; and that she teaches this as a Catholic
Tradition, believed and practiced in all ages; then which it is impossible
there should be any testimony more assured and infallible; so that if a man can
be sure of any thing done before his own times (as all reasonable men do agree
that one may) he cannot avoid being most sure of this, if his passion or
interests do not hinder him from searching into the grounds of it. I need not
therefore particularly give an answer to Mr. Chillingworth's discourse before
produced, since it wholly proceeds upon a mistake of his adversaries, and other
Catholics grounds; and since himself in the close of it seems to confess,
by objecting to himself Universal Tradition, that if this doctrine of the
Churches authority could be made appear to be grounded upon Catholic
Tradition, it would be as much credible, as if the Scripture had expressly
testified it (since in his opinion the Scripture it self, and nothing besides,
enjoyes its authority, because it is delivered by Universal Tradition) and by
consequence would not be liable to any circles or absurdities. So that truly I
wonder why (seeing Mr. Chillingworth could not be ignorant that Catholics do
generally pretend that this doctrine comes from Tradition, besides the proofs
of it out of Scripture) he should notwithstanding dispute against it, as if
there were no other ground for it, but two or three questionable passages of
Script^re.

CHAP. XLIII.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's allegations of pretended uncertainties and
casualties in the grounds of the faith and salvation of Catholics.

1. THere is in Mr. Chillingworth's book another rank of objections, which
though they do not directly combat the churches (infallibility, or) authority,
yet they had great effect upon me, because they seemed to infer that the faith
and salvation likewise of Catholics depended upon extreme uncertainties and
casualties, and by consequence that a Catholic could not give any assurance
that his faith was safely grounded. For thus he argues (c. 2. parag. 63. ad.
68.) The salvation of many millions of Papists (as they suppose and teath)
depends upon their having the Sacrament of Penance duly administered to them:
This again upon the Ministers being a true Priest, which is a thing that
depends upon many uncertain and very contingent supposalls, As 1. That he was
baptized with due matter. 2. With due form. 3. With due intention. 4. That the
Bishop which ordained him Priest, ordained him likewise with due form,
intention, etc. 5. That that Bishop himself was a person fitly qualified to
give orders, that is, was no Simoniake, etc. 6. That all that Bishops
Progenitors were fitly qualified: and so till he arrive to the fountain of
Priesthood. Now he that shall put together, and maturely consider all the
possible ways of lapsing and nullifying a Priesthood in the Church of Rome, I
believe, says he, will be very inclinable to believe, that in an hundred
seeming Priests, there is not one true one. But suppose this inconvenience
assoyled, yet still the difficulty will remain whether he will pronounce the
absolving words with intent to absolve you; for perhaps he may be a secret Jew,
Moor, or Antitrinitarian; which if he be, then his intention, which is
necessary to the validity of a Sacrament, will be wanting, etc.

2. Hereto I answer. 1 That such kind of pretended uncertainties or nullities
in particulars, do not prejudice the authority and stability of the church in
general, but that if it be true, which has always been believed in the
church, viz. That Christ has promised to continue till the worlds end a church
governed by lawful Pastors, and preserved in all truth, he will engage his
omnipotency to make good his fidelity, and by consequence he will take care to
prevent or remedy all obstacles that can be imagined to be otherwise able to
evacuate such his promises: and I suppose two such Attributes of Christ are a
foundation strong enough to build a faith not obnoxious to such a world of
casualties, as Mr. Chillingworth suspects. 2. That Mr. Chillingworth's whole
discourse proceeds upon a mistake of the established doctrine of the Catholic
Church, which has not declared all those things to be nullities, nor any of
them in the sense that he alleges. It is true in the Canon law, and among
C^suists there are mentioned many nullities of Orders and other Sacraments, as
Simony, or Heresy, or Schism are said to nullify the Ordination of a Bishop
or Priest: But how to nullify it, by taking away the Character wholly? No. But
the Church to show her detestation of those sins suspends the authority of
exercising those Offices from any one that is guilty of those sins; and
likewise from those that are ordained by such Simonicall or Heretical Bishops,
till they have given satisfaction to the Church: And therefore in that moderate
judgment of Pope Melchiades, (so much commended by S. Augustine Ep. 162.) when
he decreed, that if the Donatists would return to the Catholic Communion,
their Bishops, if the more ancient in any City, should be acknowledged the
lawful Bishops of such a City, or if the younger should succeed upon the first
vacancy, there was no mention made of a reordination of such Heretical or
Schismatic Bishops, or of any Priests made by them. 3. It is not true, that
the salvation of Catholics does absolutely depend upon the Sacrament of
Penance lawfully administered: For though it be necessary to the being of the
Church in general, that that and all other Sacraments be lawfully administered,
and by consequence we may be assured, that Christ will in general prevent all
real wants and obstacles thereto: yet it is not necessary that this should be
affirmed of each Catholic in particular: For to Christians which are adulti,
that is, capable of the exercise of Faith, Hope and Charity, even actual
Baptism lawfully administered is not absolutely necessary, for in such persons
the Votum Baptismi will supply all wants or defects impossible to be avoided;
and much more certainly will the same Votum serve for other Sacraments, as the
Eucharist, Penance, etc. 4. Concerning intention, which the church in the
Council of Florence (in Instr. Arm.) and in the Council of Trent (Sess. 7.
ca. 11.) has indeed defined to be a necessary requisite to denominate a
Sacrament to be lawfully administered in these words of the Council of
Florence; Sacraments are perfected by three things, the Matter, Form and Person
of the Minister conferring the Sacraments, with an intention of doing what the
church does; of which if any one be wanting, the Sacrament is not perfected.
And these of the Council of Trent, If any man shall say, That in Ministers
when they administer the Sacraments there is not required an intention at least
of doing what the church does, let him be Anathema. Mr. Chillingworth might,
and I am confident did know, that the Intention required was such an one as
might be found even in Pagans, Heretics, Jews. etc. administering Baptism,
so they do it, as executing the Office hypocritically intruded into by them in
the due form, and with a right pronunciation of the words of the church,
although in the mean time in the secret of their hearts they did renounce,
deride and detest that Sacrament, and all the efficacy ascribed to it, as
appears by the Decisions of ancient Counsels against the Donatists, and the
Rescripts of Pope Nicholas the first, and Alexander the third. De consecr. d.
4: cap. a quodam.
And hereupon S. Thomas treating of this subject, p. 3. q. 64. a. 8. ad. 2.
delivers his sense in these words, Some answer better, says he, that the
Minister of the Sacrament does operate in the person of the whole Church, whose
Minister he is; and in the words of the church which he pronounctth is
expressed the churches intention, the which suffices to the perfection of a
Sacrament, unless there be an outward expression of the contrary on the part
of the Minister, or receiver of the Sacrament. Upon which grounds I suppose it
was that Salmeron the Jesuit, and Scribonius Marius a learned Franciscan,
highly esteemed by Cardinal Perron, (besides some ancient Schoolmen) do after
this manner with a far greater latitude then generally Controvertists or
Schoolmen do allow, Salm. in Ep. Paul. l. 1. p. 1. disp. 2. scrib. Mar. de
Sacr. disp. 1.
endeavor to express their sense of S. Thomas, and the Decrees of those two
Counsels, viz That in the Minister there may be a twofold intention. 1. Merely
speculative, inwrap'd in the secrets of his heart, and of which no outward sign
does appear, nor indeed no sufficient one can; of this intention the church
judges not. 2. Practical, which relates to the outward act; and is thereby
really accomplished: The former, say these Authors (unless the church shall
define the contrary, as hitherto to their seeming she has not) can neither
profit nor prejudice in conferring Sacraments: If it be an ill, malicious
intention, it may help to damn the person, but it will not hinder the validity
of the Sacrament, nor the efficacy of it. The later practical intention, is
that which is only to be considered here. As a servant that is sent by his
Master to deliver possession of a house, if he really perform the legal
ceremonies, and pronounce the words requisite, whatsoever thoughts of
unwillingnesse, reluctance or contradiction lurk in his breast, the delivery
will be valid. And truly it seems not intelligible, how it can be possible for
a Minister, as a Minister of the Church, not compelled by force, nor drawn by
promises, that knows what he does, and clearly shows that he will do what he
knows, should as the church commands him, with all due formality perform a
Sacrament, and yet at the same time intend or resolve not to do what he does:
He may possibly have in his wicked heart inward wishes that the Sacrament might
want effect, or a misbelief that the Sacrament is nothing valuable, but a mere
superstitious, vain or noxious ceremony. But as for the thoughts by which
performing a Sacrament he would endeavor to intend not to do that which he
intends to do, such thoughts seem to be mere aeriall fancies. Indeed if he show
his contradiction or intention by any outward sign by which it may be judged,
that though he observe all the requisite formalities, yet he intends them
merely in a mockery, as if an Actor upon a Stage should personate the
conferring a Sacrament, and much more if he neglect the due form of words. He
will thereby declare that really, that is not a Sacrament which he performs,
but a mere mockery and malicious scornful Pageantry. Those learned, and as yet
uncensured Authors, therefore (whose opinions I do here relate only
historically) do conceive the meaning of the church in the forementioned
Decisions to be only this, viz. That it is requisite to Sacraments that they be
only this, viz. that they be not administered jestingly, histrionically and
ridiculously, but after such a manner that it may reasonably be judged, that he
who administers them intends to perform his duty and office imposed on him by
the church; that is, to perform and confer a Sacrament, and not to play the
fool: Not that the church ever intended that the Sacraments should be valid or
null, according to the inward fancies of the administrer, or that it should be
in the power of an atheistical or malicious Bishop or Priest to damn all his
Diocese and Parish. And for a further proof of this, it is observeable, that
even at the very time when this Article concerning the necessity of intention
was debated and concluded in the Council of Trent, Catharinus Bishop of Minori
declared openly this sense of that Article against certain disputing Schoolmen,
and during the sitting of the Council, published a book to the same effect, no
man censuring or condemning him; Although indeed his manner of expression was
far more unwary, and more approaching to the sense of the Lutherans and
Calvinists then the forecited Authors, Salmeron, and Scribonius Marius; the
further fitness of which opinion I leave to the judgment of the Catholic
Reader, my intention being only to make a Narration of what I was told or did
read in others.

3. And these are the principal arguments produced by Mr. Chillingworth
against the infallibility (as he loves to call it) of the Church; at least such
of them as had the greatest effect upon me, during my time of Protestancy, to
hinder me from submitting my self to the authority of the Catholic Church,
or indeed to any authority at all, as obliging in conscience; which arguments
(when I came to examine them) appeared to me in general, not to touch the
established doctrine thereof at all. Whether they were of greater force against
his particular adversary, it concerned not me, neither had I commission or
authority to examine.

4. It is not my purpose in this Narration to give particular answers(...)to
all his objections: Only this I profess, that I do neither remember any one
through his whole book, which formerly had any strong influence upon me, nor
(since my becoming a Catholic, after not a perfunctory per-usuall of it) have
I met with any, which to mine own understanding, upon the grounds by me
formerly laid, do not seem to me easily answerable. And I am confident, that
if any Protestant shall apply Mr. Chillingworth's discourses to the established
doctrine and expressions of the Catholic Church, he will acknowledge that,
notwithstanding any thing said by him, this may remain true, That the
Catholic Church has authority to propose points of Faith, and to interpret
Scriptures; and that no particular Churches or Christians may or ought to
contradict or refuse to submit to her determinations and interpretations.
Insomuch, as if Mr. Chillingworth had been so fortunate as to have undertaken
no more then to examine the doctrine of the church, he would scarce have made
use of, and much less would he have relied so confidently upon the strength of
any of those arguments which he has produced against his adversaries
Positions: He must have been forced either to acknowledge the truth of the
churches doctrine, or have put himself to the trouble of inventing other kind
of arguments, then any I could yet meet with, either in his, or any other
Protestants writings.

CHAP. XLIV.
Dangerous consequences of Protestants doctrine against the authority of the
Church.

1. I Will at length put an end to this tedious (but that it is so necessary)
discourse upon this second conclusion concerning the Judge of Controversies,
and authoritative interpreter of Scripture, by showing, among many, some
special enormous and unavoidable consequences of the doctrine of Protestants
concerning this point, who refuse, yea oppose the consent of the present and
ancient Catholic Church, propounding doctrines of Faith, and interpreting
Scripture, and submit to their own particular reason, or private Spirit.

2. The first is an impossibility of Unity, yea though reason were suffered to
proceed simply without mixture of passion and interest, as experience and
reason it self shows, and it has been already proved.

3. The second, an evident contradiction to Universal Antiquity, which will
not afford one example of any Catholic Writer, that either has affirmed,
that in interpreting Scripture every man is to follow the guidance of his own
reason or private Spirit, against the authority of the present church; or that
has himself refused, or taught others to refuse upon any pretense to submit to
the determinations of the present Catholic Church.

4. The third is, that if the universal testimony of the present church,
either by her public profession and practice, or in her decisions in a
General Council do not indispensably oblige all Christians to obedience upon
this pretended exception that no express mention is made in Scripture of such
an unlimited power given to any church of one denomination; then it will
follow, that those churches and Counsels which have assumed to themselves this
authority to exact subscription to any decisions of any doctrines, other then
express quotations of Scripture to be understood by every one, according to
his own fancy, and that has accursed all gainsayers, are guilty of
insupportable uncharitableness, injustice, and tyranny: Upon which grounds all
Protestants are obliged to anathematize the four first General Counsels, as
well as all the rest which follow, yea above all other the Council of Nice,
since therein were anathematized all those that did not subscribe to an
expression of one Article of Faith, which notwithstanding those Fathers
acknowledged to be so far from being contained expressly in Scripture, that
the word(...)(which occasioned so many Tragedies) was not so much as of
Tradition, but only invented by them, as proper to oppose the Heresy of the
Arians, and to express the sense of the Traditionary doctrine of Christ's
eternal Divinity and equality with the Father.

5. The fourth is, that upon Protestants grounds it is impossible they should
rationally call any doctrine Heresy, or any separation Schism, without
condemning themselves: For concerning Heresy, if they, following the ancient
Church, define Heresy to be a relinquishing or opposing the belief of any
doctrine generally professed in the Catholic Church, or defined by a lawful
Couucell, they will include themselves within the lists of Heretics, since if
for several ages before Luther, there were either any Churches Catholic, or
any authority to make a lawful assembly; they have done apparently the same.
But defining, as they do, Heresy to be a contradiction of a Fundamental
Article of the Christian Faith expressly contained in Scripture; and not
naming, but rather explicitly renouncing any visible Judge authorized to
determine, whether such or such an Article be to be accounted to be expressly
contained therein against those who deny it, it is impossible to come to an
issue between parties contradicting one the other.

6. I will give only two instances in two points acknowledged in England: the
first in that great point controverted between the English Protestants and the
Socinians. The English Protestants call the Socinians Heretics, because they
deny the eternal Divinity of the second Person in the blessed Trinity, because
this is, say they, a fundamental Article of Christian Faith, and expressly
contained in Scripture: But this the Socinians confidently deny, yea they
profess that the contrary rather is expressly contained in Scripture; for,
say they, Neither the word Trinity, nor Personality, nor Consubstantiality,
etc. are to be found in Scripture, neither can any Texts be produced, which
witness in formal words, that the Son is equal to the Father, in respect of
the Godhead, yea many Texts expressly say, that he is inferior. But now what
Texts are there to be found so evidently expressing the eternal Divinity of
the Son of God, as there are for appropriating the Divine Nature to the Father
only? ( Viz.) these two Texts, This is eternal life to know thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And, To us there is but one
God, even the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ.

7. The truth is, if Tradition and the authority of the Church be not admitted
to interpret Scripture, the Socinians, and other Antitrinitarians cannot by
Protestants be condemned as Heretics upon the pretense of denying express
Scripture, since if reason alone be judge, those Texts cannot be called
express, which may be confronted with others seemingly contradicting, or which
are capable of a sense, it may be less probable, yet so as that without much
racking, the words will be able to bear: a case which to have happened in this
controversy, every reasonable man will confess, that shall cast his eyes upon
the several positive Texts alleged by Crellius in his book De uno vere Deo. I
may add further, that if the universal Tradition of the present Church in the
time of the Council of Nice had not prevailed for the stating of that great
controversy against the Arians, so many objections those Heretics heaped
together, not only out of Scripture, but likewise out of the writings of such
Fathers as preceded that Council, that perhaps they might have endangered the
cause, as will appear to any one that shall cast his eyes upon a world of
passages quoted by Heretics, out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, S.
Justin Martyr, Origin, Lactantius, etc.

8. The Second instance is the Heresy of Rebaptization renewed by the
Anabaptists of these times, and in conformity to Antiquity condemned by English
Protestants: it is more evident then the Sun, that express Scripture alone
being the Rule, and private reason or Spirit the Judge, the Anabaptists cannot
upon Protestants grounds be accused either to err in a point fundamental, or
however in a point fundamental contained expressly in Scripture.

9. In the last place, that upon Protestants grounds no separation among them
can justly be called Schism (in the notion of Antiquity) appears yet more
evidently: For among those ^^ of S^^^^ now in England, which abhor and renounce
the Communion of one another, 1. There is not any one of them that has the
assurance to style themselves the Catholic Church with exclusion of all
others not in actual Communion with them: Now Schism is only a separation
from the external Communion of the Catholic Church, at least, if universal
antiquity may be allowed to be the judge. 2. There is not any one of them which
dares apply to themselves in particular those words of Christ, Tell the Church,
and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a
Publican, or those Promises of his, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And, I will send the Comforter
which shall lead you into all truth. And, Behold I am with you to the end of
the world. Now there is no Schism, but from such a church to which those
elogies and promises belong. 3. All the means and remedies left them to deal
with those they call Schismatiques or Heretics are, not to excommunicate them
in a General Council, as the Catholic Church has continually upon occasion
done; for what a ridiculo^s affembly must that be, to which they should presume
to attribute the name of a General Council? And how more ridiculously would
an Anathema sound, being fulminated by a Synod of Charenton, or Gappe, or D^rt,
etc. But their proper course in such cases, is to persecute, imprison, or
perhaps burn one another, as Calvin did Servetus; and by this means the weaker
and sufferer would be the only Heretic and Schismatique. But of Schism, more
in the following Conclusion.

CHAP. XLV.
The third Conclusion.

The point of Shisme slightly considered by Protestants: which notwithstanding
ought above all others to be chiefly considered.

THE 3d. CONCLUSION, viz.

That there is one only Church of Christ: and that all Heretics who believe
not all Christian doctrines taught in her, and all Schismatiques, who, breaking
the bond of Charity, divide themselves from her visible and external
Communion, are separated from Christ himself.

1. IN my discourse upon this Conclusion I need not separate Heresy from
Schism, since I do not know any Sect in these times precisely Schismatic,
that is, without any mixture of Heresy, (as the Donatists were in the
beginning, who agreed in all doctrines with Catholics, but separated upon a
quarrel grounded upon a matter of fact. Therefore hereafter when I speak of
Schism, and enquire upon what party it is to be charged, it is to be supposed
that Heresy must accompany it, seeing the foundation of all the present
separations among Christians is their disagreeing in points of faith and
doctrine.

2. Now though this divine truth, viz. That the true Church of Christ is only
one, and by consequence, that an injustifiable separation from it, is in a high
degree damnable, be acknowledged by all Christians that I know, since it is an
express article of our Creed, Credo unam sanctam and Catholicam Ecclesiam,
that is, I believe one holy Catholic Church; and therefore there may seem to
be no necessity to put ones self to the trouble of proving it: Notwithstanding
I will not refuse that trouble to make a collection of quotations, both out of
Scripture and Fathers; to the end, both to get a distinct notion of what was
anciently understood by this word, Schism: and to set forth (according to
their conceptions) the abominablenesse and extreme sinfulness of that sin; and
this the rather, because a sad meditation upon such passages enforced me to
consider in what a state I had formerly lived, and likewise made me wonder,
that heretofore above all other points I had not bent my thoughts and studies
to enquire and determine (since it is apparent that there is a Schism in the
church) upon which party the guilt of so horrible and exterminating a sin did
lie.

3. But the truth is, my wonder decreased, when I considered that hitherto I
had not met with any Protestant Writers that have thoroughly considered this
point of Schism, which yet above all others ought to have been most exactly
ventilated and examined, as S. Augustine (lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil.) says, in
the case of Schism against the Donatists; The whole question therefore is,
whether you do not ill, you I say, to whom the whole world objects the
sacrilege of so geeat a Schism? the exact examination of which question
whilst you neglect; all that you say is superfluous: and whereas you live like
thieves, you boast that you dye as Martyrs. And again, (Ep. 164. ad Emer. Don.)
Wherefore in the prime place this is to be enquired, for what reason you made a
Schism? To the same effect said Optatus before him concerning the same
Donatists, (lib. 1.) The business in hand is concerning separation: In Africa,
as in all other Provinces likewise, there was but one church before it was
divided by those who ordained Majorinus in the Chair, upon which by succession
thou art set. The matter therefore to be considered is, which of the two
parties have remained in the root with the whole world? which of them went out?
which of them is set upon a new Chair (Episcopal) which heretofore was not in
being? which of them has raised an Altar against a (former) Altar? which of
them made an Ordination during the life time of him who was before ordanied?
Lastly which of them is obnoxious to the sentence of S. John the Apostle, who
foretold that many Antichrists would go out of the Church?

4. The almost only considerable Author among Protestants, who seems to have
written largely and purposely upon this argument of Schism, was that
unfortunate Apostate M. Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, who, as
appears by the Index of the heads of his books and Sections, allowed an entire
book to this subject: but by what means it came to pass, whether through
guilt, or what other mystery I know not, but in the publication of the three
volumes of his works, that book which he intended, or had written de Schismate
appears not, there is an hiatus in that place not yet supplied. But to proceed
to the quotations.

CHAP. XLVI.
Quotations out of Scripture and Fathers to show the sinfulness and danger of
Schism.

1. THe passages of Scripture which I especially took notice of, concerning the
sinfulness and extreme danger of Schism were these, viz. those words of our
Savior, ( Mat. 18. 7. Woe unto the world because of scandalls, for it must
needs be that scandalls come; notwithstanding woe to that man by whom the
scandal comes. Now the Fathers generally by scandalls understand Heresies and
Schisms. Which interpretation S. Paul seems to justify, joining together
Schisms and scandalls as Synonyma, or words of the same importance, when he
says, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren, observe those who make Schisms and
scandalls, contrary to the doctrine which you have been taught, and avoid them.
For^ such men serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by kind
speeches and benedictions seduce the hearts of the simple. Again, says our
Savior, Hereby shall men know that ye are my Disciples; if ye love one
another. Add to this his last legacy, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you; As likewise that saying of his, which S. Hierome quotes from
Tradition, Nunquam l^ti sitis, nisi cum fratres vestros in charitate videritis,
that is, Be yet never joyful but when you see your brethren in charity. To all
which I will subjoyn that passionate exhortation of S. Paul, (Philip. 2 1.) If
there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercy, fulfill ye my joy that ye be
like-minded, unanimous, thinking the same things, doing nothing through
contention or vainglory.

2. The same affection and zeal did the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
church express to Catholic Unity, with incredible efficacy, showing their
detestation against Schisms and Divisions: Witness S. Irenaeus (lib. 4. c.
62.) God will judge those which make Schisms in the Church, ambitious men, who
have not the honor of God before their eyes, but rather embracing their own
interest then the unity of the Church, for small and light causes divide the
great and glorious body of Christ, etc. For in the end they cannot make any
Reformation so important, as the evil of Schism is pernicious. Witness S.
Dionysius of Alexandrina, Eus. Hist. ^ccles. l. 6. c. 45.
writing to Novatian, A man ought rather to endure all things then to consent
to division of the Church of God, since Martyrdom, to which men expose
themselves, to the end to hinder the dismembring of the Church, are no less
glorious, then those which a man suffers for refusing to sacrifice to Idols.
Witness S. Cyprian, (de unit. Eccles.) Do they think that Christ is amongst
them when they are assembled? I speak of those which make assemblies out of the
Church of Christ: No, although they were drawn^ to torments and execution for
the confession of the name of Christ, yet this pollution is not washed away, no
not with their blood: this inexplicable and inexcuseable crime of Schism is
not purged away, even by death it self. That man cannot be a Martyr that is not
in the Church. And again, He shall not have God for his Father, that would not
have the Church for his Mother. Witness S. Pacian (ad Sympr. cp. 2.) Although
that Nova ian has been put to death ( for Christ) yet he has not received a
crown. And why? Because he was separated from the peace of the Church, from
concord, from that Mother, of whom whosoever will be a Martyr, must be a
portion. Witness S. Optatus (lib. 1.) Among other Precepts, the divine
injunction has likewise forbidden these three, Thou shall not kill. Thou shall
not go after strange Gods, and ( in capitibus mandatorum) in the head of the
Commandments, Thou shall not make a Schism. He means I suppose those words in
the preface of the Decalogue, The Lord thy God is One, thou shall have no other
Gods but me. Again (lib. 2.) The unity of the Episcopal Chair is the prime
endowment given to the Church. Witness S. Chrysostom (in Ephesians. hom. 11.) There
is nothing does so sharply provoke the wrath of God, as the division of the
Church; insomuch as though we should have performed all other sorts of good
things, yet we shall incur a punishment no less cruel by dividing the unity
and fullness of the Church, then those have done, who pierced and divided
Christ's own body. Witness the fourth Council of Carthage, (Can 1.) out of
the Catholic Church there is no salvation.

3. Witness S. Augustine (de Symb. ad Catech. l. 4. c. 10.) For this cause the
conclusion of this Sacrament ( he means the creed) is terminated in the Article
concerning the holy Church: and the reason is, because if any man be found
separated from her, he shall be excluded from the number of children; neither
shall he have God for his Father, that would not have the Church for his
Mother: and it will nothing avail him to have rightly believed, or to have done
never so many good works, without this conclusion of the sovereign good. Again,
(in Psa. 21.) Whosoever has charity is assured. But as for charity, no man
transports it out of the Church. Again, (de Bap. con. Don. l. 1. c. 8.) Those
whom the Donatists heal of the wound of I dolatry and infidelity, they
themselves wound more dangerously with the wound of Schism. Again, (sup. gest.
Emar.) Out of the Catholic Church a Heretic may have all things but
salvation. He may have the Sacraments, He may sing Allelujah, He may answer,
Amen. He may keep the Gospel, He may have the Faith and preach it, only
salvation he cannot have. Again, (l. 3. cont. Petil. c. 5.) No man preaching
the name of Christ, and carrying or ministering the Sacrament of Christ is to be
followed against the Unity of Christ. Again, (cont. adv. Le. and Proph. l. 1.
6. 17.) If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a
Publican; which is more grievous then if he was stricken through with a sword,
consumed by flames, exposed to wild beasts. Again (l. de Past. c. 12.) The
Devil says not, let them be Donatists and not Arians, for whether they be here
or there they belong to him that gathers without making a difference: Let him
adore Idols, says the Devil, he is mine: Let him remain in the superstition
of the Jews, he is mine: Let him quit Unity, and pass over to this or that,
or any Heresy, he is mine.

4. Witness likewise S. Fulgentius, (de rem. pec. cap. 22.) Out of this Church
neither the title of Christian secures any man, neither does Baptism confer
salvation, neither does any man offer a sacrifice agreeable to God, neither
does any man receive Remission of sins, neither does any man attain to
eternal life, for there is one only Church, one only Dove, one only
well-beloved, one only Spouse. Again, (de Fid. ad. Pet. D. c. 39.) Hold this
most firmly, and doubt not of it in any wise, that every Heretic and
Schismatique whatsoever baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; if before the end of his life he be not reunited to the Catholic
Church, let him bestow never so many alms, yea though he should shed his blood
for the name of Christ, he cannot obtain salvation. Witness lastly S. Prosper,
He who does not communicate with the Universal Church is a Heretic and
Antichrist. (de prom. and praed. Dei p. 4. c. 5.)

5. Surely no man can justly blame, if a serious consideration of such
testimonies of Scripture, such a conspiracy of all the Saints almost of the
ancient Church agreeing to condemn Schism, as the most heinous inexcuseable
sin that a Christian was capable of committing, not to be redeemed with Faith,
Sacraments, Alms, Miracles, no nor Martyrdom it self, awakened me from the
Lethargy I was in, and from the presumption which I had, viz. that since I my
self had no influence upon the beginnings of the Separation, but on the
contrary approached as near in my belief to the Catholic Church, as Truth
in my opinion would permit me; and lastly, since I judged charitably of the
state of Cutholiques, that therefore the guilt of Schism should never be
imputed to me. Not content therefore to rest upon these imaginations in a
matter, upon which my eternal happiness inseparably depended, if the express
words of Scripture, and unanimous consent of Antiquity were to be believed, I
proceeded to examine the present state of Protestant etc. Churches in
separation from the Roman, by the marks which the ancient Fathers afforded me
to judge by, whether of the two parties were guilty, and to which of them this
so heinous low, viz. 1. They all agreed that Schism was a thing of it self
evident, and whereof the most ignorant understandings might inform themselves:
For this being the foundation of all their disputes of the Catholic Church,
that it is a congregation so visible and illustrious, that it cannot be hidden
from the eyes of any man that does not willingly shut them, it does necessarily
follow, that they who are not in visible communion with that visible church are
apparently Schismatikes.

5. Secondly, and by consequence, that the mark of Schism and Heresy was not
a separation from the true faith simply; but from that faith which is openly
professed by the Church: For otherwise, if they had defined Schism with
respect only to the true Faith, all the evidence of Schism would be utterly
taken away, since it would be always ambiguous and disputable which of the
parties in a Schism held the true doctrine; of which ignorant people could not
be Judges; and the learned would never acknowledge themselves guilty. Besides,
the parties evidently in Schism would be sure, either not at all to
acknowledge, or at least to excuse and extenuate their fault, by saying, that
though they were in some sort divided from the (Catholic) Church, yet this
was not so unpardonable, since they left the Church only in points not
fundamental, for in such they agree with Catholics, and by consequence
remain the same church still in substantialls. This is at this day the plea of
many Protestants, as it was anciently of the Pelagians, according to that of S.
Augustine, (de Pec. Orig. l. 2. c. 22.) Pelagius and Goelestius says he,
desirous cunningly to avoid the odious name of Heresy, affirm that the
question concerning Original finne may be disputed without endangering Faith.
But this assertion of theirs he confuted particularly in his fourteenth Sermon,
De Verbis Apostoli; and in general against both Heretics and Schismatiques
proves, that whatsoever in particular their opinions are, yet since they
profess otherwise then the church does, and requires of them to do, they are
in a damnable estate, because thereby they vertually renounce one fundamental
Article of faith, viz. of the authority and unity of the Catholic Church; and
therefore if they break communion, though but for one doctrine, and that of it
self of no great importance; their orthodoxnesse in all other points will not
avail them wanting truth, and especially renouncing charity and obedience to
the Universal Church. Hereupon the same Father (in Psalm. 54.) says of the
Donatists, We have each of us one Baptism; in this they were with me: We
celebrated the Feasts of the Martyrs, in this they were with me: We frequented
the solemnity of Easter, in this they were with me: But they were not in all
things with me: In Schism they were not with me: In Heresy they were not with
me: In many things they were with me, and in some few things they were not with
me: But in those few things in which they were not with me, those many things
do not profit them in which they were with me. So again the same Father (Ep.
48.) Speaking to the same Donatists, You are with us in Baptism, in the Creed,
in other Sacraments of the Lord: but in the Spirit of unity, in the bond of
peace, and finally in the Catholic Church you are not with us.

6. Thirdly, that the proper (to all eyes visible) and essential mark of
Schism (for what cause soever it matters not) is a wilful separation from the
external Communion of the Catholic Church. So S. Augustine (de unit. c. 4.)
Those who do so dissent from the body of Christ, which is the Church, that
their Communion is not with the whole wheresoever it is spread, but are fouud
in some party separated, it is manifest that they are not in the Catholic
Church. And again (de util. cred. c. 2.) There is one Church, if you cast your
eyes upon the surface of the earth, more abundant in multitude, and likewise as
those who know by experience affirm, more sincere in truth then all others: but
concerning truth that is another dispute. And again (cont. Pet. l. 2. c. 95.)
Division and dissension makes you Heretics, and peace and unity make us
Catholics. And Uincentius Lerinensis ( cap. 9.) O admirable change! the first
Authors of the same opinions are called Catholics; and the Sectators,
Heretics, (namely because they separated for them.) And S. Prosper ( de prom.
and ben. Dei p. 2. l. 5.) He who communicates with the Universal Church is a
Christian and a Catholic: and he who does not communicate with it, is a
Heretic and Antichrist: Hereupon it is that the Fathers understand and
interpret the word C^tholique, not with respect to doctrine or belief, but
Communion external. So S. Augustine (collat. car. d. 3.) We show by the
testimony of our Communion that we have the Catholic Church. And again
(brevic. coll. l. 3.) The Donatists (says he) answered that the word
Catholic (or universal) was not derived from the universality of Nations,
but from the plenitude of Sacraments, that is, from the integrity of doctrine.
And again, (Ep. 48. ad Vinc. Reg.) Thou think that thou have spoken subtly
when thou interpretest the name Catholic not of Universal Communion, but of
observation of all precepts and divine Sacraments, or Mysteries.

7. And to the end to demonstrate to Schismatiques that they could not pretend
to any portion in the Catholic Church, the Fathers ordinarily silenced them
from any claim thereto, by asking them whether they could address
communicatory letters unto, or receive such letters from all Catholic
Bishops, which they not being able to do, were supposed to be sufficiently
convicted. So S. Augustine ( ep. 163.) speaking of Fortunatus the Donatist, I
asked him if he could send communicatory Letters (which we call Formatas)
whither I would name etc. But because the thing was manifestly false, they
quitted that discourse with confusion of language. Hence it was that the
ancient Schismatiques, not being able with any the least pretense to challenge
the title of Catholics, were forced to repair themselves, by laying an
aspersion or diminution on that name, as when Sympronian told S. Pacian, (ep.
1.) That none under the Apostles were called Catholics: and when Gaudentius
the Donatist affirmed that the word Catholic was a humane fiction, which S.
Augustine calls, Verba blasphemia, Blasphemous words. lib. 1. con. Gaudent.

8. Notwithstanding in some cases the Fathers allow, that a man may possibly be
separated from the external communion of the Catholic Church without
imputation of Schism, according to this discourse which I have found quoted
out of S. Augustine. Often times also it happens, says he, that the divine
Providence permits that some good men should be cast out of the Christian
Congregation by some over-turbulent sedition of carnal men, which injury done
unto such men, when they shall bear it patiently, for the peace of the Church,
and shall not attempt any innovations of Schisms or Heresies, they will
instruct men with what true affection, and with how great sincerity and charity
we ought to serve God. The design and resolution therefore of such men is,
either to return when the tempest is calmed, or if that be not permitted them,
either by reason that the tempest yet continues, or out of fear lest by their
return another tempest should be raised more violent then the former, they
preserve a will and affection to serve even those, to the violence and
commotions of whom they have given place, defending to the death (without
making any separated conventicles) and maintaining by their testimony the faith
which they know is preached in the Catholic Church: Such as these the Father
who sees in secret crowns in secret.

9. I remember that Monsienr Grotius, from this speech of S. Augustine, and a
suitable action (I think) of S. Chrysostomes, defends the non-association to
the Catholic Church of himself, and such peaceable Protestants as himself:
But surely in vain, for first this discourse of S. Augustine supposes that such
persons do not hold any doctrines condemned by the Catholic Church. 2. That
whenever leave or opportunity shall be given, they will readily embrace her
Communion. 3. That they do not communicate with any Sects manifestly in
separation from it: None of which suppositions can he applied to Monsieur
Grotius, etc. and therefore such a Communion in voto, or desire cannot in the
judgment of Antiquity avail them; since if it could, no Heretic nor
Schismatique could be culpable; or that in such a sense does not communicate
with the Catholic Church: for there is not any of them but would willingly
communicate with her upon these terms, viz. That she would change the clauses
and conditions of her Communion, and reform her self according to the
patterns of their particular respective Sects.

10. A fourth mark of Heresy and Schism is, when the first Authors of them
can be named, and by consequence can be proved to be in time posteriour to
Catholic Unity: And particularly for doctrines, such were esteemed
Heretical, which could not be maintained to be Apostolical, that is, (not
which the Authors did not pretend to be deducible out of Apostolical
Writings, for all Heretics generally alleged Scripture for all their
blasphemies: but) which they could not prove to have been professed in the
church, and deduced successively from Age to Age since the Apostles times: Thus
S. Athanasius (in Dec. Syn. Nic. cont. Arian.) Behold we have proved the
succession of our doctrine delivered, from hand to hand, from Father to Son:
But as for you (Arians) new-Jewes and children of Caiaphas, what Progenitors
can you show of your speeches? So likewise S. Pacian (Epist. 3.) For my self,
holding my self assured upon the succession of the Church, and contenting my
self with the peace of the ancient Congregation, I have not learned any
studies of discord.

CHAP. XLVIII.
An Application of the former marks of Schisms to the present Controversy; and
a demonstration that they do not suit to the Roman, but only Protestant
Churches.

1. HAving thus informed my self of the mind of Antiquity concerning the
nature and marks of Schism and Heresy, and applying them to the controversy
in hand, between the Roman and Protestant etc. Churches, it appeared as clear
to me as the Sun at noone day, that if the same Fathers and Bishops meeting in
the ancient Counsels to condemn the Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Novatians,
and Donatists etc. had lived in these times, they must of necessity upon the
same grounds have condemned the Lutherans, Calvinists, English-Protestants,
Socinians etc. For it being apparent, that there is really a Schism among the
Western Christians since Luthers Apostasy, in as much as so many Sects do not
only actually separate from the communion of that church, which before that
separation they all called the Catholic Church, but likewise impute
superstition, idolatry, and other crimes unto it, thereby to justify such
their separation, by which means not a Schism only, and that most properly so
called, is happened, but Heresy likewise is to be imputed to one of the
parties divided: That neither of these titles belongs to the Roman Church, and
therefore that both of them are justly and necessarily to be charged upon the
Church of England (and by consequence, much more upon all other Sects of
Protestants, as being much more violent and uncharitable against the Roman
Catholic Church) may to my understanding be demonstrated most evidently after
this manner, viz.

2. First with respect to separation from external communion: In a manifest
Schism (as this is apparently) those who are but a part, who are new
beginners, whose prime authors may be named, who have introduced among
Christians novelties, not heard of in the world, even by their own confession,
for above a thousand years, and have actively separated themselves from the
external communion of the whole, in which they did formerly remain, those and
those only are Schismatiques; and such are Protestants, as is evident. For 1.
The English church is at the best but a particular church, which in the
beginning of the reign of King Henry the VIII. did live in external communion
with the then whole Catholic Church, but afterward in the same Kings days
divided it self from the same external communion, by renouncing obedience to
the Pope, whom before they acknowledged the visible Head of the Catholic
Church. 2. The same English Church in the days of his Son King Edward the VI.
but especially to his Daughter Q. Elizabeth, to the former Schism added an
alteration of several other points of doctrine, confessedly for very many ages
universally embraced by all Catholics, and conspicuous in the public
profession and practice of the church: and in this double division both from
the Faith and external communion of the Catholic Church has the English
Nation continued ever since. Therefore according to the notion of Schism,
which we have from Antiquity, and plain express reason, the
English-Protestant-Church is properly Schismatic and Heretical.

3. On the contrary, the Roman Church (acknowledged by all Englishmen to have
been the Catholic Church; and even since the separation allowed by English
Protestants themselves to be at least a true member of the Catholic Church)
has continued to this day in the same form of external communion that she
had before, has not actually nor actively separated from any church
pre-existent, much less from the whole body; has changed nothing of doctrine
etc. therefore if she was the Catholic Church before, she is so still:
however she cannot in any the least show of reason be called Schismatic.

4. For further proof of this, let us consider the first beginners of
separation, Luther, Zuinglius, or (to apply this discourse to the Church of
England) Tindall. I desire to know whether when Tindall alone, of his own
head, without any authority, either civil or ecclesiastical, yea in open
desiance of both, began to disperse doctrines unheard of among his countrymen,
all Catholics, dividing himself from the external communion of the whole
world, whether, I say, Tindall thus standing alone, as supposed, as yet not to
have gained Proselites, was properly and truly a Schismatique, or no? If he
was, I would fain know by what right he or his followers came to lose that
name, when he had perverted a company, suppose a Parish, or Diocese, or
Province, yea that whole Kingdom, is it become a meritorious thing to gain
Proselites to Schism or Heresy? Is one single person when he is out of
company a child of hell, and being joined with seven other as wicked, or
perhaps more wicked then himself, does he thereby become a child of God? Then
certainly all Pharisaicall Sectaries have good reason to do what our Savior
says of the Pharisees, namely, to travel Sea and Land to make Proselites,
since ill company, it seems, may bring them to heaven, whereas if they had
been alone they could not avoid sinking into helll. But if Tindall so standing
alone in real separation from all other Christians, was no Schismatique; then,
since by confession on all sides the Catholic Church cannot fail, it will
follow, that Tindall in his own single person was the Catholic Church, and
the whole body of Christians divided from him were Schismatiques.

5. If this way of arguing be not demonstratively concluding, both out of the
forementioned grounds of the Fathers and evident reason, yea even palpable
sense, it will be impossible to make a Syll^gisme, or to conclude rationally
from any principles whatsoever; we must alter Dictionaries and all forms of
language, and affirm that there is no means left to understand one another,
though we endeavor to speak never so plainly: For if he be not a Separ^^tist,
who does by his own confession actually separate, and he an Innovator, who does
actually innovate: And if that church which in An. D. 1516. was confessed not
to have been Schismatic, because then all things were peaceable, no Schism
was yet begun, if the same church continuing without any alteration in doctrine
or practice till the year following, that Luther taught and divided against it,
and so ever since be to be called Schismatic, because others would stay no
longer in it, then to change is to be constant, and to be constant, to change;
to run away is to stand still, and to stand still to run away.

6. If Protestants reply, that though in respect of the then present state of
the church, Luther, Tindall, etc. did make alterations, in regard of some
precedent ages before Luther, in which the church had been wholly drowned in
error and superstition, they did indeed innovate; Yet since they sought to
reduce the present distempered church to the form and soundness of the ancient
Apostolical church, they were neither alterers nor innovators, but rather took
away all alterations and innovations. I answer, that if Luthers or Tindalls
judgment alone deserved to be balanced with the whole world, and if there
were any suspicion that Christ had forgot his promises, or were become unable
to perform them, there might be some pretense for such a plea; otherwise such
an excuse does augment their guilt, in as much as they do dishonor Christ,
calumn^ate the one, holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church; charge themselves
with the extremity both of infidelity and pride, or (in the language of S
Augustine) blasphemy and intolerable madness.

CHAP. XLIX.
A continuation of proofs, that Schism and Heresy cannot with the least show
of reason be imputed to the Roman Church; but only and wholly to Protestants,
etc.

1. A Further proof as evident as the former, viz. that the imputation of
complete Schism with Heresy annexed, is only to be charged upon Protestants,
etc. and not with the least show of reason upon the Roman church, and that with
respect of doctrine innovated, is this.

2. It is first confessed that all the doctrines, which the Protestants call
errors, and those in themselves damnable (unless where invincible ignorance
shall perhaps excuse) and therefore obliging all Christian people after having
received a new light by the preaching of Luther, Tindall, etc. to forsake them,
and the communion of all those that persisted in the maintaining of them: I say
it is confessed that all such pretended errors were spread through the whole
Catholic Church in Communion with the Roman in the age before Luther began
his Apostasy, nemine contradiceute. (Now by the way, how this can agree with
that sense which they give to the promises of Christ, that he would preserve
his Church in all truth, so that the gates of hell should not prevail against
it, I confess I cannot comprehend: For if all Heresies be the gates of hell,
as the Fathers say; then much more Heresies in themselves damnable, although
the church had not condemned them, because against essential truths. Besides
they will not deny, but that invincible ignorance may possibly excuse
Pelagianisme, Photinianisme, Arianisme, etc. so that upon their grounds,
notwithstanding the promises of Christ, all Christians for above a thousand
years together might as well have been infected with these Heresies also.

3. It is secondly confessed, that excepting two or three, and those not of the
most considerable opinions, all the rest (now condemned by Protestants, were
publicly and generally embraced and professed for several ages before
Luther: I will add, by all ages and churches till S. Gregory's days
inclusive, that is, for about one thousand years: I might go further, and
justify my assertion clearly and evidently: but for the present let us pitch
upon S. Gregory's time. For warrant of what I have said, besides the testimony
of S. Gregory's writings, Liturgy, Rituall, Missall, etc. and besides the
ancient ecclesiastical history (especially of England) and the Synods
anciently assembled there, I appeal to the confession of the most learned
Protestants, as Humfrey, Fulke, the Centuriators of Magdeburg, etc. whose words
describing the Religion brought into England by S. Gregory, and S. Augustine,
The Benedictin Monk, Hamp. l. Jesuit rat. 5. p. 5. Car. Chron. l. 4. p. 567.
Bal. in Act. R. pont p. 44. Osiend. cent. 6. p. 288. Magd. cent. 6. 748. and
369. Fulk. conf. purg. p. 333.
are these, They brought in, say they, Altars, holy Vestments, Images,
Chalices, Candlesticks, Censers, sacred Vessels, holy Water and sprinkling
with it, Relics and the translations of them, Dedication of Churches, with
the bones and ashes of dead men, Consecrations of Altars, of Chalices, of
Corporalls, of Baptismall Fonts, of Chrysme, of Oil, of Churches by using
sprinkling of holy water, celebration of the Mass, use of the Archiepiscopal
Pall in the solemnizing of the Mass, books of Roman Ritualls, and a burden of
ceremonies, free will, merit, and justification by works, penance,
satisfaction, Purgatory, single life of Priests, public invocation of Saints,
and worship of them, veneration of Images, Exorcismes, Indulgences, Vows,
Monachisme, Transubstantion, Prayer for the dead, exercise of the Jurisdiction
of the Roman Bishop, and his primacy over all Churches, in a word, the
remaining chaos (as they call it) of Popish superstition.

4. It is thirdly evident that within that time in several Counsels
(Provincial at least) most of the points in debate between Protestants and the
Roman Church, have been either decided, or the belief of them supposed, and all
the practices (which Protestants condemn) justified and commanded: no better
proof of which assertion need be sought for, then that Tome of English Synods
published by Sir Henry Spelman. And on the contrary that it does not appear in
any Synod that any of those doctrines or practices have been condemned, nor in
the least degree censured: so that if there were any authority in the
Catholic Church for above one thousand years together, if she could challenge
either belief, or but non-contradiction to her decisions, they cannot be
excused, who not only not receive, but oppose, yea condemn, yea blasphemously
calumniate her both for doctrines and practices so unanimously professed and
embraced; and all this even then when they acknowledge her to be the object of
that Article of the creed, Credo unam, sanctam, Catholicam, Apostolicam
Ecclesiam: But how ( unam) if they may, yea ought to divide and tear her in
pieces? How ( sanctam) if defiled with so much profaneness, superstition, and
Idolatry, and all this not only permitted, but commanded by her? How (
Catholicam) if contradicting the ancient universal church? Lastly, how
(Apostolicam) if so evidently condemnable by Apostolic writings, as is
pretended?

5. In the fourth place, it was to me an irrefragable testimony of a strange
watchfulness of divine providence over the church to preserve it from the
gates of hell (that is, established and dangerous errors) that during those
worst times thereof, when ignorance, worldliness, pride, tyranny, etc. reigned
with so much scope, I mean during the time of about six ages before Luther;
when the Popes, so wicked, so abominable in their lives, enjoyed so unlimited a
power even over secular Princes themselves, and much more over the Clergy; yet
notwithstanding we do not find that there was any innovation at all in any
points that concern doctrine, defined by Counsels; nor particularly that the
Popes, though in practice they assumed to themselves a vast exercise of
external Jurisdiction, yet that they ever attempted, much less effected the
introducing any decision, as de Fide, of their power above that which was
universally believed, not only in the former ages after S. Gregory's times, but
in times immemoriall before that.

6. In the fifth place, concerning the time between the first Council of Nice
and S. Gregory it appeared to me evidently that many points now in controversy
have been defined expressly against Protestants: That many have been universally
reputed Heteriques for maintaining the very same opinions now again innovated
by Protestants, as Aerius, Vigilantius, Iovinian, etc. That scarce any point of
doctrine of the Roman church, but is expressly maintained by the Fathers
generally. That whatsoever passages seemingly contradicting to Roman doctrines
are out of the Fathers produced by Protestants, do at the most only argue want
of memory in the Fathers, opposing that in one obscure place, which they had
plainly affirmed in twenty: That those Fathers, who were so quick-sighted to
take notice of, and so zealous to condemn any innovation in doctrine or
practice, yet neither have observed nor opposed any one point, either of
doctrine or practice, received in S. Gregory's time, and continued to these, as
an innovation: That the general language of the Fathers when they spoke ex
professo concerning Prayer for the Dead, Purgaetory, the blessed Sacrament, the
Primacy of the Pope etc. was like those of these times; the ancient outward
form of the church like that of the present; And on the contrary, all these,
both expressions and Liturgies, and outward face of the ancient Church much
more unlike to the Temples of the Calvinists or Lutherans etc. yea or English
Protestants, in things wherein they differ from the Roman, when they were from
the Congregations of ancient Heretics.

7. In the last place, that the pretended proofs out of Scripture alleged by
Protestants, proceed either because no mention is made of Scripture of such
points, (a way of arguing generally renounced by the Fathers, who condemn many
Heretics by Tradition alone without Scripture:) or because they, by drawing
consequences out of Texts of Scripture, say they can confute such doctrines of
the Roman Church, which yet upon their own grounds will not suffice to call the
contrary opinions so pretended to be confuted heretical, and much less will
they be a sufficient warrant to make such mortal divisions in the church, as
are in these days.

8. From all which considerations it seemed likewise to my weak understanding,
that this plea made use of by Protestants to excuse their Schism upon pretense
of so many dangerous errors and heresies crept into the Catholic Church,
necessary to be reformed, was a plea of all others the most unreasonable, the
most unjust that ever was, a plea so far from excusing them, that above all
other things it will make them most unpardonable before God and man; a plea
formally evacuating the promises of Christ, inevitably ruining all
Ecclesiastical authority, rendering useless and ridiculous all the marks that
Antiquity gives us, whereby to judge of Schism and Heresy. Lastly, a plea
which English Protestants, by the just judgment of God, have to their own
ruin put into the mouths of Calvinists, and all other Sects, for as they
served the Catholics, so have the Calvinists used them, upon pretense of
reformation, and Scripture, and the ancient Apostolic Church, they see
themselves robbed of their church, of their faith, of their liberty, of their
livings, and many thousands of their lives; and yet they that were the
destroyers of all lawful authority, and exercisers of too much unlawful,
complain of injustice; they that pluck^d down the hedges of Gods vineyard,
wonder to see so many several kinds of beasts rush in and eat their grapes; in
a word, to use the expression of S. Augustine, Et tamen nec ser^ saltem toties
divis^ atque conscissi, sentiun^ quod feccrunt. i. e. and yet for all this,
seeing so many divisions among them, seeing themselves so torn in pieces, do
they not yet perceive the fault that themselves have done. Cont. Parm. lib. 1.

CHAP. L.
A continuation of the former arguments, viz. that the guilt of Schism lies
only and wholly upon Protestants.

Catholics not uncharitable, for saying. That Protestancy unrepented is
damnable.

1. THese Principles laid by the Fathers, with unanimous consent of the
execrable nature and extremest dangerousnesse of the crime of Schism; together
with the several descriptions and marks which they give to understand it by,
seemed to me so reasonable; and these deductions which I made from the
aforesaid principles, together with the application of those marks to the
present state of controversy between the Roman and Protestant churches seemed
so unrefutable: Lastly, the conclusion and result of the whole matter, viz.
That the crime of heresy and Schism cannot with the least show of reason be
imputed to the Roman Catholic Church, nor with the least show of reason
avoided by Protestant Churches, since the Fathers being Judges, there is not
one mark of Schism which can be found in the Roman, nor one mark but is
evidently found in Protestant churches. All this seemed to me so unanswerable,
that unless I did resolve to put out mine own eyes, I could not but see that
I had all my life hitherto continued in this fearful state of Schism^ And
(unless I did resolve to proceed to that desperate contempt of Scripture, of
consent of Antiquity, and of all Ecclesiastical authority, as to think Heresy
and Schism to be no other then counterfeit(...)or bugbeares invented to fright
such foolish Christians as would submit to any authority Divine or
Ecclesiastical) I could not but think it more then time to avoid the precipice
into which I was ready to fall, and and for that purpose, to range my self to
that Communion, which both by testimony of Scripture and all Antiquity, and by
visible experience could demonstrate that a full effect of all Christ's promises
had been accomplished in her, which privilege not any other congregation (in
our Western parts at least) did pretend to, any other way then by calling
themselves a part of her, whom yet at the same time they called an Idolatresse,
and a Strumpet divorced from her celestial Bridegroom, or at least
communicated with them that were guilty of such blasphemies.

2. I do profess in the presence of God, and all his blessed Saints and
Angels, that I could could not my self imagine, nor find in any Protestant
writer any exception or objection that came home to the point: this one
essential mark of Schism viz. forsaking the external public Communion of
the Catholic Church, being impossible to be avoided by them, since both all
the world sees it, and they themselves confess it, though indeed under another
and more plausible name.

3. I may therefore spare my pains of examining particularly what Mr.
Chillingworth and other Protestants allege for their excuse, all which are
evidently answered with applying to them that one saying of S. Augustine in his
first book to Petilian the Donatist, I object to you the crime of Schism which
you will deny: And I will presently prove, because you do not communicate with
all Nations. I may add, speaking to Protestants, Not with any one Nation or
church pre-existent to Luther. Calvin confesses that he divided a toto orb
terrarum, from the whole world, and so do other Protestants: And impudence it
self cannot deny, but that in respect of external communion they have to this
day relinquished the whole world; attempts have indeed been made to get an
entrance into the Greek church, but in vain, for they have been rejected, and
remitted to the obedience of their own Patriarch, as appears by the letter of
Hieremias Patriarcha etc. And therefore for a proof unanswerable, that the
Schism of Protestants is a separation not from a particular church (as they
call the Roman) but from all Christian Churches all the world over, let them
suppose the same question proposed to them, which the Emperor Basilius made to
Photius, the Pseudo-Patriarch of Constantinople, With which of the four
Patriarchs do you communicate? So that as the same S. Augustine says in the
same book, Hoc scelus and maximum, and manifestum, and omnium vestrum est. i.
e. This crime (of forsaking Universal communion) is both of all other the
greatest, and a manifest one, and belongs to all the sorts of you.

4. If they say they preserve the bond of charity, allowing a possibility of
salvation to Catholics, only they separate from Catholic errors which
would be damnable to them being so persuaded. What is this to External
Communion? Add hereto, that though English Protestants, for their own
interests, to justify the lawfulness of their Succession, do allow such a
degree of charity to Catholics; yet it is manifest that they renounce not the
communion of Calvinists, etc. who deny that there was any true church in the
world when Luther began his sacrilegious Apostasy, and so involve themselves in
the same uncharitableness. Some there are that say (says S. Augustine Ep.
48.) we thought it ^^de no matter where (i. e. in what Communion) we preserved
the Faith of Christ: But thanks be given to the Lord, who has gathered us from
separation, and has manifested that this is a thing pleasing to God who is
One, to be served in Unity. Besides,(...) (...)est etc. (says Epiphanius
Diaconus) It is a mere frenzy (an obstruction of reason) to blame, or impute
error to all Churches.

5. If they say, we left only the abuses practiced in the Catholic church,
which no man can justly blame another for reforming; What is this still to an
absolute forsaking of the external communion? Tell me (says S. Augustine
coat. Gaud, l. 1. c. 7.) whether the church at that time when you say she
entertained those who were guilty of all crimes, by the contagion of those
sinful persons perished or perished not? Answer, whether did the church
perish, or not? Make choice of what you think good. If she then perished, what
church brought forth Donatus? But if she could not perish, because so many were
incorporated into her without Baptism; (he means, a second Don^tisticall
Baptism) answer me I pray you; What madness did move the Sect of Donatus to
separate themselves from her upon the pretense of avoiding the Communion of bad
men?

6. Therefore Protestants do in vain please themselves with this word of
Reformation: and with telling the world that many, even good Catholics, both
in ancient and later times, have earnestly called for a Reformation. For no man
denies but that there has been great need of it, and is to this day, viz. in
respect of doctrines and practices of particulars, and those too too many. But
can any one Catholic in any age be produced that called for a change of any
one point of doctrine established in the church, or a reformation of any
practice authoritatively settled there as unlawful? not one such as yet has
been produced, and I am confident not one can; and much less any one that upon
such pretenses has either counseled or execu^ed a division in the church. To
what purpose then a separation from the external communion of the whole church
upon this ground of reforming particular abuses, which may lawfully and without
any blame be done by an inward Schism, or mental separation from errors and
superstitions?

7. Therefore when Protestants beast so much of their purifications and
reformations, Catholics may desire S. Augustine (cont. Gaud. l. 1.) to tell
them for them, You have indeed great matters which you may flourish among your
righteousnesses, (and reformations:) namely, ^ division of Christ, an annulling
of the Sacraments of Christ, a forsaking of the peace of Christ, war against
the members of Christ, calumnious accusations against the Spouse of Christ, and
a denying of the promises of Christ. The same Father (de unit. Eccles.)
likewise will tell them, that if they would have thought good to follow our
Saviors example, they would not upon such pretenses have forsaken the
external communion of the church: For (says he) when he was to be circumcised
was John sought after? for that thing was used to be performed by the Jews.
And when a legal sacrifice was to be offered for him, was there any scruple
made of that Temple, which was by himself called a den of thieves? For the Lord
which said, Be ye holy because I am holy, does make his servants to converse
among wicked men so unspottedly, if they preserve that holiness which they
receive, as the Lord Jesus himself was not defiled with the least contagion of
wickedness during the time that he lived among the Jewish Nation: neither when
be being made under the law, underwent those first Sacraments according to that
most perfect way of humility, neither afterward when having chosen his
Disciples he lived in the company of his own Traitor even till the last (
parting) kiss. For by his example not only those who do no wicked things, but
those likewise who consent not to any wickedness are wheat securely remaining
among chafe because they neither do such things, nor consent with them that do
them; although being themselves good, they patiently suffer the wicked,
continning in the same field, until the harvest, in the same floor until the
winnowing; within the same nets, until the separation which shall be made upon
the shore (i. e. at the end of the world.)

8. And this doctrine the same Father presses so constantly, so zealously,
that he professes that any separation that is made in the Church upon what
pretense soever before the day of judgment, is a sacrilege inexcuseable. Let
them therefore study what excuses they please, and conjure up as many
objections as they think good, truth it self ( speaking by S. Augustines mouth
Ep. 48.) will or ought to silence them for ever, Certi sumus neminem se a
communione omnium Gentium just separare potuisse. i. e. We are assured that no
man can justly separate himself from the communion of all Nations. And again
says the same Oracle (Cont. ep. Parm. l. 2.) Praecedendae unitatis nulla est
necessitas. i. e. There is no necessity to cut Unity asunder. And again (l. 2.
cont. Gaud.) Aute tempus littoris damnabiliter separant. i. e. Before the time
come that the net is to be drawn ashore, the separations which men make are
damnable.

9. Which speeches of S. Augustine will be true till the end of the world being
built upon the promises of Christ, that his church should continue for ever in
all truth, secure against the gates of hell; and upon the command of Christ,
that no separation should be made of the tares from the wheat til the last day
of harvest, in which Exibunt Angeli and separabunt, i. e. Angels (not men)
shall go forth and separate: By occasion of which text the same Father annexes
these powerful words, speaking to the Donatists, (con. ep. Par. l. 2.) Let
them choose (says he) whether of the two they will rather believe; Jesus
Christ, that is, Truth it self says, The field is the world; and Donatus
says, that Gods field is Africa alone. Let them choose whether of these two
they had rather believe. Jesus Christ, that is Truth it self says, In the
time of harvest I will say to the reapers, gather first the tares; and
interprets it, saying, the harvest is the end of the world; And Donatus says,
that by the separation of his party, the tares are separated from the wheat
before the harvest. Jesus Christ, that is Truth it self says, the reapers are
the Angels; and Donatus says, that himself and his associates have done that
before the harvest, which Jesus Christ says that the Angels are to do at the
harvest. Let them choose whether of these two they had rather believe. They call
themselves Christians, we propose to them Jesus Christ and Donatus: Let them
consider what will become of them, if they bestow only words upon Jesus Christ,
and their bearts upon Donatus? So that this conclusion of his is unalterably
true, not for his times only, but til Christ's second coming, viz. That all
separation which is made before the drawing the net on shore (or before
harvest, i. e. the end of the world) is a eamnable separation; Being
Sacrilegium Shismatis, quod omnia scelera supergreditur. i. e. being the
sacrilege of Schism, which surpasses all other, crimes. (Aug. con. Ep. Parm,
l, 2.)

10. Therefore to show the extreme in justice of English Protestants against
the Catholic Church, and the just judgment of God upon (...)for it, we may
desire them to consider, that in their own congregations they are constrained
to connive at both errors in doctrine, and abuses in practice to support a
Schismatic Unity, which they would not suffer for Catholic Unity. So S.
Augustine speaks to the Donatists (lib. 2.) Why do they, says he,
perniciously suffer such kind of men in the crime of a Sacrilegious Schism,
which they might (and ought) to have tolerated profitably in the integrity of
(Catholic) Unity? Again, let them consider with what justice they can
condemn the other Sects, Presbyterians and Separatists, if they seek the same
destructive way of reforming them, which themselves practiced upon the
Catholics: For the Presbyterians will allege Scripture, as well as they;
they will pretend errors and superstitions, as well as they: And the
Separatists beyond this will allege for themselves, that which it will be
impossible for them to reply reasonably to, for they will say, Since you your
selves have taken away all obliging humane authority in points of Religion,
give us leave to enjoy that liberty for our own consciences, which you have
purchased us: we desire not to tyrannize over other men, only we would not
suffer that you should pretend by a show of liberty to introduce tyranny. If
Protestants shall oppose secular power or multitude to such allegations, that
will be to confess that their reformation was a mere worldly design. If they
shall say that it is not fit that a small conventicle of Sectaries should
prevail against a National Synod of the English Clergy; then they must not
take it ill to have those efficacious words of S. Augustine applied unto them,
Is the just weighing of matters come to this pass, that a Council of the
Maximianenses, who are an under-segment of your Sect, shall have no force or
consideration against you, because in comparison of your numbers they are but a
very few, and shall a Council of your own prevail against Nations, against
the heritage of Christ, and the ends of the earth his possession? I wonder if
that man have any blood left in his body, that should not blush at the
mentioning of such a thing as this. Aug. Ep. 154. ad Emer. Don.

11. I will conclude this conclusion with a brief consideration of an
accusation which Protestants lay against Catholics, whom they charge with
extreme uncharitableness, for affirming, that Protestants dying in their
Religion without repentance cannot be saved. Hereto it is answered, that
Catholics do not pretend to judge of the salvation or damnation of
Protestants in particular, yea they will not doubt to say that to many
thousands of them neither their Heresy nor Schism shall prove de facto
damnable, but that supposing they dye with an intention to renounce whatsoever
their opinions should appear to them to have been erroneous, their invincible
ignorance caused by education, misinformation of Catholic doctrines, etc. may
probably find pardon from our merciful Judge, in case they be truly penitent
for all other faults committed by them, upon supposition that any such have
been committed: But surely it is no uncharitable judgment to say in general,
V. Lugo de fid. Disp. 12. Sect. 2.
That it is damnable to dye in a damnable or mortal sin without repentance:
And therefore since even by Protestants confession Heresy and Schism are in a
high degree damnable sins, and since Catholics are verily persuaded that
Protestants are guilty of these two crimes, it may be called in them a mistake,
but it cannot be called uncharitableness in Catholics upon such a
supposition to make such a judgment. Yea on the contrary I wonder how the
English Protestants, etc. who pretend that Catholics are guilty of these two
crimes, can notwithstanding contrary to the doctrine of all Antiquity, affirm
that such persons are not in a damable estate; surely it is selfguilt, and not
charity that makes them so charitable.

CHAP. LI.
The fourth Conclusion.

Proofs of it out of Fathers.

THE FOURTH CONCLUSION is,

That the Catholic Church ever after the times of the Apostles was, is, and
shall be visible, continuing in an uninterrupted succession of lawful Pastors
and true doctrine to the end of the world.

1. FOr confirmation of this conclusion out of Scripture, Texts, sufficient
both for number and perspicuity, have already been produced both out of the Old
and New Testament in the second conclusion.

2. The same doctrine is no less conspicuous in the writings of the Fathers.
It is easier (says S. Chrysostom Hom. 4. in Esa.) that the Sun should be
extinguished, then that the Church should be obscured. And again, The Sun is
not more manifest, nor the light proceeding from it, theu the actions of the
Church. The Church (says S. Cyprian de Unit. Eccl.) being clothed with the
light of our Lord spreads its beams through the whole world. Aug. cout. Pet.
l. 2. c. 104. Id. con. Parm. l. 2. c. 3,
The Church (says S. Augustine) has this most certain mark, that she cannot
be hidden. And again, Do not these men grope at noone day as if it were
midnight? It is a quality common to all Heretics, not to see the thing of all
things in the world most clear ( viz. the church) which is placed in the light
of all Nations, out of the unity whereof whatsoever they do, though it may seem
to be done with great exactness and diligence, yet can no more secure them
from the wrath of God, then the spiders webs from the rigor of the cold.
Hereupon the same Saint ( de unit. Eccl.) calls Christ the most true declarer
of his body, insomuch as be suffers us not to be mistaken neither in the
Bridegroom nor in his Spouse. Upon which grounds he makes several exclamations
to this purpose, (Id. cont. cres. l. 3.) O the mad perverseness of men! Thou
conceivest that thou deservest to be praised for believing Christ, whom thou
see not; and believe thou shall not be damned for denying his Church which
thou see: Since that Head is in heaven, and this body is upon earth. Thou
acknowledgest Jesus Christ, and that which is written (of him) O God be thou
exalted above the heavens, and do not acknowledge the church in that which
follows, and let your glory be spread through all the earth. The like
expressions he has upon Psalm 56. and in his 166. Epistle ad Donat, and on 1.
Ep. of S. John Tract. 2. etc. And again (in Psalm. 70.) The Christian world is
promised, and this is believed (by them:) This promise is fulfilled, and it is
contradicted by them. And again, If the church shall not continue here on
earth even to the end of the world, to whom did our Lord say, Behold I am with
you even to the end of the world. And again (de Bapt. con. Don. l. 3,) If from
the time of S. Cyprian the church perished, from whence did Donatus appear?
out of what earth did he bud? out of what See did he arise? from what heaven
did he fall? And again (cont. Jul, l. 5.) If by those holy Priests of God and
famous Doctors, Irenaeus, Cyprian, Rheticius, Olympius, Hilary, Ambrose,
Gregory, Basile, John Chrysostom, Innocent, and Hierome, the Manicheans have
violated and corrupted the Church, Tell me (Julian) who was it that brought
thee forth? was it a chaste Matron, or a Harlot, who in her traveling brought
thee forth by the womb of spiritual Grace into that light which thou have
forsaken? I willingly omit infinite other passages, especially out of S.
Augustine to the same purpose, because even Protestants generally do not
question the substance of that truth herein contained.

CHAP. LII.
Application of these proofs, to the advantage of the Roman Catholic
Church, and against Protestants, etc.

1. THe cause therefore is clear in the general Thesis, that the Fathers
opinion was, that by virtue of Christ's express promises, his church was to
continue visible and distinguishable from all other unlawful congregations to
the worlds end. This I do not find denied by the English Protestants, I mean
neither that this was the sense of the Fathers, nor that this sense was ture.

2. The great controversy therefore is in the Hypothesis, or application of
the general Thesis, viz. whether that such conclusions as the Fathers deduce
from the visibility of the Catholic church in their days, may rationally be
inferred from the Roman Catholic church visible in these days. For example,
that it is unlawful upon any pretense of errors or abuses in practice, to
separate from the external communion of that church, which now calls it self
the Catholic Church (which is only the Roman, for the Grecian churches,
though they challenge the title of Catholic Churches, that is, true members
of the Catholic, yet I do not find that they make an association to their
external communion, a necessary condition to all Christians.)

3. The English Protestants say no, against all Roman Catholics, who
unanimously affirm, that since such discourses of the Fathers were grounded
upon Christ's promises to his church, which were to be effectual to the end of
the world, that therefore they are as fitly and necessarily to be applied to
the present, as to the ancient Catholic church, and that no other church, but
that in communion with the Roman, can make any valuable or legitimate
pretentions to that title. Though the truth is, if it be to be granted that
there is any visible Catholic church at all, whose external communion is
necessary, the Protestants are inexcuseably culpable, since they neither would
nor could upon their grounds communicate with any church in the world that was
in being, when Luther began his Apostasy.

4. In this controversy therefore, upon these following considerations and
grounds. I fully satisfied my self, that the plea of Roman Catholics was just
and reasonable. For ^. Though English Protestants deny the Roman church to be
the Catholic church ( cum Emphase;) yet they acknowledge her to be a true
member at least of the Catholic church; being forced hereto for their own
interest to justify the lawfulness of their Ordinations, etc. And this
acknowledgement alone is sufficient to condemn them for their separation as
guilty of Schism, since he who separates from an acknowledged true member of
the Catholic church, does consequently separate from the Catholic church.

5. Secondly they acknowledge that the whole body of the present Catholic
church enjoyes the same privileges and authority, that it did in the times of
the ancient Fathers: that a Schism from it is as pernicious as anciently: that
a truly General Council now is as obliging and unappealable from as
heretofore: And upon these grounds they will condemn themselves, since it is
apparent, that if the Eastern churches were assumed together with the Western
to make up the full body of the Catholic, most of the opinions and pretended
errors, upon which they ground the lawfulness and necessity of their
separation, will appear to be the doctrines of the church called Catholic
even in their sense, as e. g. acknowledging the blessed Sacrament to be a
proper Sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead, the Real Presence (per modum
transmutationis) Prayer for Dead and Purgatory, Invocation of S^ines,
Veneration of Images, etc. And therefore if all the four Patriarchs had met at
the Council of Trent, they had Infallibly concurred in condemning the
Protestants as Heretics in these points, and their separation upon such
grounds is Schism, properly so called.

6. Thirdly it appeared evidently to me, that those communions and
congregations of Christians which acknowledge subjection to the Pope, could
only rightfully challenge the name of the Catholic church, For 1. I took it
for granted that that which was called the Catholic church after the times of
the four first General Counsels, when the A^^ans, Photinians, Macedonians,
Nestorians, Eurychians etc. were anathematized, was indeed the only tru^
Catholic church; by which account the Abyssine churches, as being (at least,
anciently) Eutychians, and several Eastern churches, as Nestorians, Jacobi^es,
etc. were and are to be excluded from that denomination; which yet the
Protestants now, although they dare not communicate with them, would admit into
the body of the church; but most unreasonably; for if the Abyssines continue
yet Eutychians, the Protestants of England (who receive the four first
General Counsels) do thereby acknowledge them to be Heretics; if they have
quitted Eutychianisme, and really adjoined themselves to the Roman church
(according to several Embassies mentioned by Damianus a Goes etc.) then
Protestants will find it so much more to their disadvantage to argue any thing
from the Abyssine churches. 2. I could observe nothing, which could make me
doubt that that which was called the Catholic church from the four first
General Counsels to S. Gregory's the Greats days inclusive, was indeed so.
For if in S. Gregory's days there was a Catholic church (is Protestants
grant there was) then that which was in communion and subjection to him was
only it, since none that I know pretend to allow that title to any congregation
divided from him. Now in the church of S. Gregory's time it is apparent that in
a manner all points of Doctrine (now by Protestants called errors and causes
of their separation) were universally acknowledged as Catholic doctrines, as
I showed before by a joint confession of the most learned Protestant writers,
by which they vertually confess, that if they had lived in S. Gregory's days
they would as well have separated from him. Besides it appears by S. Gregory's
Epistles that he as Pope enjoyed a supereminent authority, and sollicitously
exercised a care over all Christian churches: As for his Jurisdiction, as
Patriarch, and the extension thereof, that I took not here into consideration,
since it is not a point pretended to be an Article of Faith. 3. From S.
Gregory's days, till the separation of the East from the external
jurisdiction, rather then the Faith of the Pope and Western churches, the whole
body of the church under one visible Head remained, as it did before, enjoying
the title of the Catholic church, no other pretending thereto. 4. Since the
Division of the East from the Western churches (caused as I conceive, upon a
quarrel about the Popes Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and not any point of
Doctrine) the limits of the Catholic church seem to be much streitned.
Concerning which Schism (if it be indeed a Schism properly so called) I
apprehended no necessity to be very curious to inform my self, being persuaded
during the time of my being a Protestant, that, as for that one point of
belief, concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost, wherein the Greek church
expresses her self otherwise then the Roman, if in substance and sense there
be a real difference, that the Roman church was Orthodox. And besides that, I
know not any point of doctrine wherein the Greek church agrees with Protestants
to condemn the Roman church. It is true they communicate in both kinds, but I
could never find that the Greeks made that point any pretext of their division
from the Roman, neither indeed can they, since they also give the Eucharist to
the sick only in one kind, acknowledging withal, that such communicants
receive the whole effect of the Sacrament. As for the story of the Schism, it
was begun by Photius the Pseudo-Patriarch of Constantinople upon ambition and
interest, because the Pope would not confirm his illegal intrusion into that
Chair; which generally has been a fatal occasion of almost all Schisms, as
long since S. Cyprian has observed. Lastly it is manifest that those rights of
Jurisdiction also, which (since that Schism) have been denied by the Greeks to
the Pope, were not then begun to be demanded, but had been possessed by him for
several ages; so that there was at least injustice, if not error, on the
Grecians part.

7. Fourthly, that the Pope, as successor of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles,
has a primacy and superiority over all Bishops and Patriarchs, yea an
authority over the whole Catholic church, so that he may truly be called the
Head of the Church, has been delivered by so constant and universal a
Tradition, that it cannot without extreme impudence be denied. Now how far this
superiority and authority extends, I thought it needless curiously to inform
my self, since, as far as I can learn, all that the church requires in this
point even from ecclesiastical persons, is a subscription to this profession
mentioned in the Bull of Pope Pius IV annexed to the Council of Trent, and
collected out of the same, viz. Romano Pontifici Beati Petri Apostolorum
Principis successori, ac Jesu Christi. Uicario, veram obedientiam spondeo ae
juro. i. e. I do promise and swear true obedience to the Pope of Rome,
successor of blessed S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

8. Now that thus much is of universal Tradition, what greater proof can be
desired then may be afforded us in a late book entitled Les Grandeurs dell'
Eglise Roman, where such a world of testimonies out of Counsels Occumenicall
and Provincial, Popes, Fathers, both Eastern and Western Histories
Ecclesiastical etc. are produced to maintain the Co-union of S. Paul with S.
Peter in at least some degree of his universal authority, which not
withstanding are not an hundredth part of that which may be alleged out of
antiquity for S. Peter's Principality, and the Popes as his successor. Yea that
great Council of Chalced on, (acknowledged and received in England (even when
it endeavored to deprive the Pope of some part of Jurisdiction, yet
acknowledged this his superiority and authority as Pope, the Bishops there
calling him their Head, and themselves with all Christians, members under that
Head. Moreover Socrates and Zozomen (writers far from being partial for the
Pope) yet mention ancient immemoriall canons of the church, Socr. Hist. Eccl.
l. 2. c. 8. Sozon^. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 10.
wherein at least a negative voice is given to the Pope in any thing that shall
be introduced to oblige the whole church, To conclude, Monsieur Blondel, the
most learned French controvertist that ever undertook their common quarrel
against the Pope, in that large volume which is spent in confuting particular
extravagant opinions concerning that subject, as touching the infallibility and
Monarchical Omnipotence of the Pope, his Lordly and domineering headship, and
a Monarchical power usurped by him by which to subdue all the members of
Christ, etc. yet notwithstanding (which is very remarkable) he confesses
himself, that never any Council or Nation, Blondel page 16. 810. 855. 12. 316.
107.
no not that of Florence nor Trent it self ever adventured to define any thing
concerning such excessive titles and power as the Popes Partisans do attribute
to him. But on the contrary, that the titles of the Apostle S. Peter ought not
to be put in debate, since that the Grecians and Protestants also do confess
that it has beone believed, and that it might be indeed that he was the
President and Head or Chief (Chef) of the Apostles, the foundation of the
Church, and possessor of the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Yea moreover, That
Rome, as being a Church consecrated by the residence and Martyrdom of S.
Peter, whom antiquity has acknowledged to be the Head (Chef) of the College
Apostolic, having been honored with the title of the Seat of the Apostle S.
Peter, might without difficulty be considered by one of the most renowned
Counsels (viz. that of Chalcedon as Head (Chef) of the Church: Which is in
effect to acknowledge that the necessary doctrine of the Roman church
concerning the Popes Primacy and Authority is Orthodox.

9. Upon which grounds, since it appears to have been an universal Tradition
of the church (besides express words of Scripture) that the Catholic Church
was to remain visible to the end of the world, that is, a church possessed of
all substantial Christian doctrines, preserved in all truth, governed by
lawful Pastors, as one body consisting of ruling and ruled members under one
visible head, (which S. Cyprian makes the foundation of Unity Ecclesiastical)
I concluded (as I thought, rationally) that that part of the Christian world,
which continued in Communion with, and obedience to this so acknowledged
Supreme Authority, might and ought most justly to challenge the title of the
Catholic Church.

10. Therefore though the privilege of an independent Patriarchall church
(which the English Protestants of late begin to challenge, to the end to excuse
their church from the title of Schism, for withdrawing it self from the Popes
Jurisdiction) were just and legal; yet they will never be able to justify
themselves for disbelieving what they together with all the other Western
churches so many ages agreed to have been true, or for denying the title of
Oecumenicall Head to the Pope. Let it be supposed therefore, what some of them
allege, that it is in the power of such a King of England, as Henry the VIII.
with the forced consent of his Clergy, to erect the English church into a
Patriarchate, as Justinian the Emperor did Justinianaea Prima: Or that England
being an Island like Cyprus, might have the privilege to be independent of any
Patriarch; all that will follow thereon, will be only, that the Pope as
Patriarch of the West shall by this means be deprived of some Patriarchall
Jurisdictions, Investitures, Rights of Appeals, etc. which have anciently been
endeavored to be withdrawn from him by the African Churches, etc. Yet what is
this to his title of S. Peter's Successor, and Head of the Church? Or was
Justinianaea or the Isle of Cyprus so independent in matters of point of Faith
or public practice on the Pope or other Patriarchs, or however, on a General
Council, as that they could dejure alter any thing established by Universal
Authority? Could they renverse decisions of Oecumenicall Counsels? Or did they
ever usurp such an authority to themselves, as to impute superstition,
idolatry, profaneness, heresies, etc. to all other churches, under a show of
Reformation, ruining the whole order of Discipline and Belief, confessedly
continued in the whole church for above a thousand years? Till they can produce
examples of an authority of Reformation of such a nature assumed by any
Catholic Prince or particular Kingdom, the other pretended right of
exemption from Jurisdiction will be so far from excusing them, that it will
make it apparent to the world, that it was merely their Princes lusts, ambition
and unquenchable thirst after ecclesiastical revenewes, that first put the
thought of Reformation into their heads, and that upon as just grounds they may
expect from others a Reformation of their Reformation, which will perhaps prove
more durable, when those baits shall be utterly taken away, which first whetned
their wits to contrive that project of a Reformation.

11. For my own part therefore, seeing these several conclusions concerning
the Catholic Churches indefectibility, authority, unity, and Visibility, so
unanimously attested, confirmed, and made use of by all Antiquity, with so good
success against all manner of ancient Heresies and Schisms: And on the
contrary perceiving no such method practiced by Protestants disputing with one
another, no mention in any of their writings or arguments from Christ's promises
to the church; but only presumptuous boastings of greater sagacity and cunning
to wrest Scripture to their several purposes, without the least success of
unity with one another, yea to the utter despair thereof: Having shut mine eyes
to all manner of worldly ends and designs; yea resolving to follow truth
whither soever it would lead me, though quite out of sight of country, friends
or estate, at length by the merciful goodness of God I found my self in
inward safety and repose in the midst of that City set upon an hill, whose
builder and maker is God, whose foundations are Emerauds and Saphirs, and Jesus
Christ himself the chief Corner Stone: a City, that is at unity within it
self, as being ordered and polished by the Spirit of Unity it self; a City
not enlightened with the Meteors or Comets of a private Spirit, or changeable
humane reason, but with the glory of God, and light of the Lamb: Lastly, a City
that for above sixteen hundred years together has resisted all the tempests
that the fury of men, or malice of hell could raise against it, and if Christ's
promises may be trusted to, and his Omnipotence be r^lyed upon; shall continue
so till his second coming. To him be glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
SECT. III.
Containing a brief stating of certain particular points of Controversy, etc.

CHAP. I.
The Question of the Church being decided, decides all other controversies.

How it is almost impossible that error should have crept into the public
doctrine of the Church.

Of what force objections out of Scripture or Fathers are against the Church.

1. AFter that Almighty God had changed that, which was to me a stone of
offense, into a rock of foundation, making me to find repose of mind in
submitting to the authority of his church, which by reason of my former
misapprehensions I carefully avoided; as if the greatest danger that a
Christian could be capable of had been to be a member of Christ's mystical
body, which is his Church, or as if the harkening to the Church had been the
way to make a man worse then a Heathen and a Publican, I then found an
experimental knowledge of the truth of that speech of S. Hierome, (cont.
Lucifer.) viz. that the Sun of the Church presently dryes up all rivelets of
errors, and dispells all the mists of natural reason: as likewise of that of
the Prophet, Quicredit, intelliget, i. e. He that believes shall understand:
For being arrived to the top of that mountain, upon which God had built his
church, I found clear weather on all hands, I found that there remained nothing
for me to do afterward, but to hearken to, and obey her, that both Scripture
and Fathers, and now mine own reason taught me was only worthy to be obeyed.
And therefore the truth is, here should be an end of my Exomologesis, or
account of my inward disputes about controversies concerning Religion, which
quickly ceased, after that I left off to be mine own Guide and Teacher.

2. Notwithstanding among the particular controversies in debate between the
Roman Catholics and other Sects, I will select especially six of the most
principal, on purpose to show, that if any regard had been had either to the
authority or peace of Gods church, there would never have been any differences
about them, and that in the judgment even of moderate Protestants, the
differences are indeed of so small weight, that if there had been amongst them
but the least measure of charity, or if Schism had not been esteemed by them a
virtue; they would never have made such fatal and deadly divisions upon
pretenses so unconsiderable.

3. They indeed lay to the charge of the Catholic church novelties in
doctrines and practices: and yet Catholics, even out of those few that
remain, of the most ancient Ecclesiastical Authors, show clear proofs of
these doctrines and practices, and desire no more of them, then that they would
speak in the language of the ancient church: They accuse her of impieties, and
idolatries, and superstitions, yet Catholics show them that the most holy,
learned Saints and Martyrs that ever were in Gods church practiced and
maintained such pretended superstitions, etc. They accuse her of Schism, for
not separating from her self and and the whole world, and for not being able
to hinder them from committing that most sacrilegious crime; and they impute
Heresy to her, for being constant in maintaining the decisions of all
Counsels, and the profession of all churches and ages.

4. But before I examine the vanity of these imputations by stating those six
particular controversies, I shall desire our English Protestants to meditate
sadly upon two subjects especially. The first is, Which way they can imagine it
to be possible that an error should imperceptibly creep into the belief and
practice of the whole church, even setting aside the security we have against
any such mischief by the means of Christ's promises? For was it not true,
which antiquity testifies, yea and S. Paul himself expressly, that the
Apostles and Apostolical men were instant in season, and out of season, to
make known to the primitive Christians, and to inculcate diligently and
laboriously into their minds the whole sum of Christian doctrine, not
forbearing both publicly, and from house to house to reveal to them the whole
will of God, not suppressing any thing that was profitable, (Act, 20. 20. 27.)
And this so fully and effectually, as that if an Angel from heaven could be
supposed to teach any thing, not only contrary, but(...)i. e. besides that
which they had taught, he was to be accursed, Galat. 1. 8. Then do not the
Fathers tell us (and what proof can Protestants produce to make them appear to
be liars, when they tell us) that at least for five hundred years all caution
imagineable was used to prevent and exclude any novelties, that any Heretics,
yea or any Christians, though as learned as Origin, or as holy as S. Cyprian,
should attempt to introduce? May we not add hereto, that whatsoever novelties
of the least moment should be obtruded by any, would discover themselves to be
novelties, by thwarting the public profession and practiced devotions of the
church? as S. Cyprians Rebaptization would oblige all men to practice that
which they had always forborne: and the Arian and Pelagian etc. impieties
would constrain the church to alter the forms of prayers to the Son of God,
and for Gods Grace to cure the impotence and perverseness of nature,
acknowledged in the daily public confessions. Upon which grounds, S. Cyril
against Nestorius, and S. Leo against Eutyches, disprove the errors and
impieties of their Heresies, by producing the profession and practice of the
church in administering the holy Eucharist, whereby she restified her belief of
a real presence of the very body and blood of Christ there, which could not
consist with their Novelties. So that upon the same ground, if Invocation of
Saints, Prayer and offering the most holy Sacrifice for remission of sins to
the dead, Veneration of Images, etc. had been novelties, would not such
practices have more directly thwarted the public devotions of the church,
then the Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches: How was it possible then that such
doctrines should have been taught by any particular Father, (as confessedly
they have been) and not any one appear that should discover and protest
against such innovations? what charm was there in these doctrines above all
others, to cast the church into a sleep, that she should not perceive them, or
to silence the Fathers, that against their custom in all other innovations
they should not open their mouths against them? And much more, how was it
possible that the public Liturgies and devotions of the church should come to
be changed by admitting such pretended novelties and superstitions, and yet no
signs or footsteps be left that such a wonderful change has been made, not
one writer to be found that can tell us of any one that opposed it.

5. The second thing that I desire them to consider is, That since it is at
this day, and has been for many ages the universal belief of the church, that
all such pretended Novelties were indeed Catholic and Apostolic Traditions,
what arguments Protestants can reasonably esteem sufficient to disprove this
belief, and to dispossess the church of her renure? Will the silence of one
or two Fathers, think they, be of force enough to such a purpose? If so, I
doubt whether the church would then be able to maintain any one Article of
Faith. Would a few seeming difficulties and obscure, seemingly opposite
quotations out of some writings of a few Fathers serve their turn? It did not
so in the cause of the Arians, of the Pelagians, of the Novatians: etc. and why
only in the present controversies? Will quotations of Scripture decide the
questions against the present church? Indeed if it could be imagineable, that
the whole Catholic church could at the same time, and with the same hand,
deliver us Scripture and doctrines contrary to express Scripture, if she could
be supposed either so foolish as not to see that which no body could be
ignorant of, or so wicked, as (clearly seeing what God said) to command us not
to believe him, but rather the quite contrary, then she might deserve to be
styled Schismatic, because she continues in such a wicked unity; and
Heretical, because she would not submit her judgment and aushority to the
passions and lust of an Apostate Monk. But even Protestants themselves will
absolve her from such a high degree of guilt, as to contradict express and
formal Scripture. And as for Texts of Scripture, either obscure or ambiguous,
or ^ationally admitting several interpretations, though to some prejudicate
ears they may seem to sound otherwise then the church teaches, in all reason
and honesty the churches interpretation of them ought to prevail against any
private man's: I am sure all sorts of Sects will either submit their judgments
to the sense of their particular churches, or at least will conceal their
opinions, when they cannot submit them; this civility and duty teaches all men.
But as for the children of the Catholic church, they have an obligation
binding them in conscience to trust the same church for the sense of Scripture
(especially in points which she says are of Universal Tradition) which they
have trusted for the Scripture it self; and therefore S. Augustine said well,
and like a perfectly good Christian and Catholic, The words of Scripture are
so to be understood, as the world has believed them, which that it should
believe the Scripture has foretold. And surely he that will duly consider of
what weight the universal testimony of a whole age of the church is to prove a
Tradition, will never think that a few objections, or obscure passages either
in Scriptures, or two or three Fathers, who are apt to speak unwarily, when the
matter is not in controversy; should decide the cause against it, especially
considering that it is almost impossible to receive absolute satisfaction of
the doctrine of former ages any other way, or at least any other way so well,
as by the universal agreement of the present age, that so the former ages
delivered to her, What shall we say then, when to the evident testimony of the
present age for Catholic verities may be added a world of testimonies, both of
Scripture and ancient writers, beyond all comparison far more then for her
enemies contradictory assertions, even those enemies themselves being judges,
as will appear undeniably to any man that will consult that one book of
Brercley's Apology of Protestants for the Catholic church.

CHAP. II.
Of the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation. Of the Adoration of Christ in
the Sacrament, and of Communion under one Species.

1. THe six special controversies which I shall briefly consider, shall be; 1.
Concerning the Eucharist, and therein of the Real Presence of Christ's body by
way of Transubstantiation: as likewise, Of the Adoration of our Lord present in
the Sacrament; and communion under one Species. 2. Of Invocation of Saints. 3.
Of Veneration of Images. 4. Of Prayer for the Dead, and Purgatory. 5. Of
Indulgences. 6. Of the Public Service in Latin. The reason why I make choice
of these is, both because these are the especial controversies, wherein there
is a real and manifest difference between Catholics and Protestants, who
make these points the principal causes of their separation: For as concerning
the debates about Grace and Free Will, Predestination and Justification, as
likewise the merits of good works, though ignorant-popular-preaching
Protestants make a great clamor about them, yet I was most assured, that there
was indeed a real agreement, when they came to explain themselves sensibly
about them. As for the controversy concerning the Pope, I have spoken
sufficiently in the 52. chapter, at the latter end of the fourth conclusion.

2. First therefore concerning the Real presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist, and that by way of Transubstantiation: In discoursing upon which,
because my design is not to write the controversy in general, but only in
reference to the doctrine, which, following the church of England, I was taught
there; it will be sufficient for me to signify, that by that church I was
taught that in the blessed Sacrament the body and blood of our Lord were really
present, exhibited and received by the Communicants, really I say, not only as
the objects of Faith, or not only as really exhibiting the effects of Christ's
suffering; but as truly and properly as the Roman church professes, only I
was forbidden to say that there was any real change made in the bread and
Wine, which remained after Consecration, as they were before: In a word, I was
taught to say, what neither I nor any other was able to express, save only
that the Romish doctrine was false, which taught that that presence was made by
a presence of Christ's body under the Species (which only remained) of the
visible elements.

3. Now when, I say, that I was taught to express my belief thus by the church
of England, my intention is not that that church obliges every one to believe
thus; For the truth is, so a man will but renounce the two words of
Transubstantion, and Consubstantiation, he may, preserving the term really,
interpret himself; as if really signified only figuratively, or as the object
of the understanding, as we see a world of writers allowed there to have
expressed themselves: Yea in the 28. and 29. Articles of that Church there are
certain clauses which require only a figurative sense to be understood, as when
it is said, The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the supper, only
after an heavenly and spiritual manner; and the mean whereby the body of
Christ is received and eaten in the supper, is Faith. And again, The wicked
etc. are in no wise partakers of Christ, but rather to their condemnation do
eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so great a thing. Which clauses being
allowed, those Articles do admit, yea require not only the Calvinistical, but
even the Zuinglian sense concerning that point. Yet notwithstanding this,
whether the Calvinisticall party there had with their usual importunity
extorted the inserting of those clauses into the Articles, I know not, yet
those that followed the Prelaticall Governing Faction never considered those
expressions, but without any Calvinisticall hypscrisie professed that they
believed the Real Presence as truly and really and properly as the Catholics
did: See the conference of Poissy.
And so King James commanded Monsieur Casaubon to signify his sense to
Cardinal Perron in the words of Doctor Andrews, then Bishop of Ely.

4. Now what other reason can be imagined should move the most learned and
prudent part of the English Clergy to express themselves so near the
Catholic sense, but only a conviction that besides the formal words of
Scripture, the Ecclesiastical Tradition and general doctrine of the Fathers
enforced such a sense? But by what mystery it came to pass that they should
dispense with themselves for following Tradition no further; but that under a
pretense that the Sacrament was a mystery inexplicable, they should forsake the
same Tradition and Fathers, who generally profess, that that presence is made
by a real transmutation of the visible elements into the very Body and Blood
of Christ, this I confess I could never comprehend.

5. Now that such was the Traditionary doctrine of the Catholic church,
(besides the testimony of the present age, which will be of infinite weight to
any one that duly considers it) and to omit a world of quotations out of
Counsels and Fathers, wherein expressions to prove the same are as full, yea
perhaps more rigid then the Decision of the Council of Trent it self, I
became convinced from these considerations, viz. 1. Because in all the ancient
Liturgies that ever I saw, there are express mention of the verity and reality
of this change, and not any the least intimation of a figurative sense: there
are express prayers that God would by his omnipotent power cause the Bread and
Wine to become the Body and Blood of our Lord, and not the least intimation,
that the way of communicating of these mysteries should be only by Faith, or by
the operation of the understanding. 2. Because in the form of communicating
both in the Eastern and Western churches, (which form or Canon, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Basile, etc. attribute to the
Apostles themselves as authors) there was required from the communicants a
confession of their belief of the reality of this change; or to express it in
S. Ambrose his language, ( de Sacr. l. 4. c. 3.) The Priest (viz. presenting to
thee that which before consecration was bread) says unto thee, This is the
body of Christ, and thou answerest, Amen, that is to say, it is true; That
which the tongue confesses, let the heart believe. 3. Because generally the
Fathers when they speak of this argument, have recourse to the omnipotence of
the Word of Christ, Vid. Iren. l. 4. c. 34. S. Cyril. Hier. Ca^ Mist. 4. Amb.
de sacr. l. 4. c. 4. Et de iis qui mist. init. c. 9. Gaudent. de rat. sac. Tr.
2. S. Greg. Nyss. ora. Cat. c. 37. Eusebius. (non Emes hom. Pasc.) Ambr. ubi sup.
and to wonderful operations exalted above all humane credibility, as the
cause of this change, thereby leaving no doubt that they understood a
conversion (not significative, but) real, true and substantial. 4. Because
the same Fathers to make their auditors more capable of the mystery,
exemplify in other kinds of changes or conversions, as of the change of the
Bread which Christ did eat, into his own flesh; of the miraculous conversion
of water into wine; of Moses rod into a serpent; and the waters of Nile into
blood. Which language would be extremely ridiculous, if they intended not a
real and substantial change. 5. To prove that they understood not only a
presence of Christ in the action of the Sacrament (as some English Protestants
explain themselves) or a presence consistent with a Lutheranical coexistence of
the substance of bread and wine, S. Ambrose will satisfy us, who answering
that very objection that the difficulties would be less if it were affirmed
that the substance of bread and wine remained together with the body and blood
of Christ after the consecration, has these words, de Sacr. l. 4. To the first
objection we must thus answer, That in matters of faith a man ought not to make
choice of that which is accompanied with less difficulties, for otherwise we
should affirm that in God there is one only hypostasis etc. But he ought to
affirm that which is most conformable to the testimonies of the holy Fathers,
and to the Tradition of the Church, although never so many difficulties present
themselves, seeing that he ought to captivate his understanding under the
obedience of Faith. So likewise S. Ignatius quoted by Theodoret in Dialog. 3.
speaks of certain Heretics who received not the Oblations and Eucharists;
because they believed not that the Eucharist was the flesh of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Which is a proof undeniable, that the most primitive church taught this
Catholic dgctrine of the real Presence; for if there had been only a
spiritual presence, what pretense could those Heretics have to resuse them.
Vid. Aug. Psalm. 98. Ambros. de sp. 5. l. 3. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Hom. 24:
Nazian. Epitaph. Gorg. Theod. Dial. 2.
6. Because both the ancient Liturgies and Fathers of the church do testify
the general custom of Gods people to adore Christ present upon the Altar
after Consecration: and this not only in the time of administration, but
afterward also, as supposing, that that which remained, was and continued
truly the body of Christ, according to those words of S. Cyrill of Alexandria,
Cyril. Al. Ep. ad Colosyr.
I know what they say, namely, That the mystical benediction, if any relics
remain of it to the next day, is unprofitable to sanctification. But they that
say thus are mad: For there is not another Christ made, neither can his holy
body be changed, but the virtue of the benediction and the quickening Grace
remains perpetually in it. 7. Lastly, because by this argument of the real
transmutation of the visible elements into the body of Christ the third
General Council of Ephesus, and several ancient Fathers, confuted the
Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, about the two natures of our Savior,
Council. Ephesians. anath. 11. Cyrill. Alexan. S. Leo P.
as I mentioned occasionally before. So that such a world of testimonies of
Antiquity concurring, the Tradition being so constant and uniform, S. Leo the
Great had just cause to say (Ep. 23.) In the church of God this is so
consonantly witnessed by evemans mouth, that the truth of the body and blood of
Christ is not even by the tongues of infants concealed among the Sacraments
(or, Mysteries) of the common Faith.

6. An Universal Tradition therefore of the Real Presence has been so
forcible and unconquerable, as that it constrained even the English Protestants
themselves to acknowledge it, and that simply and unhypocritically: How could I
then defend my self from submitting and captivating my understanding to the
same Tradition, as constant for a real change and conversion? I must profess
ingenuously, that during the time of my being a Protestant, the only, or I am
sure principal hinderance from an entire conformity to the Faith of Catholics
in this point, was the inextricablenesse of those arguments which my reason
suggested to me out of natural Philosophy against it, as, how it could be
possible that the same body could be in heaven and upon the Altar at the same
time? how accidents could remain without their proper subjects etc. considering
with all the small, or rather no satisfaction which the Scholasticall
subtilties gave me.

7. But now if it be demanded, what new Philosophy I have learned, since I
learned that the Catholic church was to be believed and obeyed, and what
preservative I have found against those former arguments of natural reason? I
must answer freely and ingenuously, that I have not learned to answer such
arguments, but to despise them; and to say, God forbid that vain Philosophy
should ((...)) make a prey of me, defrauding me of the most necessary communion
with the church of Christ, and most essential virtue of captivating my
understanding to the obedience of all Evangelicall Mysteries. I do therefore
freely confess my ignorance, and inability to demonstrate how this particular
Mystery can consist even with those rules of Philosphy which I my self receive;
But withal, I must not conceal that when I was a Protestant also, I did the
same for other points, as the Mystery of the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation
of the Son of God, etc. And I did not find any scruple in those mysteries,
because I could not reconcile them with Aristotle, or any other Patriarch of
Heretics, as Tertullian calls the Philosophers.

8. I will further add, that that which gave me entire satisfaction, and
obliged me in conscience to silence, and not to answer my reason, when it would
raise objections against Transubstantiation, was, that the same authority, for
whose sake I believed it, taught me to believe it to be a mystery inexplicable
and incomprehensible, and that it was not lawful so to examine it, as that it
should stand or fall according to the dictates of natural reason. Insomuch as
S. Gregory (called the Divine) spoke like one that deserved that surname, in
the second General Council of Constantinople, That it was not permitted to
the Maobites and Ammonites to enter into the church of God, that is (says
he)(...) (...)i. e. to Logical and vainly curious and subtle discourses. I
refer the Reader to an abundant collection of the testimonies of Fathers,
forbidding this curiosity of examining the possibility of this mystery upon the
grounds of natural reason, which are to be found in Cardinal Perrons Reply to
King James. (Repl. lib. 4. cap. 1. 2. etc.) Therefore far be it from me to
determine this Mystery, by the subtle and too too curious disputations of the
Schoolmen: I do not envy them their leisure to employ their fancies about such
matters within their own walls; but if they begin to pass for competent
Judges of this Mystery, I must prosesse that I disclaim them, and I cannot
without grief remember what dangerous use Protestants make of their vain and
sometimes ridiculous Philosophical Questions about this Mystery, who satisfy
themselves that the Mystery it self is not true, because they find no
satisfaction in the discourses and answers, which the Schoole-writers endeavor
to give to a thousand foolish objections, which they conjute up out of
Aristotle's Philosophy against this Mystery, to be adored and trembled at. It is
only Scripture, testimonies of Fa^hers, Ecclesiastical Tradition, General
Counsels, and the Profession of the present Catholic Church, which are the
proper Judges of this controversy, and whose authority, when it is employed as
it ought, will assert this divine truth of the Reality of Christ's presence, by
way of conversion in the blessed Sacrament, to the confusion of all Novelties
and all Blasphemies of Heretics. The ancient, both Latin and Grecian Fathers,
who certainly were of wits as subtle and pierceing, as any that have succeeded
them, yet never thought upon such nice enquiries, as now every young
Philosopher can prattle of; and therefore I profess, since I am far from
finding any obligation at all lying upon me to the contrary, yea since the
Council of Trent ( Sess. 13. c. I.) has defined this point in the language of
Antiquity, and not of the Schools, saying that Christ is present in the
Sacrament Sacramentaliter, i. e. mysteriously, inexplicably, I will never
endeavor to answer any Philosophical arguments any other way then with such
words as these of S. John Damascene, The Bread and Wine is changed into the
Body and Blood of our Lord; but this after an unsearchable manner: For of this
matter we know no further, but only that the word of God is true, and
efficacious, and omnipotent. Damasc. de Orthod. Fide lib. 4. cap. 14.

Of the Adoration of our Lord Jesus Christ present in the holy Eucharist.
9^ Let us now consider to what the church obliges all Catholics in this
point. If any one (says the Council of Trent Sess. 13. Can. 6.) says that
Jesus Christ the only Son of God ought not to be adored with the exterior
worship of Latria it self in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; and that for
that end it ought not to be proposed publicly to the people to be adored; and
that those who adore him are Idolaters, let him be Ana^hema. Which worship of
Latria is not given to the outward Symbolls of the Eucharist, but only to Jesus
Christ himself there present. Daille l. des Imag. p. 340. and 376.
A certain degree of respect (even by the confession of the Calvinists) is due
to all outward instruments of Religion, as to Chalices, to the books of
Scripture, to the water of Baptism, and to the Species of Bread and Wine in
the Holy Eucharist. And Catholics allow no more: But the true object which a
Catholic adores with this sublime act of adoration or Latria, Test. Doc.
Sorbon.
is in the case in hand, Jesus Christ himself, who is to be adored every where
wheresoever he is present, and therefore likewise in the holy Eucharist, in the
which the Catholic church knows and acknowledges no other substance (as the
Calvinists desire to impose on them) but only Jesus Christ. And if they be
Idolaters for this, the Lutherans are so too, who teach the same doctrine,
Kemn. Exam. par. 2. p. 92.
though they express themselves in the point of the Real Presence after
another new-invented manner: yet notwithstanding the Calvinists (when their
worldly interests obliged them) could be content to comunicate with the
Lutherans, and could swallow their pretended Idolatry, but out of fear and
hatred of Catholic union make even the church her self a prejudice against
her doctrine.

10. For mine own part (whilst I was a Protestant) I profess I could never
answer to mine own reason, why we should condemn the worshipping of Christ,
whom we professed to be present in very truth, without figures or fancies. If
he had not been there after a peculiar Sacramental manner, I might lawfully
notwithstanding have worshipped him there, because I may and ought to worship
him every where, as being God omnipresent: yea though his humane nature be
locally present only at the right hand of the Father in glory, yet I may
worship the man Jesus Christ every where; because that person, which is God and
Man, is every where present (viz.) according to his divine not humane nature,
and yet it seems when a new acc^ssion of another kind of Sacramental truly
real presence is added to the former, though I acknowledge this later presence
to be as real as the former, I must be forbidden to express that I
acknowledge and believe it any other way then by saying with my lips that I do
so; I must then deny unto him (in that place, at his own table and altar, and
at that time, whilst are celebrated those mysteries, adorable even to Angels
themselves) that worship and respect, which I would have given him at mine own
table, or whilst I was doing the ordinary works of my calling. But it will be
said perhaps, you are not forbidden to worship him, but you must not worship
him as present there. And why for Gods sake? Bid me rather believe that he is
not after an epseciall manner present: But this is tyranny and injustice in the
highest degree, to command me to believe that he is as truly, (though after
another manner) present there, as at the right hand of his Father; and at the
same time to command me by my works to belie my belief. No, no. Quam magis
ingenue Peribonius! How much more ingenuous are the Socinians, then all other
Sects! for whereas the rest would gladly pretend Antiquity, and take much
unprofitable pains to make a Father now and then speak a word in their favor:
The Socinians instead of puzling themselves to untye, cut asunder all such
knots and difficulties, they with an impudent resolutenesse break through all
obstacles. Let the ancient church determine what it please, and let the ancient
Fathers agree to speak as they have a mind, if what is spoken and decreed
either suit not with what they fancy that the Holy Ghost does mean, or
(natural reason being Judge) ought to mean, or if the Holy Ghost in their
opinions has been silent in it, without more a^o they presently reject and
condemn it; upon which grounds they strein not to alter all the language almost
of the church, they know no such thing as a Sacrament, they acknowledge no
promises to, nor no ^ffects of such ceremonious actions, as the church and all
Christians call Sacraments, they scoff at the Real Presence, and abominate
the adoration of Christ in his Mysteries: Let S. Ambrose (de Sp. 5. l. 3.) say,
By his footstool is meant the earth, and by the earth the body of Christ, which
every day we adore in the mysteries, and which the Apostles adored in our Lord
Jesus. Let S. Augustine (in Psa. 48.) say, For he took earth from earth, both
because be conversed here in very flesh, and gave us likewise very flesh to eat
for our salvation. Now no man eats that flesh, but that he adores it first: And
thus a way is found how the Lords footstool is adored. And again (Epist 120.)
expounding that of the Psalmist, All the rich of the earth have eaten and
worshipped, And they also (says he) are brought to the table of Christ, and
partake of his body and blood; but they adore him only; they are not satisfied,
because they do not imitate him. Let S. Chrysostom (in 1. Cor.) say, This
body the wise men worshipped in the manger, etc. Let us at least imitate those
barbarous men, we, who are the Citizens of heaven; Thou see him not in a
manger, but upon the Altar; not a woman holding him in her arms, but the
Priest himself present, and the Spirit abundantly powered upon the sacrifice
presented there. Lastly let Theodorct (Dial 2.) say, The mystical Symbolls are
understood, which are celebrated and believed, and adored likewise, as being
the very things which they are believed to be. What is all this to a Socinian,
though all antiquity agree in the like language, and not one Father explicitly
dissent from it? But as for Protestants, not having the confidence to renounce
the Fathers authority, they make it their task to prove out of such places,
that the Fathers intended by such speeches, that it was Idolatry to worship
Christ present on the Altar. But- Nobis non licet esse tam disertis.

Of Communion under one Species.
11. This is not a matter of doctrine; but mere practice: The church says not,
it is unlawful to take it in both kinds; but only that upon reasons
sufficiently prevailing with her, she thinks fit in the ordinary practice it
should be so administered: The Governors Ecclesiastical therefore are to be
answerable for it.

But to demonstrate that even those, who is their private opinion think it were
better it should be administered in both kinds, yet ought not upon pretense
thereof to break forth into a sacrilegious separation, I will only recommend
these few considerations to our English Protestants, viz. 1. That there is no
explicit command in Scripture, that the Sacrament should be communicated under
both Species. If they urge the example of our Savior, and the manner how he
administered it; they know that they themselves allow authority to the church to
alter forms not essential to the Sacraments; and accordingly practice both
the form in Baptism, and the holy Eucharist, otherwise then they were first
instituted. 2. That it is evident, and no ingenuous Protestant will deny it,
but that even in the Primitive churches it was an ordinary practice in several
occasions to receive it only in one kind. 3. That not one proof can be showed
that the sick ever received the cup. 4. That notwithstanding in the opinion of
Antiquity, those who received it so were believed to have enjoyed the whole
benefit and virtue of the Sacrament. 5. That the Greek church, though she gives
it ordinarily in public in both Species, yet neither in private, nor to the
sick, no nor (as it is said) in Lent. Neither does she make that difference any
ground of her separation from the Roman church. 6. That Protestants confess,
that those who have a natural antipathy against wine, may receive the body
alone, and may notwithstanding assure themselves that they want no fruit or
effect of the holy Eucharist. Upon which grounds, if they would duly consider
what a horrible crime Schism is; they would no doubt believe that this were
not a sufficient excuse for them.

12. The only proof that I will give of the opinion and allowed practice of
antiquity in this point, shall be to set down here in English, the 289. Epistle
of S. Basile, ad Caesariam Patriciam, a memorable monument of the usage of
private communicating of the holy Eucharist, and that only under one Species
among the ancient Christians, His words are these, (...)etc. that is, And truly
every day to communicate and participate the holy body and blood of Christ, is
a good and profitable thing, seeing he himself has said in express words, He
that shall eat my flesh, and drink my blood has eternal life. Now who does
doubt but that daily to participate of life, is no other thing but daily to
live? Therefore it is that we our selves do communicate four times every week,
to wit, on our Lords day, on the fourth day, on the sixth day, and on the
Sabbath day. And moreover upon other days, if the memory of any Martyr be
celebrated. Now it would be superfluous for me to demonstrate that that custom
is not to be condemned, by which Christians were necessitated in the times of
persecution, in the absence of the Priest or Ministsr, to receive the Communion
(privately) with his own hands, since an inveterate practice has effectually
confirmed it. For all those who lived Monastically in the Deserts, where there
was no Priest, reserving the Communion in their Cells, received it of
themselves. In Alexandria likewise, and in Egypt, each one of the common sort
of people, for the most part, has the Commnnion reserved in his own house. For
the Priest having once offered the Sacrifice, and distributed it, he that
receives it entire all together, and afterward daily communicates of it, ought
to believe that he communicates and receives the very same which the Priest
gave him. For likewise in the Church it self the Priest delivers a part (of the
Sacrifice) and the Communicant receives it, with an entire power to dispose of
it, and so with his own hands lists it to his own mouth. Now it is the very
same in power (or virtue) whether any one shall receive one only portion from
the Priest, or many portions together. Hithert^ S. Basil.

CHAP. III.
Of Invocation of Saints. Of Veneration of Images. Of Prayers and Offerings for
the Dead, and Purgatory. Of Indulgences. And of public service in the Latin
tongue. With what charity and modesty the doctrines of the church are to be
examined.

1. COncerning Invocation of Saints, to show the opinion of the ancient church
about it, it may suffice to take notice that for denying the lawfullnesse of it
Uigilantius was accounted an Heretic, as Dr. Fulke, Hierom. cont. Vigilant.
c. 2. 3. Full. Resp. ad Pseudo-Cath. Cent. 4. Gol. 1240.
the Centuriators, Osiander, etc. acknowledge out of S. Hierome. I am sure S.
Ambrose says in the very language of the Council of Trent, We ought to pray
unto the Angels in our own behalf, who have been given for guards unto us, we
ought to pray unto the Martyrs, whose bo^^dies remaining among us, seem to be
as it were a gage and hostage of their protection. And S. Augustine (in Psalm.
85.) in the language of the Church Litanies, All Martyrs intercede for us,
adding, To the end that they may rejoice in our behalf who pray for us. And
Theodoret (l. 8. de Martyr.) gives the very sense of the present church in this
point, We do not adore the Saints as Gods, but we pray unto them as divine men,
that they would intercede for us. A Tradition this was of the ancient Jewish
church also, as those words of Josophus witness, The pure souls which hear
those that call upon them, obtain in heaven a most holy place. And the same
Tradition was so constant in the ancient Christian Church, Origin in Number. c.
31. Him. 26.
that Origin asks; who doubts but that the Saints do aid us by their prayers.
Add hereto, that the ancient Liturgies of S. Basile etc. have the same prayers
to Saints, in the same form as they are found in the Misfall and Breviaries at
this day. And, that not any Father condemns the practice of it, either as a
novelty or supersticion, which in all other cases upon all occasions they have
done.

13. To show the innocence of the church, far from deserving such behavior
from her children, as she has found in this regard. Consider first, that all
that the church decides in this point is, that they may be prayed to. 2. That
by the church no man is obliged or constrained to pray to them, or to any but
to God. 3. That this is only that they would intercede for us, a thing which
we sinners desire at the hands of other sinners greater perhaps then our
selves. 4. That (excepting only the Litanies which are rather ejaculations and
wishes, then formed prayers; and excepting some few Poetical Hymns, to which
a greater license has always been allowed) the Church, both in the Missall
and Breviary directs the prayers, which she makes with re^pect to Saints,
immediately to God himself, desiring him to hearken to the intercession which
his Saints make for us, and by their ministry to aid us. And therefore whereas
Protestants make their chief difficulty in this matter to be their uncertainty,
whether our prayers can arrive to the Saints hearing; though it may be resolved
out of express Scripture even out of those words, There is joy in heaven over
one sinner that repeurs; ^ot certainly, when the prayers are directed
immediately to God, as the church does, no man will doubt but they may arrive
thither. I cannot choose but on this occasion to publish the ingenuity of the
Socinians once more, who deal with Religion as they would do with an
Astronomicall Hypothesis, framing and changeing heaven and earth according to
their phaenonema; And therefore they, to take away the trouble of examining
either Scripture of Fathers, dissolve the whole controversy, with framing a
new point of Philosophy, viz. that separated souls have no apprehension, nor
parception at all, but are indeed as senseless as the bodies, contrary to
millions of stories, which are surely not every one false, contrary to express
Scripture, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, and S. Paul's judgment,
Whether it was in the body, or out of the body (that I was wrapped into
Paradise) I cannot tell, God knows: by which words, though he knew not which of
these two ways it was, yet he gives to understand, that he might have been
raped in Spirit without the body.

Of Veneration of Images.
3. Concerning Images, we may consider, 1. That they had them in the ancient
church, Tertullian puts it out of all doubt, Tert. de Pudic. c. 7. Ambr. de
invent. corp. Gerv. and Prot.
who makes mention of the l^st sheep generally graven upon the Chalices: And S.
Ambrose says, That a person appeared to him, which seemed like to S. Paul, the
features of whose countenance I had learned, says he, from his picture. The
profession and practice of S. Paulinus is so clear in this behalf and so
confessed by Protestants, that it is lost labor to quote him. 2. No man can
deny but that the sight of holy stories in picture, do both more easily
represent to weak capacities, and put even the best men in mind of good things,
then the reading them in a book. 3. The Council of Trent ( Sess. 25.)
expressly professes, that the ground of Catholics Veneration of them is not
that it is believed that there is any divinity or virtue in them, for which
they ought to be venerated: So that all occasion of superstition is evidently
cut off. 4. That things which have any regard to Religion are to be respected
and treated with reverence, this nature teaches, and the Calvinists
acknowledge, as I took notice before out of Monsieur Daille. 5. That by reason
we have not words enough to express all our conceptions, nor variety enough of
outward actions and postures to express our inward intentions and notions,
hence all the trouble and contradiction among Christians in this point has
proceeded. And therefore as the ancient Jews applied the word(...)and the
posture thereby represented, viz. prostration both to the supreme degree of
adoration due only to God, and to the reverence of honorable persons: So
likewise the second Council of Nice, for want of words applying the word
(...)(which imports the same) to images, therefore it was, that till the
misunderstanding was cleared, the Western Church in the Council of Francford
rejected their decision. But those who love Schism will needs most unjustly
reassume a voluntary misapprehension of the churches intention in this point,
which clearly distinguishes and makes an infinite distance between the
respect, which they give to Images, and that which they render to God, and
gives little more to Images, then Protestants themselves confess to be due to
all holy things pertaining to Religion. The Jews at this day (the greatest
enemies certainly of Idolatry that ever were) yet will not unfold the volume of
their law til after many humble declinations of their bodies, and kissings of
their hands; neither will any sober Christian enter into a church (though he do
not pray) without uncovering his head, to show that he makes a difference
between that place, and an ordinary profane house. The ground of the
lawfulness and fitness of these outward expressions is this, because since we
cannot choose but in our minds and thoughts make a a difference between holy
and profane objects, it is as fitting to express that difference by outward
shows. So that if Catholics be to be suspected of superstition and idolatry
in this behalf; certainly the Calvinists are much more guilty, for exhibiting
an outward reverence to the Bread and Wine in their Cene, seeing they will not
allow a distinction between the several respects which Catholics
acknowledge. 6. That the church obliges no man ( hic and nunc) to exhibit any
veneration to Images, etc. Only they must not condemn it in those that allow
and practice it.

Of Prayers and Offerings for the Dead: and Purgatory.
4. The denial of this made Arrius a Heretic; and besides him I do not find
since Christianity begun, til the last age, any one single person that denied
or questioned it; never was there found any Liturgy without it; nothing so
frequent in Fathers and Ecclesiastical histories as the recommendation of it:
In a word I am confident there is not one doctrine or practice of Christianity
delivered with so full unquestionable a Tradition. So that a man may as well
make an Apology for being a Christian or believing the Gospells to be the word
of God, as for this. The truth is, the more sober and learned sort of English
Protestants do confess the immemorial antiquity of i^; and would the State
there suffer them to upbraid the sacrilegious usurping of such infinite
revenewes, as have been ravished both from the living and the dead in that
Nation, there is no doubt, but that practice would have yet continued there,
for the English church it self has decided nothing against it, excepting only
in consequence by denying Purgatory, which is necessarily supposed in prayer
for the dead. Yet I may say they do not indeed deny Purgatory in the whole
latitude, as the church has decided it, which obliges no man to any particular
conceits about it, though perhaps received as a certain Tradition by many
credulous Catholics, as if it could be nothing else but a certain
subterraneous mansion full of tortures, fire and brimstone, etc. None of which
the church expressly acknowledges, but only Purgatorium esse; animasque ibi
detentas sidelium suffragiis, potissimum vero acceptabili altaris sacrificio
juvari. i. e. That there is a Purgatory, and that the souls detained there are
benefited by the prayers of the faithful, and especially by the acceptable
sacrifice of the Altar. (Council of Trent Sess. 15.) Yea in the following
words, that Council expressly commands Bishops to take care that neither any
uncertain groundless or subtle discourses of it should be published to the
people in Sermons, but only what is found delivered by the holy Fathers and
sacred Counsels; which is in sum, that the souls of Christians, not dying in a
perfect estate, romain in a condition which may be eased and meliorated by the
prayers, Oblations and Charity of the living; according to the express
assertion of S. Aug^stine; We ought not by any means to doubt but that the
Dead are helped by the prayers of the holy Church, by the saving sacrifice, and
by the Alms which are distributed for their souls, to the end that God may
deal with them more mercifully then their sins have deserved: For that is a
thing which the church observes; having received it from the Tradition of the
Fathers. (Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 32.)

Of Indulgences.
5. That which the church commands to be believed as Catholic Traditionary
doctrine, touching this matter of Indulgences, is briefly contained in the
Bull of Plus IV. (relating to the 25. Session of the Council of Trent) in
these words, I believe that power of Indulgences has been given and left in
the Church by Jesus Christ; and that the use of them is very healthful to
Christian people. The ground of which doctrine, according to the position of
Alexander of Hales, Durand, Paludanus, and others, quoted at the end of this
discourse, is the practice of that severe discipline and correction, which in
the most primitive times was exercised against (especially public and
scandalous) sinners, those severe penitential Canons then executed, those
painful Exomol^geses, prostrations, cilices, weepings, covering themselves with
ashes, rigorous fasts, but principally those long abstentions and banishings
from the most holy Sacrament, yea even from entering any further then into the
porch of the church, which the primitive zeal imposed upon Delinquents, which
are mentioned in the most ancient Ecclesiastical writers, and most expressly in
Tertullian and S. Cyprian. An example of which severity more rigorous then all
before mentioned, S. Paul has left us in that censure of his upon the
incestuous Corinthian, whom he delivered over to Satan, to be tormented by him
in the flesh. for the saving of his soul, l Cor. 5. which censure he calls by a
general word(...)i. e. an objurgation by (or, before) many, 2 Cor. 2. 6. from
whence ecclesiastical censures were called in the 7. and 8. General
Councels(...)Notwithstanding to show that Ecclesiastical. Governors ought to
mix Christian charity and meekness with their severity, especially when they
see great signs of compunction and amendment in the Penitents, the same Apostle
has left an example likewise of Indulgence and favor to the same person,
which he expresses by the two verbs (...)and(...)i. e. graciously to spare,
and to comfort. In conformity to which rule, the Primitive Churches, as upon
occasion they used great severity, so likewise great benignity also to
Penitents, which S. Cyprian calls the giving of Peace.

6. But in succeeding times zeal and servor of devotion growing cold, and
generally Christians not being able to support so great a rigor, the church in
wisdom thought fit to qualify both the severity of penalties imposed, to
shorten the times of abstention from the holy Eucharist, and to grant remission
and Indulgence, especially in Articulo mortis generally unto all Penitents:
hence came it that the intercessions of Confessors and Martyrs in behalf of
Delinquents were admitted by the Bishops, as we read frequently in S. Cyprian;
hence the two favorable Canons of Indulgence ( viz. the 10, and 12.) of the
first Council of Nice.

7. In these last and most wicked times, wherein the ancient Ecclesiastical
Discipline is almost wholly lost, not through any fault of the church, (which
enjoynes all Priests to have before their eyes the ancient penitential Canons,
and by them to regulate their penances) but through the general overflowing of
coldness in devotion, profaneness, and impatience of suffering, and likewise
through the impudence, covetousness, and partiality of Priests: no man can yet
deny, but that as the power of inflicting censures remains in the church, so
likewise does the power of Indulgences.

8. Concerning which Indulgences, all Catholics do unanimously agree to these
two points. 1. That they are profitable: and 2. That the Church has power to
grant them, according to the Decision of the Council of Trent. But as for the
extent of the virtue of Indulgences, and as touching the conditions required to
the receiving them fruitfully, Catholic Divines are divided in their opinions.
For 1. concerning the extent of their virtue, Bellarmine (l. 1 de Indulg. c.
7.) sets down this as an opinion maintained by Catholics, viz. That
Indulgences are no other then relaxations of Penalties enjoined by Confessarii,
or which ought to have been enjoined according to the Canons. Which opinion,
says he, is maintained by grave Authors, Alexander of Hales, sum. Theolog. p.
4. q. 23. memb. 2. Durand and Paludanus, Pope Adrian 6. in 4. Sent. q. de
Indulg. And likewise by Soto the Dominican, and Card. Cajetan, both which
teach, that Indulgences are never granted but for Penalties enjoined. Now both
these were appointed by the church to maintain the Doctrine concerning
Indulgences against the late Heretics. Likewise Maldonate the learned Jesuit
(in his book de Sacram. c. 2. de Indulg. q. 1. 2. p.) says, that the opinion,
That Indulgences are only relaxations of the Penalty either enjoined in the
Sacrament of Penance, or ordained by Ecclesiastical Law, seems to him to be
the most true opinion, because it is held by good Authors, and seems to be
demonstrated by unanswerable arguments. And in pursuance hereof the same Author
produces eleven reasons; the substance of the three first of which, is this,
Because we ought to believe, that the Indulgences now in use in the church, are
the same that were anciently practiced, as the Council of Trent expressly
says: Now, says he, we find no other Indulgences in the ancient church and
Counsels, but such as we have mentioned. Again, It was the custom of the
church to add this Particle to the Indulgences given, De Pooeitentiis
injunctis; since therefore, says he, the church has so warily expressed her
self, it would be temerarious to interpret her meaning otherwise. The same
doctrine is strongly maintained likewise by Estius in 4. Sent. did. 20. ^. 10.

9. In the next place, concerning the conditions required to receive benefit by
Indulgences, all Catholics agree that these three are necessary. 1. Authority
in him that grants them. 2. A just reason for the granting them. 3. Due
dispositions in the party receiving them. Now for this last point, Card.
Cajetan ( as he is quoted by Bellarmine l. 1. de Indulg. c. 12.) maintains,
That besides the conditions of being in the state of Grace, and of
accomplishing the actions ordained for the gaining of Indulgences, there is a
third condition necessary to him that would receive fruit by them, which is,
that he have a will to satisfy God by his own labors, as much as he can; and
that Indulgences are of no profit to those who will not satisfy for themselves
when they can. From whence he concludes, That in such an infinite number of
persons that visit the churches in the times of the solemn Stations, and the
like Indulgences, there are but very few that reap the profit of them iudeed.
This opinion, says Bellarmine, is profitable and pious, though perhaps it is
not true. But since Card Bellarmine, the learned Estius Chancellor of Doway,
professes his belief, that this opinion is not only profitable and pious, but
very true. See his Comment. in 2. Ep. ad Cor. cap. 2. v. 11. as likewise in 4.
Sent. did. 20. Sect. 10. The like is strongly maintained by Comitolus a
learned Jesuit, in Resp. Moral. q. 36. who confirms his opinion by the
testimonies of Antisiodorensis, Henricus a Gandavo, Adrian VI. Boniface VIII.
Sylvester, etc.

Now the aforesaid Authors, who teach that Indulgences are only relaxations
from Penances enjoined, vel ab homine, vel a. Canone, do not therefore believe
that they are satisfactions only to the Church, and not to God; for Maldonate
expressly declares the contrary in these words, in the forecited place, Cum
injungitur poenitentia ab Ecclesia, etc. when the Church enjoynes any Penance,
she enjoynes it not only to the end that by such a Penance we should satisfy
the Church, but God also. Now the Indulgence is answerable unto the Penance
enjoined, and by consequence it is granted us, not only to the end that this
penalty should be remitted us before the Tribunal of the Church, but before
Gods Tribunal likewise. And from thence he concludes, that though Indulgences
do regard directly only Penances, which are enjoined to be accomplished in
this world, notwithstanding they do consequently deliver from the pains of
Purgatory likewise. For (says he) since God does not punish the same fault
twice, and since the penalty which men pay in Purgatory, is the same with that
which they ought to have paid in this world, if the Church, by the means of
Indulgences, does remit the penalty, which in this life is due to the Justice
of God, it follows, that she remits likewise that which shall be due in
Purgatory, that is to say, that which those living persons, to whom such
Indulgences are granted, ought otherwise to suffer in Purgatory. Now whether
this Doctrine deserve a separation, let all reasonable, moderate Christians
judge.

Of Public service in the Latin tongue.
8. This is a matter which concerns only the outward order and decorum of the
church, an whereof Ecclesiastical Governors are only to be judges and
disposers, so that if there be any excess or inconvenience, they only are
answerable before Almighty God, particular persons are not at all concerned in
it. Indeed if the Church had appointed her service in the Latin tongue on
purpose that the people should not understand it: Or if she had decreed that it
was a thing unlawful that any body should praise God with the understanding,
but only Priests, and Bishops, and learned men, Protestants might have some
pretense for their clamor, in this regard. But 1. since the Church found her
Liturgies in the same tongue through all the Western world from the beginning
of Christianity. 2. Since no example can be found in any ancient churches,
Jewish or Christian, Eastern or Western, that the languages of Public
Service have been altered, though those of the Countries have been; insomuch
as in our Saviors time the Jewish Devotions were performed in Hebrew, when the
people only understood the Syrian tongue; so the Cophtites, so the AEthiopians,
and so the Jews to this day. 3. Since it is apparently, both of great
comeliness and benefit, that there should be an uniformity in Gods public
worship, so as that wheresoever a Christian travels, he may as well join
himself with other Christians in the service of God, as when he staid at home.
4. Since particularly for the Mass, the greatest part of it from all Antiquity
was performed in a low voice by the Bishop or Priest, the people neither
hearing, nor in the ancient Church seeing him, by reason of a vail or curtain,
which was drawn between the Altar and the people, excepting only at some
certain peculiar times, as at the Elevation, etc. 5. Since the church permits
the translating and publishing of her Liturgies, since she commands the Priests
to explain and inculcate unto the people the meaning of all mysteries; and
since she furnishes even the most ignorant persons with devotions suitable to
their capacities, and far more beneficial to them then the hearing the Psalms
and other parts of Scripture read, so difficult and abstruse, that even the
most learned must confess their inability to comprehend them. Lastly, since an
indiscreet promiscuous exposing of Scriptures has been the occasions of so
many inconveniences, a better though sadder proof whereof cannot be given then
in the present state of England, where every one reading Scripture, and all
visible authority of interpreting it (so as to oblige others to receive such
interpretations) being disclaimed, every one of those infinite numbers of Sects
believe that they find in Scripture sufficient warrant for all such horrible
seditions and murders as have lately been committed there: Therefore the
Catholic church has esteemed it a thing befitting her wisdom to continue an
uniformity in her public worship received from our Fathers, and her care and
charity to appoint respectively to every condition and state of Christians
their proper allowance and dimensum of spiritual food, and to imitate our
Savior, who would not reveal even to his Apostles themselves all the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, during the times of their infirmity, when
they were not able to bear them.

9. These being the principal points of controversy between Catholics and
Protestants, I judged fit to signify how (when I considered what the church
had declared to be her sense of them, separating them from private opinions, to
which no man is obliged) they appeared so reasonable, and so consonant to
antiquity, that if I should have continued in a separation from her for their
cause, I must at the same time have professed to have renounced all interest in
the most glorious Saints and Martyrs that ever the church enjoyed. And if it
were Gods good pleasure that all other Protestants, lovers of unity, would
think fit not to judge of the Catholic church by the character given of her by
Calvinist Controvertists, who lay to her charge whatsoever imprudent or
erroneous positions they find in any particular Catholic author, insomuch as I
am confident not one objection among twenty in their writings proceeds directly
against the church, but that, if they would be persuaded to hear her testifying
of her self in her public doctrine, they would find that they have been
cousened into the guilt of this pernicious exterminating crime of Schism, by
the passions and iuterests af men, enemies to peace and Christian charity, and
that they have been enemies to Gods church for telling them the truth, that
perhaps themselves believed in the sense and latitude that she proposes it.
Lastly, if they would but think the judgment of their own Bucer (in Mat. c.
26.) worthy to be hearkened to, who tells them, Nihil esse damnandum quod ull ^
ratione bonum esse queat. i. e. That nothing is to be condemned (especially in
the Church the Spouse of Christ, and Mother of us all) that by any way (or in
any sense, or respect) can be good, they would think themselves obliged to
consider the doctrines of the church with all possible caution, modesty,
humility, and charitable construction, and not ruin their souls by forsaking
her Communion, till they found that charity her self, which covers a multitude
of sins, could not excuse her, that is, till they found that notwithstanding
the promises of Christ, the gates of bell had, actually prevailed against her.

CHAP. IV.
The Holiness taught and practiced in the Catholic Church a great motive to
embrace the Doctrines. The Authors former exceptious against certain practices
ascribed to the Church, with their answers. Of the Carthusians. Of Mystical
Theology, etc,

1. I Will now discharge the promise which I made in the XVII. chap. of the
first Section, which was to give a narration what effect the eminent rules of
holiness and true solid devotion, which contrary to my expectation, I found in
the Catholic Church, had upon me, and that not only to incline my will to
love them, and desire the practice of them, but to dispose my understanding
also to be more docible, and more easily persuaded of the truth of speculative
points, which were professed in a Church so enriched, and by persons whose
whole employment was to love, serve, glorify, and admire the goodness,
wisdom, and all other perfections of Almighty God, to meditate day and night
upon the holy Mysteries of our Salvation, and to mortify all manner of vice,
passions, and lusts, far more intrinsecally, spiritually, and perfectly, then
any thing that I had seen or read before could give me a notion of. I hope I
need not be ashamed to profess this, and however I will not forbear to
publish mine own shame, by professing, that the life and Counsels of S.
Charles Borromee, and the truly Christian Spirit of humility and meekness
shining in the writings of Monfieur Sales, Bishop of Geneva, gave more
satisfactory answers to all the objections of Protestants, then any I had
hitherto found in all the volumes of those famous Cardinals, Baronius,
Bellarmin and Perron, or at least that the former gave a point and a pierceing
virtue to the discourses of the later, which in former times I had often and
without much effect perused.

2. That way of satisfying doubts and controversies was the stranger to me,
because it came directly contrary to my expectation; for I must profess I had
in former times a far stronger aversion from the Catholic Church, considered
by me as an enemy to Holiness, then as an enemy to truth. I had observed, 1.
In general, that most of the points in controversy between Catholics and
Protestants were such as contributed either to avarice or ambition. 2. I saw
that rich men, (to whom our Savior said it was impossible that they should
enter into the Kingdom of heaven) were the easiliest admitted of all others by
the prostitution of pardons and Indulgences. 3. I saw that many Casuists had
handled the sins of great men, Usury and Simony, so tenderly and favorably,
allowing so many qualifications, that it was become almost impossible to
deprehend them. 4. I saw the ancient discipline of the church almost quite
vanished; and absolution given upon a small penance for such sins (adultery,
blasphemy, and that most horrible and atheistical gallantry of Duelling) which
the ancient church would scarce have pardoned after ten years macerating of the
body and soul with fastings, weepings, and yet greater austerities, and for
which she would not have received to peace the persons guilty by recidivation,
by admitting them to the Communion, no not in Articulo mortis. See the
annotation of Petavius upon S. Epiphanius, ad Haeres. 59.) 5. I saw (me
thought) that absolutions were given as of course; and that persons, though
habitually addicted to mortal sins, yet upon an outward profession of sorrow
expected and challenged pardon and admission to the blessed Sacrament, and all
this toties quoties. 6. I saw that attrition i. e. sorrow for sin, merely out
of fear of being damned, with the Sacrament, was counted a sufficient
qualification to remission of sins, whereby in my opinion, charity it self
became unnecessary: Such prejudices as these was I possessed withal, all which
I imputed to the church her self; insomuch as though I suspected that my
understanding might be overreached by subtle Disputants to excuse the
errors, which I believed to be in the Roman church, yet I was resolved that it
was impossible my will should be seduced so far as to approve such enormous
practices.

3. Now the occasion and manner how I came to be satisfied of the eminent
sanctity taught and practiced in the Catholic Church, and concerning those
practices, not that they were excuseable, but that they were not to be imputed
to the church (which was most innocent of them) was as follows. It happened not
long after my arrival at Paris, that my curiosity led me among other places to
visit the Monastery of the Carthusians, whom we deprehended in their ordinary
employment of prayers, and in the place of their almost continual residence,
the church: A sight that was, which made a strange impression upon my mind,
being at that time also in some unquietness, by reason of certain scruples
already entertained concerning Religion. For there I saw persons so utterly
secluded from the world, that they never visited other men, and rarely and with
unwillingnesse admit-other men's visits, yea excepting a few hours weekly,
renounced the conversation and sight of one another, but only in the church,
where their conversation was only with God: Persons so mortified in their
looks, so immovable in their postures, with countenances so intent upon their
present devotions, as if they only lived with their rational faculties, and
so far from observing, that they were observed by others, that truly I believe
they knew it not: persons (as after enquiry I was informed) that through the
whole course of their lives practice a strict abstinence, and for a greater
part, a rigorous fast; persons that every day allow near eight hours to vocal
prayers, and laborious singing in the church, and almost all the hours besides
in their private cells to meditation and contemplation: persons that no
incommodity of weather hinders from their midnight watches, and devotions in
the church for several hours together; persons, whose inseparable clothing is
hair-cloth, and whose other more private mortifications and austerities they do
most sollicitously con^^al from the world, and account it of all other the most
rude mortification, if they should come to be discovered: persons, who are so
far from desiring the esteem of the world, that they never would publish any
miracles done in their solitude, nor seek the canonization of any of their
Saints, no not their Founder S. Brun^ himself: persons who notwithstanding all
these austerities, express in their conversation the greatest repose, and
contentment, and cheerfulness of mind imagineable, the greatest compassion
toward others, that would seem to compassionate them, and protestations, that
if there were no happiness to be expected in another world, yet that the
inward ravishings of soul; the spiritual embraces, which their celestial
Bridegroom affords them many times, deserve to be purchased with far greater
worldly losses, and with far greater austerities, then any that they have or
can suffer. Lastly, persons whose order has continued now without interruption
for about six hundred years, without the least scandal, without the least need
of Reformation, growing the more perfect according to the declination of the
rest of mankind, as if God intended it, in an especial manner, to be the
defense and security, the chariots and horses of Israel: An order whose
increase of revenews are perceived not by themselves, but the poor only, who
are accordingly more amply and frequently sustained; insomuch, as that which
has been the corruption of other orders, is the purifier and refiner of this;
and I may add this observation with respect to England, an order that Almighty
God did principally choose, by which to condemn Schism at it is first entrance
there, viz. by suffering them, that is, piety and innocence it self, to be the
first victimes and sacrifices offered to it.

4. I must confess, that as I could not consider these things without
astonishment and admiration, so I could not free my self from some degree of
envy and indignation, that I could not find any thing in any of our Churches to
oppose to such a spectacle: I was willing enough to suspect that there might be
some mixture of a secret hypocrisy, and pride, and ostentation, even in such
renouncings of pride and ostentation: But then I confuted my own suspicion by
this most sure observation, that Almighty God did not usually of all other
vices suffer hypocrisy even in a single person to be long undiscovered, much
less in a whole order, and for six hundred years together. Therefore I began to
discourse thus within my self; Is it possible if the Roman church be so deeply
guilty, and so intolerably depraved, as I have hitherto believed, that Almighty
God should suffer such servants of his to lie in those dregs and pollutions,
exposed to eternal perdition so many years together? Has their continual
meditation been in the holy Scriptures, and yet never one beam of divine light
be sent from heaven to irradiate any of their understandings, and to convince
them, that their whole Religion is apparently contradictory to the same
Scriptures? Is it likely, that if the Faith of the Church was of necessity to
be changed, and the practices to be reformed, that God should make choice of
such Apostles as a debauched, perjured, sacrilegious, Apostate Monk of Germany;
or a seditious, uncharitable, malicious Picard, or a furious Gladiatour of
Switzerland, and in the mean time leave such persons enflamed with his love,
still lying in their deadly ignorances and impieties, never suffering one of
that order to be converted, yea leaving Heresy more confirmed in them now,
then ever before that such a pretended new Evangelicall light discovered it
self?

5. Some time I spent in such meditations, which I could neither hinder nor
satisfy my self in; yet because it seemed dangerous to me to build resolutions
upon the manner and method of Gods Providence, which is inscrutable; therefore
I thought it as necessary for me to examine (not the outward shows, but) the
Rules of Holiness practiced in the Roman church, as the doctrines therein
professed; for if the former appeared to be according to the Spirit of Christ,
they would strongly argue for the truth of the later. Having this design, I
provided my self of the best Methods of Devotion and Spirituality that I could
meet with, and upon all occasions I made conversation with such Religious
persons, as were in opinion eminent for a spiritual life; The success whereof
was strange and incredible: For whereas I had always been of opinion, that
that which in the Roman church was called mystical Theology, was, if compared
with the ordinary Practical Divinity, as I took the Moral Philosophy of the
Platonists to have been, compared with that of other Philosophers, viz. the
same ordinary doctrines and precepts of virtue, but only clothed in abstruse,
sublime, and Metaphorical terms, rendering the professors thereof not more
virtuous then other men, but more fantastical and self conceited: But I found
that the notion I had of it had no affinity with the thing it self; Mystical
Theology being nothing else in general, but certain Rules, by the practice
whereof a virtuous Christian might attain to a nearer, a more familiar, and
beyond all expression comfortable conversation with God, by arriving unto, not
only a belief, but also an experimental knowledge and perception of his divine
presence, after an inexpressible manner in the soul; wherein he is taught first
to purge himself of all pollutions of sin and worldly lusts, to possess
himself of all Christian virtues, and by such means to prepare himself for an
union with the heavenly Majesty; the general instrument of all these blessings
being a constant exercise of Mental Prayer, that is, meditating with the
understanding upon heavenly mysteries, but especially inward ejaculations,
aspirations, and immediate acts of the will, loving, praising, adoring, and
perfectly resigning it self to the most perfect will of God, by which in time
there is made a perfect denudation, mortification, and annihilation of a man's
own private will, and a suffering ones self to be inacted and moved immediately
by Almighty God, and at last a contemplation of the divine essence without any
medium, without all help of grosser imaginary forms, an absorption of all
operations (called by them a divine idleness) whereby the soul reposeth
securely, and with unspeakable pleasure in the bosom of her heavenly
Bridegroom. I speak not now of strange effects, outward and respecting the
body, as Elevations, Ecstasies, etc. which though admired at by others, yet are
neglected, and even prayed against by spiritual persons themselves.

6. Now to prove that these are neither dreams of ignorant souls, nor sublime
extravagances of soaring spirits, we may consider that. 1. The greatest
understandings that many of the last ages have brought forth (as S. Bernard, S.
Thomas Aquinas, S. Bonaventure, and I. Picus Count of Mirandula etc.) have all
written uniformly upon the same subject, and have showed clearly, that what
they wrote was not mere speculation, but comprehended, practiced, and felt by
them. 2. That even the meanest capacities have arrived to the perfection of
contemplation, as S. Isidore a plain husbandman in Spain, S. Teresa, S.
Catherine of Siena, and of Genoa, (silly ignorant women) and that unparalled
young Heremite, Gregorio Lopez. Insomuch as whosoever shall with a true
resignation and pure intention enter into this life of the Spirit, though his
understanding be not able to give him entertainment for meditation, yea though
he be not able to help himself with reading others, yet if, being informed of
the necessary points of Catholic Faith, he humbly and constantly move his will
to frame cordially acts of love and resignation, etc. to God, even such a man
or woman shall not fail to arrive, it may be, to a higher degree of union, then
the most learned and skillful Doctors, even to that perfection of which S. Paul
speaks, Crucifigor cum Christo: and vivo, jaem non ego, sed vivit in me
Christus. i. e. I am crucified with Christ: and I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me. 3. To the end to be secure of delusions it is observeable, that
whereas in other Sects ^^^re are certain counterfeitings of such a mystical
familiarity with God, joined with strange motions and effects, as awong the
Anabaptists, Famulists, Quakers, Ranvers, etc. (strange examples whereof (in
the last age) we may read in Florimundus Raemundus, yet now daily outdone by
those Sects in England, as at Malton in Yorkshire, London, and other places,
where they abound) yet such illuminations discover their black Author, in that
the persons are far from being cleansed of their carnal lusts, pride, malice,
etc. and the design appears commonly to be the troubling the world with some
new pretended Revelation and Reformation etc. Whereas among spiritual persons
in the Catholic Church, the inseparable qualification for contemplation is a
deep humility, a most tender charity and love of Catholic unity. 4. Lest a
suspicion should arise that this mystical Theology and doctrine of
contemplation should be an invention of Religious Orders to magnify themselves
in the worlds opinion, as having means to a nearer approach to Almighty God,
then the rest of the world: We may consider both that the same rules for
substance are found in the writings of the ancient Fathers, as S. D^onisius
Aroopagita, S, Augustine, S. Basil, Joannes, Cassianus, S. Hierome, etc. and
that even those most active Fathers and Bishops of the church have
notwithstanding attained to a great perfection of contemplation; yea that in
this last age there have not appeared any more perfect therein, then those two
famous Bishops, viz. B. Francis de Sales, Bishop of Geneva, and S. Charles
Barromee, that most unwearied sollicitous Archbishop of Milan and Cardinal,
and Antonio de Roias a Spanish secular Priest: Though withal it cannot be
denied, but that a retreat and disengagement from the world, solitude, silence,
and other austerities be very powerful and effectual dispositions thereto.
But concerning Mystical Theology I shall refer those that desire further
information, to the writings of Thaulerus, Harphius, Rusbrochius, the Bishop of
Geneva, S. Teresa, and many others: Particularly the several Treatises, as yet
Manuscripts, of that late very sublime contemplative, F. Augustine Baker, a
Monk of our English Congregation of the Holy Order of S. BENET; The yet
imperfect sum of whose methodicall instructions concerning Internal Prayer,
having happily met withal at Rome, I found my self pressed to hasten my
reconcilement to the Church, because I thirsted to become capable of practicing
those heavenly instructions. And afterward in France, but especially in my
passage through Cambray, having seen many more of the same Authors writings,
the Spirit of which did eminently show it self in the lives of those
excellently devout and perfectly religious Benedictine Dames there; and being
by them informed (which within a few days mine own eyes assured me of) that
the same doctrine was received and practiced by their Fathers at Doway. I
presently, contrary to all my former resolutions, to dispose my self only
among strangers in a religious life, determined to fix my self at Doway. I
forbore in the former Impression to mention this Author among the rest, because
I thought his books were confined to Cambray, where they were written, or to
his own Convent at Dowvy: But being since assured, that they were largely
dispersed, even among the secular Clergy, I could not without ingratitude now
omit his name, and I hope that e're long a full account of his spiritual
instructions concerning the several Degrees of Internal Prayer, shall be
happily communicated to the world, methodically digested, and authoritatively
published, to the glory of God, and great advancement of devout souls in his
divine love.

7. For my present purpose it will suffice that by that short enquiry I made, I
satisfied my self, that in no other Congregation, but the Catholic Church
only, were to be found either rules in writing, or living directors for a true
spiritual life in any comparison approaching to those before named. Insomuch
as I have often wondered why Protestants would not at least borrow and
transcribe such writings for their own use and practice; and all that I could
say for answer to my self was. 1. That according to that saying of the Fathers,
Spiritus sanctus non est extra Ecclesiam. i. e. The Holy Spirit resides not any
where out of the Church, that is, disperses not his extraordinary favors, and
sublimer gifts any where else. 2. Because Protestant Religion, etc. renouncing
all Evangelicall Counsels of perfection, as voluntary poverty, chastity etc.
and their avarice having swallowed all the revenews, which nourished men in a
solitary life of meditation and contemplation, they both want such effectual
helps thereto, and dare not for fear of being censured as half-Catholiques,
commend or practice the means proper and conducing to it, insomuch as the very
name of Contemplation is unknown among them, I mean in the mystical sense: for
all that is understood among them in their Treatises of devotion by that word,
is only the descanting upon any mystery of divinity, or passage of Scripture.

8. Finding therefore not only beyond, but contrary to my expectation, such a
trea^ure in the Catholic Church as true Devotion, an union with, and
participation of the Divine Nature, and the means to purchase this treasure
being so obvious there, and so unknown all the world over besides; could I do
less then say, Quis dabit mibi pennas ficut Columba? Who will give me wings
like a d^ve, that I may fly into the wilderness, retired out of the world, and
be at rest? that wilderness into which God has promised that he will bring
his chosen ones, in which loquetur ad cor little, i. e. He will communicate
himself familiarly unto them: I do freely confess my partiality, I could not
choose but wish that truth might appear to me to be the companion of Holiness,
and that that church which could give such admirable directions to love God,
might not deceive us when she would instruct us to know him. In a word, I was
the easilier persuaded to believe and submit to the churches authority, because
thereby I was sure to evacuate pride, and an esteem of mine own sufficiency to
be mine own directour, and by consequence to exercise at least an act of
humility and obedience, if not of faith.

9. As for the prejudices and accusations before mentioned, which I once
imputed to the Catholic Church, the clearing of them is not at all difficult;
for as for the first, the whole force of it lies in this, ^ that Christ is
accused to have taken care both for the subsistence and honor of his servants
and Ministers; a fault that no sect can forgive, as if they intended to be
revenged upon their seducing Ministers, by exposing them to beggary and
dishonor. But this was never the disposition of Catholics, they have always
willingly afforded this double honor to the Clergy, and yet never any Church
upon earth laid so heavy censures upon avarice, Usury and Simony, as the
Catholic Church both done. Concerning the 2. the prostitution of Indulgences
and Pardons is in formal words condemned by the Council of Trent: So that it
is not the Church, which opens Paradise so freely to rich men, but only
particular avaricious Priests, who I fear do by such vain promises shut it both
against themselves, and such customers. To the 3. the imputation only
concerns two or three private Casuists, so far from being justified by the
church, that the Pope has expressly censured and condemned them. Concerning
the 4. I fear indeed the scandal of prostituting absolutions for the greatest
crimes upon ridiculous penances is but too common; but yet without any fault of
the church; yea we may reasonably judge of the mind of the Council of Trent in
that respect, by the zealous practices of S. Charles Barromee (then whom no man
had a greater influence upon that Council) who immediately after its
dissolution spent himself wholly in endeavoring to restore the ancient
discipline, as far as this wicked age could bear it, according to the mind of
that Council. For the 5. as the rest, it only reflect; upon particular
persons, and touches not the church at all. The like may be said of the last,
which speaks of Attrition, and the sufficiency thereof with the Sacrament of
Penance to qualify a person guilty of sin for Remission: Upon better enquiry I
found that all Catholic Authors, though they assent to that doctrine in
gross, yet they do not all agree in their explication of the notion of
Attrition. For in direct opposition to my pre-conceived prejudice, I find, that
(not to speak of Jansenius and his followers, who profess to embrace S.
Augustines Doctrine therein) the learned Estius and Sylvius (the former in l.
4. sentent, did. 16. 9. and the latter in suppl. D. Tho. ad 3. p. a. 1. q. 1.)
do thus express themselves, that there are four acceptions of the word
Attrition, according to four Motives unto sorrow for sin. 1. Out of mere
natural and humane motives, as loss of goods, fame, health, etc. 2. Out of
fear of hell, and not at all the love of God. 3. For the offense indeed
committed against God, but yet this out of an in-efficacious, suspended, and
mere optative will. Now none of these three, say they, are sufficient, even
with the Sacrament, to qualify a sinner for the remission of his sins: But
only the fourth, which is indeed essentially Contrition, but an imperfect one,
according to the expression of the Council of Trent, being a Grief for sin,
because God is offended, joined with an absolute purpose no more to offend him,
and proceeding from a will to please him, as deserving to be loved above all
things, though this will be as yet feeble, remiss, and imperfect. This they
say is the lowest qualification that with the Sacrament can suffice to
remission of sins. And this they resolutely contend to be the sense of the
Council of Trent; grounding themselves upon this, to their seeming firm
foundation, viz. That it is against Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the ancient
Church, to say, that a man without any degree of true charity can be capable of
the remission of his sins, or the favor of God. But very many dissent from the
ri^ou^ of this ^^eir expl^ cation. That which the (...), ((...). 14. ^^. 4.)
concerning this point, is, That A^trition (called there imperfect Contrition)
excluding a will of sinning, and joined with a hope of pardon, but arising from
a consideration of the filthiness of sin, and fear of punishment for it,
although without the Sacrament of Penance it cannot of it self bring a sinner
to justification, yet it disposes him to the obteining the Grace of God in that
Sacrament: And that it does not (as Calvin affirms) make a man a hypocrite, or
more a sinner then before; but on the contraery, that it is a gift of God, and
an impulse of the holy Spirit not yet inhabiting in man, but only moving him,
by which a penitent being helped, does prepare unto himself a way unto
righteousness. Then which what could be spoken more moderately, cantelously,
and piously? To conclude this argument, Scandalls there will and must be in the
church to the end of the world, as our Savior foretold; and withal, as he
foretold a grievous woe to the authors of them; and a blessing proportionable
to those that would not be scandalized, that is, that neither would join in
heart to consent to such scandalls, nor out of hatred of them to usurp the
Angels office (who only are deputed to separate and pluck up all scandalls at
the end of the world) or to rent the mystical body of Christ.

CHAP. V.
The Conclusion: wherein the imputation of inconstancy charged upon the Author,
is answered: as likewise of forsaking a Religion, because it was persecuted.

1. BEfore I wholly take off my pen from this paper, I will, though not without
some indignation and grief, answer two imputations which have been charged upon
me since my declaring my self a Catholic; the first of which is inconstancy:
That which raises these passions in me, in regard of this, is only my respect
and charity to the authors of such an imputation, which I fear preceeds from a
poisonous root of bitterness, I mean a contempt of Religion in general: They
that would not account it a fault for a man that had found out a new mystery or
trade of thriving, to embrace that, and forsake another in which he had spent
the whole former part of his life: They that would not impute this as a fault
to a man to renounce one sect of Philosophy, and to embrace another, either for
the greater probability of it, or even the gracefulness of being new, or a
Paradox: Yea they that would impute it as a folly and morosity, if a man did
not conform himself to any fashionable novelty in clothes, or language, or
opinion: Such men as these, who think that profit, or fancy, or vanity may
excuse inconstancy, and make it commendable; esteem it a vice only, when
conscience and the glory of God, and eternity is in question. Religion is the
only thing that must be left to the hazard, whether good or bad it must not be
changed, and it is dishonorable for a man that is in the way to hell to avoid
it, or to accept of heaven, unless he was born with a right to it. So that the
Jews, who, to keep themselves to their old Rabbis; and the Pagans, who, to
maintain their old even in their own opinion ridiculous Idols, rejected our
Savior, shall in such men's opinions deserve the commendation of constancy, and
the Apostles for harkening to him, who only had the words of eternal life,
shall not escape their censure. For my part I profess, though I had not
believed the Fathers, who with one mouth protest that Schism and Heresy are
most mortal and almost unpardonable sins; if I had only esteemed them as less
good to my soul, I would have done that right to my reason, as both to have
rejected them, and to profess likewise the rejecting them. The Apostle
commands us to try all things, and thus far I suppose that such objectors, if
it were only for curiosities sake, would agree with him; but he adds further,
hold fast that which is good: but here they would leave him, and say, Hold fast
that which you held before, whether it be good or bad, let your reason judge of
good things, but withal let it reject even the best, rather then be
unconstant. Indeed if by being a Catholic I had relinquished any good thing
whereof I was possessed being a Protestant; if my fidelity to temporal
Superiors, my love to my Country and friends, etc. were not even increased by
this change, I should blush to hear such an objection for mine own sake;
whereas now I both blush and grieve only for their sakes; and my only revenge
on them, shall be to beseech God to bless them, with bestowing on them this
very fault of inconstancy, that they may live to change at least this little
less then Atheistical opinion. To conclude, I desire them first to meditate
well whether they be not concerned in that character which S. Augustine ( de
Bapt, cont. Don. l. 2.) gives certain persons in his time, who (says he)
whilst they are afraid to be reprehended for a small time here for inconstancy,
are not afraid to be damned for eternity. And next, whether I be not absolved
in another speech of the same Father, saying, ( cont. Cresc. lib. 3.) As it is
a landable thing not to be removed from a true opinion, so it is a blameable
thing to persist in a false one; which never to have held is the prime
commenda^ion, but the second, to change it; that either that which is true may
remain from the beginning, or at least by rejecting the false one, the true one
may succeed: And likewise in another parallel one of S. Ambrose, (Ep. 31. ad
Valent. ^mp.) I am not ashamed to be converted with the whole old aged world;
seeing no age is too late to learn that which is good: Let that old age blush
which cannot amend it self, etc. it is no shame to change for the better.

2. This objection only reflects upon my discretion; but the next wounds me in
the point of honesty; for I am charged with ingratitude for leaving a church,
(wherein I had been bred, and received more then ordinary favors) in the time
of her affliction and persecution. Whereto I answer. 1. That if God was pleased
to make affliction an occasion of illumination to me, who was I that I should
wilfully shut mine eyes against his light? 2. If I had, following the example of
many, passed over from the persecuted party to the persecutors, there might
have been some ground of an ill suspicion. But it was so far from that; that I
made choice of a Church, whose only portion both in war and peace was
persecution, and this to be expected by her whether party soever prevailed; if
the King was restored, all that her members could hope for, was to return to
their ancient pressures, not only upon their goods, but lives also. This was
the portion of that church which I embraced, if that party had been victorious.
But on the other side, if the bloody designs of the Presbyterians (who only
then appeared) had succeeded, what a cup of bitterness and terror was prepared
for the poor Catholics? what less then utter desolation even to sowing with
salt was to be expected from persons, who profess a tyranny even upon the
souls of all men, that dissent from them in the sleightest opinions; from
persons, who were the contrivers of those bloody laws against Catholics, not
so much out of conscience, or out of hat^ed to them, as for their worldly
designs, and against the Kings interests, yea to be a snare unto him; for what
disadvantage could it be to his Majesty, that his Subjects should enjoy the
liberty of their consciences? and what more fatal engine did they make use of
to ruin the late King withal, then by calumniating him with suspicions of
Popery, either when any new ceremony was instituted, or when the rigor of the
law was mollified against an innocent Priest? from persons lastly, who could
not forbear to threaten ruin even to their best friends; who, whereas they had
been solicited by them to expose their lives to free their souls from tyranny,
saw themselves ready to be a prey to the most ungrateful prodigious tyranny
that ever was. It is true, of late God has been pleased most miraculously to
break the jaw bones of those Lions, and to commit his people to more merciful
hands; they may be permitted to hope for some ease from Governors, whose
profession is to leave men's consciences to God, to whom only they are naked and
in the light; especially considering that they themselves have by Gods
particular goodness escaped that danger, whereby Gods purpose seems to have
been to teach them mercy in the School of Experience. But these were things
almost above my wishes, much more above my hopes, when I first embraced
Catholic Religion. I was then so far from forsaking a church, because it was
persecuted, that it was persecution I fled to, persecution suffered with most
admirable patience and joyfulnesse; it was persecution that invited me to
become a Catholic; for this I relinquished present fortunes, and all hopes of
future; this made me esteem the loss of my natural Country, hindered, and most
dear friends a great gain and preferment. Lastly, for this I can without
murmuring hear my self styled a desertor of my Religion, because it was
persecuted, even when I embraced a Religion, which was persecuted by that very
church that complained of the injustice of persecution, and when she complained
so, yet persecuted Catholics.

3. Therefore rejoicing and glorying in such a happy crime as inconstancy, and
in so unreasonable an imputation, as forsaking truth for persecution, and
neglecting such unreasonable accusers, I will as I ought, turn my self to the
blessed Author of this change, and confessing unto him in the language of the
same S. Augustine, (Soliloq. c. 33.) Gratias tibi ago illuminator and liberator
meus, quoniam illuminasti me, and cognovi te. Sero novi te Veritas antiqua,
sero novi te Veritas aeterna. i. e. I give thee thanks O God my enlightener and
deliverer; for thou have enlightened me; and I have known thee. It was late
before I knew thee, O Ancient Truth, it was late before I knew thee, O Eternal
Truth. I will pray unto him in the words of the same S. Ambrose, (de Penit. l.
2. c. 8.) Serva, Domine, munus tuum, Custodi donum quod contulisti ettam
refugienti. i. e. Preserve O Lord thine own free grace, keep that gift of
thine, which thou have been pleased to confer upon me, that even fled from
thee, and was a long time unwilling to receive it.

Amen.
FINIS.
AN APPENDIX: WHEREIN Certain misconstructions of this Book, published by some
Protestants, especially by I. P. Author of the Preface, before the L. Falklands
Discourse, touching Infallibility, are cleared; And likewise the grounds of
that Discourse examined.
CHAP. I.
A brief Recapitulation of the design, and contents of the whole Book.

1. DEar Catholic Reader^ though this book was commanded by the unworthy
Author to address it self, especially to Protestants, to whom the account
therein is given; yet since not only it, but whatsoever shall be said by others
to its prejudice (as it can scarce be avoided, but that writings of such a
nature will find either Contradictors, or at least severe Interpreters) may
perhaps fall into thy hands, and though but for novelties sake be perused by
thee? I judged requisite in this re-impression to bespeak thy candor and
charity both in perusing it, and whatsoever thou shall read or hear concerning
it.

2. To dispose thee therefore to exhibit (not to the authors person, but his
cause, which is thine also, as thou art a Catholic) the effects of such
candor and charity, thou art earnestly entreated to take into thy
consideration that the Authors design was not to publish a book of
Controversies, nor to venditate any particular opinion of his own in any point,
now in debate between Catholics and Protestants, but to perform an act of
obedience; And being in his own intention then ready to take his farewell of
the world, (in conformity to the command of others,) to leave as it were a
Yestamentary legacy to all Christians, therein satisfying Catholics, that his
Union with them was not an effect of interest, or any sudden humor of
discontent, or inconstancy, but the fruit of as much advisednesse and reason as
he was capable of; and tacitly inviting Protestants, if his proceedings could
approve themselves to them, by his example and Method to get a view of truth,
disintangled and unclouded from preconceived, unjust prejudices, and out of
love to that truth and most necessary care of their own safety, in heart at
least to forsake the dwelling, which they might feel begin to shake and tremble
under their feet.

3. Whosoever therefore shall vouchsafe to read this Book, if he will give a
right judgment of it, must let the Authors meaning be the spirit of it; and
then he will look upon it and consider it, as Tabulam Votivam, in which is
represented the Authors safety and happiness procured by a ship wrack, and his
liberty effected by a captivity, and by suffering his hands and feet to be
restrained by chains never, by Gods grace, to be cast off. In a word, he will
there for the time, be a witness and Auditor to one that has been persuaded
simply and ingenuously to tell a homely, but most true story of the fortunes,
which happened to him in a strange country, discovering by what unexpected
means, and with what unseen snares, Divine Catholic Truth (Gods merciful
providence so disposing it) did unawares most happily entangle, arrest and
fasten him in the Catholic Church, at a time, when of all others he least
apprehended a captivity from that Coast.

4. The instruments employed by God to effect this Captivity, were especially
these two. 1. The conversation of a worthy, prudent and learned friend, namely
Doctor H. Holden, Doctor of the faculty of Paris. And 2. the perusal of a
little book, entitled, Reigle Generale de la foy Catholic, written in French
by Mons. Francois Veron, Doctor of Divinity, and Pastor of the Catholic
Congregation at Charenton. These two proceeding in all points almost upon the
same grounds, and in the same order, in a short time effected that Conviction
in me, which many volumes of Catholic Controvertists, formerly used, and a
world of Verbal disputes had in vain attempted.

5. In brief, the method and proceeding, by which these two successefully
effected their charitable designs upon me, was this. I was at that time, (more
then in their opinion, for they said it was in their certain knowledge) out of
the Church; and according to mine own persuasion, in at least a faileable and
fallible Church, a Church that could pretend to no authority over my
conscience, as a Christian, but merely over my external actions and
profession, as an Englishman; And withal, such a Church as in the then present
circumstances was become very languishing, and in a very doubtful condition
for subsistence. Herupon I became sollicitous (upon an imagined supposition of
her future defaillance) how to make the least imprudent choice, among all other
separated Congregations and Sects, in case I should really be put upon such a
necessity.

6. Being full of these thoughts, and vexed to the heart, both at my self, and
all other Sectartes, that I was become so hard to be pleased, and that none of
them could represent themselves to me with any qualities fit to invite me to
join with them, neither could I induce my self to overlook or pardon a world of
defects and deformities, which I could not but observe in each of them: In
these circumstances, being obliged by many occasions and businesses to frequent
the conversation of the foresaid worthy friend, then my neighbor, and not
being able to conceal the agitation of my thoughts; he beforehand knowing
that, whether the Church of England failed or no, I stood in absolute need of a
Church for my Soul, and now perceiving that I was in quest after a treasure, in
places where it was not to be found, he gave me a prospect of the Catholic
Church by quite different ligh^s, then I had ever before viewed her: For in his
discourses, as likewise in the forementioned book of ^^ed upon her in her pure
simp^^ ^^ had been no kind of multiplicity of p^^^ among her children; (...) as
^^ conspiring in the belief (...) profession of h^^^^ Doctrines (...) those
Doctrines (...) to cut off (...) produced such Authors, (...) among
Catholics, as with the greatest freedom from partiality on ime^^sts did
interpret those Doctrines, and which imposed no greater burdens, nor streitned
the paths in which she would have her children to walk, more then she intended
and declared.

7. By this means I found that all the furniture, with which I had for so many
years provided my self to combat against Catholics, or to defend my self from
them, was taken out of my hands: I perceived that in the depth and center of my
spirit, I was really, though unknown to my self, a very Catholic, before I was
a Catholic: For all the necessary declared doctrines of Catholic Religion,
(as they are expressed in the language of the Church) I found I had never
rejected: and as for those points, which I could not digest, and for which I
had been averted from the Church, I found that they were particular dogme's
either of some popular controvertists or Schoolmen, or affixed to certain
Orders, and as freely renounced from the notion of necessary Catholic
Doctrines by other unsuspected Catholics, as they had been by my self.

8. Hereupon that inward satisfaction of mind (which attended this discovery)
love of unity and a complacence in the security of an established state of
mind, made me hasten to profess my self our Lords and his Churches Captive. I
was quickly weary of that former licentious freedom, which I enjoyed, to
believe what I would, so I would not publicly contradict what the Laws and
interests of particular S^^es and Sects among Protestants thought good to
order: whereby it came to pass, that into whatsoever Church amongst them I
should ^^^pen to change my residence, I was as much obliged, if not more,
(supposing that I would enjoy the privileges of that Congregation) to change
the outward profession of my Creed, as my habits or fashion of life. Having an
immortal soul, I was glad to find an immortal faith, to enrich it with; a
Faith not fashioned according to the humor and garb of Nations, Cities and
Villages; a Faith, the very same in variety of States, well or ill ordered, of
Monarchies or Aristocracies, or popular governments: a Faith, upon which
neither the passions interests, or Tyrannies of Princes and Governers, nor the
various mutations of ages had any influence: It was alone unchangeable, when
nothing, besides it, was exempted from change.

9. Charity to my self obliged me to embrace this Faith: and charity to others
made me, being required, not unwilling to communicate o^ others the treasure I
had found, and to discover the ways how I came to find it. And this I have
done, God knows, imperfectly enough in this Treatise, yet in some sense
perfectly, because sincerely. In which there is nothing of Doctrine, which I
acknowledge to be mine, but what thou ( dear Catholic Reader) wilt challenge
to be thine by as good a right, it being the Common Faith of all Catholic
Christians, Whatsoever there is, that seems Doctrinall besides this (excepting
it may be, some expressions not warily enough couthed) belongs to particular
Catholic Authors, mentioned by me, not with intention to show my self a
Proselyte of their opinions, but only to declare the convenience that I reaped
by them, in that I found I was not obliged to retard my assent to Catholic
Doctrine, contained in essential Truths; since by their means I found a world
of particular disputes cut off, and, though I was not, I found that I might
without danger have been of their Opinions.

CHAP. II.
Grounds upon which certain passages in this book have been misunderstood by
some Catholics, and those mistakings cleared.

1. WHen I was employed about the first publishing of this Book, the have of
the Printer, and my thoughts then busy about a matter of much greater
importance to me, then the printing or publishing of books, viz. about
soliciting an admission and unchangeable abode among the French Carthusians,
made me that I could not allow my self the leisure to examine what I had
written, nor to qualify some phrases, which I did almost suspect, might, as it
has proved, be obnoxious to misconstruction. I forgot likewise to quote the
Authors names, whose particular interpretations and opinions had been so
beneficial to me, though I had no Obligation nor intention to assent to them.
However this neglect of naming them, derived upon my self the censures of
those, that having been taught otherwise, judged every thing to be Heterodox
and unsound, that was not favored by their particular Masters, or that was
delivered in such Phrases and expressions as their ears had not been acquainted
with Whereas if the Authors had appeared^ either their authority would have
justified what they taught, or at least I should not have been accountable for
it.

2. Had it not been for these (^s the case then stood with me) not inexcuseable
omissions, I had doubtless avoided some ^igorous imputations and censures,
which (as I have been informed) certain, questionless, well meaning
Catholics have given of this inconsiderable Book.

3. God forbid I should condemn the Authors of such censures, since I am
confident the ground of them was not any passion against me (a stranger to
them, and only known by the happiness befallen me of being a Catholic) but a
zeal to the Purity of Catholic truth. The Method of the book, and the manner
of stating controversies in it, was indeed somewhat new in England, and
therefore no wonder if some were startled at it. Besides, if I had had the
Providence or leisure to have softend some expressions, and to have made it
appear, that that latitude in Disputes, which in England will not pass so
freely, yet in France and other Catholic Countries is very receiveable, they
would have seen, that it was not my fault, but my fortune only to displease
them.

4. In this Review of my Book, I have endeavored to give them all the
satisfaction possible, I have added the explanation of several phrases, which
were before hard of Digestion, I have quoted the several Authors, whose larger
Opinions I had occasionally made use of; I have protested my disengagement from
particular Dogmes; Nay I have not refused to retract and cancel, what I judged
fit to be retracted, and more I could not do with a good Conscience. For the
general argument of the book, being a story of what was passed, it was not
possible for me to alter any thing in the Narration; for God himself cannot
make that which has been, not to have been: Or if I should publish my self so
palpable a liar; as because some passages do displease some persons, therefore
to say that such things were not such, what good or convenience would proceed
from a lie? God is my witness, in matters of this nature, I despise credit:
Nay more, I know not how, but I find a gust in making a Retractation,
whenever I can conceive it requisite, For I count it no virtue to write
plausibly, or eloquently, or learnedly: But I esteem it a great virtue not to
persist in an error, nor because I have said a thing once, therefore ever
after to maintain it, for a false or vain credits sake. If I have not given
sufficient proof of this in this second Edition of my book, I do beg of every
charitable Catholic Reader to suggest to me what they yet shall judge fit to
be altered, and to give me convincing reasons for it, and I promise them a very
cheerful readiness to content them, and not great resistance against being
convinced.

5. Only this one thing I must profess to them, that it is not a convincing
argument to me to hear any say, Other Controvertist's have inwrapped within
their treatises many Thoologicall Doctrines beyond what Catholic Religion
obliges them to, as concerning the Popes Infallibility, etc. therefore you are
obliged to follow their example. For I must needs tell them, that besides it is
in it self unreasonable to spend time in disputing with Protestants upon
Questions in which some Catholics will be of their side: I cannot but impute
the unsuccessefulnesse in such disputes, and the paucity of Converts, to such a
way of managing Controversies, when Catholics show what a number of Doctrines
they are able to maintain more then is necessary, and more then concern
Protestants to hear of. So that it is to be feared the design of such
Catholic writers is not so much to seek the Conversion of Protestants, as to
show their zealous adhesion to the particular Doctrines of their Order or
Party. For mine own part, truly I am no tied to any peculiar Dogmes; that holy
Congregation, to which by Gods providence, I am inserted an unworthy Member,
does not exercise that violence over spirits, subject to them, as to force a
belief of any unnecessary distinctive Doctrines upon them, or a profession of
doctrines, which they do not believe, or would not, if they lived any where
else; Conscience and not faction or partiality is the director of our assent,
and it is from the Church only, that we receive the Rule of that assent. Now
enjoying this liberty, and having, I thank God, neither hopes nor fears from
the world, I will not captivate my own understanding to any but God and his
Church, nor my tongue or pen to any particular Schoolman or Controvertist. Now
my meaning is, not hereby to imply that I condemn any of these Doctrines, but
only that I desire leave, being to deal with Protestants, to be silent, and
take no notice of such questions, wherein they are not concerned, but are
(whilst troubled with those disputes) so much the longer detained from entering
into Catholic Communion.

6. Having made this profession of my resolution to offend none, and yet
withal of being subject to none, but the Church, to which only, and not any
Faction in the Church, my desires and endeavors shall be to invite
Protestants; and to which, if by Gods blessing they adjoyn themselves, they
shall be equally welcome to me, to whatsoever party in it they shall range
themselves: If hereafter any Catholic will not content himself with that
satisfaction, which I have, and will, as far as reason and conscience will
permit, give him: If he be unlearned, I must desire him to dispense with me for
taking Rules from him how to manage Controversies: If he be learned, and
especially if himself be employed in the Conversion of souls, then I desire
him to give me leave with all respect and humility to ask him, is there any
such privilege given to any Rank of English Missioners, as that souls may not
be suffered to be converted, unless it be upon the grounds of Suarez, or
Scotus, or Becanus, etc.? Is it lawful in France to propose the churches
doctrine pure and unmixed with private opinions, and is that unlawful in
England? Is the Council of Trent a suspected Rule, without such or such a
Doctors interpretation? I have been informed that several persons, and I have
known some that have reaped good by so despiseable a Treatise as this; God,
whose power is made perfect in weakness, giving his blessing to so imperfect,
but well meaning work: Can any charitable Catholic envy this, or be sorry
that Protestants should be delivered by any from their errors and Schism,
unless the instrument of their conversion devote himself to all your
particular distinctive Tenets? Truly for my part, if, since my being a
Catholic, I have entertained any particular Doctrines, though they should be
never so contradictory to yours, yet since with all that difference, we remain
both of us firmly united in the belief and profession of all Doctrines truly
Catholic, I should willingly and cordially encourage any Protestant to
believe you, and condemn me, upon condition that his esteem of you, and
prejudice against me, might be an inducement to him the sooner to entertain a
good opinion and liking of Catholic Religion it self. If in this Book there
be mentioned any opinions in your opinion too large, yet doubtless you cannot
but know, that they are publicly and uncontroulably asserted by unquestioned
Catholic Authors: Or however the Quotations will now inform you so much, and
direct you to their particular Treatises. And the principal of these Authors
are Salmeron, Bacon, Molina, etc. learned Fathers of the Society; as likewise
Salmanticensis, Monsieur Veron, Estius, etc. Out of such Authors as these I do
quote many passages and opinions, accounted indeed generally of the largest
allowance, but yet not condemned by any: On the contrary, their books have been
in the highest manner approved. These opinions I quote, not as mine own, for I
profess against espousing any in this Book; but as doctrines and
interpretations, though not so generally embraced, yet universally uncondemned.
Now shall these men pass untouched, who asserted, and published such opinions,
and must I be traduced, as an unsound Catholic, for transcribeing them, and
for only saying that they said so.

7. Experience of what is past, obliges me to prevent misconstructions for the
future: for which purpose this little that has been said, shall suffice. And
now dear Catholic Reader, I once more address my self to thee, and to give
thee assurance that thou may freely and without suspicion read this Book, the
Authentical Approbations annexed to it will secure thee, and withal I protest
unto thee, that in my heart I do find a great averseness from admitting any
noveltyes in opinion, or any suspicious questionable dogmes: and to show my
self a true son of the Catholic church. I do here with an humble clear
confidence pronounce, that I do submit, not only my self, but all my writings
and words, yea my very thoughts (as far as thoughts can be judged by a humane
Tribunal) to the judgment of the holy Catholic Roman church, of his
Holiness, the Head of the church, and of all whatsoever my Superiors therein;
declaring, that if there be any thing in this or any other of my writings,
which is contrary to piety, good manners, holy Scriptures, or Ecclesiastical
Traditions, or to any verity whatsoever, I do heartily renounce and recall it:
NON FACTUM, NON DICTUM, NON COGITATUM ESTO.

CHAP. III.
Misinterpretation of my book by Protestants, particularly by I. P. the Author
of the Preface to my Lord Falklands Discourse of Infallibility.

An answer to the Preface.

Pro captu Lectoris ^abent sua fata libelli.

1. BOoks have their fates, not from the real qualityes, which are, in
themselves, but from the several dispositions, imaginations, and present
tempers of the Readers; the eyes of some Readers do see in Books that which is
invisible to others: yea what is directly contradictory to what others think
they see: And from the same passages some receive a conviction of preconceived
opinions, when as others become more hardened in such opinions. So certain it
is, that all manner of effects and events are to be ascribed merely to the
Providence of God, who if he leave us to our selves, and do not so dispose of
second causes after a supernatural manner, that his divine Truths be
advantagiously represented to us, even the Scripture it self, and all the
divine infallible mysteries of Faith will appear error, and folly, and a
scandal unto us, Light will darken us, Truth will seduce us, and happiness it
self will be an occasion of our ruin. The experience that we see every day of
this (me thinks) should make us even feel and acknowledge, that Faith is the
pure gift of God, and by consequence that those, who rely upon the conduct of
their own uncertain Reason, are almost certain to be mislead by it.

2. When I wrote this Book, I did expect no other, but that it (proceeding from
a very weak and imperfect judgment) should be obnoxious to contempt and
censures of both Catholics and others, from whom it could not conceal many
imperfections that were in it, so that I was not much surprised to hear it
severely judged. But I had little suspicion, that Protestants could extract
from it arguments to confirm them in their errors: yet even this has happened.
And this (I confess) pierces me to the heart; charity and compassion to souls
(so in love with their errors, that the confutation of them makes them more in
love with, and better persuaded of them) swallows up all the anger and
resentment, that nature would fain raise in me, to see my conceptions so
unjustly pe^verted, and urges me, for the good of their souls, and not for mine
own credit, to let such Chymicall extractors of errors from truth see that
their art has failed them.

3. I hear there have appeared several books written by Protestants, in which
the Authors have taken advantage from some misunderstood passages in my
EXOMOLOGESIS. Only one such book is come to my sight, or rather only a Preface
to my L. Falklands discourse of Infallibility, written by a person unknown to
me, but only by these two letters J. P. and an extract out of another book,
which I have not seen. By answering of which Preface, as far as it touches me,
I conceive grounds will be laid, upon which any other Objections made by
Protestants may find and answer, if the Objectors will please to make
application.

4. It will not be needful to transcribe the whole Preface at large here, but
I shall set down very faithfully and heartily the substance of it in several
particulars in order, and adjoyn unto them as distinct and satisfactory an
Answer, as I can at the present, considering the great disorders of Paris,
where this is written, and my unprovidednesse of Papers and Books. And that
being done (if I be permitted) I will take that boldness, which my most dear
Lord, the Author of the following Discourse of Infallibility, would (if he were
living, I am sure) have given me, to show the invalidity of it against
Catholic Doctrine.

5. As for the Preface of J. P. in which he reflects upon the most deserved
praises of that noble Lord, excellently represented in the precedent
Dedication. I acknowledge my self [I cannot say his convert: for many years
before him I was a witness of the merits, that might challenge them, but] one
that does entirely agree with him in that point; And if my most worthily loved
and honored Friend, M. Triplet, the Author of the Dedication, will only give
me leave to except out of the several heads of his praises, this one, of
having (as he thinks) efficaciously and meritoriously written against the
Catholic Church (and woe is me for my dearest Lords sake, that this must needs
be excepted) I would willingly subscribe my name under his: he knows I have
enjoyed an equal happiness with him, to be a witness of all those his
admirable qualities. He knows, that though with less deserts, yet with
(perhaps) equal good fortune, I have had my share in that unparalled
friendship of his; the memory of which is the pleasing est image that the world
has left in my mind, since I made a resolution to quit the world. Indeed it is
an image too pleasant to be looked upon, considering my present condition and
profession; were it not that it can never offer it self but accompanied with a
most piercing compassion, that those stupendous excellencies and abilities
were not crowned with Catholic Belief; yea, which is most miserable, were
employed against it. In one thing I must needs yield to M. Triplet, which is,
that I cannot pretend to the ability to erect so beautiful a monument to the
memory of that honored Lord, nor with so delicate a touch draw his picture, as
he has done in his Dedication, for which expression both of his gratitude and
skill, I think my self obliged to pay him my most humble thanks: And I will
take the permission with him to recommend to the imitation of my Lord, his now
only Son, all those admirable qualities of his deceased Father, only
beseeching him, that he would not (and beseeching God, that, neither he nor any
of his friends may) account among such qualities, the writing of such
Discourses against Catholic truth, which occasioned the publishing of an Elogy
of him equally very artificial and very natural.

6. Thus much of the Preface therefore being acknowledged to be unanswerable,
the design of all that follows is. 1. To show that the doctrine of the
churches Infallibility is of all others most general and comprehensive, and
which, if it could be demonstrated, would immediately decide all other
controversies. 2. That therefore none can seriously think Protestants so
unreasonable, but that if they were persuaded of the truth of this, they would
presently submit, and leave all disputing. 3. But yet since it seems evident to
them, that some Decisions of the Church are contradictory to the Scriptures,
which Catholics propound as infallibly true; Therefore it is necessary, that
Infallibility ought to be demonstrated at least to a higher degree of evidence
then they have of the contradiction of the Churches Decisions to the infallible
Rule of Gods Word. 4. That no such demonstration has been made by Catholics,
the great Defenders of the Church of England have very excellently and fully
demonstrated. 5. And this with such success, that the very name of
Infallibility begins to be burdensome even to the maintainers of it, in so
much that one of their latest and ablest Proselytes, Hugh Paulin de Cressy, (as
the author styles him) which is a title that the same Serenus Cressy, (for that
is henceforth his name assumed in Religion) utterly renounces and is most
certain the Author can never justify against such a world of much more able
Proselytes) has acknowledged the same word Infallibility to be an unfortunate
word, and too advantageous to Protestants, and therefore fit to be forgotten,
and laid by. Whereupon the Author gives scope to a fit of triumphing at the
strength of reason and power of truth, that a Catholic is forced or renounce
so fundamental a doctrine, which yet notwithstanding is not found in any
Council, etc. 6. Now lest it should be thought to be only the word
(Infallibility,) but not the notion of it intended by Catholics, and
understood by Protestants, that is deserted by Mr. Cressy, the Author says,
that Protestants never impugned it by Nominall Arguments, producing a passage
out of Bellarmine to justify the acknowledged sense of that word. 7. Hereupon
the Author imputes to Mr. Cressy unreasonablenesse in answering Arguments made
against that which himself confesses cannot be maintained. 8. And yet greater
unreasonablenesse in the manner of his answer, because deserting Infallibility,
he answers only for the authority of the Church, and so makes this authority
answer for that Infallibility. From this last he draws three consequent
absurdities (which shall be set down when their place comes to be answered) 9.
Hereupon he profesles that, having considered the inconsiderablenesse of M.
Cressy's whole discourse, he changed his resolution to answer it, as judging it
not to deserve an answer. 10. And lastly he concludes the invinciblenesse of my
L. Falklands discourse of Infallibility

7. This is the mind and whole importance of the Preface, which, whether
rational or no, shall be examined; but it is confessed to be orderly enough,
and therefore shall be endeavored to be answered according to its order, and
the Paragraphs and divisions made by me, not himself.

CHAP. IV.
An Answer to the four first Paragraphs of the Preface.

1. THat which the Author of the Preface says in his first Paragraph (viz.
That the Doctrine of the churhes Infallibility is of all other most general
and comprehensive, and which, if it could be demonstrated, would immediately
decide all other controversies) is so conformable to evident reason, that it
cannot be denied. And that which reason requires of me to acknowledge in the
first Paragraph, charity would invite me to grant universally in the second.
[viz. That if Protestants were persuaded of the truth of this, they would
presently submit, and leave all disputing.] Were it not that I. P. himself
discourages me. I doubt not but both himself and many others, (if they were
absolutely convinced of the churches Infallibility) would not wilfully detain
the truth in unrighteousness, by continuing in an obstinate, and then an
acknowledged disobedience to the church. But they behave themselves in the
search of the truth, as if they were afraid to find it. They come with extreme
prejudice and partiality to the examination of the controversy, and if they
can find but any small advantage against any passage in Catholic writers,
though the churches doctrine be not at all concerned in it, they presently give
the cause decided according to their own minds and interests, which partiality
of theirs seems much more intense, and withal heightened with f^^ greater
Passion, since the downfall of their Church then ever it was before for
indignation to see the extreme weakness of their cause, imbitters them much
more in their disputes against Catholics, and increases their obstinacy
against the authority of Gods church, as if they would be revenged against God
for giving such an advantage to his Church. Proofs of this (given by too many
others) will appear in the whole contexture of this Preface, as I shall
demonstrate.

2. Thirdly, J. P. says, That since it seems evident to them, that some
decisions of the Church are contradictory to the Word of God, which Catholics
propound as infallibly true; Therefore it is necessary that Infallibility ought
to be demonstrated at least to a higher degree of evidence, then they have of
the contradiction of the Churches decision to the infallible Rule of the
Scriptures. Truly this is not altogether unreasonable, therefore to give him
satisfaction, I will fix a good while upon this point, though I shall be forced
to say over somewhat said already. Therefore according to the grounds of the
precedent Book, I will endeavor to clear the controversy of Infallibility, as
it is there handled, from the mistakes of J. P. and to effect this more
prosperously, I will peruse this supposition.

3. Let it be supposed, that the Church of England did pretend to an
Infallibility, or if you will, to an authority of obliging all Christians under
pain of Damnation to submit to her Decisions. This being supposed, and that I,
desirous to enquire into the grounds of this pretension, should betake my self
to a meeting of several learned Protestants, and say to them, since it is so
necessary that all Christians should receive information in Christian Doctrine
from you, Pray let me know where I shall find it. This request would presently
raise a murmr amongst them, and there is only one answer in which they would
all agree, which is this; That that only is to be accounted the doctrine of the
Church of England, which has been determined by the authority of the English
Bishops, ratified by the secular head of the Church, the King, yet with the
advice of the Parliament, and embraced by all the children and Subjects of the
English Church. But when they would descend more particularly to signify the
special repositories of this Doctrine, there would be great variety of
answers; For the most moderate of them would say confidently, it is all to be
found comprised sufficiently in the little Catechism made for Infants, others
would add the Common Prayer book, others the book of Homilyes, others would yet
thrust in the book of Ordination, others the 39. Articles and Canons; others
besides would have the four first General Counsels not to be forgotten; and
lastly, some few of those, who are pure Protestants indeed, would say, the
whole Canon Law, in as much as concerns doctrine especially, and as far as it
is not revoked by Acts of Parliament: All this, with all that went before, is
the entire Rule of English-Catholique Doctrine. And all those for their
several answers would produce English Fathers and Doctors, whose books have
been received and approved without contradiction in the Church of England.

4. To save the blushing of an English Protestant, I would not suffer Mr.
Chillingworth, nor my Lord Falkland to put in their votes; for they would have
renounced all these, and protested, that neither the Catechism, nor
Common Prayer Book, nor Homilies, etc. nor all these together, contain that
doctrine of the Church of England, to which all are obliged to submit, but only
the Bible, the Bible, and nothing but the Bible, and this not interpreted by
any Bishop or Synod of Divines, but by every good man's reason, let him shift as
he can: An answer, which it admitted, not only totally destroys the spiritual
Jurisdiction of the English Clergy, but all authority whatsoever, even of the
civil Magistrate, in matters of Religion; yet to show the great impartiality
of English Protestants toward Catholic Faith, because they fancied, that by
such a position Catholics might receive some damage, they not only admitted
this position of M. Chillingworths, and saw it approved by their Doctor of the
Chair, but triumphed in it, as the great Masterpiece of the wit of this Age;
whereas if they had but half an eye open, they might have seen in it the
inevitable ruin of their whole Fabric, So that J. P. did not well consider
what poor service he has done, and what small refreshment he has given, or
rather what a dishonorable Epitaph he has fixed upon the monument of his
deceased Church, by giving his Testimony of applause to this Treatise of my Lo.
Falklands, as one of the great Defenders of the Doctrine of the English Church,
which is more ruinous to it, then all the spiteful writings and plots of
Cartwright, Knox, Henderson, or all the rabble o^ Geneva joined with them. But
to return.

5. A Supposition being made of the foresaid answer, and it being granted, that
all these answers have been published, or without contradiction or censure
admitted in the church of England, should not that man be very negligent of his
souls good; that being to examine the truth of its doctrine, should trouble
himself any further then with the little Catechism of half a sheet of paper, as
plainly and as simply written as is possible, as if the children that are to
learn it, had composed it; since all say, it is at least part of the Rule of
the English Faith, and some, without censure of others, say it is all; what a
while must the poor man's soul be held in suspense, if he were to stay till he
had searched into the Common Prayer Book, Homilies, Canons, Acts of Parliament,
Proclamations of the King, Ancient Councels, Canon Law, etc. his soul perhaps
might be disposed by death, God knows where, before he had examined the
hundredth part of what was necessary.

6. Now to apply this to the present subject, it is agreed by all Catholics,
that the church is an infallible witness and guide; and Protestants profess,
that if this could be made evidently appear, they would hold out in no
controversy at all, for they would never dispute perpetually with them, whom
only to hear, were to be satisfied; this therefore is to be made evident unto
Protestants; yea, more evident then that any particular decisions of the Church
do seem to them evidently contradictory to Scripture: This is the task of
Catholics, especially Catholic Missionaries. Now, though when it is said, The
Church is infallible, This be commonly understood of all the whole Church in
general; yet, when we say, She is an infallible Guide; it is most ordinarily
understood of the Church, speaking by some authorized person or persons,
representing the whole body.

7. About this Representative there is diversity of opinions among Catholics:
some say the Pope alone does sufficiently represent the Church, as a Guide
infallible; Others, a General Council, though without the Pope; Others, a
General Council convoked, presided in, and confirmed by the Pope; Annal.
fidei, nu. 111. Systema fidei, ca. 22. This was likewise the opinion of Gerson.
And lastly others (as learned Fa: Bacon acknowledges) add further this
condition, that the decision of such a Council be accepted and submitted to
by the whole Church: All that hold any of these opinions, are universally
esteemed good Catholics, and I would to God all Protestants had so much
humility, as to subdue their own private Reason to the largest of them; and for
Catholics, this I may confidently say, That they, who without betraying the
Truth, make the way to the Church easiest and plainest, have most charity and
Faith enough; the others may have more Faith, I would they had more Charity
too. Truly, to my understanding there is some inhumanity in urging Protestants
to more then Catholics will be obliged to: or to think that to Protestants
prepossessed with passion and partiality, that can be made evident, which is so
far from being evident to some Catholics, that they renounce it. Since all
changes therefore proceed by degrees, in the name of God let it not be expected
from Protestants, that they should with one leap mount to the utmost verge and
extent of all Doctrines, held by Catholics? That they should at one gulpe
swallow both all Catholic Doctrines, and all Theological Dogmes. Be it
granted therefore that it is true, that the Pope is infallible: I will believe
it, as a Theological truth, but since neither the Church nor the Pope himself
has told us so, I cannot, if I would, believe it, as a Catholic Doctrine: what
therefore have I to do to dispute of it to Protestants, whom my duty is only
to persuade to the belief of the Churches Doctrine? What pity is it that they
must be delayed, and as it were kept out of the Church, till all objections
that they can make, and be furnished even from Catholics themselves to make
against this position, be answered, or all advantages that they can advise
against any Bulls or Decretals be cleared to their satisfaction.

8. Therefore I being engaged to make good to I. P. That the Church (speaking
by a Representative is an infallible Guide) would fain choose that
Representative, which is qualified with all the conditions allowed by any
uncensured Catholics, to make it most easy and most acceptable to
Protestants, which is a general Council Confirmed, etc. by the Pope and
accepted by the Church. But yet I will abstract from this last clause of being
ac^epted by the Church, (though there is not any one point of controversy in
debate between us and them, for which we have not all this authority) as being
proved ex superabundanti in what I shall say hereafter.

9. That therefore which I undertake to make evident to I. P. is, That the
Church speaking by a general Council, confirmed by the Pope, is an infallible
Guide, (and that with greater evidence, then he can bring for any contradiction
pretended betwixt any decision of such a Council, and the Scripture; yea, with
more evidence then he can produce for the Scripture it self, which he owns for
his Guide.) which truly to an impartial hearer is no difficult matter, even
going upon his own grounds: For if I should ask I. P. Why do you acknowledge
the Scripture to be an infallible Rule, as far as it is a Rule? He would answer
me; Because it is delivered unto us, as such, by an infallible Catholic
Tradition: for if he talks of any other proof, as a private spirit, or natural
reason, it will be ridiculous; He may as well say he can judge and demonstrate
it to be such by smelling with his nose. If I should further ask him, how it
appears evident to him, that the Scriptures have been delivered by an infa^ible
Catholic Tradition? He could not deny, but that many Heretics have denied
many books of Scripture; yea, that there is not any one book in the Old or New
Testament, but has been renounced by some Heretics and their followers: yet
because some Councels have decided, and Fathers witnessed, and the Catholic
Church in all ages since have received them as such; therefore it is evident,
that they have been delivered by the Church by Catholic Tradition. And this is
most rational and convincing. Upon these grounds therefore I proceed; and ask
any discreet indifferent man, Whether an authority that shall after this manner
propose any doctrine, This we have received from Christ and his Apostles, that
such and such a doctrine proposed, is a divine infallible truth; and we command
all Christians whatsoever, under the pain of anathema and eternal damnation, to
believe it for such: whether I say, such an authority does not assume to it
self the office of a Guide, and of an infallible Guide? Certainly, he that
should speak in this style, and yet have a guilt, or be in a possibility of
seducing, were the most impious abhorred tyrant in the world. What an attentat,
an usurpation upon Gods Scepter and Throne would this be, if God had not
derived this authority upon the Church represented in a Council? What a cruelty
to souls? What a blaspheming of the Holy Ghost? Now that this has been the
style of all General Councels is evident: and that Councels speaking in that
style, have been submitted to by the Fathers and accepted by the Church with
all veneration, as the Oracles of God, is equally apparent: nay, I do not know
that ever any Heretic (before these days) did expressly contradict this in the
Thesis; though in Hypothesi they have renounced such particular Councels as
themselves were Anathematized by. Therefore not only all Councels, but every
Decision of every Council to which an Anathema is annexed, decides this
question, and proclaims to all the ends of the world this truth, That the
Church speaking in General approved Councels, is an infallible Guide to all
Christians. Against this not a passage or word in any Father can be produced,
but infinite passages for it: Hence it is that the Fathers unanimously profess;
That out of the Church there is no possible salvation, because there is no
Guide to Heaven but in the Church. If therefore it be a proof evident enough to
I. P. of an universal infallible tradition of Scripture, that one or two not
General Councels, did with some variety set down the number and names of the
books, and that generally speaking, the Fathers have amongst them given
attestation to them, some to some books, and some to others, few to all; and
that the Church in after ages has universally accepted them, as such; How
short comes that tradition of this, concerning the infallible Guidance of the
Church, that is vertually decided in all Councels, and every decision of all
attested by all Fathers, not one in one passage contradicting or condemning
that style; but unanimously in all ages since Councels were accepted by the
Church, approved and submitted to: how opposite is this truth to the main
design of his following discourse, which attempts to prove, that there is in
the Church no infallible Guide at all? And how contradictory to that Article of
his Church, concerning not only the fallibility, but actual erring of
Councels? And again, how conformable is this way of proceeding to the authority
given upon Record, in Scripture by our blessed Savior to his Church? I say to
his Church; for the Fathers assembled in Council speak not thus in their own
persons, nor as so many learned men, but in the person of the whole Church,
which they represent, and do no more but subsume particulars under that General
Anathema, pronounced by our blessed Savior, when he said, If he refuse to here
the Church, let him be unto thee, as a Heathen and a Publican.

11. I conjure therefore I. P. and all his and my friends, that he and they
would produce, or at least set before their own eyes those Decisions of
Councels, which seem to them evidently false, because clearly contradictory to
Scripture, and compare his evidence of a seeming contradiction, with this
evidence, that it is impossible there should be such a contradiction; and if
they do this with a serious mind, and desire to find the truth, that they may
embrace it, and with hearts lifted up to God, to free them from all respects of
the world, and to enlighten their souls with the love of his truth, then
perhaps they may see that, which as yet it seems is invisible to them; it is
most certain, there is not one express formal text of Scripture contradictory
to any Catholic Doctrine; this they confess themselves. And indeed, even
abstracting from the promises made by Christ to his Church, it is morally
impossible, that so many wise and virtuous men, should with the one hand give
the Scripture, as Gods word, and with the other present Doctrines expressly and
directly contradictory to it, and none be able to observe the contradiction,
though their daily study was to meditate upon, and interpret the Scripture. Now
whether any consequence from obscure texts can be more forcible, then that
which I have named from the style of General Councels, I leave not to their
wits, but consciences to judge.

12. Matters therefore being impartially weighed, that triumphing Epiphonema of
his, in the fourth and fifth Sections vanishes; in which himself with
admiration exposes to the admiration of others, those great conquering
defenders of the doctrine of the (late) Church of England, that with such
excellent conduct and valor, and such admirable success have combated and
defeated this our Darling, Infallibility: he did ill, and even enviously to
their glory, that he did not name those worthies; for my part, besides the
noble Author of the following Discourse, (whom certainly he means for one) and
by consequence Mr. Chillingworth, I cannot remember that ever I heard any great
Elogium in this respect given to any English writer: Yet it may be he might
have an eye upon the last Archbishop of Canterbury, and his late enlarged
Dialogue: which if he did, then I conjure I. P. that he would once more peruse
the said Archbishop's Discourse, and single from it whatsoever is impertinent
to the main essential controversy; that is, whatsoever touches particular
debates of Catholics, about the Popes infallibility, and the exceptions that
may be found against certain Councels, as likewise about the several qualities
and conditions required to an acknowledged obliging Council (all which things
are nothing to the purpose.) And lastly, that laying aside all these
unnecessary velitations, he would apply the Archbishops most efficatious
arguments to an Ecumenical confirmed Council (especially if he will add the
condition too of being actually received by the Church) and my life for his, he
will see reason to acknowledge, that all that discourse is of no force at all
against the Church, yea, that the Archbishop himself never intended it should.
However the Calvinists, or fantastical private Spiritists, or exalters of
humane reason, might deal against the universal authority of Gods Church: the
Prelates of England were too wise to judge, that people would be so blind, as
to think any obedience could be due out of conscience to a National Church,
begun and continued upon secular and indeed unlawful intrests, if that Church
should build its authority upon a profession of renouncing all authority. And
therefore, though they were very earnest in the controversy about
Ecclesiastical Authority, when they were to write or proceed juridically
against Presbyterians or Separatists, yet they loved not to talk of it against
the Catholic Church: yea, it was from the Catholic Church only, that they
borrowed their Arguments against their Schismatics; as may in a good measure
appear in the printed Reasons of the University of Oxford against the Covenant,
Negative Oath, and Ordinances concerning Discipline and Worship, approved by
general consent in a full Convocation, June 1. 1647,) and it was under the
shadow of their pretense to be still a member of the Catholic Church, and to
have received their Authority and Succession from it, that they obliged good
easy Protestants to continue their subjects. But this is but a guess that I.
P. in this passage reflected upon the late Archbishop, or any other English
Prelaticall Writer.

13. Certain it is he must intend my Lord Falkland, as one of the great
Defenders of the Doctrine of the Church of England, since he speaks this in his
Preface to his Discourse of Infallibility, and with an evident design thereby
to recommend both the Author and his work. This being so, I. P. will give me
leave to use his own words. O the strength of Reason rightly managed! O the
power of Truth clearly declared! Yea, O the force of a guilty conscience! For
what else but the irresistible power of truth, and evidence of reason, and
acknowledgement of guilt, could move him so publicly to condemn his own
Church, and to confess its ^surpation impossible to be justified? Behold (O
Protestants) how your Church is defended! here is a discourse that undertakes
to demonstrate, (and if you will believe, your brother I. P. has admirably, and
unanswerably performed it) that upon earth there neither is, nor ever was any
Guide, that could oblige any other to follow his direction; and that every man's
conscience is to be guided by his own single natural Reason, choosing that
Faith which is most agreeable to Nature, and holding it only so long as Nature
likes it, and then changing it for another: In fine, a Discourse that gives you
leave, yea, almost invites you, to return to the Religion of the old
Philosophers, those Epoptes and Priests of Nature. If there be any force in
this your Defenders discourse, what becomes of your Articles and Canons, your
Synods and Convocations, your Infallible Acts of Parliament, and Proclamations?
It is evident he might as well, yea more reasonably, have said, That the
Council of Trent is a great defender of the Church of England, for that indeed
justifies Ecclesiastical Authority; whereas this discourse directly and
purposely, and universally destroys it: But the meaning, or that which should
be the meaning of I. P. is this, That the Authority of the Church of England is
impossible to be maintained: for if (as the Catholic Church avows) there be in
the Church by Christ's appointment, any Authority Ecclesiastical, obliging in
conscience; it is certain it is not inherent in the Church of England, that
began but yesterday (and is not now at all) and when it began, it began by the
renouncing of all visible authority. Again, if as this discourse pretends,
there be no obliging authority (that is, no infallible one; for surely none can
be obliged to an authority, that confesses it self questionable) then both the
Catholic Church and the Church of England are mere names, and verbal sounds,
that signify nothing. This is so evident, that it is pity to insist longer
upon the persecuting of good I. P. that here publishes his conviction and
confession, and must either tear out this Preface before such a discourse, or
abjure his Church of England, if ever it appear again.

14. By what has been said it is apparent, that the doctrine of the
Infallibility of the Church, speaking by a lawful Ecumenical Council, is
delivered by as full a Tradition, as it is possible for a doctrine to be
delivered. And therefore Protestants are inexcusable and (...)since, receiving
such special Books of Scripture upon no other grounds, but Tradition, they yet
renounce the Churches authority, which is more universally and authoritatively
delivered and confirmed. The same Truth is unanswerably, grounded upon what
has formerly been proved in this Book, viz. That it is impossible, that that
which any one age agrees in, as Tradition, should not be so, because that would
argue, that some former wh^le Age has agreed to deceive their posterity.

Ob. 15. But perhaps I. P. or his friends will say, That though what has been
asserted may be effectual to demonstrate the Infallible Authority of the
universal Church, yet not so to demonstrate, that the Roman is that Infallible
Catholic Church, since the Greeks may put in their plea, at least to be a very
considerable part. That they are not unwilling to submit to the Universal
Church, though she should condemn them: For though the importunate restless
malice of some Calvinistical spirits among them has procured some uncivil, and
indeed unchristian Clauses to be put into the English Articles, derogating from
the Authority of General Councels; yet the true English Protestant has always
been ready to protest submission to the Universal Church. But they are not
satisfied, that they ow that submission to the Roman; and if not to the Roman,
they know not to what Church.

Sol. 16. To say something for the clearing this difficulty, I shall desire them
to consider, 1. That whilst the Eastern and Western Churches were joined in one
External communion, it is apparent that that Body was the Catholic Church, to
which the Promises of Christ were made, and to which Protestants themselves
would not have refused submission. 2. That a breach happening between these
Churches, is not mortal to the whole Body, but only to that Member that did
unlawfully separate. 3. By consequence, that both the Title and real Authority
of the Catholic Church remains in the innocent Part, that is, either in the
Roman or Eastern Church. 4. That whethersoever of these two be the Catholic
Church, English Protestants are Schismatics, since they are divided from both,
and the pretended grounds of their Divisions are Doctrines received by them
both. 5. That in case English Protestants would now take into debate, to
whether of these two parties they should re-adjoyn themselves, by that means to
become Catholics again, they must be forced to quit both a greater number of
their Topical Doctrines, and more fundamental ones, to fit themselves to an
union with the Eastern, then with the Roman Church. 6. That if they will needs
out of Passion prefer the Eastern, their Passion will be evident, since that
whenever either remorse of conscience, or the approaches of death made them
see their unsafe condition, thousands of them have fled to the Roman Church for
shelter, but never any to the Grecian, or any other, but the Roman. 7. That as
long as they are out of the Roman Church, they are in a headless trunck,
divided from the successor of St. Peter, whom St. Cyprian, St. Hierome,
Optatus, etc. acknowledged to be the foundation of Unity, Order, etc.

Ob. 17. Now if among Protestants, any out of a perverse condescendence shall
grant that the grounds alleged for the separation of the Eastern and Western
Churches, are not in themselves of such main importance, as to hinder them from
being really one Catholic Church: And therefore that before the present
controversies can be decided, a general Assembly of them all must be expected.

Sol. 18. to this they must give me leave to say. 1. That they make the
Promises of Christ to be casual, temporary and obnoxious to critical days and
seasons, if they think, that the changes of Kingdoms, or that the humors of an
earthly Tyrant can either evacuate or suspend the force of those promises by
which our Lord has obliged himself to provide, that the Gates of Hell, that
is, heresies, shall not prevail against his Church; The effect of which
promise, in the opinion of such Objectors must be delayed, till the Grand
Signior will allow the Grecian Bishops to meet with the Western, to consult of,
and procure the peace and union of Christendom. 2. In case they should be
permitted to meet, Protestants may without the spirit of prophecy foretell
their own most solemn condemnation: For since both the Eastern and Western
Churches do already agree in most doctrines renounced by Protestants. [viz.
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the blessed Sacrament, Prayer for the Dead,
and by consequence a Purgatory (in which souls are capable of refreshment by
such Prayers) Veneration of Images, Relics, etc. Invocation of Saints,
Indulgences, Merit of good works, etc.] In which Doctrines they do agree as
acknowledging them to be Traditionary: It is impossible they should ever be
persuaded to revoke any of them, being met in an Assembly, unless they will
renounce all order and manner of proceeding in former General Councels; which
is not according to the Method of Protestants. Viz. Endlessly to dispute every
controverted Point by Texts of Scripture, but to judge of the Truth of Points,
and the sense of Scripture by Traditien? In such Assemblies therefore Bishops
will ask one another, Have your Fathers delivered to you, that Bread, after
consecration, becomes the Body of Christ? That this body in the Sacrament is to
be adored? That we ought to pray for Souls departed in the Faith of Christ,
etc.? If so, Servetur quod traditum est. Now it being apparent, that at the
present all agree, that such Doctrines both in the East and West have been
delivered by Tradition; and that their meeting together in a Council will not
help to make a contrary Tradition possible: It will follow, that whether
divided or united, whether alone, or in Assembly, they are, and ever will be at
least so far united, as to join in the condemnation of Protestants.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to the Remainder of the Preface.

1. THe rest of the Preface of I. P. touches my self only, and pretends to
show what success the writings of those great Defenders of the Church of
England have had against me in particular, forcing me to confess, That
Infallibility is an unfortunate word: That Mr. Chillingworth has combated it
with too great success; so that I would wish the word were forgotten, or at
least laid by, etc. Now since the Church is not at all concerned in this, but
my self only, who am charged with writing an incongruous impertinent Book, a
Book that deserves no answer, but answers it self, since it maintains that
which its Adversary did not combat, etc. Truly, were it not for I. P. and his
friends sake more then mine own, I would not answer for my self: But since I
perceive, that the word Infallibility is as unfortunate a word to them as it
was to me, I will endeavor to take order that it shall be so no more.

2. First therefore I say with Mr. Veron, that the word Infallibility has been
found out by the Schools, that love to find out as short ways to express their
notions, as possibly can be. And the world finds very great convenience by it:
Therefore with reference to the Church, Schoolmen, and from them
Controvertists, (desirous to express the great veracity of the Church,
considered as a Judge, or witness of Divine Truths, deposed by God with her,
and withal the utmost obligation, that all Christians have to believe truths so
determined and witnessed by her) found out this single word Infallibility, to
express both these by: But yet the Church her self has not as yet assumed or
borrowed this word in any of her Decisions from the Schools: and therefore
being none of the Churches word, we are not obliged to make her to speak it:
and the truth is, though it comprehends all that they intend by it; yet it is no
adaequate measure of those conceptions, because Infallibility may comprehend a
great deal more; for truth and our obligation to believe it, is yet in a higher
degree in Scripture, then in the Decisions of the Church, as Bellarmine
acknowledges; For the Scripture in all points, both of Doctrine and Story, and
all circumstances is infallibly true: not so the Decisions of the Church, in
which the simple conclusion decided, is only accounted infallibly true; not so
the principles upon which it depends, or reasons by which it is proved, and
much less are orders made by Councels, which depend upon information; yet
notwithstanding we cannot find a more energetical word to express the
unquestionable, and unappealable authority of the Church, then Infallibility.
We may proceed further, and say, that Divine truths, revealed internally after
a supernatural manner to the Prophets, Apostles, etc. and by intellectual
images, are yet more infallible, then the same truths revealed by words; because
words being but the Images of Images, are further removed from that prime
Exemplar of truth, which is God; and besides are in themselves unavoidably
ambiguous, and so do not convey truth so infallibly, as Internal illustrations,
yet what can we say more of these, then that they are Infallible? Lastly, there
is no Image so perfect, but in as much as it is an Image, it comes short of the
Exemplar, which is truth it self, that is God; and by consequence differs from
it: yet the supremest title that we can give to God himself, in this regard, is
Infallibility.

But to instance more familiar examples of the several degrees of
Infallibility, I am infallibly assured, that I cannot repeat all the words I
have spoken this last year; and yet I am more infallibly assured, that I cannot
say over again, all I have spoken in my whole life. I am infallibly assured,
that if I threw a thousand dice, they will not be all sixes; and yet I am more
infallibly assured, that the same cast upon so many dice cannot be a thousand
times successively repeated: Of all these impossibilities I have several
degrees of assurance, and every degree in a certain sense infallible, but in a
severe acception of that word, the very highest is not rigorously infallible,
because none of the cases alleged are absolutely impossible, if we speak of
the highest degree of impossibility; for such imply a flat contradiction, as
that a part should be equal to its whole, or any thing be and not be at once, a
kind of certainty that is appliable even to very few Demonstrations: we are
not so sure that the light of the Moon is borrowed from the Sun, or her Eclips
by the interposition of the Earth, yet these are reckoned amongst
demonstrations in Astronomy, and no man in his wits ever doubted of either.
Methinks, if God have furnished his divine and supernatural truth, with evidence
equal to this, that the Sun will shine to morrow, or that there will be a
spring and harvest next year, we are infinitely obliged to bless his
providence, and justly condemned, if we refuse to believe the least of such
truths, as showing less affection to save our souls, then the dull Plowmen to
sow their corn, who certainly, have far less evidence for their harvest, then
Catholics for their faith, they insist not peevishly upon every caprichious
objection, nor exact an infallible security of a plentiful reaping next Summer,
but notwithstanding all difficulties and contingencies proceed cheerfully in
their painful husbandry; and here I shall beg leave to ask the Reader this
serious question, supposing (not granting) that the greatest assurance the
Church can give, (abstracting from the promises of Christ) be of no higher
infallibility, then the lowest degree we have mentioned: would you venture your
soul, that a thousand dice, being thrown out of a box would come forth all
sixes? Do you not see by this argument, that it is a thousand to one the
Catholic is in the right, and consequently a thousand to one the Protestant is
in the wrong, and this will necessarily follow; for in Religion we cannot stand
by and look on, but we must absolutely engage on one side, and therefore it is
a desperate shift of such Protestants, as think, that because they see not a
clear demonstration of the Churches Infallibility in the severest importance of
that word, they may therefore safely continue in their schism, unless they be
hardy enough to venture their souls in a way, where it is at least a thousand
to one they lose them. So that, though humane wit should by captious objections
seem to trouble the clearness of the Infallibility of the Catholic Church
(which is in it self really impossible to be endangered) yet are the motives of
adherence to that Communion, so highly credible (even in a rational and natural
consideration) that it were an absolute madness, to prefer any other separated
Church or Congregation, which cannot pretend to the least credibility to
support it.

3. These things being thus premised, since there are so many degrees of truth,
or veracity and Infallibility, and yet the same word Infallibility applied to
them all, it may be very reasonable, that great Caution should be used in the
application of it, that is, that it should be expressed in what sense and
degree the word is taken before it be urged or disputed upon So that if it be
advanced to a more sublime degree then the matter requires, no wonder if there
be misunderstanding between Disputants, and not only a prolonging of
Disputations, but also an impossibility of ending them: Now whether it is the
fault of Catholic Controvertists for want of explication and clearing of the
sense of this word Infallibility, that has given an advantage to Protestants,
I examine not; but sure I am Protestants have taken advantage from the
ambiguousness of this word Infallibility, to embroile the controversy of the
Churches authority, and to spin it out endlessly: insomuch, as there is not one
Author of them I ever met with, that (treating of this controversy) disputes to
the point, or so much as aims to combat against the Churches Authority, but
against an image of Infallibility, created only by their own fancies.

4. For proof of this, (to omit the ordinary Polemical writings of Protestants,
who wast paper and time only in combating particular unnecessary points
controverted by Catholics themselves) I shall desire any ingenuous Protestant
to examine the proceedings of Mr. Chillingworth, and even my noble Lord too, in
this little Treatise, and he will acknowledge what I say to be true; yet
certainly no English writers ever professed to come closer to the point, then
they.

5. First for Mr. Chillingworth, what a brand ^ shing and flourishing does he
keep with his pen, and what a great proportion of his book is spent in
Discourses, by which he would p^etend to enervate the Churches Infallibility,
which do not so much as approach toward it? For suppose a Pope were
Simoniacally elected, or a Bishop unlawfully consecrated, or a Priest not
baptized, or that any of these had a perverse intention in administering the
Sacraments, would the Church for all this fail in being an Infallible Guide? or
would all Christians be turned out of their way to salvation? Did not, or might
not he easily have been informed, that excepting in Infants, even Baptism it
self, and much less any other Sacrament unlawfully and invalidly administered,
do not to such a degree prejudice the persons, but that the Votum Baptismi will
suffice them? And Simony does not wipe out the Character, though the Church in
detestation of that crime does in validate the Popes acts, and destine him,
when the crime is proved, to a Deposition. And as for my Lord Falkland, upon
what a mistaken notion of Infallibility he proceeds in this discourse, let the
27th. and 28th. Paragraphs of that Treatise (according to a more exact
impression, 1646) witness, where enveighing against Catholics for putting
Heretics to death; and preventing a Recrimination, for Calvin's burning of
Servetus. And the Church of England executing Catholic Priests: He concludes
that passage with these words. The Church of England, confessing she may err,
is not so chargeable with any fault, as those which pretend they cannot, and so
will be sure never to mend it: And besides, I will be bound to defend no more
then I have undertaken; which is to give reason, why the Church of Rome is not
Infallible. Whereby his Lordship shows clearly, that in his opinion, an
argument from any, supposed, erroneous opinion, or faulty practice in the
Church, was of force to disprove the Churches Infallibility, although such an
error or ill practice was never authorized by any decision of a General
Council, nor universally spread through the whole Church, as this example,
mentioned by him, apparently never was.

6. It was from the like disapprehension that my self formerly had of the
notion of Infallibility, and misapplication of it to points controverted by
Catholics, in which the Church it self is entirely untouched, that I conceived
Mr. Chillingworth's book unanswerable, and by consequence was so long kept at a
distance, and disheartened from so much as taking into debate, whether the
Catholic Church was to be considered by me, when I was in quest of a new one;
had I not reason then to say, that the word Infallibility was (not as I. P.
quotes me simply, an unfortunate word, but) to me an unfortunate word: not for
any fault that was in the word it self, but for my misinformation and mistake
of the true sense and inportance of the word? and was it a betraying of the
cause or a confession of guilt, when I said, that Mr. Chillingworth had
combatted against that word with too great success? Success, I mean, not
against the Church, but against his own soul, and the souls of his
fellow-English-Protestants, (if I may lawfully call them his fellows) who
conspiring with him in the mistake of the word, were, and are, God knows, with
him frighted from the Church, which is placed out of the reach of all the shot
and noise that he makes against it. It was therefore not without cause that I
wished that the word might be forgotten, or at least laid by, that is, as long
as Protestants do, and will persist in a wilful mistaking of its sense and
notion. And that this was my meaning, and no thought of finding fault with the
word Infallibility it self, which I acknowledged to be as fit a word to express
the Authority of the Church by, as could be found in one single term, does
evidently appear in many passages of my book: and therefore, notwithstanding
that wish of mine, and seeming advice to others; yet I my self unawares in all
this discourse till I came to this point, made use of the same word, but it was
with a resolution to say, what I have now said, to prevent any more mistaking
of it. I. P. therefore, if he well consider it, will find little ground to
please himself with those other words of mine, That Protestants have indeed
very much to say for themselves, when they are pressed unnecessarily with it;
and therefore I desired that they might never be invited to combat the Church
under that Notion. It was pure pity to them that I said thus, and not the
least apprehension for Catholics. They have indeed much to say for themselves,
when they are pressed unnecessarily with it, and the occasions of their
mistaking it not taken away; for they will run into endless disputes, and such
disputes, as Catholics will furnish them with arms to defend themselves;
whereas, if they be urged to produce what they have to say for themselves, when
the Authority of the Church, speaking in a lawful Ecumenical Council is
objected to them, they are dumb and ashamed to name the new, and quickly
decrepite Church of England, and its Authority, which vanishes at the very
sight of the Authority of the Universal Church; yea, and as silent will they
be, when they are invited to combat the Authority of the Church, under the
notion of Infallibility, so that that notion be first cleared, and warning
given them to abstain from misapplying it to questions, in which only
particular Catholics, and not the Church it self is concerned: but indeed, I
should not have said, They have much to say for themselves, for, alas, it is
miserably against themselves, in the highest degree, when they either
unfortunately, or wilfully shroud themselves under ambiguities of words, or
when they change the state of that question, which should end all questions,
either devising or catching at all advantages to keep them out of Gods Church.

7. Upon these considerations, if I said, that Infallibility was (to me) an
unfortunate word, had not I reason to say so, since it endangered my loss, and
caused my delay of attaining to the fundamental happiness of this and the next
world, which is to become a member of the Church of Christ? This might have
been spoken without any prejudice or disparagement to the word it self: as it
may be truly said, that Homousion (the Churches own word) was an unfortunate
word to the Arians, as likewise that Theotokos was an unfortunate word to the
Nestorians, since they would not accept heaven, unless they might have it
without being obliged to receive those words. Therefore I. P. must pardon me,
and give me leave to say more, that is, that Infallibility was an unfortunate
word, not to me only, but to Mr. Chillingworth likewise, and to my lord
Falkland, and to I. P. himself, and indeed to all Protestants, since they will
needs, to their own great disadvantage, make advantage of it, to embroil
Controversies, to multiply objections, and to exclude themselves from the
Church: and this they do, because they will neither use nor accept of any other
word; And this word which is in it self, and confined to the present acception,
very expressive and proper) they will needs understand in a far more sublime
and comprehensive Notion, then Catholics intend, thinking, that if they could
show that any particular personal opinions of Catholics, or any practice in
the Church did swerve from that rectitude, which they imagine to be imported by
that word that they had reason to renounce the Churches Infallibility and
authority, though (by being in the Church) they would have no obligation to
join in such opinions or practices. What Protestant would have the confidence
to say, that it does not belong to the Church to be the interpreter of
Scripture, or that acknowledged lawful General Councels are not obliging under
the penalty of manifest Schism, that is, damnation? And again, on the
otherside, what one Protestant is there, who will not protest against the
Infallibility of the Church: and yet this Infallibility in the meaning of the
Church, neither dose nor must comprehend more then is imported by the other
expressions? Is it not apparent therefore, Since no such word as Infallibility
is to be found in any Council, and since the Church did never enlarge her
authority ^^ so vast a wideness, as Protestants will needs hither to collect
from the word Infallibility; but rather that she does deliver the victory into
our hands, when we urge her Decisions, that any Catholic, that had any charity
in disputing with Protestants, would either wholly abstain from the word it
self, or since it is become so common, and with all so convenient (for no other
single word can be imagined so proper) would, in using of it confine it to its
necessary acception in the present matter, and so prevent Protestants, that
they should not, if they would, make use of it to their most disadvantagious
advantage; And this latter expedient I have in this review made use of, keeping
the word Infallibility (in it self good and innocent;) yet withal using
caution, that it should not be mistaken.

8. What is now become of your exclamations, my good unknown friend, I. P. how
impertinent are they, and how harshly and inharmoniously do they sound? O the
strength of reason rightly managed by the Great Defendors of the English
Church! O the power of truth clearly declared! That it should force an eminent
member of the Church of Rome (alas, eminent in nothing but in miserable
imperfections) to retract so necessary, so fundamental a doctrine, to desert
all their Schools, and contradict all their controvertists? For is it not
apparent, even from the first impression of my Book, that it was so far from
being true, that the strength of reason rightly managed by you, or the power of
truth clearly declared by you, compelled me to use such expressions; that on
the contrary, it was your manifest unreasonableness, and your wilful mistake of
Truth, that forced me out of compassion and charity to you [not to retract any
doctrine of the Church, nor to desert any community in it, but] to temper what
the Church and the Schools, and Controvertists, likewise say, to your too much
depraved palats.

9: Having been so large hitherto, I may the better dispense with my self to be
brief in what follows. Therefore, whereas in the sixth Paragraph I. P. says,
That it is not the name or word (Infallibility) that is deserted by Mr. Cressy,
but the whole importance and sum of it; since he does not except against the
word, but to receive it in the sense of Cardinal Bellarmine; that is,
Infallibilis est qui nullo casu errare potest, etc. To this I must needs say,
that truly I. P. is mistaken, for it is only the word Infallibility that is in
controversy, and that protestants (I do now except Mr. Chillingworth, etc. who
are far from being truly English Protestants) do make mere nominal controversy
of this great fundamental one: for no argument that ever I saw, is so much as
intended by them to disprove this truth, That it belongs to the Church to be
the interpreter of Scripture, and not to any private spirit, or natural reason,
or this, That the Decisions of the Catholic Church in lawful approved General
Councels are not obliging under pain of Anathema, incurring of schism, and by
consequence damnation: and it is this, I say principally this, that the Church
understands by the notion of Infallibility: Therefore it is in your own sense
only, and not Bellarmines, that you will understand those words of his,
Infallibilis est qui nullo casu erra^e potest: for Bellarmine himself, as I
have showed in my book, acknowledges a General Council to be infallible, yet
not Infallible, as the Scripture, that is, Quod in nullo casu errare potest,
for the Scripture is Infallible, not only in Essential Doctrines, but even in
all circumstantial, historical passages, phrases and and words: whereas
Councels are only Infallible in the substance of their Decisions, the which
Decisions, as Salmanticensis says, are likewise to be extended no further,
then the latitude of the Heresies, which they intend to condemn: but as for
other passages in Decrees or decisions, as the grounds, principles, and
reasons, from which a Council deduces its conclusive Decisions, etc. In those
it may be deceived, and much more in orders and reformations, which depend upon
prudence or information. It is therefore a very great apparent mistake, when
you say, that Mr. Cressy retracts (either the word Infallibility it self, which
he often makes use of, or or much less) the full importance and sense of that
word, unless you will mean, that he will not use it in your full importance and
sense; for that he acknowledges he will not; he is too charitable to you, to
justify or encourage you in your mistakes. As for Mr. Chillingworth, my lord
Falkland, and if there be any other that proceed upon their grounds, whom you
ought to have called, not the Great Defenders, but the great Destroyers of the
Church of England) though they do indeed mistake the word Infallibility,
extending it to too comprehensive a sense, yet, that does not hinder them in
their way, for by making every ones personal reason to be judge and
interpreters of Scripture, they do thereby destroy all obliging authority,
whether fallible or infallible.

10. In the seventh Paragraph the Author, I. P. very rationally, that is, very
consequently to his most irrational mistaking me. First imputes
unreasonableness to me, in making any answer to the arguments, made against
that which he confesses himself cannot be maintained. Hereto, I answer, That 1.
Since it was Mr. Chillingworth's book, and not any Prelatical Protestants
argument against the Catholic Churches authority, that perplexed and entangled
me. And 2. since I knew that Mr. Chillingworth believed his arguments
unanswerable, not only by his Adversary, and such as proceeded upon his
Adversarie's. special grounds, but by any Catholic upon what grounds soever;
and that the only grounds upon which Catholic authority could be destroyed,
were not such as my Lord of Canterbury, etc. proceeded on. viz. To set up a
little authority, and seemingly to contradict an universal one; but only such
as Mr. Chillingworth used, viz. To disoblige every Christian from all authority
whatsoever, as obliging the conscience to the believing of any thing, and
making private reason the judge: where was this unreasonableness of mine, when
I attempted to show the world how I came to be undeceived, and upon what
grounds I ceased to think, what before not I only, but very many Protestants
besides my self, thought; namely, that Mr. Chillingworths book did wholly
destroy, not only his mistaken Infallibility, but the true real Infallibility
or Authority of the Church. I am most assured, if the reasons given by me
against M. Chillingworth be indeed concluding, and my answers to his objections
satisfactory, that if Mr. Chillingworth had been alive to read my book, and had
thought so too, he would not have made that poor shift that I. P. has done,
and have said that Mr. Cressy did unreasonably to impugn him.

11. In the next place forasmuch as concerns the manner of my Answer, which I.
P. in the eighth Paragraph, says is yet more unreasonable, In that I, deserting
the Infallibility, answer only to the authority of the Church, so making this
authority answer for that Infallibility. I answer, that it was only a mistaken
notion, that both I and Mr. Chillingworth, and all Protestants have of the word
Infallibility, that I deserted, and desire I. P. likewise to desert with me,
but as for the true Infallibility, which is in effect al one with the Authority
of the Church, it could never enter into my thoughts to desert it, and it
proving to be the very same thing with the Authority of the Church, obliging
under damnation, it is very reasonable, that this Authority should answer for
that Infallibility, and that Infallibility for this Authority.

12. As to the three Absurdities in the opinion of I. P. following from the
unreasonableness of my answer; of which the 1. is, That after all I have said
to Mr. Chillingworth's arguments, I must still acknowledge them unanswerable,
as they were intended by him that made them. 2. That my Answer must be to no
purpose, because I pretend to answer his arguments as against the Authority of
the Church, simply considered, without Relation to such an Infallibity, which
were never made against an Authority so qualified. And 3. That if I intend to
refute all opposition made to the Infallibility of the Church, by an assertion
of its bare authority, then must I assert that authority which is fallible, to
be as great and as convincing, as that which is Infallible, etc.

Here I answer, that there is no need of any further answer, for that which is
already said, demonstrates all these consequences to be mere mistakes, grounded
upon mistakes Yet, because for good I. P. sake, I am content to take the pains
to say more then absolute necessity requires; therefore that which is already
said, being presupposed; to the first pretended Absurdity, I answer. 1. That
Mr. Chillingworth did esteem both the Rhetoric and Logic of his Book
prevalent, not only against Dr. Potters single Adversary and his grounds, but
against the very foundations of all Catholic Authority; insomuch, as he
challenges all Catholics whatsoever, protesting, that if they be able to
answer, but a very few leaves of his Book, he will submit and go to Mass
presently. And 2. The truth is, if his positive grounds of The Bible, and
nothing but the Bible, interpreted casually by private reason, be the only
Rule, not Infallibility only, but all Authority is destroyed: Therefore his
intention was, that his arguments should have heir force, not only against
that notion, which he thought his Adversary had of Infallibility, but against
the thing it self, whether you will call it Authority or Infallibility. And by
consequence, 3. I have no obligation to think still (for it never concerned me
to think) his arguments to be unanswerable, as they were intended by himself.

13. To the second pretended Absurdity, I further answer, that it is true, Mr.
Chillingworth very often mistakes, even his Adversary in his acception of the
word Infallibility: And this I said in general in the Book, and much more that
he mistakes in his application of this mistaken notion to the Churches
Authority, or qualified Infallibility. But though I said this in general, you
will find, that when I come to a particular answer of passages and grounds
quoted out of him, they are such as concern the positive fundamental grounds of
his whole book, and destroy not only all Infallibility, but all Authority,
yea, the very being of a Church, whether Catholic or Schismatic. And where I
answer particular objections against the Church, I have no recourse to his
mistake of Infallibility; Therefore my answer is to some purpose, though many
of his objections be to none, as to Catholics in general.

14. To the third supposed Absurdity, I answer, that I had rather think I. P.
did read my Book negligently, then that he would censure it maliciously, and
against his conscience, if he did read it with care. For it is evident through
my whole book, that my own thoughts were, etc I have clearly signified those
thoughts to have been, that Infallibility and Authority are in effect all one,
as applied to the Church: For to say that the Church has authority in a General
Council to propose Doctrines of Faith, and to oblige all Christians under
penalty of damnation to receive and believe the said Doctrines, and withal to
say that she is fallible, and may deceive and propose falsities for truths, and
so propose them, as that there can be no appeal from her, would be the
extremity of injustice, and the exalting of a Tyranny more grievous then Sicily
ever felt, a Tyranny upon Souls. I wonder therefore what art it was that I. P.
used, when he extracted out of my book, that because of the ill use that Mr.
Chillingworth, etc. made of the Scholastical word Infallibility, exalting it to
the supremest degree that the word could import, that is, to a degree not at
all pretended to by the Church, no nor scarce by the Scripture it self, and
therefore I declared my willingness, not to serve my self of that word, which
was none of the Churches own, and desired others also, either to abstain from
it, or at least to adjoyn such necessary qualifications to it, as were allowed
by the Church, to the end, that Protestants might see, what it is that they
combat, and ought to submit to. viz. The just and lawful Authority of the
Church, in interpreting of Scriptures Authoritatively, and proposing of
Doctrines with absolute obligation of believing: I wonder, I say, by what new
art he extracted this consequence, that I must assert, that that Authority is
as great, and convincing, which is fallible, as that which is Infallible. Did I
ever deny, or give the least ground of suspicion, that it was in my heart to
deny, the Authority of the Church to be Infallible in Decisions propounded by
her, as traditionary? Is it to say the Church is fallible, or a Guide that may
lead a soul out of the way, or a Judge capable of mistaking, because there may
be spread in some places of the Church some Opinions (no Decisions) or some
practices, which Protestants may account unwarrantable? No, no, it is mere
guilt in I. P. that made him draw such an inference; he is loath to see the
truth appearing out of clouds. I may more truly call the word (Infallibility)
the Darling of Protestants, then, as he does, of Catholics, a Darling to them,
because they can (under the ambiguousness of it) shelter themselves from truth,
obedience, and salvation.

15. Now, whereas I. P. in his ninth Paragraph professes, that, having
considered the inconsiderableness of Mr. Cressy's answers, and indeed whole
discourse; he changed his resolution to answer it, as judging it not to deserve
an answer: I have nothing to say but this, that truly I neither did, nor can
commend the Book to him, as a writing considerable, or that might deserve his
labor to consure it; but yet if I thought there were no other imperfections to
make it inconsiderable, besides those that he has taken notice of in his
Preface, I fear I should be tempted to think well of it. However, this I can
say confidently, that notwithstanding any objections as yet made by him against
it, he may, if he please, resume his resolution to answer it, without
apprehending any guilt, but only the choosing so weak an Adversary. But yet
instead of that, I would rather advise and beseech him to read such a
Fundamental Controversy, as this, concerning the Churches Infallibility, with
other eyes and heart then he has done mine; that is, with a mind
dis-interessed and willing to find the truth by whomsoever proposed. It is
impossible but that education must needs have given a great Bi^s one way:
therefore when he reads any thing, upon the truth or falsehood whereof his
souls depends, he should rather strain himself to give a weight to objections
made against any of his settled preconceived opinions, then catch at
circumstantial advantages to elude them: if there be any reasons weakly urged
by me, he ought to exercise his own wit to press them more efficatiously
against himself: but above all things he ought to pray to God (as God willing,
I shall not fail to do both for him, and all his, and my friends) that he would
increase in his heart a diffidence of his own judgment, and an humble
pliableness to submit to truth and authority.

16. Lastly, Where he concludes with his testimony of the invincibleness of my
Lord Falkland's Discourses, especially the Reply: I have no more to say, then
what I said in the beginning, excepting this, that for the Reply, he to whom is
was made is concerned in it: and as for the Discouse of Infallibility, if the
noble Author were alive, I would have presumed to have had his leave to have
answered it.

CHAP. VI.
The Fundamental ground of my Lord Falkland's Discourse Examined.

1. HAving said thus much to the preface of I. P. (if these additional papers
had not been hastily called for to the Press) I had perhaps finished a begun
Discourse in opposition to my most dear lord Falkland's Theses concerning
Infallibility; to each of which I had determined to have adjoined an
Antithesis. But (so much leisure not being permitted me) I will content my self
at present to single out the eleaventh Paragraph, (according to a former
Edition, An. D. 1646.) and to oppose a brief Answer; and by so doing, I shall
give a vertual satisfaction to the whole Discourse; Because in that one
Paragraph) and in scarce any one besides) is clearly contained the state of the
main Controversy. viz. The ground upon which is demonstrated the necessity of
an infallible authority in Gods Church, and the only seeming rational and
possible way to avoid and defeat that authority.

2. The words of the Paragraph are these, The chiefest reason, why Catholics
disallow of the Scripture for a Judge, is, because when differences arise about
the interpretation, there is no way to end them: And that it will not stand
with the goodness of God to damn men, for not following his will: if he had
assigned no infallible way how to find it. This is the Allegation of
Catholics, in which mention likewise might have been made of the writing of
the Fathers, and any thing but the testimony of the present Church, because
reason and experience shows that differences will arise about the
interpretation of them likewise, and no possible way to end them neither, but
by a present infallible Authority. To this Allegation of Catholics, his
lordships answer follows in these words. I confess, this to be wonderful
true(...)[1. for I am not such a wretch as to speak otherwise then I think] and
let them ^^cuse themselves that think otherwise. Yet this will be no argument
against him, who believes, that to all, who follow their reason in the
interpretation of the Scriptures, and search for Tradition, God will either
give his Grace for assistance to find the Truth, or his pardon if they miss
it: and then this supposed necessity of an infallibly Guide, with this supposed
damnation for want of it, fall together to the ground.

3. The fundamental ground upon which Catholics build the necessity of an
infallible Authority, is that Article of the Creed, Credo un^m Sanctam,
Catholicam, and Apostolicam Ecclesiam, 1. I believe one Holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church. I believe the Church to be one, one Body consisting of many
members, subordinately joined, and united under one Head: which Unity is,
especially, in regard of one faith professed by all, and one Charity chaining
all hearts together: Now one Church there cannot be, without one Faith; and one
Faith cannot be, where differences are impossible to be reconciled; and no
possible way to reconcile differences, but by Authority; and no Authority
sufficiently efficacious to this end, but an infallible one.

4. I confess this to be wonderful true, (says his lordship) for I am not such
a wretch. etc. what is it that his lordship confesses? That the Church is one
Body, professing one faith? No, alas! That was no Article in his Creed. What
then did he so ingenionsly confess? That it was necessary that differences and
controversies should be decided? No nor that neither. The thing that he
confesses with an unexampled ingenuity, is, That, if it be necessary that
differences should be decided and ended, and that errors should be abolished;
God is obliged by his infinite goodness to make his truth known some infallible
way, by some infallible Guide. So that by his lordships acknowledgment, and by
the evidence of reason, if the Church must have one faith, it must have one
infallible Guide. It is therefore this Unity of the Church, that his lordship
denies to be necessary; yet he would not have denied the necessity of such an
Unity, if he could have found an infallible Guide; without which he knew there
could be no unity; but missing of that, and despising to think of such a
blind, and lame Guide as a Church of England or Geneva, etc. [none of which
could ever end one controversie] He concludes that there is no necessity that
controversies should be concluded, Nor damnation for not following the will of
God, since he left no infallible Guide to lead us to the knowledge of it. A
doctrine so horrid, that it is much more derogatory to the honor of Christ,
then Arianism it self, which though it robs him of his divinity, yet places him
above all other creatures. But this denies him even that degree of common sens,
which men of mean capacity enjoy: for it makes him establish a law with his own
blood, which is neither necessary to be kept, nor indeed possible to be known;
then which, what can be more absurd and ridiculous? The perspicacity of my
honored lords judgment was so employed in opposition of Infallibility, that I
am confident, he never reflected upon these sad inevitable consequences.

5. But surely no salvation is to be had without this unity in divine truth,
(as I have shown at large in my Exomologesis) and only Christians have the
Depositum of Divine Truth entrusted to them: Where then shall they find it? In
his lordships forementioned Answer it is implied, That it is only to be found
in Scripture, and Traditionary writings. But all such writings are obnoxious to
variety of senses, and interpretations: What must be done in that case to find
out the true Interpretation? for that every body (says his lordship) must shift
as well as he can; he is to do his best, following the dictamen of his own
private Reason, to find out the true sense of Scripture. And for his comfort
he is to believe, that if his private Reason should chance to mis-lead him, [as
ten thousand to one it will] yet there is no danger at all, let but private
Reason do its best, and he may assure himself all will be Well: Gods infinite
goodness would fail, if a Soul, proceeding so reasonably, should miscarry. But
how is this confidence of security in following private Reason grounded? That
does not at all appear, neither in Scripture nor Tradition, neither did his
lordship seem to employ the admirable sharpness of his own private Reason to
search grounds for that, upon which the Eternal disposal of his soul depended.

6. That which drove his lordship upon the rock of private Reason, was merely a
mistake, us may appear to any one that shall carefully read this small Treatise
of his. If he could have found an infallible Authority [for one less then
infallible, was to his reason a ridiculons thing] he would have abhord the
though of relying on private Reason interpreting Scripture. He sought after
this infallible Authority, but he sought only there, where either it was not,
or at least it would require very sharp eyes, and a very unprepossessed mind
to discover it; Therefore he streins his Reason to prove, that this
infallibility is not to be found in the Pope, nor in a Council, at least, not
so evident to him, as to countervail the seeming evidence of the force of some
objections, that he had against some decisions of Councels, and such an
evidence he must needs have or none; To demonstrate this, he makes use of all
the imaginable difficulties and mullities that could be found against the
legitimation of a Pope and Council, and of any erroneous opinions, or unlawful,
or questionable practices in the Church, though never decided, nor warranted by
the Church it self. But there is not one word in all his Discourse against the
Infallibility of the Universal Church it self, or of a general Council approved
of, and received by the Church. It seems in his Disputes, it had been his
misfortune, chiefly to treat with those that would urge the Dogme of the Popes
Infallibility, not only as a Catholic Truth, but also, as a necessary
fundamental established point of Catholic Faith, and not being fully cleared
in the evidence of their pretentions [a thing not very strange, since many
learned Catholics would furnish him with doubts, and Objections to increase
the mist and obscurity] he concluded, that no Infallibility could any where be
made appear.

7. Being thus unfortunately persuaded, that there was no evidence of an
Infallible Universal Authority, plain evident Reason taught him, that there
could nor possibly be any other Guide, but private Reason following its own
light; for this private Reason would never lead him to submit his Reason to a
Church of England, or Geneva, or Racovia, etc. For why to any one of these,
rather then to another? And if to all of them indifferently, then to
contradictions, because in many things they contradict each other.

8. In this case and circumstances therefore, his lordship argued as reasonably
as it was possible for one to do, that had mistaken the first principle; and
with the clear ingenuity of a truly noble spirit [not imitated hitherto by any
Protestant] he acknowledged that upon any other grounds but his, the Plea of
Catholics was unanswerable and unavoidable, that is, unless private Reason
(following its own light in the Interpretation of Scriptures) were to be every
ones Guide; and this being apparently a most fallible Guide (unless it were
certain, that God would give his grace, that is, good fortune, to assist
private Reason in finding the Truth, or his pardon in case it missed of finding
it) the pretentions of Catholics are unanswerable.

9. Now instead of searching reason to combat this usurpation of private
Reason, I shall beg of all reasonable ingenious Persons, to consider with me,
what deplorable case this was; that he who saw evidently, that if the Catholic
Churches Authority and Infallibility were opposed, all other Churches must
expire; The Authority of the English Church would be an airy fantosm; the
Tyranny of Geneva, an abomination; Amsterdam a mere Bedlam; Racovia an
execration, etc. Should notwitstanding think, that any one could be safe in no
Church at all, and thereupon (renouncing all authority, both name and thing)
should betake himself to the casual conduct of blind, humane, natural Reason;
but J^^cia Domini abyssus multa.

10. Well; but this conduct of Reason, and this indifferency, as to the point
of danger, Whether Reason be a true ar false Guide, must be disproved by some
infallible way (says his lordship in the beginning of the twelfth Paragraph)
otherwise none can be condemned, if they follow it.

11. For Gods sake, what more infallble proof can be imagined against it, then
this, That such a Guide, such an arbitrary, uncertain, incapable, blind Guide
and interpreter was never heard of in Christ's Church till this age, that it
appeared out of the mists of Polonia. It Is true, it has been actually, really
followed by all sorts of Heretics, and Schismatics, though they were ashamed
to call it by his own name of private Reason, for they pretended it was the
Church, the Primative Apostolic Church that they followed: but never till this
later Age private Reason (as private Reason) showed it self in the Chair of
Judicature. A Guide, that will lead them (that follow) through Rivers and Fens,
through Woods and Deserts, through Mountains and Precipices, to the right hand
and to the left, backwards and forwards, and in a Circle: A Guide, that must
never repose, but be continually traveling, which way it matters not, being as
secure in Falsehood, as in Truth: A Guide, that can never be confident, much
less secure of the right way, yea, obliged to be doubtful, that he is wrong: A
Guide, that the Scripture never mentioned, and the Church never heard of, but
supposed, (by being called a Chruch) that it never should be hearkened to: so
that whether Scripture, or Tradition, or Church or all of them be followed,
such a Guide ought to be deserted and renounced: A Guide, that two persons
cannot possibly follow together, because no two persons (that ever followed any
other Guide, beside Authority) did, or could think all things to be reasonable;
that any other thought so: And lastly, by consequence such a Guide, that, as
long as he continues in the office, there cannot possibly be any Church any
where. And is not this an infallible Eviction, that this is an imaginary
seducing Guide, since it is impossible, that that should be a Guide appointed
for any Christian, which neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor any of their
followers ever mentioned, yea, which does formally destroy one of our twelve
Articles of the Apostles Creed, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam.

12. And yet when all this is said, even this is a less unreasonable, and less
unsafe Guide, then any divided particular Church can be: For this hood-winked
Guide (inquiring into Scripture, and searching after Tradition) may possibly
stumble upon the way to Unity and Truth, that is, the true Catholic Church;
for private Reason, professes the exclusion of partiallity, and will not refuse
to take into consideration, whether it self ought not to be renounced, and
Authority submitted to: and if it chance to find Reason for Authority, it will
resign its Office, and cease to be a Guide any longer, or private Reason any
longer; whereas particular Churches [being founded upon the renouncing of
Universal Authority in practice, and yet usurping that Authority, which they
renounce) do not only mis-lead their followers, but (having seized on them)
do chain and fasten them in that Dunge. on.

CHAP. VII.
A concluding Exhortation; wherein all are invited to Catholic UNITY.

1. FOR a farewell to I. P. and all his Brethren, and to all my dear mislead
Countrymen, of what Religion, Sect, or Faction soever, but principally the
Protestants, Presbyterians, and Independents. I beseech them all to suffer a
word of Exhortation, made by St Paul to the Philippians, Phil. 2. Si quae ergo
consolatio in Christo, si quod solatium, etc. If there be any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of Charity, if any society of the spirit, if any b^^els
of Compassion; fulfill the joy of St Paul, and all Saints, that you be of the
same Judgment, having the same charity; being of one mind, thinking the same
thing. That is, Think Catholic Unity a desirable thing, and pursue the ways
to attain it.

2. Now the Sun shines not clearer at Noon then this Truth, That there is no
possible Unity without Authority, nor no Christian Unity without an Infallible
Authority, all other Authority is mere Faction and Rebellion, an Authority that
reaches to the outward appearance, or that binds only the purse; If there
were any true Spiritual Authority lately in England, or now at Geneva, etc. it
would engage the consciences of those that are under it; and that not as
English men, or French, but as Christians; And by consequence all Christians
should be obliged to submit to it, a thing that themselves do not so much as
pretend to. Therefore by all those passionate exhortations of St. Paul, I
conjure you be no longer averse from Catholic Unity and Catholic Authority:
for be assured without such Unity and Authority submitted to, you will find no
consolation, no not in Christ himself, no comfort in the charity of the Father,
nor society with the ^^ Spirit, etc.

3. Do not (according to your mistaken custom) account us uncharitable, in
professing, that salvation cannot belong to any that are estranged from our
Catholic Communion; we could not be Catholics, if we said not so: Thereby we
approve our selves to be the lawful children of the Ancient Saints, Martyrs,
Confessors, etc. all which, out of their burning charity [not pride, or malice]
protested damnation to all out of their Communion; For how could they, or we be
the true Church, unless we excluded false Churches. St. Augustine was the
benignest, humblest, charitablest soul in his Age, yet who thunders so loudly
and so terribly against Schismatics, as he? And his enemies, the Donatists,
(pretending to be the Catholic Church, to the end to justify seemingly their
false plea) were forced to denounce damnation to all, from whom they were
divided, otherwise they would not have had so much as the show of Catholics.

4. More particularly addressing my self to my most dear friends the English
Protestants, (of whose communion I once was a seduced Member) consider, I
beseech you, that that which at the first composing of this Book, I only
suspected might possibly happen, is now abundantly effected: God has in part
visited on you the persecution and injustice you laid upon us: Now do you not
see, that your Church was the mere creature of State Policy? If it had had the
power of Religion; the decay of your Ecclestical estates, or imprisonment of
your Bishops would not have destroyed Authority among you: The censures of a
captive Pope, or Excommunication of a Synod meeting in a Grot were as terrible
to irregular, disobedient Catholics, as if they had thundered from the Capitol,
or the Emperial Palace in Constantinople: Where are the proofs now of your
Spiritual Power? Why do not you thunder out your Excommunications against the
Subverters of your Religion, or against your own daily revolting subjects?
Alas, who would be frighted with such Anathema's? Or what subjects have you
now, after the loss of your temporal Lordships? And which way shall those
Lordships be regained, that you may become a Church again? Those that were once
content you should enjoy them, will not adventure their own estates to recover
them for you; the Lutherans are too far off, and the Calvinists too near; you
may comfort your selves with your Liturgy, and perhaps your Surplices worn in
private Conventicles; But as for a succession of Priests or Bishops, that is
not to be hoped, much less a restoration of your Religion, which is now quite
out of date.

5. To what Church will you now apply your selves? To the Scottish Kirk, or your
own Presbyterians (the first incendiaries of all these troubles, the Idumaeans,
that cried Exinanite, Exinanite usque ad fundamentum in ea?) Or to their
successors of a thousand names and shapes, and all of them frighrful? What is
it that holds you from returning to Catholic Communion? What other injuries
have we done you, except that we have forced you to blush, to see how patiently
we suffered your injustices, oppressions and persecutions? But the Truth is, you
were not so much our Persecutors as that poisonous generation of Calvinists
among you; they were those who instilled fury into our Kings and Parliaments,
and poison into the laws against us; Which very laws are still kept in force
against Catholics, and the present Governors (who profess Independency and an
absolute freedom of Conscience) are yet (by a secret transition of some dregs
of Calvinistical pollution) become severe Executioners of their cruelty against
us; By that means destroying the foundation of their own Religion, and rendering
themselves obnoxions to be censured by neighboring Princes and States, as
persons of no faith or constancy even to their own Principles. But however it
is to be hoped that care will be taken, that the Presbyterian banner shall
never be displayed amongst you, lest their little fingers prove hereafter more
heavy to all their opposors, then the Prelatical loins were formerly. And I
cannot but congratulate unto Scotland their late procured liberty from this
more then Scilician Tyranny of Kirkism.

6. If those now exauctorated, now dispossessed Presbiterian Spirits would
hearken to the advice of one that truly wishes so well to their souls, that he
would willingly sacrifice his life for their good, I would desire them to
consider how palpably beyond all other Sects their condition is most miserable,
and evidently accursed both by God and man. For their Dominion and Tyranny
never lasts longer, then during the times of sedi^ions, and secret rebellious
practices. Then indeed secular ambitious spirits (having great use and need of
them to whisper treasons, sow discontents, inflame revenge, and (under a show
of zeal) root all charity, obedience, and peacefulness out of the consciences
of the people) do suffer them to rage; Whilst these plots are agirating, so
long they have leave given them to domineer over the souls of men, and to set
up their abhorrid Tribunals: But when once their secular lords see themselves
settled by their practices; then nothing is so contemptible, as a Calvinistical
Minister, witness Geneva, where they have no influence upon the State; and
witness Holland, where the whole Body of their wretched Ministry are not
allowed one single voice in their Government, nor the meanest Artisan scarce
willing to cast away a daughter upon them.

7. Filii hominum usquequo gravi cord, ut quid diligitis vanitatem, and
quaeritis mendatium? O my beloved Countrymen, How long will you remain of such
stupefied, insensible, blind hearts? Do not you perceive that it is mere
emptiness that you graspe, and a palpable lie that you so busily seek; whilst
(renouncing Christ's Authority) you follow the conduct of your own Reason and
Spirit? Are you not now become like the men of Sodom struck with blindness, yet
persuaded that you are the only Seers? You cross and justle one another in the
way, knocking at all doors, but the right? How impossible is it that this
blindness, this eternal wandering should be cured, but by the Opobalsamum of
Catholic Faith and Obedience to the only spouse of Christ, the Church? Your
eyes are not the only Organs, but your ears must be used for the learning of
the true way; Faith comes by hearing, not studying or disputing, and the
persons to be heard are those that are sent, that have a Mission sealed by
Christ, and delivered successively from his Apostles and by their Successors.
If you would hear, you would believe; And if you would believe, you could not
be divided. But you will read, and study, and dispute, and the fruit thereof is
not faith, but science falsely so called, which puffs you up with a vain
opinion of knowledge, and tempts you to study and dispute without end. Now if
you really believed the Scriptures which you read, you would hear the Church,
that is the only safe Interpreter of them. He that hears you, hears me, says
our Savior to, and concerning his Apostles and their Successors: Christians
must be hearers of their Teachers to the end of the world: What infinite
numbers of mis-lead souls have continually deceived themselves into eternal
perdition, and all of them with the Bible in their hands, and perhaps in their
heads and memories? And this not for want of reading, or disputing, but of
hearing and believing.

8. This is the true and proper Difference indeed between a Catholic and a
Mis-beleever: The Bible is a Rule to them both: but the sense of the Bible is
conveyed several ways to them: Heretics receive it by the eyes, they deliver
it themselves to themselves, by which means every one being a Teacher
independent of another, Christ has no Scholars among them: so that every
Reader creating a sense proper to his own taste, and disposition, they all agree
only in possessing the outward bark, but the true sense escapes them; Whereas
a Catholic receives both the Bible, and the sense of the Bible from the
Church, and Teachers appointed in Her; So that he has the same assurance of the
sense^ ^^ of the Bible it self, then which a greater certainty cannot be given,
even Protestants themselves being Judges. By this means it comes to pass, that
as it is impossible, that Heretics should agree any other way, then in
faction; So it is impossible, that Catholics should differ in points of
belief; and as it is impossible, that Protestants should be humble, who trust
none, n^r rely on any but their own wit and judgment, (they being their own
only Authority) So it is impossible that Catholics should in this regard be
proud, whose wit and judgment is to renounce their own judgment, and to depose
their own wit, and to captivate both to the obedience of Faith, which comes by
hearing Christ speak to them by his Church: Lastly, as it is impossible that
Heretics, who follow private Reason (which of all others by a general
acknowledgment is the blindest Guide) should not with their blind Guide fall
into the Pit; so it is impossible, that Catholics (if their works be
answerable to their faith) should not with the Church that teaches them, attain
the glory, which Christ has purchased for his Elect.

9. Do not (I beseech you, my dear friends) look upon this Characteristical
difference between Catholics and Heretics, as a new device of our own brain,
but as an Ensign set up by the Fathers of the Church, yea, by the Holy Ghost
himself, speaking by his Choicest Organ St. John the Evangelist. (Ep. 1 Chap.
4.) Ipsi de mundo sunt ideo de mundo loquuntur, etc. They are of the World,
therefore they speak of the World, and the World hears them, we are of God: He
that has known God, hears us: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the
Spirit of Error. The Apostle (in the beginning of the Chapter) had warned the
Brethren of the multitude of Antichrists, that is, Heretics that were shortly
to infest the Church, and to preserve themselves from their poison, he advises
them to try the Spirits, that they might discern the true from the false. Now
to enable them for this Trial, he gives this mark of distinction: They, says
he, that is, the false Spirits are of the world, and they speak of the world,
and the world hears them: Their great Master, and Arch-Apostle is the world,
that is, worldly lust, which (as he said before) were, The lusts of the flesh,
^he lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, these were the great Masters that
taught them their new Doctrine, and made them renounce the old. The weariness
of an unmarried, or of a chaste life, ambition after great estates, and scorn to
submit themselves to obedience, these taught new lessons to the Arch-Heriticks:
and these lessons they preach to others, and those that are of the world, and
love such censual conveniences, hear them. Thus is Heresy begun and continued
in the world.

10. On the contrary, (says he) We are of God, who have conquered the world,
and by that means ^rample on these things; we have a far more noble ambition:
For the reward that we pretend to, is no less then God himself; And all that
know God, and know how to set a value on him, hear, and obey us. Hence he
concludes, Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error. But it
may be replied, That as there are many true Believers much immersed in the
lusts of the world, so there may be some Heretics, that in appearance at
least, are in a good measure free from the same lusts. It Is true: yet those
Heretics do not hear the Ministers of Christ; They receive their writings,
they study them, and dispute out of them, but do not hear the true Pastors
interpreting them: Hereby indeed is known the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of
Error. For if they without mission would not pretend to be Apostles, nor
deliver their own doctrines out of the Apostles writings, but have humility to
hear the Apostles and their Successors, and Faith to believe them, they would
never be obnoxious to this Spirit of Error.

11. To conclude, (my dearly beloved Friends) instead of examining those
several marks of true and false Churches, and Teachers extant in Books of
controversies, content your selves with this Catholic mark given by the
Apostle in his Catholic Epistle to all Christians to the worlds end; Would you
know where the Spirit of Truth is? It is not among them that accept, and read,
and study the Scriptures; for then what would be Heresy? Do they not in all
their wanderings and mazes carry the Bible with them? And the Bible it self (as
they use it) leads them to destruction; For Lust, Ambition, Curiosity,
Covetousness, or Pride, (either blinding them or staining their eyes) makes
them think they see in Scripture that which foments, and increases those
Passions; Whereas if (having their eyes open to read the Bible) they would keep
their ears open likewise to hear the Church interpreting it, it is not possible
they should err, or be at variance about the mysteries of Faith. God Almighty,
of his infinite goodness, clear your eyes, and open your ears, that you may see
and hear, and live for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
AD LECTOREM.
En tibi, (Candide Lector!) illas Eximii Doctoris ad Quaesita mea pridem missas
Responsiones, in priori quidem hujus Libri Impressione promissas, sed ex
oblivione omissas. Quod ad speciales autem Doctrinas pertinet vel hic vel
superius in Libro contentas, me tanquam Historici solum non Dogmatistae parts
agentem. respicias. Et vale.

Quaesita Generalia.
QUaeritur primo. Utrum haec Thesis sit in Romana Ecclesia irrepraehensibilis,
videlicet. Nihil est creditu necessarium in Religione Christiana tanquam de
fide, nisi quod revelatum fuit Ecclesiae per Christum and Apostolos ejus?

Respondetur. Quod haec thesis, ut jacet, est omnino irrepraehensibilis, immo
nihil est proprie de side (cujus actus necessario and i^mediate innititur
divinae revelationi) ^nisi quod revelatum fuerit a Deo Ecclesiae per Christum
and Apostolos. Ab eorum enim tempore nihil de novo Ecclesiae revelatum
agnoscimus.

Qu. ^. Utrum omnes articuli de Religione in Concilio Tridentino determinati,
and propositi, sin^ veritates divinae, and tales quae ab Apostolis fuerint
Ecclesiae revelatae?

Resp. Omnes articuli pure doctrinales, nec aliam inclu^entes materiam facti
quam quod divinitus institutum agnov mus, determinati a Concilio Tridentino
tales sunt quoad substantiam. Qui vero vel disciplinales, vel ex toto, vel ex
part ad materiam facti non divinitus instituti spectant, canonicam habent
certitudinem, ac proinde quicunque illorum aliqu^m pertinacitur condemnaverit,
tanquam Ethnicus and publicanus habendus est.

Qu. 3. Si non; (U^ v. g^ articuli de libris canonicis, de vulgata
translatione, de communione sub una spe^ie, de veneratione imaginum) utrum
liceat Catholico inquirere and probabiliter determinare quinam speciales
articuli sint tales veritates revelatae, and quinam non?

Resp. Ad quaestionem principalem (sepositis hypothesi and perenthesi) quod
omnino licet. Ad hypothesim supra responsum est. Ad parenthesim autem
respondetur. Quod esse librum canonicum importat duo. 1. Quod vel doctrinam
revelatam contineat, vel cerre nihil dissonum a veritate divina and Catholica.
2. Quod liber ipse semper habebatur a multis. Ecclesiae Doctoribus divini
fuisse alicujus authoris, Cui scilicet istius libri doctrina ad Religionem
spectans, aut immediate a Spiritu sancto revelata fuerit, aut in illa tradenda
divinum adfuerit speciale auxilium. De prima part potest Concilium vere
oecumenicum certissime decernere, de secunda, cum majori vel minori
cer^itundine juxta varias re^um circumstantias, ita tamen ut canonicam semper
habebit certitudinem hujusmodi Concilii etiam in hac part decretum. Quod idem
dicendum est de vulgatae editionis decreto, licet pure materiam facti designet:

De communione sub una tantum specie, Council ^ Decretum est negativum,
videlicet. Ecclesiam non teneri nec institution^ seu prae^epto divino, nec
quacunque alia^ de causa, Sacramentum E^charistiae fidelibus omnibus sub
utraque specie administra^^. Et hoc certistimum habet Ecclesia ex traditione
and praxi. An vero justis de causis unam tantum speciem communiter administrari
decreverit, prudentiae non doctrinae quaestio est.

De veneratione imaginum quamvis res facti sit, hoc tamen ab ipsis Apostolorum
temporibus traditum habemus.

Qu. 4 An non haec sit pobabilis ratio distinguendi inter tales articulos
scilicet, ponendi istos articulos esse revelationes divinas in quibus Concilium
explicit significat Ecclesiam traditionaliter recipisse talem doctrinam a
primis usque Christianismi temporibus?

Resp. Hanc rationem seu viam distenguendi inter tales articulos, probabilem ac
sanam esse, non vero solam and unicam. Oportet enim ut articuli qui sint
revelationis divinae, sint doctrinales, and qui nunquam ab omnibus Ecclesiae
Doctoribus habebantur incerti, and tunc etiamsi Concilium declararet hujusmodi
articulos ad novatoris alicujus obtundendam audaciam, absque eo quod agnoscat
express illos traditionaliter receptos esse, attamen hoc necessario
subintelligiretur. Novum enim aliquod nequit Concilium oecumenicum Ecclesiae
proponere ut revelatum, nec si proponeret ab Ecclesia recip^retur.

Qu. 5. Utrum omnes articuli a legitimo Concilio propositi sint recipiendi and
amplectendi, vel Christiana fide (scilicet qnod ad articulos divinitus
revelatos) vel sal^em obedientia canonica (quod ad reliquos) Quae ^bedientia
scilicet obligat omnes ad non contradicendum, ita ut merito damnentur omnes qui
se ab Ecclesiae communione separant, ut schismatis non necessarii rei?

Resp. Affirmative ad totam quaestionem, supposito quod Goncilium sit
oecumenicum and legitimum, and omnia conciliariter agat.

Qu. 6. Utrum assistentia Spiritus sancti Ecclesiae promissa necessario
credenda sit simpliciter in omnem veritatem eam ducturum, au solum in
necessariam?

Resp. Necessum est credere Spiritum sanctum, non dico inducturum sed
conservaturum Ecclesiam, Catholicam in om^i doctrina seu veritate revelata;
immo ita recturum eam, ut nunquam in errorem aliquam notabilem, id est, qui
vergat in gravissimum animarum detrimentum, universaliter induci permitrat;
licet in errorem facti, and forsitan do^^^^^ non immediate and express
revelatae, incidere poterit pars major Ecclesiae.

Qu. 3. Utrum Concilium, (secundum quod Stapletonus affirmat) possit erronee
proponere doctrinas quasdam (scilicet quae adfundamenium Religionis non
appropinquant) non veras?

Resp. Primo notandum esse, quod aliud est Concilium oecumenicum Ecclesiae
doctrinas proponere, aliud Ecclesiam illis adhaerere. Deinde aliud est
Ecclesiam doctrinis a Concilio propositis adhaerere tanquam revelatis, aliud
illis assentiri tanquam decretis ac definitis a supremo in Ecclesia tribunali.
Quicquid sit, non denegamus Concilium oecumenicum, posse in quibusda^
circumstantiis Ecclesiae proponere doctrinas quae nec immediate continentur in
revelatis, nec sunt de rebus magni momenti, sed vel facti vel disciplinae,
quodammodo falsas, aut non omnino veras.

Qu. 8. Utrum unquam definitum fuerit ab aliquo Concilio oecumenico Ecclesiam
vel concilium esse infallibilem? Et si sic, Ubi?

Resp. Nunquam, quod meminerim, (evidentissimis sepo^itis scripturae locis)
express definitum legi. Supponitur enim ad omnem definitionem infallibilis
haec decernendi potestas: Quippe si cuilibet licuerit Supremi Tribunalis, sive
Ecclesiastici, sive saecularis, authoritatem ac jurisdictionem in dubium
revocare, ruunt certe omnis Regiminis and gubernationis fundamenta? Si vero
tali decernentis authoritati credendum ac cedeudum necesse sit, perinde est,
quantum ad debitam subditorum obedientiam, an fuerit talis authoritas secundum
se infallibilis, an non.

Qu. 9. Utrum quando vulgo dicitur Ecclesia Catholica est infallibilis, istum
verbum infallibilis importer divinam quandam assistentiam and inerrabilitatem?
An solum moralem (at in summo gradu) certitudinem? Cui scilicet inniti possent
homines sine aliquo periculo, immo omnin^ ^ebeant?

Resp. Quod hujus questionis solutio maxim pendet de propria vocabulorum
significatione, nimirum quaenam infallibilitas vel certitudo quam di^i^nus
divinam? Quaenam naturalis, id est naruralis evidentiae, and quaenam moralis.
Quae omnia ex Logicae principiis desumenda and dissolvenda sunt, Quod non est
hujas loci. In praesentiarum sufficit quod talis sit Ecclesiae infallibilitas
seu inerrabilitas, quaeque ex divino proveniat instituto and auxilio, ut in
errorem Christianae doctrinae ac Religioni oppositum nunquam induce^ur, nec
portae inferi praevalebunt adversus eam.

Ut tibi vero (qui difficultatum medullas soles penetrare) before faciam satis
in re tanti momenti, ex qua nimirum caeterarum omnium inter Christianos
controversiarum petenda est solutio, superaddam hic breviter quod nondum a me
nec verbis, nec scriptis accepisti.

Ecclesiam esse infallibilem, tum ex promissis Christi Domini in sacra
scriptura frequenter habitis, tum ex natura ipsius traditionis universalis
Ecclesiae, quam etiam in genere sumptam infallibilem esse, alibi satis, si
recte memineris, tibi evidentissime demonstravimus.

Ecclesiam autem esse infallibilem, nihil aliud est, quam Ecclesiam non posse
falli, id est; Universalem Ecclesiam unitam sub una in ejusdem fidei and
Sacramentorum communione, non posse errare in traditione Christianae ac
revelatae doctrinae, quae scilicet a Christo and ab Apostolis ejus per
universum orbem edocta ac disseminata fuerit.

Doctrina haec Christiana, in cujus traditione nequit Ecclesia a veritate
aberrare, non solum continet dogma^a, quae veluri mere speculativa videntur;
Trinitatem nempe Incarnationem, etc. (Quae licet ad Christianae vitae
perfectionem parum aut nihil conducere existiment novatores, attamen re vera
totius Christianae praxeos bases sunt and fundamenta) sed etiam Christianorum
operum and Christianae vitae institutiones and actus, ut in Sacramentorum
administratione and receptione, and in multiplici materia facti, quae ad vitam
aeternam consequendam Christianorum u^iversirati necessario requiruntur.

Infallibilita^ haec est duplicis generis. Prima, quae perfecta and absoluta
est, spectar ad traditionem articulorum fidei, id est, articulorum revelatorum,
quaeque divinam revelationem tanquam objectum formale essentialiter vendicant.
Secunda est Canonica, id est, articulorum ab Ecclesia definitor^m quorum nulla
habetur revelationis divinae universalis traditio. Quae tamen talis est
conditionis and naturae, ut omnes Ecclesiae subditi and membra hisce teneantur
subcribere and obedire definitionibus.

Prima infallibilitas in sola Ecclesia universali residet, neque in Papa, neque
in Concilio nisi in quantum Ecclesiae unversali consentire and cohaerere
creduntur, in alterutro tamen Ecclesia universali consentiente. Attamen
Concilio vere oecumenico and perfect generali hoc proprium inest, quod in
illius revelatorum fidei articulorum definitionibus involvatur necessario
universalis Ecclesiae consensus. Quae vero sint conditiones and qualitates
Concilii vere oecumenici constitutivae, non est hujus loci statuere. Prima
igitur infallibilitas ad traditionis universalitatem divina suffultam speciali
providentia reducitur. Secunda tum in Papa, tum in Goncilio residet juxta
varios Reip. Christianae status and conditiones. Potest enim Summus Pontifex,
ubi urget aliqua necessitas, nec poterit Consilium generale opport^^e
congregari, quicquid necessum fuerit ad tollendum schisma vel scandalum
canonica infallibilitate decernere. Cui tota Ecclesia, saltem usque ^um
Concilium generale haberi poterit, cedere teneretur.

Veritates autem seu propositiones quae ab Ecclesia universali infallibiliter
determinari possunt, duplicis sunt generis. Vel enim sunt ipsae veritares
immediate et in ipsismet terminis revelatae, vel sunt consequentes seu
illationes ex illis. Prioris generis veritates posse ab Ecclesia universali
infallibiliter definiri, seu potius designari. alias ^ibi manifestissime
oftendimus; sicut and illas explicare, and terminls magis perspicuis exprimere.
Non etenim per nudas verborum cortices and literulas materiales, sed per
ipsorum sensu^ and significationem, suam novit and tradit Ecclesia doctrinam.
Ac proinde panis conversionem in Coepus Christi recte explicuit Ecclesia,
exorta occasion, nomine Transubstantiationis.

Posterioris autem generis propositiones bifariam dividimus. Vel enim
evidentiss^me and primo intui^^ constabunt cuicunque sanae mentis proponantur,
supposita premissaram veritate. Ut, verbi gratia, quod Christus duas habuerit
voluntates, ex hypothesi du, plicis naturae, divinae scilicet and humanae, in
Christo, manifestissimum elucet. Vel quae studium aliquod and scientiam
requirunt ad hujusmodi sequelae seu consequentiae evidentiam percipiendam. Quae
quidem evidentia majoris vel minoris certitudinis apparebit, tum juxta subjecti
perspicuitatem vel obscuritatem, tum etiam juxta ratiocinantis doctrinae and
ingenii gradum.

Prioris generis veritates, priorem obtinent infallibilitatem in definitionibus
seu declarationibus Universalis Ecclesiae ad fidem spectantibus. Posterioris
vero generis propositiones juxta prius divisionis membrum acceptae, similem
habent certitudinem, licet gradus quasi inferioris. At vero propositiones de
posteriori divisionis membro, nequaquam habent supremam illam and universalem
infallibilitatem, sed canonicam tantum respectu totius Ecclesiae. Quibus
seilicet, sicut and quibuscunque aliis universalis Ecclesiae decretis firmiter
standum est nec ullatenus reluctandum.

De rebus autem facti, five disciplinae, sive regiminis sint, quae jure divino
nullam habent institutionem, hoc tantum nota, quod eorum praecepta seu
instituta, dicuntur Ecclesiastica, quae juxta varias rei Christianae
conditiones ac dispositiones, vel omitti, vel immutari possunt a constitutis in
authoritate secundum quod expedire visum fuerit, nec aliam in se continent
universalem infallibilitatem, quam quae filios Ecclesiae, recepta and
perseverante sanctione, illis subjacere and obedire certissime constringit.

Qu. 10. Utrum quando dicitur Ecclesia Catholicae Romana, sensus fit,
universalis Ecclesia sub uno capite collecta, quod caput olim fuit, and nunc
est, and probabiliter semper erit Romanu^ Pontifex. Ita tamen ul st ista seeds
in posterum vel dissolata fuerit, vel ab insidelibus possessa, quem^umque alium
praesulem Ecclesia sibi praefecerit iste pro visibili capite Ecclesiae and
successore D. Petri habendus sit?

Resp. Quod Ecclesia Catholica dicitur Romanae, posteris hisce temporibus
(antiquitus enim cum loquebantur Patres de Ecclesia Romana, particularem seu
Dioecesanam Ecclesiam Romae ut plurimum designarunt) ad distinguendam illam ab
aliis omnibus haereticorum ac schismaticorum conventiculis, (quorum recentiores
aliqui titulum Catholicae, nescio qua dementia, audent sibi vendicare) per
denominationem a capite desumptam. Quod vero Sedi Romanae annexa sit ex
instituto Petri totius Ecclesiae capitis aliqualis authoritas certissima
traditione constat. Non equidem de necessitate absoluta, cum fuerit prius
Antiochiae; sed ita ex hypothesi rei factae ut ubicunque resideret electus
praesul in totius Ecclesiae caput, seu Petri successorem, Romanae Sedis
Episcopus denominaretur.

QUAESITA SPECIALIA.
QUaeritur 1. Utrum tenendum sit ut de fide omnes libros qui nunc in Canonem
recipiuntur pari jure esse divinos and infallibiles? An solum posse omnes cum
fructis legi in Ecclesia, eos nihil in doctrine aut moribus falsi in
secontinere, and proptered authoritatem eorum non temere rejiciendam?

Ratio dubitanda est, tum quia plurimae praefationes S. Hieronymi aliquos
libros e Canone antiquo Judaeorum eliminant, immo idem libros Machabaeorum
notat, and 3. and 4. Esdrae somnia vocat: ^um Six. Senensis etiam post
Concilium Tridentinum abdicat aditamenta ad Hesterem: Et Melchior Canus etiam
de Baruchi libro putat sine culpa haerese^s posse dubitari, l^c. com. 1. 2. c.
9. Unde Cardinalis Bellarminus agnoseit tales libros posites esse in gradu
inferiori.

Resp. Juxta supradicta ad tertium quaesitum generale, scilicet, omnes libros
receptos in canonem aeque infallibilem continere veritatem quoad doctrinam
revelatam, id est, quod fidei sen doctrinae revelatae nihil oppositum aut
dissonum contineant. Verum quoad librorum authors, quibus etiam an omnia in
eis contenta immediate a spiritu sancto dictabantur, long impar est eorum
certitudo.

Qu. 2. Utrum Concilium Tridentinum (ubi de imaginibus praecipiens ad Concilium
Nicaenum 2. nos remittit) c^nsendum sit interpretari sensum istius, ubi loco
adorare dicit venerari, aut debitum honorem confer?

Resp. Concilium Tridentinum nequaquam interpretari sensum Concili^^^ Nicaeni,
sed idem aliis verbis asseverare. Si enim, (quod tibi saepius dixi) prototypon
non imago proprie veneretur, parum refert quo utatur vocabulo, nisi fiat
quaestio de nominum etymologia

Qu. 3. Utrum articulue de Transubstantiatione in Con^il. Trident. Non
sufficienter credaetur secundum mentem Sy^odi, ab eo qui ^^cat, and
profiteatur. Ego credo quod post con consecratione^^, panis des^^it esse in
Sacramento, and loco ejus est praesens corpus Christi vere, realiter, and
substantialiter (scilicet ut loquitur synodus sacramentali^er, seu modo quodam
inestabili and incomprehensibili) quod fidelibus communicatur ad vitam, and
indi^nis cedit ad condemnationem. Quanquam in ^ ered talis homo profiteatur se
nolle immiscere seipsum Scholasticis and Philosophisis de islo mysterio
disputationibus. Ut quid factum sit de substantia panis? In quo subjecto
subjectentur accidentia ejus? etc. modo recipiat in se nu^quam se
interpretaturum modum istius mysterii contra consensum Sholasticorum.

Ratio dubitandi est, quia h^e doctrina a S: Patribus proponi^ur non sub
notione miraculi, sed mysterii inexplicabilis, unde apud eos nullae tantae
Philosoph^cae controversiae, and subti itates reperiantur, and prop^^rid ^a^e^
sub^isitates non p^ssunt ^liciesse ^^ antiqua traditi^^^ Ecclesiastica.
Praeteria Cardinalis Peronius asserit Concilium Triden inum n^min^^m cegere ad
usurpandam vocem transubstantiationis.

Resp. Sufficienter credi sub his terminis. Ubi vero subjungis, Quod fidelibus,
etc. men's est ni fallor, Quod dignis, etc. subest enim aequivocatio, nam etiam
indigni possunt esse fideles, verum hoc dico ad majorem cautelam. De reliquo
nemo tenetur jurare in verba Scholasticorum, sufficit te contra communem Patrum
and Ecclesiae consensum nunquam modum istum velle interpretari, nec
determinate. Cavendum tamen est, ne sub terminis tuis oppositum aliquid
transubstantiationi inhaereat animo.

Qu. 4. Utrum ille dici possit admittere Canonem 2. siss. 21. Council. Trident.
de communione sub una specie, qui quamvis ipse nullas videat sufficientes
rations negandi communione^ utriusque speciei, tamen profitetur se pie credere
fuisse aliquas quae proculdubio Concilio videbantur justae and sufficientes,
and canonice submittit se iste alterationi?

Resp. Affirmative. Inquirat tamen hic Christianus, si doctus sir, cord recto
motiva Concilii in h^c part, and justi^sima statim inveniet.

Qu. 5. An fit de fide licitum esse coercere and punire vel trade^e puniendos
morte, exilio, vel aliis civilibus poenis haereticos convictos?

Resp. Subjectum quaestionis non esse materiam fidei, ac proinde nihil esse de
fide in illa materia. Veruntamen ce^^^ssimum esse rebels a side and ab
Ecclesia coerceri and pun^^i posse; poenis nimirum spiritualibus (id est
censuris Ecclesiasticis) a superioribus suis Ecclesiasticis; Et poenis
temporalibus, (id est incarceratione, exilio, and similibus) a superioribus
suis temporalibus. Morte vero puniri posse haereticos etiam convictos, immo
relapso^, vel obstinatissimos (modo a seditionis and rebellionis in Remp.
defuerit omne periculum) nunquam fuir totius Ecclesiae dogma Catholicum.
Quicquid autem sit de praxi Inquisitionis jam recepta^, Catholici plurimi, immo
and doctissimi, praecipue in Gallia nostra hoc semper improbarunt, sed haec
quaestio facti est, seu prudentiae, non doctrinae.

Qu. 6. Utrum and quatenus liceat Catholico optare and suadere concessionem
utriusque speciei, Reformationem abusuum in Reliquiis, Imaginibus,
Indulgentiis, etc. Liturgiam and Preces in lingua nota and intellecta, etc.
Sciticet tanquam media admodum efficacia ad reunionem Eo^lesiarum?

Resp. Cum subditorum non sit, superiorum suor^m leges ad libitum interpretari,
immo nec, sub reformationis specie, quamcunque praxim authoritato stabilitam
corrigere (h^ec enim propria seditionis ratio est) nemini Catholicorum licet
public repraehendere nec verbo, nec scripto, Ecclesiae diseiplinam canonice
erectam, Labefactatam vero restaurare, dummodo prudenter fiat, poterit
unusquisque suo modo conari. Cum autem Episcoporum ac pastorum sit (quos posuit
Spiritus sanctus regere Ecclesiam Dei) imposturas omnes authoritate publica
prohibere ac tollere, his omnium est sobrie indicare quos manifest perceperint
Religionis abusus, tum in Clero, tum in populo. Verum nec licet, nec convenit
privato cuicunque suadere mutationem praxis cujuscunque, quam vel ab Ecclesia
sancitam, vel in. Ecclesia consuetudin^ generali and antiqua usurpatam novimus.
De communione sub utraque specie, ac liturgia seu precibus Ecclesiasticis in
lingua vulgari habendis, si qua spes esset illud obtinendi, apud haereticos
parum vale^et. De reliquiis, Indulgentiis, Imaginibus, etc. multa forsan, modo
caure fieret, and monenda and suadenda forent. Quicquid sit; Ecclesiarum, (ut
vocas) reunionem sperare nequaquam fas est, nisi prius rebels in sponsam
Christi, submissis cervicibus, potestati a Deo ordinat^ cordatum jurent
obsequium. Vale.

A Table of the Contents of the several Chapters.
Sect. 1. Cap. 1. THe occasion of the Authors departing out of England. Bloody
commotions of Calvinists there. The horribleness and strangeness of them. p. 1.
Sect. 1. Cap. 2. Sacrilege and Perjury acknowledged even by Heathens to be
principal causes of public calamities. p. 4. Sect. 1. Cap. 3. England
prodigiously guilty of sacrilege since the schism. Visible judgments have
continually pursued this crime there. p. 7. Sect. 1. Cap. 4. Perjury how
frequently and how heinously committed in England since the Schism. p. 12.
Sect. 1. Cap. 5. The sanguinary Laws, and cruel execution of them upon
Catholic Priests in England. p. 16. Sect. 1. Cap. 6. The Authors sadness for
the sins and miseries of his Country. What remedies and lenitives he found for
this sorrow. p. 18. Sect. 1. Cap. 7. A scruple suggested to my mind, viz. To
the Communion of what Church I should adhere upon supposition that the Church
of England should fail. p. 20. Sect. 1. Cap. 8. A Reflection upon several
Sects. And first upon the Socinians. p. 22. Sect. 1. Cap. 9. A Reflection upon
the Calvinists and Lutheran Churches. Their first disadvantage, in comparison
with the English Church. p. 27. Sect. 1. Cap. 10. Apparent want, yea renouncing
of a lawful succession of Ecclesiastical Governors among Lutherans and
Calvinists. p. 29. Sect. 1. Cap. 11. Consent of Fathers against Lutherans and
Calvinists. p. 34. Sect. 1. Cap. 12. Seditious doctrines universally taught by
Calvinists. etc. p. 37. Sect. 1. Cap. 13. Protestants recriminating Catholics
for Rebellion, answered. p. 44. Sect. 1. Cap. 14. A fourth scandal among
Calvinists, viz. their aversion from unity. p. 47. Sect. 1. Cap. 15. The
scandalous personal qualities of Luther and Calvin.p 51. Sect. 1. Cap. 16. The
Authors unquietness not being able to communicate with Calvinists, etc.
Reflection upon the several Eastern Churches.p. 57. Sect. 1. Cap. 17. Necessity
of the Authors examining the grounds of the Roman Church. Several advantages
acknowledged to be in that Church.p. 59. Sect. 1. Cap. 18. Preparations to the
examining of the grounds of the Roman Churches Authority.p. 66. Sect. 1. Cap.
19. What prejudice the Author received by receiving the doctrine of the Roman
Churches authority expressed in School language.p. 70. Sect. 2. Cap. 1. The
first conclusion concerning the Rule of Faith. Testimonies of Fathers
acknowledging Doctrines Traditionary as well as Scripture to be a Rule of
Faith.p. 77. Sect. 2. Cap. 2. The Roman Church agreeing with Fathers in the
same rule of Faith. All Sects of Protestants disagree with the Fathers.p. 82.
Sect. 2. Cap. 3. English Protestants unwilling to justify this Position: and
why. Mr. Chillingworth's late book against the Catholic Church: and the
Character given of it.p. 85. Sect. 2. Cap. 4. Inconveniences following
Protestants Position of only Scripture. Fathers refuse to dispute with
Heretics from only Scriptures.p. 90. Sect. 2. Cap. 5. Weakness of Protestants
proofs for only Scripture. Texts of Scripture alleged by Catholics vainly
eluded by Protestants.p. 97. Sect. 2. Cap. 6. Two principal Texts of Scripture
alleged by Protestants to prove its sufficiency, and against Traditions;
answered.p. 101 Sect. 2. Cap. 7. Reasons and Texts produced by Mr.
Chillingworth to prove only Scripture to be the rule of Faith.p. 109. Sect. 2.
Cap. 8. Preparatory grounds for the answering of these reasons and Quotations.
That Christian Religion was settled in the Church by Tradition especially. The
advantage of that way beyound writing.p. 112. Sect. 2. Cap. 9. A further
demonstration of the firmness of Tradition. Certain objections answered.p. 123.
Sect. 2. Cap. 10. The second preparatory ground: viz. Occasion of writing the
Gospels, etc.p. 130. Sect. 2. Cap. 11. The third preparatory ground. viz. The
clearing of the ambiguity of these words, ( necessary to salvation.)p. 136.
Sect. 2. Cap. 12. After what manner I judged it necessary for my purpose to
examine Mr. Chillingworth's reasonings and arguments.p. 139. Sect. 2. Cap. 13.
An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's discourse premised before his proofs out of
Scripture.p. 146. Sect. 2. Cap. 14. An Answer to the Texts produced by Mr.
Chillingworth out of the Gospels of S. John and S. Luke, etc.p. 152. Sect. 2.
Cap. 15. An answer to twelve Questions of Mr. Chillingworth in pursuance of the
former Quotations.p. 154. Sect. 2. Cap. 16. The second Conclusion out of the
Fathers, concerning a Judge of Controversies. The Authors confession of his
willingness that his opinion against the Churches Infallibility might appear to
have been groundless.p. 160. Sect. 2. Cap. 17. Calvinists presumptuous
renouncing of the Churches Authority even in proposing of Scripture: And
pretentions to immediate Revelation.p. 163. Sect. 2. Cap. 18. Importance of the
controversy concerning the Churches Authority. Means for satisfaction in it
abundantly sufficient in Antiquity. This Controversy beyond all others ought
to be diligently studied by Protestants.167 Sect. 2. Ca. 19. Passages out of
the Fathers concerning the Churches authority,170 Sect. 2. Ca. 20. Quotations
out of Antiquity for the authority of Counsels. A contrary Character of
ancient Heretics, etc.181 Sect. 2. Ca. 21. The doctrine of the Roman Church
concerning the Churches authority. The great and apparent reasonableness of
it,185 Sect. 2. Ca. 22. The method whereby the Author arrived to an entire
satisfaction concerning the Churches authority.236 Sect. 2. Ca. 23. Grounds
laid to prove the certainty of I^radition. Several degrees of it.238 Sect. 2.
Cha 24. Divine Revelations proved beyond any certain humane story,246 Sect. 2.
Ca. 25. The reason of considering a double capacity in the Church. Certainty of
Belief compared with certainty of knowledge,254 Sect. 2. Ca. 26. Grounds
pre-required to the demonstrating of the Churches authority. Sect. 2. Ca. 27.
Proofs out of Scripture, etc. for the Churches authority. Sect. 2. Ca. 28. The
validity of such Texts, etc.241 Sect. 2. Ca. 29. The objection from the
overflowing of Arianisme in the Church, answered,246 Sect. 2. Cha. 30. The
general ground of the Churches authority, viz. Christ's Promises. The several
subjects and acts thereof,250 Sect. 2. Ca. 31. Authority of the Christian
Church compared with that of the Jewish,258 Sect. 2. Ca. 32. Enquiry concerning
the extent of the Churches authority. How Stapleton states this point,261 Sect.
2. Ca 33. Upon what grounds Stapleton may be conceived to have stated this
question with more then ordinary latitude,266 Sect. 2. Ca. 34. Unsatisfactory
grounds of the English Church concerning Ecclesiastical authority. Calvinists
doctrine concerning the Spirit being Judge of Controversies, exploded,277.
Sect. 2. Ca 35. Mr. Chillingworth's newfound Judge of Controversies, viz.
Private reason. His grounds for asserting such a Judge,283 Sect. 2. Ca. 36. An
answer to the three first grounds of Mr. Chillingworth,287 Sect. 2. Ca. 37. An
answer to Mr. Chillingworth's fourth and fifth grounds. Several Novelties
introduced by him292 Sect. 2. Ca. 38. An answer to Mr. Chillingworth's sixth
ground. Of the use of Reason in Faith.303 Sect. 2. Ca. 39. An answer to Mr.
Chillingworth's seventh and eighth grounds,316 Sect. 2. Ca. 40. An answer to
Mr. Chillingworth's objection concerning difference among Catholics about the
Judge of Controversies.320 Sect. 2. Ca. 41. His reasons proving no Church of
one denomination to be infallible, answered,323 Sect. 2. Ca. 42. An answer to
Mr. Chillingworth's objection of Circles and absurdities to the Resolution of
Faith of Catholics.332 Sect. 2. Ca. 43. An answer to Mr. Chillingworths
allegations of pretended uncertainties and casualties in the grounds of the
faith and salvation of Catholics.342 Sect. 2. Ca. 44. Dangerous consequences
of Protestants Doctrine against the authority of the Church.350 Sect. 2. Ca.
45. The third Conclusion, concerning Schism. The point of Schism slightly
considered by Protestants; which notwithstanding ought above all others to be
chiefly studied.357 Sect. 2. Ca. 46. Quotations out of Fathers to show the
sinfulness and danger of Schism,36 Sect. 2. Ca. 47. The nature and marks of
Schism according to the ancient Fathers.366 Sect. 2. Ca. 48. An application of
the former marks of Schism to the present Controversy: And a demonstration
that they do not suit to the Roman, but only Protestant Churches.375 Sect. 2.
Ca. 49. A continuation of the same demonstration with proofs, etc. Sect. 2. Ca.
50. A further continuation of the same arguments,380 Catholics not
uncharitable, for saying, That Protestancy unrepented is damnable,387 Sect. 2.
Ca. 51. The fourth Conclusion, concerning the perpetual visibility of the
church, Proofs of it out of Fathers,398 Sect. 2. Ca. 52. Application of these
proofs to the advantage of the Roman Catholic Church, and against
Protestants, etc.401 Sect. 3. Ca. 1. The Question of the Church being decided,
decides all other Controverversies, How it is almost impossible that errors
should crep'd into the public doctrine of the Church. Of what force
objections out of Scripture or Fathers are against the Church,413 Sect. 3. Ca.
2. Of the Real Presence and Transubstantiation. Of the Adoration of Christ in
the Sacrament. And of Communion under one species.420 Sect. 3. Ca. 3. Of
I^vocation of Saints. Of Veneration of Images. Of Prayers and Offerings for the
Dead, and Purgatory. Of Indulgences. And of public service in the Latin
tongue. With what charity and modesty the doctrines of the Church are to be
examined,431 Sect. 3. Ca. 4. The Holiness taught and practiced by the
Catholic Church a great motive to embrace the doctrines. The Authors former
exceptions against certain practices ascribed to the Church, with their answers
Of the Carthusians. Of mystical Theology.453 Sect. 3. Ca. 5. The Conclusion,
wherein the imputation of inconstancy charged upon the Author, is answered; as
likewise of forsaking a Religion, because it was persecuted.
The Appendix.
Cha. 1. A Brief Recapitulation of the Design and Contents of the whole Book.
page 476 Cha. 2. Grounds upon which certain passages in this Book h^ve been
misunderstood by some Catholics, and those mistakings cleared, 483 Cha. 3.
Misinterpretation of my book by Protestants, particularly by J. P. the Author
of the Preface to my Lord Falklands Discourse of Infallibility. An answer to
that Preface, 490 Cha. 4. An answer to the four first Paragraphs of the
Preface, 496 Cha. 5. An answer to the Remainder of the Preface. 516 Cha. 6. The
Fundamental ground of my Lord Falkland's discourse examined. 538 Cha. 7. A
concluding exhortation, wherein all are invited to Catholic Unity, 547 Latin
Questions and Answers, etc. 558
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 7. line 25. read observing. p. 16. l. last dele as. p. 19. l 4. r.
therefore ought, and. l. 2^^ r: toward which tranquillity. p. 21. l. 22. r
Re^all. p. 22. l. 19. r. thorough his. p. 26. l. 25. r. Petitions to Q p. 29.
l. 3. r. desire not to. p. 32. l. 31. r. customary. p. 33 l. 3. r. Offices and
candidati. and l. 11. r. Presbyter^. p. 35. l. 18. r. in Schism. p. 36. l. 17.
r. as these. p. 39. l. 3. r. may distu^b ^ and dele the last line. p. 40. l.
26. r. them to Luthers. p, 43. l. ul^. r. to justify. p. 44. l. 6. r. some
few. p. 45. l. 12. r. declaration of. p. 47. l^ 14. r. could not. and l. 19. to
themselves. p. 54. l. 21. r. exorcised. p. 55. l. 22. r. many. p. 65. l. 12. r.
in a greater. and l. 14. dele that. p. 69. l. 14. r. reading. p. 70. l. 1. r.
dic, and l. 3. Petrus. p. 72. l. 16. r. were as indulgent. p. 83. l. 23. r.
condemn them, p. 86. l. 24. r. Rites. p. 91. l. 10. r. wrote. p. 92. l. 2. r.
Texts of. p. 119. l. 17. r. veritati. and l. 28. r. seemingly. p. 122. l. 18.
r. in gratitude. p. 123. l^ 1. r. will be. p. 127. l. 11. r. Franc. a Sancta
Clara. and l. 33. r. in the p. 129. l^ 10. r. divulged. p. 130. l. 7, 8.
instead of And therefore, r. Now when. p. 146. l. 13. r. Cha. 7. p. 162. l. 13.
r. visibly. p. 271. l. 8. r. ca. 40. p. 172. l. 25. r. Origin (Praefat. in
libr.(...)and l. last Tract in Matthew. 29. Cha. 27. p. 173. l^ 32. r. Catech.
18. p. 174. l. 11. r. Witness S. Augustine in Psalm. 57. p. 175. l. 7. r. ( id
ib. ca. 10.) p. 176. l. r. dele it. and l. 9. r, ( cont. Ep. Fund. ca. 4.) p.
184. l. 26. r. Chap. 26. p. 190. l. 8. dele and. p. 217. of L. l. ^. r. rall,
when it shall be proved against them, and when. p. 220. l. 32. r. it can. p.
234. l. 11. r. rescuing. p. 241. l. 6. dele upon. p. 248. l. 16. dele ^. p.
275. l. i. r. Traditions. p. 262. l. 25. r. proceed chiefly from. p. 276. l. 5.
r. are of. p. 361. l. 9. r. Be ye. p. 362. l. 2. r. martyrdoms. p. 365. l. 7.
r. blame me. p. 379. l. 21. r. and in. p. 385. l. 14. r. then they. and l. 18.
r. in Scrip-p. 429. l. 5. r. vain and unprofitable Phi-and l. 11. r. thousand
needless objections. p. 432. l. 20. r. especial. p. 439. l. 6. r. respect. p.
442. l. 18. for Arrius r. A^rius. p. 446. l. 11. r. imprudence. p. 456. l. 27.
r. admitted. p. 455. l. 17. r. cautelously. p. 492. l. 24. r. an Answer. p.
498. l. 5. r. will premise this^^ p. 485. l. 31. r. such a lie. p. 500. l. 13.
r. and without. p. 522. r. Servetus, and p. 518. l. 16. r. implies. p. 544. l.
last r. or false.

FINIS.

