COURTSHIP A-la-mode.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by Mr* ^^^id Craufurd.

(...) Fortunu labori. Virg. Aenei lib. 2. LONDON, Printed for J. Barnes at the
Crown in the Pall Mall, and E. Rumbal at the Post House in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden. 1700.

To the much honored JOHN LENEVE, Esquire.
SIR,
THIS Play was written by a Gentleman, (my particular Friend) whose Affairs
called him into his own Country just as 'twas Acted; and having left the
Publishing of it to my Care, I knew not a Nobler way to discharge my Trust,
than that of laying the forsaken Infant at your Door, under whose Patronage it
may safely venture into the World. The Honor of your House will guard it from
the Assaults of Critics, and your Generosity (I hope) will allow it a portion
of your Esteem. Your Love to Music is singularly great, and your Skill
confessed by the best Masters of the Age. It Is reasonably to be supposed then,
that you bear no small Affection to its elder Brother Poetry.

I Am not a Poet, Sir, and therefore will not offer to mention the Beauties, or
excuse the Infirmities of this. But since the Town has received it as good, it
gave me Courage to lay it at the feet of so great a Judge as your self.

In this Dedication, Sir, I find an Happiness of which every Man is conscious;
I mean, Sir, I Am freed from the necessity of flattering my Benefactor, and
exposing my own weakness. Your Virtues are already sufficiently known, and your
great Character exalts you above so mean a want as my Praises. Besides, Sir,
I Am no stranger to your Modesty. My business then is only to beg your Pardon
for this Presumption, and to make a public Acknowledgment of those many
Favors I have received from you. I know this is not the way to balance 'em,
the Sum already exceeds my Stock, and I must of necessity add to the Score, by
begging the honor of subscribing my self,

SIR, Your much Obliged, and Very humble Servant, Will. Pinkethman.

THE PREFACE.
THIS Play was so long expected e're it came into the World, that I Am obliged
in Justice to my self, to excuse its appearance at a time when there were
scarce Witnesses in Town of its Birth.

It was entered in the other House, where Mr. Betterton did me all the Justice
I could indeed reasonably hope for. But that Example he gave, was not it seems
to be followed by the whole Company, since it is known that Mr. Bowman (I
mention his Name to keep the reflection from other sharers) kept the first
Character of my Play six weeks, and then could hardly read six lines on it. How
far that way of management makes of late for the Interest and Honor of that
House, is easy to be judged. Some who valued their reputations more, were
indeed rarely or never absent. To these I gave my thanks; but finding that six
or seven people could not perform what was designed for fifteen, I was obliged
to remove it after so many sham Rehearsals, and in two days it got footing upon
the other Stage. Where 'twas immediately cast to the best Advantage, and Played
in less than twenty days. How far it answered their labors, I leave to be
judged by themselves. Their Care and Readiness is confessed by every Man, though,
at the same time it is not to be supposed, that they act any Plays without a
prospect of pleasing the Town, of whose favor they justly stand possessed.
What justice I had done me in the public Performance, is very well
demonstratted by my Success.

That Decoy so often receives money, is by some I find reputed a fault. Women
of her profession do nothing without the ready pay. And let it be supposed that
she gets too much, it is but to raise the Character, and expose those Cheats to
better purpose. For you see, that notwithstanding of the Gentlemen's Liberality,
she is false to their Interests, and owns that she is honest, only because she
could hope no benefit by being otherwise; and indeed had she balked them at
last, it is not to be thought they would have trusted again to her fair promises.

That the Ladies give her Money, derogates nothing from that respect I owe to
the Fair Sex. Because it is certain, there would be no Decoys, if some young
Women did not entertain 'em; and though indeed it never had been practiced, (and
I Am half persuaded that it may be so) yet it was necessary upon the Stage. For
what is Scandalous there, must needs be so in the Closet too; and by
representing it as real in Public, 'twill enduce some to discourage those
insinuating old Seducers, lest the World should think they actually bribed them
to hunt for Husbands, when they are only passive in the matter.

That Freelove is so easily Cozened is very pardonable. He durst not stay to
examine her Fortune, lest he had exposed the weakness of his own; and she lying
under the same hazard, a speedy Marriage Naturally followed.

I Have made Willie a downright ignorant Clown, therefore -- But stay, lest I
should be thought to mimick one of my own Characters, and fight without an
Adversary, I lay aside the trouble of apologizing any farther. The Town
received my Play, and my Letters of Amors containing the Unfortunate Duchess,
etc. with more favor than perhaps either of them merited, and I Have Reason to
be very well satisfied with my fortune in my first Essays, and the more,
because I writ this Comedy in ten successive Mornings. Besides being a
Stranger, and absent, the Critics cannot in honor attack me, for as I have
done it in my Book, so here too I claim the privilege of a dead Author.

PROLOGUE, Written by Mr. Farquhar, and spoken by Mr. Powell.
THE business of a Prologue, who can say?
I think it has no business in a Play:
For if the Play be good it need not crave it;
If bad, no Prologue on the Earth can save it.
But you plead Custom for this needless Evil,
Custom! why ay, this Custom is the Devil.
For Custom chiefly all our Ills insures;
It Is Custom makes Men Knaves, and Women -- s.
You know the Rhyme, if not, let each Man ask
His pretty little Neighbor in a Mask.
Custom makes Actors, Poets keep a pother,
And Custom starves the one, and damns the other.
Custom makes Modern Critics snarle and bite,
And it is a very evil Custom makes 'em write.
It Is Custom brings the Spark to Sylvia's Lap,
Custom undresses him, and Custom gives a Clap.
Why Poets write ill Plays, why Maids miscarry,
Ask why Beaux paint, they will say it is Customary.
Custom makes modern Wives break Marriage Vows,
And Custom damns most Plays at the other House.
It Is Custom makes our Infant Author fear,
And we plead Custom for your Kindness here.
Drammatis Personae.
Sir John Winmore by Mr. Powel. Capt. Bellair Mr. Wilks. Sir Authony Addle Mr.
Norris. Dick Addle Mr. Pinkethman. Freelove Mr. Mills. Alderman Chollerick Mr.
Johnson. Ned Chollerick Mr. Toms. Willie Mr. Bullock. Scowrer Mr. Fairbank.
WOMEN.
Flora by Mrs. Rogers. Melintha Mrs. Moor. Decoy Mrs. Powell. Timandra Mrs.
Temple. Lucy Mrs. Kent. Betty Mrs Baker.

Drawer, Servants, etc.

Scene LONDON.

Courtship Alamode.
A COMEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
The Curtain drawn discovers Sir John Winmore in his Nightgown. [Solus. Sir
Jo. GREAT Joys and Small Allays consumed the Night, And peeping day proved
hateful to the sight. -- Oh Heavens! The inexpressible Pleasure of being with
those we Love -- yet it is dangerous to think upon it, a Man may lose himself in
thought, and commit a Rape by the mere force of Imagination -- Hoa! who waits
there? -- My Clothes, Sirrah, -- Has Madam Decoy been here this morning?


Enter Scowrer. [Aside. Sco. No, Sir -- would the Devil had her.


Sir Joh. Sure I heard a whispering in the other Room an hour ago; you had not
a Wench there?


Sco. Yes faith, Sir; Betty came to wait upon you, -- there is a Letter from her
Mistress.


Sir Jo. -- Reads. -- Pox on it, it is so ill writ a Conjurer could hardly read
it.


Sco. Sir, if you please, -- I Am perfectly versed in a Woman's way of writing.


Sir Jo. No more on it; I hate such nauseous Stuff: -- Does she wait for an
Answer?


Sco. Yes, Sir; and expects you will return it in Person.


Sir Jo. Then bring her in. --


[Exit. Scowrer. Well, I bless my kind Stars, I Am now in a hopeful way toward
a Reformation, and, if Timandra prove kind, I shall have no such unwelcome
Guests at my Levee: A Letter from a Stale Mistress is downright Physic to
(...) Mind; it puts us out of all order, and makes us Sick at the heart; (...)
grad^^ removes the Disease, and powerfully works us into a Love (...) of better
health. -- Fortune's a Bitch that brought her so soon, or (...) me so long at
home; for a Dun of any kind never fails to spoil a (...) Stomach for his Dinner
-- well, Child, thy business, -- I Am (...) ^^ste?

Re-enter Scowrer with Betty. Betty. You have read the Letter, I hope, Sir John?


Sir Jo. Yes, yes; have you any thing else to say?


Bet. M^ Mistress, Sir, is almost dead with grief; your unkindness (she says)
will certainly kill her.


Sir Jo. Grief's a Disease of which few Women die.


Bet. Sure, Sir John, she is --


Sir Jo. Very troublesome.


Sco. Gad take me, Sir, had you seen how she looked the other day -- Why, Venus
was a Dowdy to her.


Bet. She thought Sir John Winmore had been, --


Sir Joh. Still a Fool. But she is mistaken; go home and tell her, I Am grown
wise.


Bet. Lord, Sir, what do ye mean? is this the Reward of constant Love? her
heart was ever yours; and you know when my Lord Wanton offered her two hundred
Guineas for her Maidenhead five years after she had lost it, she refused the
offer. Well, Sir John, I Will say no more; -- But if you knew her heart --


Sir Jo. Come, come, pray thee be gone; I have no Money to lay out upon the
repair of hearts, and without that I know I must inevitably lose Possession; if
the young Lord would have bought a Second hand Maidenhead for a new one, she
was a Stubborn Fool that refused so kind a Customer -- Sirrah, guard my doors
better next morning, or --


Bet. Well Sir, a good morning to ye; you may live a hundred years e're you find
such another kind Fool.


[Exit. Sir Jo. I Am glad she is gone; this usage, I hope, will teach her
Mistress not to plague me with her damned impertinent scrawls for the future. A
Whore is the most miserable Creature on Earth; if she is modest, she starves; if
impudent, she is hated.


Sco. Lord, Sir, I hope you are not virtuously in Love with some Phlegmatic
Wench or other, whose cold Constitution of Body make^ her honest in spite of
her self.


Sir Jo. If I am, what then?


Sco. Why then you are lost, Sir, that is all; irrecoverably lost! Lucy's
ruined, Olivia will want a Friend, Mrs. Francklove a Customer, and Madam
Caterer the support of her Family, -- Hang me, Sir, if I could not weep for the
sufferings of so many sweet young Sinners.


Sir Jo. Ay, but if thou knew Timandra. -- Oh! she is charming to a miracle!


Sco. Ay, Sir, and so is Lucy.


Sir Jo. She Is witty.


Sco. Well, and so is she.


Sir Jo. But above all, she is virtuous.


Sco. For want of opportunity (it may be) to be otherwise.


Sir Jo. However, I love her for that; the word Virtue has a Noble sound in it
that charms my very Soul.


Sco. By your leave, Sir, could you love her now if she were ugly?


Sir Jo. I think so, -- yet am not sure if my Passion has reached that height.
But Heaven and Nature seldom Jarr in the distribution of their Gifts, and the
outside often tells us what to expect within.


Sco. Why faith, Sir, and I have known many a Gentleman mistake his Marks, and
undergo the Penance of a Sweating-Tub for his Sin of Ignorance. Have you
considered the state of Matrimony, the Plague of that dull insipid Partner of
your bed, distinguished by the name of Wife; from that charming easy loving
kind thing, called a Mistress?


Sir Jo. I Will have no more of your Instructions; honest Love is a blessing that
only attends generous Spirits; such as thou art, cannot know it. -- Ha, my dear
Bellair! by my hopes of good fortune, I Am glad to see thee, -- What news from
the North?


Enter Capt. Bellair. Capt. Why faith I Have got none; I rid post to York,
dispatched what business called me thither, remembered I had left the best of
Friends behind me, and returned for London as soon as possible, to enjoy his
Conversation.


Sir Jo. Use me then like a Friend, and say, had you no other motive, was it Sir
John Winmore only who brought you so suddenly from the Country?


Capt. I must confess the Fair Sex shares the Compliment; I left one here,
whose power exceeds that of the World's mighty Conqueror, her Charms are of
force to drag anew Diogenes from his Tub, teach the rugged old Cynick to
abandon dull Philosophy, contemn his Books, and soothing Contemplations, to
read his better Fortune in her Eyes; no wonder then she has so strong an
influence on such a one as I am -- plain flesh and blood, no Philosopher, and a
mere Stranger to Mortification.


Sco. Hang Mortification; the old Doatards, whose Veins are frozen, make use
on it to whip themselves into a good humor.


Capt. It was always a mortal Enemy to men of thy Vocation.


Sir Jo. Pray thee tell me the Name of this Fair One; I know thee a Rover, and
sure she is very beautiful, to whom thou art become so much a Prisoner.


Capt. Beautiful! believe me, I think her something more than Humane.


Sco. That may be, for some Women have much of the Old Serpent in 'em.


[Exit. Sir Jo. Her Name, Captain!


Capt. She Is known by the Name of Flora, younger Daughter to Sir Anthony Addle.


Sir Jo. Is she kind?


Capt. Hitherto I Have found no Arguments for despair; but the Old Man guards
this Jewel with more Eyes than Argus e're possessed; and it is no less difficult
to see her, than 'twas for Jason to purchase the Golden Fleece.


Sir Jo. I Am glad thou have towr'd in the open air so long, to perch at last
upon so sweet a prey; I Will help thee to a Medea whose cunning Arts shall blind
the old Dragon.


Re-enter Scowrer. Sco. Sir, Madam Decoy waits in the other Room.


Sir Jo. Then tell her I wait for her in this -- This, Captain, is the
Enchantress I mentioned, and she is opportunely come.


Capt. What is she of Quality? or an honest plain Mother? that helps a
distressed Brother to a charitable Sister in time of Necessity.


Sir Jo. No, she is a Woman of a Modern Employment, by some allowed for honest,
but by the wise esteemed indeed an honorable Baud; it is hard to define her
business; she is one who buys and sells Women, is adored by Girls of sixteen,
and is the Coy-Duck that wheedles Youth into the Trap of Matrimony.


Sco. Ay, the Devil take her, Pimps starved ever since Bauds, under a new Name,
engrost the whole Trade of the Nation -- But hang her, I must call her in.


[Exit. Sir Jo. She Is of an universal acquaintance, can Judge of a Fortune to a
Sixpence, offers her Service frankly, intrudes her self into any Family, scorns
the Title of her Profession, yet takes the Profit, and in spite of her
Modesty, owns her self a -- Match-maker.


Capt. I Have heard of these Matrimony Merchants, or Marriage-Brokers -- but
stay, she comes.


Re-enter Scowrer, with Decoy. Sir Jo. Madam, your humble Servant.


De. Yours, Sir John -- have you any Commands for me? You know I Am always ready
to yield a blind obedience.


Sir Jo. Madam, I have no cause to suspect your Friendship; but is it not
possible for me to see the Lady this day?


De. Truly, Sir, I Will do my endeavor. The Alderman is not at home, and I am
going this Instant to Sir Anthony's.


Sir Jo. This Gentleman is my Friend, you will oblige me in serving him, Sir
Anthony's Youngest Daughter is the Object of his Wishes; you know what follows,
and pray, Madam, accept of this; it is good to refresh a bad Memory.


[Gives Money. Capt. I presume to trouble you, Madam, with the delivery of this
Billet-deux; I had it ready writ, but knew not well how to convey it handsomely
to her; The Postage will show how much I value the favor.


[Gives a Letter and Money. De. O Dear Sir, your humble Servant; your business
shall be done. Well, Sir John, where shall I send a Note to you in the
Afternoon?


Sir Jo. At the young Devil.


De. Well then, dear Gentlemen, adieu: Your affairs shall be managed, as if
they were my own.


[Exit. Sco. Damn the old Jade, how easily she gets her Money; would I were
beneath a Petticoat for the sake of her Employment.


[Exit. Sir Jo. This Woman is Alderman Chollerick's Housekeeper, particularly
acquainted with thy Mistress, and her service is no less than absolutely
necessary; I know it is beneath a Gentleman, to use the Interest of a ragged old
Baud to promote his Suit; but on the other hand I Remember, that the deluded
Rabble never relied more on the Cant and pretended Prophecies of their
Phanatick Tub Preachers, than some young Women do upon these undermining Cheats
-- How now, any body below?


Re-enter Scowrer. Sco. Yes, Alderman Chollerick, Sir; he designs to buy this
House, and therefore must survey your Chamber, your Closet, your Dining Room,
and know their Longitudes and Latitudes.


Sir Jo. He Is my Mistress's Uncle, though none of my acquaintance.


Capt. Shall I leave you then, Sir John?


Sir Jo. No, Stay and see this old Curmudgeon, he Courts Sir Anthony's Eldest
Daughter, and plagues the poor Girl with Love and fire, which, in his Mouth,
sounds as unnaturally, as Divinity in the Mouth of an Atheist, Conscience in
that of a Lawyer, or Plain-dealing in a Courtier. Admit him, Sirrah.

[ Exit. Scowrer.
Capt. Nay now I remember him, and take this for a Mark of my knowledge; he is
covetous to Excess, passionate even to madness, and has been often cudgel'd in
the streets by Beggars, who from his Clothes judged him a Brother Mumper.
Nature made him in a freak, when irresolute what to do, she designed a Monkey,
then a Man, at last, (while she laughed too heartily at the wild medley) he
slipped through her tardy fingers, made of both, and started into a Monster, to
promote her mirth -- But see, he comes.


Enter Alderman Chollerick and Scowrer. Choll. G'morrow, Gentlemen, g'morrow,
-- a good House; a large House, well painted, yet not so very convenient as
that one I have in the Country.


Sir Jo. We'll invite him to a Glass, that we may divert our selves with the
old Churl.


Capt. I suppose his Clothes were made in the first year of the last Century.


Choll. Let me see, let me see -- I Will give but five Years purchase for it. It Is
a dear ground-rent; but no matter -- g'morrow Gentlemen; g'morrow.


Sir Jo. Will you be pleased, Sir, to stay and take --


Choll. What, Sir?


Sir Jo. A Morning's draught.


Choll. Where is it? I Am in haste, look ye, do you see.


Sir Jo. Scowrer, quick -- a Bottle -- Come, a health to your Mistress, Sir, --
I presume you're a Batchelour.


Choll. It may be I am, and it may be not; what then, Sir, ha?


Capt. I hope you're in a good humor, Sir.


Choll. Am I, Sir?


Capt. I hope So, Sir; I Have the good Fortune to be acquainted with a Relation
of yours.


Choll. Have you, Sir, pray who is that? Ha, what is he? look ye --


Capt. Your Nephew, Sir Thomas Chollerick's Son.


Choll. Very good; then look ye, do you see, Sir, he is one Rogue, and you're
another; and so farewell and be hanged together --


[Exit muttering. Capt. Ha, ha, ha, it is a teasty old Fool.


Sir Jo. He Is a Fool of the last Age; for no man is wise in this, unless he can
save his own Money, and rook his Neighbors into the Bargain, live miserably,
and deny himself the common necessaries for support of life -- Ha, welcome Ned,
thy Uncle is just now gone out.


Enter Ned Chollerick. Capt. Is Melintha kind, Ned?


Ned. I have as yet found no ground for just complaint.


Sir Jo. I suppose thy Uncle is become thy Rival, his Humor speaks him Jealous.


Capt. I hope he will not ride thee out of thy Stirrops?


Ned. Faith I am not sure, unless I were once in the Saddle.


Capt. And if thou art cast then, 'twill speak thee a weak Horseman.


Sir Jo. Yes, and his Head will suffer for the failings of his Body.


Ned. Not so fast, Gentlemen; I presume, Captain, you design to have a Branch
off the same Stock with mine; you run the same hazard too.


Capt. I do so; and all of us run a hazard; yet for such a Prize as Flora, who
would not venture? I Would do like the Philosopher, who threw himself into the Sea,
because he could not discover the Cause of its Ebb and Reflux.


Ned. You're resolved upon a practical discovery of the Terra Incognita then?


Sir Jo. And I have known men ruined by such a Voyage; some of 'em return, it is
true; but then they are old e're the day of Jubilee arrive; besides, they look
like Skeletons, or that which once was man.


Ned. Ay, and so disfigured, you will hardly find a Nose upon their Faces, unless
they be of the Goldsmith's making.


Capt. That is only when there is a non exeal regnum against him.


Ned. And that is when he goes abroad, or travels in a strange Country,
without a passport from the Church.


Capt. And then it is reasonable he should be apprehended and committed.


Sir Jo. And then some ignorant Quack is Judge, Jailer, and Executioner; and
ten to one has the Cruelty to keep him eight or nine Weeks on the rack.


Ned. And when at liberty again, the poor Malefactor is scarce able to hang
together, he totters on the Streets, as if his bones were linkt with wires.


Sir Jo. Well, after all, it is good be wise; we have shared in the follies of
the Age too long, and it is fitting we throw off the burden; thy Sister, Ned,
has made me virtuous, for now I love her, I can be no more a Wanderer -- How,
Freelove here too?


Enter Freelove. Free. I Am your humble Servant, Sir John; and yours, Captain;
you're welcome to Town -- I drunk a Bottle the other day with our Friend Ned here;
but he seems so much inclined to honesty of late, he is scarce fit for this
World.


Sir Jo. A good Character, and I Am sorry he cannot give the same of you.


Free. Nay, Gentlemen, if you are all become honest, I Am too long amongst ye.


Capt. How, Jack, going already!


Sir Jo. Some unthinking Citizen will be a Sufferer e're night.


Free. I Am afraid I must bid you farewell.


Sir Joh. What the Devil is the matter? is this a day of business?


Free. No faith, I Have no Plot to carry on, the Women --


Ned. Plot for thee and themselves too; they are always good at intriguing.


Free. Gad, it is good they are so; for I Am as dull a Dog sometimes, as any in
Europe.


Capt. And what is become of the Apothecary's Wife?


Free. She Is lost; the cunning Jilt betrayed me to her Husband; for one night
as in Bed they lay, she wept, begged Heaven's pardon, and his, and, unaskt,
confessed her lewd Practices; sighed again, and then swore eternal Loyalty;
when at the same time all this was but a fetch to gain more Credit, and make
way for a new Favorite that supplied my place.


Omn. Ha, ha, ha!


Sir Jo. Is the Goldsmith's Wife lost too, Jack?


Free. Yes faith, after a Month's Trial, she weighed me in the Scales with
(that massy lump of ill-shap'd Clay) her Husband, and finding I was some grains
too light, she threw me aside.


Ned. Would she not take thee for Bullion?


Free. No, your married women are always for ready Coin; and my stock being
exhausted, she would not bargain; for the old Fox, her Husband, could lend but
little to my assistance.


Capt. Now thou look red and plump, like a young Chaplain after a good
Christmas, or his Lord's Marriage. I hope thou have got a Mint of thy own.


Free. A large Treasury may soon be spent, when it is in the Hands of an
Extravagant Master.


Sir Jo. Then the only way is to diet thy self; for while you run from one
Ordinary to another, you are often obliged to spend double; at home you fall
not into Temptation, and your Cash is only laid out upon things wholly necessary.


Ned. Besides, you will have something to spare for a Friend by the by.


Free. Yes, faith, if I confine my self to one dish at home, I shall be able ^o
provide half a Score of my Neighbors with my latter Meat. And ^is but
reasonable, you know, that when my Appetite is cloyed, I ^ould let it be dealt
out amongst those in want.


Capt. Your past Poverty, I find, has taught you too much Charity.


Sir Jo. Nay rather his past Thefts make him suspect others.


Free. I confess a Shop-lifter, when posted in a House of his own, has most
reason to be afraid of losing his Goods.


Ned. The Case alters very much, Jack.


Free. I own it does; for Husbands are ill Book-keepers, rob them handsomely to
night, and they will not find out the loss next morning.


Capt. That Is only when they have more lying upon their hands, than they can
conveniently make use of.


Free. Ay, there it is, many ruin themselves by too much business, and which is
worse, are obliged to take a great Shop at a venture -- And it may be they have
little or nothing to put into it.


Sir Jo. In such cases a discreet Landlord will give an ease.


Free. Nay, the only Relief to be found is, when some young Merchant Sets up in
the half of your Shop, and bears an equal share in the payment of the Rent.


Ned. Sir John, I Am afraid we shall not have the Honor of a Proselyte.


Free. No faith, Gentlemen, I Am not to be so easily fettered; and then lie
grinning like a Monkey in a Chain, and gnawing the very Clog to which I Am tied
-- Can you instruct me how or where to find the Uncle of your Mistress? I Have a
Bill of forty Pounds upon the Caitiff.


Sir Jo. You Will find his Housekeeper at Sir Anthony Addle's, she no ^oubt can
inform you, -- Let Us see thee after dinner, at our usual ^lace of Randezvous;
you know the Hour?


Free. I will. -- Your Servant, Gentlemen.


[Exit. Sir Jo. Come, my Friends, I love to tred the Mall once a day, let us to
the Park then, and find a Friend or two more to dine with us.


Capt. We wait upon you, Sir John.


[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Sir Anthony's House.
Enter Flora and Melintha. Flo. Pray thee, Sister, let me laugh, ha, ha, ha?
Sure this old Lover's Charms are of force to create thy mirth! 'Twas a lovely
sight, when the greasy old Fox, caught thee in his Arms, me thought you looked
like a Lamb in the paws of a Wolf, and his bristly Beard very much resembled
the back of a Hedgehog -- Do You love him, Sister?


Mel. What if I do?


Flo. Nothing at all! -- A handsome Bedfellow only, and clean a as
Lamp-Scowrer; bedaw'd with Oil, the Badge of his Office, -- But you rely upon
the Nephew.


Mel. He Is equally indifferent to me, as the Alderman.


Flo. Poor Girl, how cold she is! the young, and the old, the ugly, the
handsome, the rich, and the poor, are all one to her, she makes no difference;
though Heaven and Nature have done it before hand! well, Melintha, believe me,
I Am of another opinion, I love the airy, the brisk, the complaisant; in a word,
I love Youth and Wit; and where those are wanting, a Spark may sit whining at
home, writing dull Songs, and playing the Romantic Lover -- I would laugh at
his melancholy madness.


Mel. Would you contribute nothing to the increase of his Distemper?


Flo. How?


Mel. Smile upon him when he entered, frown when he stays, yet give him a
languishing look at parting; tell all his faults to the next cringing Fool that
supplied his place, his to the third, and so go on, till you had acquainted
every Fop with the Qualities of his Brother, while each of them laughs at the
others weakness, without remembering his own.


Flo. No, my Father allows me no such Liberties; and though I were this moment
Mistress of my self and Fortune, I Would bestow both on some desering Youth, whose
Merits exceed his Estate. I hate a reserv'dness equal to a Penance; good
Breeding seldom appears, and good Nature for want of use grows rusty.


Mel. What think you of Captain Bellair? Sir Harry Bellair's only Son.


Flo. I suppose he bears a Commission, not out of mere love to the Profits of
his Post, but to serve his Prince and Country; and has too much of Honor to be
Mercenary.


Mel. He Is the gay, the airy, the brisk, the Complaisant, the youthful, witty,
Captain Bellair, this is the Man on whom you would bestow your self -- is it not
so?


Flo. Why faith, Sister, I own he is a witty Gentleman; but my Esteem is not yet
arrived to Love; and I praised the Man because --


Mel. You love him.


Flo. No: because I --


Mel. Admire his Shape, his good Air, or the like; -- It must be so.


Flo. Why, on my Conscience, without further Ceremony, I believe you have hit the
Mark; for I think I do not -- hate him.


Mel. And are not you ashamed, Sister, (when you remember your years) to own a
tenderness for a Man? -- Lord bless me, what will this Age come to?


Flo. And truly, Sister, you speak as if you had forgot your self; three years
are now gone since I knew you in Love with Ned Collerick, and how much are you
older than I am? -- About a year and and a half.


[Sings. Occasion's swift, and bald behind,
Let Us catch her as she runs along;
She seldom, seldom turns again,
And leaves us always in the wrong.
Then let us be merry whilst we may,
And drive all careful thoughts away,
For Age will never the loss repay.
Enter Sir Anthony.
Ha! My Father here!

Sir Anth. I profess the Girl h^s no Taxes to pay, no Family to provide for,
and therefore may be easy in her Mind. -- Well, Daughter, you have seen my
Neighbor the Alderman, he will prove no doubt a very good Husband.


Flo. A very peaceable one I suppose, for if my Sister is good Natured all day,
he will repay the Compliment at night, and never disturb her rest, unless it be
with unseasonable coughing.


1Sir Anth. Well, well, Hussie; he is a saving Man, and may in time be Lord
Mayor -- I warrant him worth forty thousand Pounds --


Flo. Why, Sir, forty thousand Pounds? -- It Is not above three years since he
Swore himself not worth five, to avoid the Expenses and Trouble of being
Sherriff.


Sir Anth. Ay that might be, because he was not married -- I did so my self.


Flo. Well, Sir, and don't you think it a great Crime? -- Bless me, Sir, --
Perjury.


Sir Anth. No matter, no matter for that, I say; 'twas to save Expenses, and
shun a troublesome Office; five hundred Pounds is a great Mulct; the Man is
nothing the worse for that; let me see -- He Is passionate and adicted to anger,
that is true; but then again he is a Man of Principles, he can pray an hour, nay
upon occasion (though he was not bred a Scholar) he could hold forth two hours --
He Is old, then by consequence wise, for Experience is the Mother of knowledge,
-- He Is Covetous, why that is a Virtue, Money is the great Machine by which men
mount to Honor; and he that holds most on it gets soonest up -- But if the Man
were Married, he would mount every day; Women are the f^rerunners of Preferment,
and an handsome young Wife has exalted many a Citizen, since I can remember.


Flo. I believe that, Sir; and if he were my Husband, it is ten to one I should
prefer him.


Sir Anth. How, Hussie! would you be so impudent? Body of me, the Girl's become
wanton; make an Alderman a Cuckold! Sincerely speaking, this Language is not to
be suffered, -- Let me come at her.


Mel. For shame, Sister -- forbear -- my Father's out of humor.


Sir Anth. A Saucy young -- But it is no matter, the Man is for you, and I say,
think well of him.


Mel. Sir, 'twas always my Study to show my self obedient.


Flo. Do so, Sister, Marry this old Trunk of a Man, an Alderman in Effigy;
Aesop compared to him appears graceful; the Monster in the Tempest -- why he is
a Beau to him.


Sir Anth Well, Melintha is riper in years, and Mistress of more discretion;
she knows no doubt better how to weigh his Merit -- In the mean time, your
Brother Dick is arrived from the University, and in a few days he shall be
Married to the Alderman's Niece.


Flo. I hope you know of a Husband for me too, Sir.


Sir Anth. For you, young Gentlewoman! No, you will prefer him, forsooth -- you
shall live with me, to save the Charges of a Housekeeper, and when I die, that
is if you behave your self like my Daughter, that is virtuously, I Will leave you
a Fortune shall prefer you to Quality.


Flo. Delays are dangerous, and I Am resolved to be before hand with ye, if my
Captain do not fail me.


[Aside. Mel. Have you allowed my Brother a new Suit of fashionable Clothes?
Timandra, I suppose, is not of her Uncle's humor.


Sir Anth. You say right; and though the young Man looks handsome in any Clothes,
I Have sent my own Tailor, Mr. Filcher, to Long-Lane, with Orders to expend five
Pounds, and in an hour's time to fit them exactly for his Body; Clothes ready
made are cheapest.


Flo. Ha, ha, ha, five pounds is little enough to provide him in clean Gloves.


Sir Anth. Clean Gloves! why what of Gloves! I Have worn these a Year and a half.


Mel. Sir there are Young Merchants upon the Exchange who have new ones every
day.


Sir Anth. That may be, and old Merchants pay for them; a young Fellow appears
to day, gay as the rising Sun, trusted by Fools, and admired by those who know
him not; next day he is gone, and hunted (like a Fox) by deep Scented Bailiffs
and incensed Creditors.


Flo. Well, Sir, and if old Merchants pay for them, young Lords and raw Country
Esquires make up the loss.


Sir Anth. Ay, it is so; we owe that to our Wisdom and Experience; a Merchant
would know no more how to live, if young men had the Art of Management, than a
Country Pedlar to officiat as Lord Mayor of this City. But to the point, will not
five pounds equip the young Man?


Mel. Fifty may do much, Sir, to out-rig this Man of War for a Love Engagement;
he must have a long Wigg.


Flo. He must change the fashion of his Sword's Hilt once a Month; in a word,
Sir, he must be a Beau.


Sir Anth. Body of me, my Son shall be no Monster; ha, Mistress Decoy!


Enter Decoy. De. Sir, The Alderman desires you would be at home -- Madam --


[ To Flora. Sir Anth. Body of me, I Am at home just now.


De. He designs to wait upon your Daughter, when he has dispatched some affairs
that call him abroad. -- The Capt. dies for you, and --


Sir Anth. Had he no other Gommands?


De. Yes, Sir, he bid me ask if your Son was come to Town, -- The young Lover
must see you.


[ To Melintha] [delivers two Letters to the Ladies. Sir Anth. Then tell him my
Son is come -- Daughter go instantly and prepare for his reception: It Is
fitting you appear gay before the man I have designed for your yoke fellow.


De. Lincolns-in-fields.


[whispers the Ladies. Sir Anth. I must go and look after my business, it is
dangerous to be negligent; and I remember half a dozen Lines, made by a City
Poet of my acquaintance, which are very much to the purpose: Care in Affairs
brings Wealth, then Friends increase.
From Friendship Power, then from our Labor ease.
Thus to be Rich, is to be Honest too,
(For Men in Power are Just what e're they do:)
Poor Cheats, in wanting Riches lose success;
For Art and Money make all Crimes seem less.



[Exeunt omnes preter Decoy. Enter Freelove, opening his Pocketbook. De. Ha!
This may be a prize; let me see, I must think, and quickly too; what? or whom
shall I personate? -- I have it, I Will be religious and ignorant, that never
fails to take with those who know not the Cheats of this Age -- Sir your humble
Servant.


[Speaks with a Cant. Free. I Have a Bill here, Madam, upon Alderman Collerick.


De. Why, truly, Sir, he is not at home at present; he is gone, I suppose, to
the Meeting House, to hear Mr. Jugler, a man that has coupl'd many a Pair, and
is a most dexterous Joyner.


Free. What a Devil does the Hag mean? -- Well, Madam, but when shall I find
the Alderman at home?


De. Indeed, Sir, I cannot be positive; but as I was saying, Mr. Jugler is a
sweet Man, he has married forty of my Friends within these late Years -- Are
you a Batchelour, Sir?


Free. I am, Madam, if you please.


De. Good Lord, if I please! truly, why not, Sir -- But yet, Sir, you must know
I Am sorry to see so fine a young Gentleman without the Comforts of Matrimony;
and out of pure Love to that handsome Face, which speaks so much of good
Nature, I would help you to a Young Lady of my acquaintance, worth twelve
thousand pounds; chaste as a religious Nun, and innocent as a Dove or Lamb, I Am
sure she would be happy with you.


Free. Madam, I cannot flatter my self so far as to believe I merit that Fortune
you offer; Beauty is not easily won, and where it is supported by Wealth, the
conquest is much more difficult; yet I own my thanks are due.


De. O dear Sir, no Complements; I am but a plain ignorant Woman, and a
Stranger to the Tricks of the Town, yet you may safely leave the difficulty of
the Enterprise to my care; for though I appear mean in this dress, I keep good
Company, and have an Interest in a great many fine Ladies. Are you acquainted
with Sir John Winmore?


Free. Yes, Madam,


De. And is not he a very fine Gentleman? He makes use of my Friendship too.
But, Sir, I am obliged by my hard Fortune to let Gentlemen pay all the Expenses
which happen in carrying on Affairs of this kind.


Free. That was a needless caution, Madam; no man can be so much an Enemy to
his own Interest, as to scruple the payment of a trifle on which his Fortune
might depend.


De. A credulous easy Fool, I find -- indeed, Sir, you say very well, your
Face speaks a great deal of Wit and Judgment -- I hope you know, Sir, where to
find me; I Am the Alderman's Housekeeper.


Free. Madam, I Am now in haste, but in the mean time accept of this small
Compliment, and let me hope you will not forget the business you mentioned
concerning the Young Lady.


[Gives Money. De. O dear Sir, do you think I could forget such a one as you are?
Well, adieu -- So, this is a very lucky morning. Sir John, gave me five
Guineas, his Friend three, and this Gentleman two -- I Have no less than four
Couple of Lovers, and I must find a Plot that will bring them all together,
without the consent of their respective Guardians. In the mean time, this last
Customer shall prove the Cully, he is a Coxcomb fitted for my purpose, as
appears by his liberality to a Stranger, and I Am resolved how to bestow him.


To deal with Fools, I find's my surest way,
They all believe, and never fail to pay;
But with the wise my Trade would soon decay.
[Exit. ACT II. SCENE I.
The Alderman's House.
Enter Alderman Chollerick and Ned. Choll. WELL said! well said! very fine!
Twelve a Clock was a seasonable hour! was it, Sirrah? was it? The Constable was
a. Rogue, a Villain, and a Rascal, had he been diligent in his Employment, you
had not lodged in my House last night; the Counter was more fitting for such a
Prodigal -- A Fire kindled so late! besides, Sirrah, a Man may be undone in
farthing Candles; but your Uncle's an Ass! am I, Sirrah? speak.


Ned. Pray, Sir --


Choll. I am then a mere Ass in your Books; look ye, Sirrah --


Ned. Pray, Sir, hear me with patience.


Choll. Patience, Sir?


Ned. Yes, Patience, Sir.


Choll. Ay, Patience you say, Sir? -- Why, Patience is the virtue of an Ass,
Sirrah, -- but, do you hear? Come me sooner home at Night, go to Bed in the dark,
eat halfpenny Rolls and Cheshire Cheese, and drink small Beer; or expect --
I Will say no more -- you Rogue, expect my displeasure, and consequently to be
turned out of Doors.


Ned. I presume I Have spent nothing hitherto but my own; my Father left me --


Choll. Your Father, Sirrah? -- Why, what of your Father? Would you abuse the
dead, Sirrah? What have you spent, you Rogue you, -- nothing but your own, very
good! wondrous fine! and when did my Money become yours? -- I Would have you know,
Sirrah, I have maintained you these three Years; I Have paid a double price for
your Estate; your own, Sir! -- Why look ye now, ye young Dog you, I Have lent you
some thousands upon your Estate, even when your Title was by my Lawyer
disputed, for it is -- You're a Rogue, Sirrah, and there is an end on it


Ned. I hope the Law will yet allow my Title good to all I once possessed; you
know too, I never spent half the Interest on it.


Choll. Why, what an unlucky Rogue this is! Law, Sirrah? -- Why the Law, you
Fool, will allow nothing. Where Is your Money? Ay, where is your Money? But you
can have Law without Money -- You mistake the World, young Man, you must pay
for every thing.


Ned. I Have heard of a Court of Conscience, Sir.


Choll. Conscience! -- Why look ye, Sirrah, what have I to do with Conscience,
ha?


Ned. Very little it seems, Sir.


Choll. Look ye, do you see now, there is a Villain; is your Uncle a Rogue,
Sirrah? -- Has he no Conscience? -- What would this young Rake have proved, if
I had not clipped his Wings betimes?


Ned. I confess, Sir, my Folly is now evident to my self, the easiness of my
Nature has betrayed my Interest, and I Have armed you with my own Weapons, the
better to secure your Victory.


Choll. Why what Weapons, Sirrah? -- I profess he would provoke me, and I could
swear bloody Oaths, did not Religion and good Manners restrain me, -- Look ye,
Friend, look ye now, how long will my good Nature last? -- Not very long -- not
very long, Sirrah.


Ned. Why, Sir, I hope you don't think of losing what you never possessed?


Choll. I Have no good Nature then, you say? Very well! I can suffer your
frequent Extravagancies, see you often drive to the Court-end of the Town, pick
up a black-fac'd Whore, but of a blacket -- Conscience, ramble to a Tavern, get
drunk, and then come home at midnight, swear like a Bully, commend an affected
Fop, protest he delivers himself handsomely, and with a good grace, because he
makes mouths when he speaks; swear this a pretty Gentleman, 'cause he sung a
smutty Catch or two; the other a brave Fellow, 'cause he roared over his Glass;
the fourth witty, because he ridiculed things sacred, or towr'd so high, that
he became unintelligible to himself and others; for Madness, Sirrah, goes often
current for the height of Wit.


Ned. It does so, Sir.


Choll. Does it, Sirrah? The fifth a man of Judgment, because he was a solemn
grave Fool, spoke little, and understood less. The sixth well bred, because he
knew how to flatter, how to dissemble, how to bow and cringe, and at first
meeting to borrow Money, with the same assurance as if you had been his
Cash-keeper, or at least his intimate Acquaintance for twenty years past. Now,
you Rogue, I have no good Nature! yet can suffer all this -- No! no! not a
grain of good Nature! that is very fine! very fine, indeed!


Ned. My Judgment informs me in my choice of Friends.


Choll. Well, no matter, Sirrah, Judgment or no Judgment, I Will be revenged;
I Will have a Wife, Sirrah, -- Heirs of my own Body, Sirrah; you shall not o're-rule
me or my House, Sirrah, -- No, you shall not, Sirrah. -- Timandra! -- Niece! --
Timandra!


Enter Timandra. Tim. Now for my share in this Morning Lecture -- Sir.


Choll. Ay, Sir, come here Sir, -- Look ye here, I Have been telling Ned part of
my Mind, but he is too wise to rely upon the Judgment of his Uncle, he has
Wisdom enough of his own, and so I Have done with him; but I should be sorry if
thou were lost too, I always had a kindness for thee, and consulted thy
Interest as my own.


Tim. So it seems, Sir, and judged my Fortune yours.


Choll. How! How! This Rogue's Madness has infected her, I profess ingeniously,
he has debauched her Nature, and o're-turn'd her Obedience, -- But do you see,
young Baggage, no words! no words! -- I Am your Uncle, nay more, -- I Am Master
of your Fortune.


Tim. Sir, I Am sensible of your Power, of which that last Article is the
greatest prop.


Choll. No matter! Look ye, I Have resolved on a Match between you and my Friend
Sir Anthony's Son, it is a virtuous Youth, the Hier of a Rich rather, bend your
stiffn'd Inclinations, and comply with my Commands -- do you see, expect no mercy
from me else; study how to receive him according to his Merit, for he will be
here this Afternoon -- In the mean time, Sirrah, I Will be your Enemy -- I will,
Sirrah, -- I know how to be revenged -- Sir Anthony's Daughter -- do you hear
that, Sirrah? -- I Will have a Wife, I warrant you -- A Rogue -- a --


[Exit. Enter Decoy. De. Sir, I Have been an Ear-witness of your Uncle's
Unkindness, and am sorry the old Gentleman should be so much a Slave to his
Passions; but I hope Fortune will be more your Friend than hitherto she has
been.


Tim. Heaven grant it may be so!


De. He Is gone now to Sir Anthony's, to court Melintha; I Have plumm'd the depths
of that young Lady's Heart, and though she appears entirely devoted to Heaven,
yet she has that esteem for a handsome Young Man, which those of her Years can
hardly avoid: Her Father's Humor keeps her uneasy at home; your Uncle's
Addresses are still more troublesome; and to shun these two Plagues, she will run
into the Arms of some kind Deliverer: You may be the happy Man, and if you will
rely upon my Conduct and Skill, the business is already half perfected.


Ned. If you assist me in this, you confirm me yours; believe me, it is a
Service I never can forget; propose therefore a Reward, and it is given as soon
as asked.


[Gives Money. De. It Is not reasonable I should play the Soldier, and take
Money e're I actually serve; but truly I always thought it ill Manners to
refuse what any Gentleman offers; it is the duty of poor People to be obedient
to their Commands, especially in such Cases as these; but your business shall
be the end of all my Labors.


Ned. Thank ye, Madam, remember my good or bad Fortune depends upon your
management.


[Exit. Tim. Where was it you saw Sir John?


De. At his Lodgings: I stole thither when your Uncle was abroad.


Tim. And did he remember Timandra?


De. Remember you! Why truly he remembers nothing else, he drank your health,
sighed when he pronounced your Name, swore imperfect Oaths, grew silent on a
sudden, and as suddenly started into the other Extreme; I Have a Plot, which (if
it succeed) will produce Effects answerable to all your Wishes, -- Really and
fairly speaking, he is a notable Gentleman, he must see you this Afternoon, for
it is impossible he should live a whole day without you.


Tim. I Am obliged to him for his good opinion; but inform me concerning my new
Lover, Sir Anthony's Son.


De. The Squire, Madam, very much resembles Sancho Pancha in his Shapes, and
Don Quixot in his Intellects; Heaven I hope has designed you, Madam, a better
Husband; for Sir John Winmore (if any man can) well deserves your Love. That
assurance your Uncle has of my Fidelity, gives me an Opportunity of being
instrumental in promoting your mutual Happiness; it is in this, as in all other
Affairs, the Weakness of one creates the Power of another.


Tim. Your kindness so far exceeds my merit, it is in vain to offer payment in
words, and my Circumstances are such, as deny me the liberty of expressing my
Gratitude handsomely: but accept of these few Sentences, and let their
Eloquence atone for the defects of mine.


[Gives Money. De. Truly, Madam, you are charmingly eloquent, and if you always
speak so, half the Beaus in Town would die for you; pardon my abrupt departure,
but I am obliged by my Promise to manage an Affair for a Gentleman that
requires expedition, -- Adeiu, Madam. -- Matchmaking is a rare Employment, a
Counselor takes a Fee from one of the Parties, and I from both; I owe it all
to that mighty Passion Love, that turns the grave Philosopher to Fool, and
makes the saving Wise a spendthrift Ass.


[Exit. Tim. How unfortunate are those whose Stars condemn them to a dependence
on those they hate! this is doubly mine, my nearest Relation is my greatest
Enemy, and I am forced to purchase Liberty from those I scorn, dissemble all my
wrongs, and feign content; I am ignorant of my Lover's real Thoughts, perhaps
his Passion is no more than seign'd, and all his Courtship an effect of
Interest; yet to ease my self from present torment, I think him all Love and
Justice, and am resolved to run the risque of a new Danger yet unknown, to shun
immediate ruin.


Happy are those who live and love in Fields,
And seek no more than what a Garden yields;
There Friends never plot to rob them of their own,
No quirking Tricks, or fubtle Arts are known,
And in their Loves blessed Innocence is shown.
Here no such Joys are found, for every Maid
Is lewd or ugly, if to Wants betrayed;
Interest has banished Love, Wealth Beauty gives,
And she is still virtuous, who with Grandeur lives.
[Exit. SCENE II.
Lucy's Lodgings.
Enter Lucy and Betty. Luc. Well, and you found Sir John at home?


Bet. Yes, Madam; and how do you think he received your Letter?


Luc. Coldly, it may be.


Bet. Yes faith, as coldly as a rich Lawyer does his poor Client, and shrugg'd
up his Shoulders, like a lazy Parson raised from his warm Bed in a snowy night,
to pray with a dying Beggar.


Luc. And is he so very indifferent grown? Sure thou art not in earnest?


Bet. He never asked me (as he used to do) if his Lucy was in sickness or in
health, asleep or awake; and your Name seemed as hateful to him, as a Quondam
Companion to an upstart Favorite, whose Poverty puts him in mind of his own,
and tells him he grew up from the Dunghill; I forgot nothing a dutiful Servant
ought to have said in such a case; 'twas all in vain, all in vain, Madam; 'twas
preaching Philosophy to the Winds, and attempting by Rhetoric to persuade the
roaring Billows to a calm; we are both ruined, it is as easy to reconcile the
jarring Elements, as to recall his fugitive Heart.


[weeps. Luc. Then may I from this moment be ugly as a Monster, Despised by
all, and shunned by every Friend, Contemned by those on whom I placed my Love,
And be at last a Burden to my self, Let me still remember all my pleasures
past, That when compared to this unhappy state, I may augment the number of my
Tears.


[Weeps. Bet. So, so, this is a sweet comfort, and repays Service past.


Luc. Let others from my ruin learn to live, And when they see me naked on the
Shore, Exposed to all the Billows of Contempt, And gazed upon by Strangers from
afar, Let them remember I was once like them, Free from gross faults, and
sailed over swelling Tides, But that my folly dashed me into wreck.


Bet. For shame, Madam, so many Tears for one Man? half of that grief was
enough for the whole Sex.


Luc. Ah! let me thus consume my years in pain, Let joy be ever banished from
my Breast, No thoughts of Love shall ever enter here.


[Weeps. Bet. Pray read this Letter, Madam, it is from you Friend Decoy.


Luc. Cease, cruel Maid, and let me feel the weight Of this misfortune, which
my faults have brought; Excess of Grief a certain Pleasure gives, And stuns the
weary Soul into a Lethargy.


Bet. Pray, Madam, read it; faith I Will cry else, for company's sake.


Luc. Speak to Mount Aetna, bid the Sulphur freeze, And turn its fiery Matter
into Ice, Suspend its Motion, and forget its Heat;

[Weeps. The Sparkling Flames much sooner shall obey, Than I can know a respite
from my Grief -- But to please thee, I Will read it.

Madam,

[ Betty reads with her, and both of them smile as they read.] This is to
inform you -- ready to serve you -- opportunity -- Mr. Freelove -- Estate 15
hund. yearly -- prepare for his reception -- no Father to overawe him -- Love
more than Interest -- Speedily Married -- repay the loss of your old Lover.

Well, Betty, has Mistress Fashion the Manto-maker brought home my new Gown?
Change the Toilet, make up my last lac'd-head suit; Do I look charmingly to
day? are my Eyes in Arms? and may I expect a Conquest? I Am resolved to be
merry, and forget my loss.


Bet. Ha, ha, ha; hang me if I don't begin in earnest to believe the Story of
the Ephesian Matron; Good Lord! what weak Creatures we Women are? Why, Madam,
we both wept two minutes ago, and now we are both pleased again.


Luc. It Is sitting it should be so; for Souls subject to passion, cannot be
strangers to tenderness; a Woman should be easie-natur'd, and not bigoted to
any Principle.


Bet. Why faith, Madam, you're in the right; let us in and prepare for the
arrival of this new and potent Lover; 'Gad I hope he has a handsome Servant, I
have a strange inclination this Morning to the State of Matrimony, for
Executions always put me in mind of Mortality.


Luc. And the losss of Sir John tells me, I ought to be no more what I have
been; I resolve to play honest Game for the future, and that is both the safest
and the surest course to happiness; but It Is strange that Precepts seldom reach
the Heart,
Though often repeated, and expressed with Art;
Nature to Virtue rearely leads the Mind,
Nor was our Judgment for our Guide designed:
Else why so many Laws to rule the Will,
And teach us how to shun bewitching Ill?
Nothing draws back the Soul that wildly roams,
Like adverse Fortune that unlooked for comes.



[Execunt. SCENE III.
Sir Anthony's House.
Enter Sir Anthony, Dick, and Flora. Sir Anth. I profess these Tailors are
great Rogues, it is hard to know what to make of 'em; they cannot endure labor,
because their Employment is at best but idleness; they never make good
Soldiers, for generally speaking they are all Cowards; why truly they are good
at nothing but Cheating, they invent so many Fashions, and have so many tricks
to wheedle men out of their Money, Silk, Buttons, Binding, Buckrum, Canvass, and
so forth, that it is but reasonable sometimes to clip half a yard from their
Bills; sincerely, I could rail at the Knaves these eight days -- why, body
of me, Mr. Filsher has spoiled the Lad's Coat, he looks like a Cock stripped of
all his Feathers.


Dick. Uds so! or one of the University with his Gown pulled over his Ears, but
Satis est quod Sufficit, that is to say, Sir Father, the Coat is long enough,
since the Fashion has turned them into Doublets.


Flo. Sure Timandra must admire that Shape, that Air, and that innocent honest
Face.


Sir Anth. Why truly the young Man has something of the old World in his
Co^untenance, he looks like the last Age, a downright Man, and speaks as he
thinks, which nowadays is reputed madness. But, come Dick, let me see how you
will make your Court to the Lady, how Salute her. I mean, in a word, let me see
how you can make your Honors, as the modern men of Fashion word it. Flora
shall be Timandra.


Dick. Why thus, Sir Father, I pull off my Hat, thus I make a Leg, and by
Jupiter thus I kiss.


[Salutes aukwardly. Flo. Fogh, Brother, what a way there is, -- for shame.


Sir Anth. Well that is no matter; stand up Dick, look modest; So! So! hold up
your Head, set out your Breast, hold in your Breath; now observe how I salute
you, I saw my Lord Mayor salute his Lady so, and he has been thrice at the
Royal Levee; thus I pull off my Hat; thus I bow; now by your leave, fair Lady
-- Now what thinks thou on it?


[Salutes Dick antickly.] Flo. Ha, ha, ha! Why faith, Sir, you have mended the
matter very little, that is the old Elizabeth way; I Am sorry I am not a Man, I
should make a Courtly Young fellow fit for the Ladies.


Sir Anth. Dick do as I have done, no matter for Apish tricks, they were
invented by airy Fools, and practiced by none of the wisest to this very day.


Dick. Why look ye, Sir Father, it is a saying in the University, Contraria
juxta se posita majis illucescunt, if there were no Fools, Wit would never be
esteemed, if no spend thrifts, a savingman would not be called virtuous; the
Deformities of one man set off the Beauties of another! and that is the plain
English on it.


Flo. I Am afraid, Sir, you have spoiled a good Philosopher, 'twas a pity he had
not stayed at the University; for ought I know, he remembers his Logicks better
than his Creed.


Dick. Creed! do you see, Sir Father, -- a great deal better; for we often forget
that, when we study Logicks: I can tell you how many Predicaments there are,
how many sorts of Syllogisms, what is Ens rationis, and Universal a part rei,
as readily as a Carman Counts his Faggots, ay, and make Sophisms as fast as a
Boy would throw Pease into his Mouth.


Sir Anth. Look ye now, Daughter, there is a Young Man for ye, I profess
sincerely, the Lad has wounderful parts, and I believe 'twou'd be hard to find
me such another between Temple-barr and Aldgate; nay verily, I suppose, I might
have included the other end of the Town, for Courtiers are often great Dunces,
but hide their Ignorance with a Natural stock of Impudence.


Dick. By Ovid, so they do.


Sir Anth. Yet after all, when I was a Young Man, these things were as familiar
to me as my Name, and I could have told you at first sight, if Entionis was a
Grecian or a Roman Captain, and how many Battles he won, and Sophims and Solims
were always in my mouth, sleeping or w^king; but time, and much business, has
oppressed my Memory -- Age is the Worm of Judgment, that gnaws so hard, it
grinds the wood to nothing.


Flo. I thought you had never been at the University, Sir!


Sir Anth. Ay, that is true, that is true. -- But I have read tho, hussie.


Dick. Why, by Mercury, Sir Father, you understand very little; though a Grecian
or a Roman Captain, quotha! -- look ye now -- but stay -- who is this.


Enter old Chollerick hastily. Choll. A rogue, -- ay a Rogue -- I Will have a
Wife, a Dog, a Villain, a Puppy, an Ass; you should have your bones broke,
Sirrah -- But no matter, I Will be revenged, I Will have Heirs of my own to enjoy
my Estate, not one of my Relations shall ever possess a Shilling on it, do you
hear that, Sirrah? do you hear that?


Dick. What Is the matter, Sir Father, with the old mad Fellow? He grumbles and
grunts, as if he had the Colic, or the great Devil in's Guts, and frisks and
jumps. --


Sir Anth. That Is your Uncle, and Brother that is to be; the Man no doubt
meditates on some of Mr. Jugler's Sermons.


Flo. My Sister is the Text, I suppose, and he designs to enlarge upon her very
shortly.


Choll. Your Estate, Friend! -- very well! -- very well! -- why look ye now,
that is nothing; I Am in possession -- Ay, Sir, but it is mine nevertheless -- Is
it, Sirrah? is it? -- Yes Sir -- you lie, Sir, -- Ay, but the Law shall prove
the truth on it -- shall it? -- very fine! I Will Law you, you Dog you, I will,
with a Pax to ye, Do You feel that, Sirrah? Law, quotha! do you feel that, you
Rogue, you Rake, you Son of -- Gad forgive me, what was I going to say?


[Beats the Walls. Sir Anth. Truly the Man is strangely agitated, and deep in
thought, he has not observed us all this while.


Flo. Hush, Sir, he is at his Soliloquies, I Am informed it is his common practice.


Choll. You incorrigible Rogue, you Dunce; you Milk-sop, you Sheep's-face -- '
it is more than I am able to bear; is it, Sirrah? say you so? Yes Sir, it shakes
my Nature, and has banished Duty from my Breast, I Will do my self Justice --
Will you, will you, Sirrah? Will you lift your Arm against your Uncle? No sure,
you Dog you, you will not; but I shall be before hand with ye; do you feel the
weight of that again, do you, Sirrah? I Will handle you with the same hands I use
toward my self, but a little more roughly -- I will, you Rogue you, -- Ha!
good morrow, Sir, good morrow.


Sir Anth. Good morrow, Neighbor, good morrow; Flora, call your Sister to me.
-- Dick look Spruce, he is your Mistress's Uncle.


Dick. Ay, Sir Father, ay.

[Dick stands a tiptoe, and surveys himself.
Sir Anth. This is my son, Neighbor Cbollerick, newly arrived from the
University.


Choll. Very good, Sir.


[Dick prunes and mumps. Sir Anth. Dick, Salute the Uncle of your Mistress.


Dick. Why, Sir Father, do you think I Will kiss this moldy piece of Antiquity,
that Mummy transported from Egypt, or some Eastern Country, and wafted about
from House to House by the wind within him; -- not I, by Aristotle, Sir Father.


Sir Anth. Take him by the hand, Neighbor, the Young Man is bashful, but your
Niece will nevertheless find him a Youth of good Parts.


Choll. Lend me your Fist, young Gentleman --


[ Dick Salutes aukwardly. but where is your Daughter? I came to see her, not to
fool away time, which is so precious; for we have undermining Rogues about us.

Sir Anth. I Have sent for her, -- ay, and here she is.


Re-enter Flora, with Melintha. Daughter, my Neighbor honors you with his
best Affections; and it is my Command, you give him a suitable reception.

Mel. Sir, I forget not to weigh his Merit; I think him Young and handsome too,
if you say he is such.


Flo. Heavens! how handsomely she dissembles! but so it is, your modest,
reserved, thinking Creatures, always Plot best, they wear a double Face, seem
one thing, and design another?


Choll. Now look ye, do you see, Madam, your Honorable Father and I have been
upon some terms about a Match between you and my self; he dislikes not the
Propositions I Have made him, and is resolved to double the Knot of this
Alliance, by marrying your Brother to my Niece; now, if you relish the motion,
it is a bargain.


Mel. Sir, my Father no doubt has consulted my interest, and I have that
respect for you, which your Virtues exact even from your Enemies.


Sir Anth. Body of me, it is an obedient Girl.


Dick. Why, Sir Father, what means all this? I hope you don't design my Sister
should marry this old Spawn of a --


Sir Anth. Mum, Dick, mum; he is Rich.


Dick. But, by Socrates, he is not handsome.


Sir Anth. No matter, he has a wealthy Niece, Boy, and thou may come to ride
in thy Coach.


Dick. Uds so, that is fine, ride in my Coach! then she shall have him, by
Hercules -- Sir, my Sister has e're now I suppose opened the Gates of her
heart, that have been so long barricadoed to the God of Love, and given
admittance to the Forces of your Charms, who have entered with bag and baggage.


Sir Anth. Ingeniously, the Lad speaks like an Oracle; Joy of my heart, if thou
pleadest so well for thy self with Timandra, the Cause is won.


Choll. The Young Man has sense, and knows how to make use on it; would the
Rogue my Nephew were like him.


Mel. I should be heartily sorry for it.


[Aside. Flo. The Monkey and the Bear, or the old Calf doting on the young;
would I had their Pictures drawn, the Alderman would make a handsome piece.


[Aside. Dick. Come, Sir, make up to her; uds so you shall marry her, her
Modesty and Silence are Signa Naturalia of her Consent and good-liking.


Mel. Would this Young Fool were in the Indies, he unmans the old People, and
fills their Heads with Chimera's and Windmils, to a degree of madness.


Choll. Why, look ye now, Madam, as to what your learned Brother says, about
the Signaralia of your good-liking, I know not; but this I know, I have a
kindness and a love for You, and am willing to join hands with you, if your
Honorable Father and you are both pleased; for I intend to purchase a House in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, for they say that is a very good Air; and I am not so old,
but I may have Heirs.


Flo. The old Stag cast Horns three years ago; (for so long it is since his Wife
died) yet once again longs to have the burden renewed, scorns, to be half a
Citizen, and thinks his Head unlike his Neighbors!


[Aside. Sir Anth. Why truly I Am pleased, so your Niece can love my Son.


Choll. Love him? -- Why look ye now, she shall -- she will -- she must -- love
him -- I Will make the Baggage dote upon him. -- I protest I had almost forgot my
self, my Passion often has the ascendant of my Judgment, but we are all men and
subject to Infirmities -- may I kiss you, Fair Lady -- look ye, Madam, may I
take another, -- oh, what a sweet Breath there was, a sost Lip, and every thing
so very -- oh -- my lovely young Rosamond, my Cassandra, my -- my --


Mel. Pray, Sir, don't squeeze my hand thus; just so a rugg'd Farmer grasps his
Plow.


Dick. By Aristotle, he designs to Plow upon your Ground, Sister.


Mel. Pray, Flora, relieve me from this insupportable Plague.


[Aside. Flo. You see, Sir, how he handles the Text, I knew what his
Meditations would come to, he scarce has the patience to stay till he is
licensed by Ecclesiastic Authority, but would be in the Pulpit ex tempore.


Sir Anth. Mum, Hussie, the Man knows how to behave himself.


Dick. Uds so, this is a fine Hilt, finer than my Sir Father's old Oliverian
Tilter; let me see, let me see, by Mars a fine Blade too, why I could fight
like Aeneas, and kill twenty such Pimps as Turnus; the Art of making Arms is
very fine, would I had those Vulcan made for the sturdy Son of that impudent
Whore Venus, when the Poet Sings, Illi inter sese multa vi brachia tollunt. So,
so, a very good Blade.


[Makes passes at the Wall. Chol. I am not very old, fair Lady, I can walk like
my Neighbors, I go to the Exchange every day on foot; and last week, when my
Friend Mr. Roundhead's Daughter was Married, I frisk'd and jumped, -- Why I can
shake a Leg, Madam, very nimbly upon occasion, so, -- and so -- For I learnt to
dance at thirty years of Age, to please my Wife whom I then Courted -- Ha! --
Oh! -- What Is the matter with the young Man -- Oh -- Farewell Sir Anthony, Good
buoy, Madam, I Am dang'rously ill on a sudden, but I Will wait upon you when my
fit is over, -- A Pox on the young Rogue, the glances of his naked Sword have
cast me into an Ague.


[Exit. Sir Anth. Dick, Dick, sincerely speaking, Dick, I Am sorry for what I
see, Body of me, you have frighted the Alderman; I know he mortally hates to look
upon shining Steel, ever since a drunken Bully run him throw the Lungs for a
false Arrest at his instance; put up, Dick, put up; ingeniously I Am heartily
vexed, 'twas an unluky accident, but come along with me, in the Afternoon you
shall beg his pardon, when you wait upon your Mistress.


[Exeunt. Flo. Well, Sister, and how did the old Fellow kiss -- Ha, ha, -- was
it not a lucky Adventure, that the young Fool chanced to draw his Sword! you
know now, if you lose the Nephew, how to frighten the Uncle into good Nature.


Mel. Is this a fit time to make reflections, Flora! it is dangerous sporting
with our ruin.


Flo. Lord, Sister, what do you mean? would ye have me melancholy?


Mel. No, but let us into my Chamber, and there examine our Circumstances;
accidents unseen may happen (witness the relief I just now obtained) and it is
necessary we should lay down a form of management, that every trifle may not
put us to a nonplus -- you know we must see our Lovers this Evening.


Flo. Come, Melintha, let no Fears distract your easy Soul, Love ^^all inspire
Cunning, besides Necessity has often wit begot,
And racked Man's lazy Soul to form a Plot;
Roused up its sleepy Powers, and taught it how
TO encounter danger, and to conquer too.
But when it is to a subtle Woman known,
Much more of Art, and Success too is shown.



[Exeunt.] ACT III. SCENE I.
The Tavern.
Sir John Winmore, Captain Bellair, and young Chollerick drinking. Sir Jo.
CAptain, a Health to your Mistress, Cares are from Love inseparable, Wine for a
while may bury half our Pains, let us therefore have a short reprieve from
trouble.


Capt. I own the force of the generous Grape, and thought it once omnipotent,
it turns a man inside out, and of a close-minded intriguing Fellow makes a
babbling Fool; it can banish all thoughts of business, but Love still keeps the
Field; it is a powerful Passion, and those to whom Years and Experience in the
World have justly acquired the name of prudent, are baffled from their surly
Precepts of rigid gravity, and forced to sigh and love, nay dote as we do.


Ned. I would not be again at liberty for an Empire; it is but a vain boast and
dream of Pageantry! we enjoy the freedom of Salvages, ramble wildly from place
to place, and seek for Shelter beneath the Shade of some deluding Jilt, who
when a Storm approaches flies away, and leaves us naked to the angry Heavens.
There Is a Happiness in honest Love, which fickle Wanderers scorn, because they
know it not.


Enter Mr. Freelove. Free. I Am your humble Servant, Gentlemen -- I suppose I Have
kept my hour.


Sir Jo. Thou have done so, but pray thee tell me, Feeelove, (for Love was
again the subject of our last Discourse) have thou in earnest kept thy Freedom
too? Art thou not become a virtuous Lover? And weary of thy past Freedom (where
every Port was thy home) now resolved to run with speed to Land, and take the
protection of the Church, that for the future thou may be a lawful Trader in
the state of Love?


Free. I confess I am yet a Pirate, I scour the Seas, fight, and am sometimes
wounded; I encounter Fireships and fair Enemies with equal Ardour, but seldom
retire a Conqueror.


Ned. On my Conscience I believe thee.


Free. However, Gentlemen, I Am now in a fair way toward a Peace, to morrow
Morning I present my self before my Judge, if she accept my Service I Will enter
into Pay, and list my self a Member of the Matrimonial Commonwealth.


Capt. In earnest, Jack? Art thou firmly resolved to abandon thy wonted
Freedom, thy darling Sins, the Follies of thy Youth, and take the Pen^ance of a
Wife to expiate thy Guilt?


Ned. What canting Fool has wheedled thee from thy first Principles, and turned
the Perspective, showed thee a distant Happiness at hand, and diminished the
present Bliss? Sure thou will not be so easily fettered!


Capt. Believe me, I Am sorry thou keep'st not better Company, or that thy easy
Nature should be debauched with vicious Morals; why Marriage is a mere
drudgery, the allay of all those Pleasure Life bestows, the reverse of Liberty,
and a Wife the badge of Slavery.


Sir Jo. It Is a promised Heaven never found, a Fire that glides before the
credulous Traveller, leads him from his Road with a show of Light, and leaves
him at last to mourn his Folly in the dark.


Capt. It Is the Lure that serves to cheat an easy Fool,
And stop his happier flights through yielding Air.
A while he soars aloft, and spreads his Wings,
Disdains the Earth below him, and his Keeper;
Proud of his Liberty he flies at all,
And feeds with pleasure on the panting Prey:
But viewing unawares the artful Cheat,
He quits the Air, and fastens on his Ruin.
The gaudy Feathers promised solid Joys,
But were designed at first by subtle Knaves,
To cheat him of his Freedom and his Pleasure.

Free. Gentlemen, you surprise me! I thought to have found you all Penitents,
confessing to one another the madness of past Years, and designing a new course
of Life; but I Have judged amiss, and had too much of Charity for my Neighbors;
yet to show myself a good Christian still, I Will own my Inclinations to Virtue,
and surrounded with Enemies, affirm it is Wisdom to marry, and convenient both
for the Body and the Estate.


Ned. Have thou spoke the Sentiments of thy Heart?


Free. Yes, by my hopes of better Fortune than hitherto I Have known.


Sir Jo. Let me then embrace thee. What we said was only designed to try thy
Virtue, no Maxims of ours; and by my hopes of success thou art dear to me as a
Brother.


Capt. You are of our Society, Freelove.


Ned. One of Virtue's Proselytes, Jack.


[They embrace him. Free. Gentlemen, I Am glad you are not what at first your
Words seemed to persuade, and that my Judgment, since I saw you, informed me
how to choose a way of living, commended by men of so much Prudence and Merit.


Sir Jo. Where has thy wandering Heart fixed it self? is she beautiful? can my
Friendship be of use? for believe me I Will be proud to serve thee.


Free. I have not yet seen her, but am told by others she is handsome to a
Miracle, witty beyond belief, and of a Fortune sufficient to banish want for
ever from my Doors.


Capt. Her Name.


Free. Luscinda. My Modesty and Interest are at wars, the last commands me to
her, and the first tells me my Equipage agrees not with my Pretensions; I Have
Money too, yet cannot find a Servant.


Capt. Jo. I have one at your Service, he is a troublesome unmannerly Rogue, and
sometimes possessed with the Spirit of Contradiction, but of undoubted honesty.


Free. Necessity shall excuse his faults; I Am obliged to ye, Captain, for this
favor, and shall make it my study to deserve and re-pay it.


Capt. I Am fortunate to my Wish in having the opportunity of showing that
esteem I bear thee; thou have pursued extravagant Courses hitherto, and I
rejoice at thy better Inclinations -- hoa -- who waits there?


Enter Drawer. Dra. Do You call, Gentlemen?


Capt. My Footman.


Dra. Yes, Sir.


[Exit. Enter Willie. Capt. Come here, Willie.


Will. Whaut waud ye say? tell, me, Sir.


Capt. Wait upon this Gentleman; serve him honestly, and execute his Commands
with that submission you ever showed to mine.


Will. Aun whau wull pay me for my pains, Sir?


Capt. Sirrah -- you shall be paid.


Will. Be me Saul I wull seir him thaun aus weil as ever he was seir'd in his
days, aun gin he hea mein till a bonny Lass -- ye ken whaut I mien, Sir -- I
caun get her brauly for him; Ise staurt her aus soon aus our Meast Johoan waud
staurt his Text whun he has preached a heal year upon it.


[Re-enter Drawer, and delivers a Letter to Sir John, and another to Ned.] Dra.
I had these two Letters for you, Gentlemen.


Will. Hear ye me; Me frein, hea ye gotten any thing for me deel be fain; O me
gin, I haud an Letter saun I caume out o me ain Kintrey; what think ye o thaut
now?


Sir Jo. [reads] They will -- Lincolns-Inn-Walks -- half an hour -- your friend
with you -- yours to command -- Bellair, this Letter concerns thee too.


Free. Gentlemen, you are busy, and I have already told you how I am to be
employed -- Come along, Sirrah.


Will. Sirrau me nea Sirraus, Sir; the Minister bauptized me Wullie Beetlehead,
a Scotlaund-Man.


Free. You Rogue, did the Parson give you all these Names? Willie, honest
Willie, come along Willie.


Will. Ay Sir, whaun I hea tasted the Wine, aun drunken tea yer good health.


[Drink^. Free. This is insufferable Ignorance.


[Kicks him. [Capt. Down stairs ye mangee Rake -- use him thus, and then expect
the effects of good breeding from him.


[Exit Freelove. Will. Wung whaut waud the maun be aut, my arse is na made of
Wainscoat, baut gin I haud ye -- I ken whaur, Sir -- I soud mauke your head as
sauft aus an --


[Exit. muttering. Ned. [reads.] In the Walks -- your Sister along -- Sir Jo.
Winmore -- Sir A^thony's Son with her -- weary of his Company -- Come,
Gentlemen, let us fly where Love commands, and so much Beauty waits.


Sir Jo. I feel unusual Motions at my heart, it is hard to say -- between two
different Passions which of them reigns with greatest Power. Love and Fear
divide my Soul, and whirl my Blood through this disordered frame.


Ned. I'i take care to comfort you with Timandra's Presence; I hope, Capt. you
have no such Love-qualms at your heart.


Capt. No faith, I go to find my Mistress with that cheerfulness with which
I Have encountered my Enemies when Martial heat and honor spurred me on.


Courage in Love has often brought success;
Levelled the Way for wished for Happiness.
The Canting, Whining Fool, young Maids despise,
Whose only Courtship in his Silence lies;
Love, like our Wine, should sparkle in our Eyes.
[Exiunt. SCENE II.
Enter Alderman Chollerick and Dick. Choll. WEll, Young man, you are very
welcome; my Neice shall receive you like the Son of Sir Anthony Addle.


Dick. Uds so, I like that Speech very well -- but by Ovid I know not what to
say to her; for though, upon occasion, I can let my Sir-father see my Parts, and
that his Money is well bestowed upon me in the University, yet to speak to a
young Lady, and a Stranger too -- Why, I can no more do it, than go to bed
without my Supper, or say my Prayers at night without falling asleep.


Choll. Come, come, no matter for that, the Woman knows your Errand: bear up to
her briskly, the baggage loves a confident thundering Lover, that deal his
Oaths by dozens.


[Exit. Dick. A thundering Lover, that deals his Oaths by dozens -- By Priam
I Will fit her for that: Hem -- hem -- let me see -- ay, I have it -- Mum Dick [
Enter Timand: she comes -- now boy prepare, it is a lovely Wench by Jupiter --
Madam -- by Ovid I Have almost forget my Complement -- but stay, I must salute
her first -- Madam, let the Cannon of my Sighs batter down the Walls of your
Resolutions, that my Love may ride in Triumph through the Streets of your
heart, and display the Colors of my sincere affections over the -- Uds so, my
Memory will betray me -- over the -- why Madam -- why Madam, over your Beauty
-- I Am a Beau.

[Stands a Tiptoe.
Tim. An Eloquent declaration of Love I must confess, and spoke like a Man just
arrived from the Siege of Namure.


Dick. Uds so, Madam, why I came but to Town last night, or this morning early
from the University, where we only fight for bloody Noses, or so, and scale the
Walls of a stately Pie -- it is a handsome Coat.


Tim. And were your Clothes made at the University? Sir, you look like a
handsome Gentleman.


Dick. No, Madam, my honorable Sir-father brought them ready-made in
Long-Lane; he is a very Wise man, Madam, though I say it that should not say it; and
yet I know no reason why a man may not commend the Wisdom of his own Father.


Tim. I presume he may be wise, for he has dealt little of his Wilt to his Son.


Dick. O Lord, O Lord, your Ladyship is merry with your humble Servant -- But
uds so, I forget my thundering Complements: Madam, my heart (like Tinder) took
fire from -- what? -- took fire from the first sparkle your fair Eyes darted
upon me; by this Light I love ye; by this Right Hand I dote upon ye; by Plato
and Aristotle -- I dye for ye, and -- the Wastcoat too is of an exact length.


Tim. Dye for me, Sir! Sure ye would not rob the World of its best Jewel!


Dick. Uds so, that is true, I Am handsome, and the World is pleased to esteem me,
and so forth: but as I was saying, Madam, dye for ye -- why, I Would fight for ye,
and that is more, if ye consider I Am a Beau.


Tim. How, Sir! would Beaus rather dye than sight?


Dick. Yes, Madam, he would rather be kicked to death twenty times, than run to
death with a small Sword once; but by Juno I Will box over a Hat with Samson for
ye; and it is a bloody dog, Madam, I warrant him; why, he c^n handle a
Drey-horse like a Paper-kite; I can dance too, Madam, Tal-la-ra, ta-fa-la --


[Sings and dances acquardly. Enter Ned Chollerick. Ned. Sister --


[Whispers Timandra, and Dick listens. Dick. Lincolns-Inn-Fields! by Vulcan I
heard that.


Ned. And do you feel that? Imprimis, So much for ill manners. Ditto, to cure
your madness.


[Kicks him. Dick. Uds so, your humble Servant, Sir; but by Ovid I don't love
your Bills, though of few Articles; beat a Knight's Son! Uds so, the King shall
hear on it, that he shall.


Tim. Are Sir Anthony's Daughters there?


Ned. Yes, I just now came from them, after my promise to return in six minutes.


Tim. Lead the way then, I Will follow -- your humble Servant Sir, I hope you will
easily pardon that Affront the Gentleman put upon you; 'twas but a Jest, and
Beaus, such as you are, commonly have such pretty Jests put upon them.


Dick. Have they? Uds so, I Will never be a Beau again then; by Pan I courted
very handsomely till that Rascal came in; I never shall forget his Impudence;
I Have a good mind now to send him a Challenge that I may cut his Throat civilly,
like a modern Christian: but hang that Thought, Tyburn stares me in the face
already; my Sir-father shall see him fined some hundreds of pounds, imprisoned
till payment, and obliged to find bail for his good behavior for the future;
there would be no living if there were not Law for such Rogues to bind them to
the Peace.


Enter Old Chollerick. Choll. How now? where is my Niece?


Dick. Niece!


Choll. Ay, my Niece, Sir.


Dick. By Ovid, as the Latin Saying is --


Choll. I Will have none of your gabling strange stuff; I Will have nothing to do
with Latin, no, not I; I say, where is Timandra? where is my Niece?


Dick. Why there was a damned sort of a fellow, I think he is her Brother, at
least he called her Sister; but every Woman may be so to him for ought I know.


Choll. Well, and what of him? it is Ned; it is that young Villain, it is; and
I Will be revenged, a knave: well, go on.


Dick. And so, Sir, in he comes --


Choll. It must be he, that is certain; the graceless young dog is still at a
mischief.


Dick. Uds so, it must be he then, for he was at a mischief upon sight.


Choll. What, he? -- whom do you mean? -- but go on; what was he that came in?


Dick. The Devil, Sir.


Coll. Then 'twas Ned; 'twas my sweet Nephew; would the Rogue were fai^ly
hanged; I must be rid of him, that is certain. -- Well, and what say you to
this, Young Man? what say you to it -- To what? -- Why, Sirrah; would you
pretend Ignorance? would you -- Yes Sir. -- Yes, Sir! why look ye now friend,
thus I Will teach you your duty, thus, Sirrah: -- Mercy, Sir; I beg your Pardon:
No mercy, no pardon you dog; I Will have every bone in your skin broke, sirrah;
ay, I will -- I will -- you Rogue.


Dick. Uds so; it is my safest course to remove my body from this place; it is a
mad dangerous Family, and this Old Curmudgeon may be upon me with a new Bill of
Imprimi^'s and Ditto's worse than the former: good buy, Sir, good buy -- Uds
so, let me see; I will not lose my Mistress, I Will follow to the Walks.


[Exit hastily. Choll. Well, and what did the Rogue when he came in? what was it
he said? -- Why, this young fellow is gone too -- Ned has prevailed upon him to
affront me; I Will go and seek the Rascal immediately, and if I catch him -- a --
Villian -- a --


[Exit. muttering. Enter Freelove and Willie. Free. And so she bid me stay in
this Room till she came -- Was it not so?


Will. Whaut a deel Sir aur ye deef, shoe baud ye tarry here aun no gang awau
till she caum benn.


Free. Ben -- but it is no matter; Willie, you must forget Scotland, and conform
yourself to the Customs of England; learn our Accent.


Will. Nau Sir, sheam fau me thaun, Customs o Englaun quo? Nau, nau, I'se do
aus our Meast Johoan does pray for yer reformaution in good-bred Scots. Aus for
yer accent Sir, I speak as Father Audaum spauke before me.


Free. Then Adam spoke Scotch?


Will. Goad aun thaut he did, Sir.


Free. But to the purpose; to render you a complete Servant, observe these
three things; keep a due distance; speak little, and hear much.


Will. Waud ye learn au Gentleman good manners?


Free. Why, do thou pretend to quality?


Will. Be my Saul do I Sir, we Scotlaun Lauds aur au Gentlemen whun we come tea
Englaun, thee Waulsh aun Irish aur neathing tea us for quality.


Free. That Is good; but remember when the Old Gentlewoman enters, you must be
silent as a Mute; it is she that helps me to the Rich Lady I told thee of.


Will. Is It sua? thaun hear ye me Sir; I bid ye hea au care err thaun, he haud
need o au laung Spoon thaut sups we the Deel, I waurren her au aul cheat now
before I see her.


Free. Ha, ha, ha, why so Willie?


Will. I kent au Maun o my Kintrey thaut mairied au aul wuther'd Wife thaut
scantly could tell whilk was the Stool and whilk her Arse whun she saut upon it,
aun sometimes scaurted her Head instead o her Rump; the mairiagemauker swear't
she was worth saux thousaun pund staurling, aun whun the Gentleman caum tea, --
how muckle do you think waus o't, Sir?


Free. Two thousand pounds it may be.


Will. Two thousaun pund! wa be my saul shoe had na two hunder Scots Marks, yer
Englis Womaun will trust her person whaur she wonna trust her purse; she may be
a rich Hereiss tea day, and deel a two pennys hea the morn gin ye soud chance
tea tauke her in between yer sheets.


Free. Away fool, some blockhead has inso m'd the -- Madam, I Am your humble
Servant.


Enter Decoy. De. Truly Sir I Am yours.


Will. Be me Counscience I waurran her au honorable pick-pocket, for I dinna
like thaut mumping face o hers.


De. Well Sir, I profess your business has cost me a great deal of trouble;
I Have been thrice at her Lodgings, and gave a Guinea to her Maid: In a word,
Sir, I Have smoothed the way, and to morrow you may begin an easy Journey to the
Island of Love.


Will. Be my Saul he haus na, a pair o Boots to ride in.


De. I Am persuaded your Addresses will not be unwelcom, for I have given you a
Character nothing inferior to your merit, and done every thing with that
fervor, as if my good or bad fortune had been inseparably linkt to yours.


Will. The deel be fain o yer auld wheedling Snout.


Free. Madam, I Am sensible of your kindness; and thus I express my self. Time,
and future events, shall instruct me how much I Am your Debtor, and how to pay.


[Gives Money. Will. Haurk ye Sir, a word we ye in yer lug -- keep yer Siller,
I kent the Captain cheated out o au hunder Guineas by sick anither aul wutch
aus this.


Free. Whisper softly sirrah, otherwise ye ruin all.


Will. Ay, ay, Sir -- in our Kintry we never buy au mere till eans we ride upon
her; pay Sir, I say, whun ye get the Lady aun be hanged till her.


Free. Sirrah -- well, Madam, and when shall I have the happiness of waiting
upon the fair Lady?


De. Sir, she expects you to morrow, I Will be there my self in the forenoon, and
it is convenient you should come then -- But, Sir, as I hinted to you at our
first meeting, Fortu^e has been very unjust to me, and I Am weary of this trade
of life; it is but reasonable then in serving others, I should serve my self,
and better my present circumstances in minding yours; the Lady has Ten thousand
pounds, and I demand your Bond only for One; Truly I was never Covetous, and
such a Service merits a greater reward, but the c^nfidence I have in your
generosity has taught me to use you kindly.


Free. Madam, if I marry the Lady.


De. O Lord, Sir, it shall be payable upon no other terms.


Free. To morrow you shall have it, in the mean time, Madam, believe me your
humble Servant.


[Exit. De. Sir, I Am yours.


Will. Aun the muckle deel thaunk ye, for yer well paid for yer pains; hark ye
aul woman, I hope me Masters siller sall burn the arse out o yer purse before
night, an be me saul aun ye pit au trick upon him this bred Sword sall let the
Sun and Moon shine through ye like a glass-window.


[Exit. De. Devil take the Rogue, he has almost frighted me out of my five
Senses -- but hitherto all is well, pray heaven that impudent Sot were out of
the way, if he has any influence upon his Master, my plot on that side is
ruined.


Mischief from small beginnings often flows,
But to a Mountain in a minute grows.
[Exit. SCENE III.
Lincolns-Inn-Walks.
Enter Sir John Winmore and Timandra. [Capt. Bellair and Flora crossing the
Stage. Sir Jo. I Will Not, Madam, offer to measure the Extent of your power, or
say I merit; but I Would have you remember, that the World cannot think it strange,
that an unnatural parent weakens the bond of obedience, or that a violent
passion should be regarded.


Tim. Love it seems is a strange passion, that of a Layman makes an
Ecclesiastic, and gives you a power to absolve me from that allegiance I owe
to my Uncle and my Guardian -- you would have me come to Confession too, and say I
loved.


Sir Jo. If you did, I Would prove a kind Ghostly father, Madam, and enjoin more of
the same Sin for a penance.


Tim. Thank ye, Sir; but I Am not resolved to try the experiment; it is not the
way to ease the burdened mind; for I Am informed Love begets Fear; that
Lovers are always uneasy, and it is hard to set the heart again at liberty; is it
so?


Sir Jo. It Is, Madam.


Tim. And you would have me a Companion in misery.


Sir Jo. No, Madam; for as in Love there are some pains, so there are pleasures
to balance them; one kind look from the mistress of our Vows, gives a Joy not
to be equaled; and to be beloved is a heaven beyond what dull Philosophers
ever dreamt of.


Tim. And if she prove inconstant?


Sir Jo. It Is Hell.


Tim. Then why should I run the hazard of a Love-damnation? Men, what e're they
brag, are fickle as the Winds; just now they love, and in a moment hate; yet
know not whence nor how this Change arrives, but lay the stress on Fate or
Nature's weakness: Now if my easy heart should dote on such a man, I Have fooled
my self out of a present happiness, and missed the better heaven I aimed at.


Sir Jo. Your Charms. Madam, secure you from that misfortune; your Eyes would
melt the heart of a Savage, and turn his fury into love; no man could ever love
you less; for he who once knew you, would with Joy continue your Slave; your
words would call back his wandering thoughts, and fix his nodding virtue to its
center.


Dick. -- peeping -- Uds so, here is fine work, my Mistress, by Ovid!


Tim. Sir, if you please, we'll take a turn in the other Walk; Sir Anthony's
Son, I find, has dogged me hither.


Sir Jo. Every Walk is pleasant when Timandra's there.


[Exeunt. Dick. By Aristotle I Will place my self behind this Tree, and observe
all -- Mum, honest Dick, here comes another.


Enter Flora and Capt. Bellair. Flo. Hang me If I Am not sick with these canting
words; Flame, Love, Passion, Eyes, and the like, I always thought a Soldier
should be master of more Courage than to languish for a Woman.


Capt. Who would not sigh when so much beauty's nigh? Tantalus never knew pains
like mine; for I view a bliss infinitely beyond his, and find no cause, no hope
for quick relief.


Flo. Would you have me believe all you have said, and credit every story for a
truth, without remembering your Complements are the effects of your good
breeding? You love to show your parts, and that in time of peace; you can
remove the thoughts of War's loud alarms, and play with that soft young thing
called Love: Men are subject to more changes than Proteus ere knew shapes.


Dick. By Ovid that is very fine. Sir-father, when he knows all will have a
trusty housekeeper of ye.


Capt. Who could feign a pleasure on the Rack, or think of Joys when roaring
Seas gaped wide, and threatened present ruin; much less could I counterfeit a
passion, or look and not love; to be insensible of so many Charms, would argue
stupidity; and to yield without terms to so sweet a Conqueror, speaks not want
of Courage, but a generous Confidence.


Dick. Uds so, the man is damnably in love.


Flo. Nay, now Captain you begin to be serious upon the matter, on my
Conscience I could afford my Pity.


Dick. By Hercules, the Baggage begins to yield.


Capt. Pity, Madam, has often proved the Mother of Love; if you afford me that,
you advance me one step to happiness.


Dick. Poor man! by Apollo I pity him.


Flo. Not so fast, Captain; you would march before Orders are given; it is pit y
merely for your weakness: but come, hang this dull serious Love, I hate it;
let us change the subject; I see Timandra in the other Walk, who doubtless
desires my Company, if attacqu'd as I am.


[Exeunt. Dick. Uds so? So, she hates dull love; it is a smart plaguey Wench, all
Mercury by Jupiter -- but mum, Dick.


Enter Ned Collerick and Melintha. Ned. You know not, Madam, how far this
Love-Caprice may hurry the Old man; your Father's humor is unaccountable, and
every thing tends to my speedy ruin, if Melintha prove unkind.


Dick. By Pan this is my Sister too; and this is the Rogue that kicked me before
my Mistress; I begin to shake for fear; if he should catch me, he would serve me so
again: I Will home and tell Sir-father all; by Juno I will.


[Exit. Ned. Remember, Madam, Fortune does not afford me the happiness every
day of expressing all my fears, and your danger.


Mel. To a Soul prepared no accident is of consequence; ill fortune comes with
downy wings, flies gently by, and leaves no marks of sorrow in her flight.


Ned. I have not yet, Madam, attained to that height in Philosophy; and Love
tells me, That without you I am for ever miserable.


Enter Sir John Bellair, Timandra, and Flora. Flo. Well, Sir, shall I wish you
Joy of your good success? but I Am afraid my Sister is for the Uncle; she can
digest (it may be) his infirmities for the sake of those conveniences his
money brings.


Capt. I Am afraid, M^dam, you have got such another Lover that has possessed the
passes of your heart, and bars admittance to the Enemy.


Flo. A Warlike smile, Captain: But I begin to remember we came to hear
prayers, and it is now past time: besides, I saw my Brother just now going out
of the Garden, who will undoubtedly acquaint my Father with our devotion.


Capt. Would you begin our Banishment so soon? it is but a minute since we began
to be happy.


Flo. Necessity commands a Cessation of Arms; and, Captain, you must be broke.


Sir Jo. Yet stay, fair Ladies, let these cool Shades persuade, if Lovers fail.


Mel. No, Sir, it is fitting we change the Scene.


Sir Jo. Well, Ladies, let us hope you inflict a present punishment to give a
future ease; you're afraid too much of Joy should sicken the Soul, and a long
Scene of happiness pale the Appetite: Pain gives a certain relish unto Ease,
and makes it always welcome to the mind.


Ned. Short Pleasures most of solid Joy impart;
And stole with hazard, most affect the heart.
Nature, to what is forbid, is still inclined;
And hopes of Sweets not known, mis-lead the mind.
Thus we run on, and eagerly pursue
What brings destruction, so it shows but New.
In Love there is no such Curse, give all to day;
We still Love on, our Joys know no decay,
And every hour to Pleasure shows the way.
[Exeunt. Finis Actus Tertii.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Lucy's Lodgings.
Enter Decoy, Lucy, and Betty. De. YOur Fears, Madam, are groundless; he is
already possessed with an opinion of your Fortune; naturally credulous, and every
way fitted for the Cheat; dissemble handsomely; seem not overpliant, yet give
him store of hopes, because it is necessary you should be speedily married.


Luc. I still doubt the success; Fifteen hundred a year is a noble prize; nor
are such bubbles often to be found.


Bet. You are sure he has so much, Madam.


De. Yes, yes, Child, very sure, I know most of his Friends and Relations. One
thing I had almost forgot; if his Servant should be rude, take no notice on it;
the fellow will rather speak nonsense than be silent; and I suppose his Master
only keeps him for his diversion.


Bet. E^gad, that Character has almost made me in love with him; I admire a
talkative gabling fellow; it is a sign of wit, and only speaks his Judgment not
yet ripe enough to bound it.


De. Well, Madam, I hope you have considered the nature of this Service: Heaven
forgive me, I Am forced to make many a sweet Lie for you.


Luc. My gratitude prompts my memory; accept, Madam, of this small Compliment,
and believe me a friend not so able as willing to serve you.


De. Truly, Madam, I always had a good opinion of you, and am glad to find I
have not deceived my self -- you remember the Bond of a thousand pounds.


Luc. Yes, Madam, and own my self obliged to pay a greater Sum.


De. O, dear Madam, I Am overwhelmed with your Bounty; would to heaven it were
in my power to prefer you to a greater Fortune; your Soul speaks you made for
great things -- I Have screwed her finely up if he has any Estate: these two
thousand pounds are good; if not, I Am in nothing poorer than I was -- Well,
Madam, shall I admit the Gentleman? he waits in the next Room.


[Exit. Luc. If you please, Madam.


Bet. I swear, Madam, you look charmingly to day.


Luc. I ought to pipe with art; for if the fool can be whistl'd into the Net, I
get a weighty draught -- but stay, he comes.


Re-enter Decoy, with Freelove and Willie. De. Swear you have often seen her;
and, above all, urge her to a speedy marriage; delays are dangerous; and she is
courted at this very time by a Rich Knight and two young Citizens of great
Credit -- Madam, this Worthy Gentleman, a friend of mine, has long adored you
in secret, and my happy Stars having made me of your acquaintance; I Am bold to
introduce him into the Temple, where he may worship his Goddess openly, and
receive a reward suitable to his Zeal.


Luc. The Gentleman, no doubt, knows better where to bestow his Services; and
his Merit may prefer him to the possession of a greater Beauty, and a larger
Fortune.


Will. Be me Saul the Woman speaks very bonnily.


Free. My ambition never taught me to aspi^e to a happiness beyond Lucinda's
favor: I Have long loved, but had not the liberty of Complaint allowed me; and
now I Have got it, methinks I could spend an age at her seet, and here for ever
fix my self; gaze on that fatal beauty that has so long banished peace from my
Soul, and almost ^orc'd me to despair.


Luc. Pray Sir rise.


D^. That Is well; the young Gentleman plays his part to my wish; there is a
pleasure in dissimulation, not to be changed for that dull peace of mind which
honesty and plain-dealing bestow upon their bewitched Votaries.


Luc. This is not the first time I presume you have kneeled: Love e're now has
been your Religion, and practice more than innate Zeal has taught you how to
pray with so much ease.


Will. A goad I believe the Lass is a Saint.


Free. No, Madam, false fires cannot be of use; and if I should attempt to act
the hypocrite, your Eyes would teach me how to bow.


Will. Deel be fain o me gin thea Englis Women would not mauk au maun's mouth
water at them, aun Go^d sin me new Master is come au Sweethearting tea the
Lady; I think Willie soud woo her Gentlewoman.


[Looks wistly upon Betty. Luc. And could you become a Convert? Renounce those
principles which allowed you so much liberty, and confine your self to the
precise rules of marriage.


De. Sir, I beg your pardon -- [ Whispers Lucy. Remember, Madam, he may by
accident come to a true knowledge of your circumstances; when he begins to
bite, draw with courage to secure him on the hook, for I know he will leap at the
gilded bait, when first it offers it self -- Adieu sweet Sir -- Pray, Madam, be
kind to the Gentleman.


[Exit. Will. The deel ride up throw her aun down throw her, aun a
haw-thornbuss at his tail, aun thaun she needs nea Physic. -- Goad I can niver
endure thea aulwives they look sua like wutches, aun she waur i my Kintrey she
waud be burnt in a taurbaurrel presently.


Free. Would I renounce such principles, Madam? by heaven all the pleasures of
my life, whatever I doated upon; and if a darling Sin were riveted in my heart,
with Joy I Would tear the loathsome thing from thence; dash it from me, and abandon
all for the blessing of your Love, that would give a happiness, and in it self
contain more bliss than all the beggared earth could give besides.


Will. Hear ye me, Jo: how waud ye like me for yer good man? I hea a brau
Estate in Scotland.


Bet. Like you?


Will. Ay, that is, lie we me au yer days; warm me bed in au caul Winterneight,
aun let me get bairns upon ye.


Bet. Is that your way of Courtship in Scotland?


[Kisses her rudely. Will. Ay, aun this way tea be me Saul -- we gang red wood
upon bonny Lasses. (...)


Will. Wuns thauts the way of your Englis Women, she is ready to cry out, whun
any body is near, haun her baut gin she waur at the bauck of au dike whaur deel
au ean sees her, she waud be aus caum as au laum, and let a laud kiss his weam
fou.


Bet. But pray thee speak English, else it is impossible to comprehend thy
meaning.


Will. Goad aun I had ye au mile frea au house ye waud understaun me meaning
for au thaut.


Luc. Could you sit, and with a calm brow observe the dear Companions of your
past liberty roving after new Loves? would you not flutter in your Cage and
wish for freedom; envy those who ranged through open air, and curse the hour
that fooled you into prison?


Free. No, Madam, I Would view securely men in Tempests tossed, pity the weary and
misguided Travelers; and when I saw them tracing Danger's road, in search of
Joys that vanish as soon as got, I Would shrink up in silent gladness, and bless my
kinder stars that gave me wealth and happiness at home; I Would bid them be wise,
and learn to love from me; run quick for safety to some constant Fair, whose
charms give ease from all their labors past.


Will. Now deel tauke me gin me Master does na woo aus bonnily aus I waud do
me sell, only he forgets tea kiss her -- Hear ye, Sir, tauke her in yer arms
this way, aun be me saul shoe wull grow sua tame, ye may lead her tea the Kirk
in au string, she wull gaung wood toe be mairied upon ye.


[K^ss^s Betty. Free. Sirrah -- Madam, I hope you will pardon this rudeness.


Luc. I love to see the fellow in that antic garb; it puts me in mind of the
old World, when Clothes were used for Necessity, not Orn^ment.


Will. Whaun I was in me ain Kintrey, Maudam, the Minister's Wife said I waus
the bonniest Laud in au her good man's parish.


[Struts and walks a tip^oe. Luc. Did she? -- I love the humors of strangers.


Will. Maudam, aun yea hea au mein tea marry me instead o me master, be me
saul I wull tauke ye presently, I waud na let a bonny Lass rin wood for waunt o
me.


Free. This, Madam, is intolerable Impudence -- to your distance, Sirrah.


Will. Ay Sir, whaut's the matter we ye now? ye look like a Minister whun he
has newly lost his Baunifice.


Luc. Have you got a Mistress, Willie, since you came to England?


Will. Nau, Madam; baut I hea gotten ean here aun she aun I caun agree, we may
come tea confirm the bargain between a pair o blankets.


Bet. And what would you think of making the bargain there, and confirming on it
afterward? I Have a Maidenhead to dispose of, I assure ye.


Will. Wau thaun we sall save the expenses o'Kirk-fees, aun make the bar gaun
like our for-bearers; I sall gang in to ye aun be acquainted we ye and su^
forth, we cau thaut only playing a tune without a prelude.


Bet. Ay, but Willie, it is necessary the Church should give us liberty to play,
else we may come to pay too dear for our Music.


Free. You see, Madam, they have come already to Articles; I can propose none,
but I Have a heart at your service, I give it, never to be recalled; for though
your powerful Charms forced me to make the gift, yet my consent soon followed;
my Judgment confirmed it, and it will stand good in law.


Luc. I Am afraid, though it were sealed and delivered in the Church, you would
find some corner to sculk in, and pretend to other terms; swear the delivery
was conditional, and you gave it with a prospect of possessing another to
supply the want of your own -- but however, my modesty bounds my words, yet I Am
willing my Eyes should express my thoughts, and let you know your addresses are
-- not -- unacceptable.


Free. I Have no way left to express my Joy; Silence speaks my Soul o'recharg'd
with sudden happiness; and he who loves like me, must court in dumb show; may
all your hours be a continued scene of gladness, like that which reigns at my
heart; and may each minute of your life produce new Joys, that when you have
run through all the pleasures this world can beflow, death may steal upon you
like a gentle friend, that comes to want you to a better shore -- but rather
than be troublesome to her I love, I choose to inflict a short banishment upon
my self, though I go with all the pains of an absent Lover -- Madam, your humble
Servant.


[Exit. Will. Aun whaut say ye tea me before I gaung away?


Bet. Why nothing, follow your Master.


Will. Aun my Master be in au great haist, he may stay au we bitt. Aun he aun
his Lass hea made a bargain sua his nau Wulle too.


Bet. Come, pray thee be gone, thou art troublesome.


Will. Be goad aun ye sall ^ee my bauckside presently, troublesome quo; thau't
aun Englis Woman's breeding aun he haunget till her -- [ to Lucy. Madam, fair
ye weil, aun ye hea any thing tea say tea me, ye wull see me whun I come back
again.


[Exit. muttering. Bet. Well, Madam, our affairs have put on a handsome face to
day; Fortune begins to smooth her brow, and grace us with her smiles -- it is a
lusty handsome Gentleman.


Luc. The present prospect shows a long train of coming Joys; Heaven begins to
smile upon me, since I abandoned my old sin of doting; and if I succeed in
this innocent cheat, I shall never tempt its goodness more.


None ere grew virtuous but by just degrees,
Nor traced the road to happiness but with ease.
Custom a second nature often has proved;
And it is with labor and regret we are moved,
To quit those darling pleasures once we loved.
[Exeunt. SCENE II.
Sir Anthony's House.
Enter Sir Anthony Chollerick and Dick. Sir Anth. HAve a minute's patience; I
say, Neighbor, all is not lost that is in hazard, as the saying is.


Dick. Ay, ay, Sir-father says very well; I had a Latin Proverb to the same
purpose, but by Seneca I Have forgot it.


Choll. Well, well; I Have done, I Have done; but that impudent young Jilt -- but
I Have done. I Will say no more.


Sir Anth. Your Housekeeper will set all to-rights again; she shall guard them
to night, and prepare things necessary for this great occasion, that Melintha
may be married like the Daughter of Sir Anthony Addle; your Niece shall lie in
my house too, and the morrow's Sun shall see an alliance confirmed between our
Families, which nothing less than death shall dissolve.


Dick. But uds so, I forgot to tell you how the Rogue kicked me before my
Mistress, and would have done the same again in the Walks, had I not been
obliged to my heels that brought me off unseen.


Choll. How -- O Lord! that Rogue, I profess, will make me mad.


Dick. Make him mad, Sir father? by Venus he is mad already.


Sir Anth. That was a --


Choll. Ay, was it not? -- a Villain -- I knew he would be graceless; why some
months ago I found him in his Closet a writing of a Play; well, he is a Rogue, a
Dog, a Scoundrel, a Rake, and will dye a Beggar -- but no more on it; only I Am
sure my Brother Sir Thomas Chollerick never begot this limb of Satan.


Sir Anth. But as I was saying, that was a --


Choll. Ay, that is certain, he will never escape the Gallows; I Have known that
young -- I Will say no more -- I profess I Have known the Rake come home at night
with as many Filders, Hautboys, Starving Poets, and red-fac'd Bullies -- Why
the Rascal has come home with as many empty bellies at his back, as his
Majesty's Huntsmen with all his Dogs after him; and then a Surloin of Beef, or
a Cold pie -- why 'twas no more amongst them than a pennyworth of Cheese to a
lusty Porter; but I Will make him a --


Sir Anth. Sincerely speaking, I begin to show my weakness, my blood will rise,
and I say your Nephew --


Choll. My Nephew's a Rogue, let him be damned for an unlucky -- he tempts me
to forget my self; and I profess I Am afraid I said too much; did I swear, or
not? ha!


Dick. No, no; but by Bacchus --


Choll. No matter, no matter, the Rogue would provoke a Saint to wrath; but
I Will be revenged, I will; he shall not o're-rule me, a --


Sir Anth. I say your Nephew shall be punished by Law; such affronts as these
derogate from the honor of my house; and it is fitting a --


Choll. And had the Impudence to serve him so beneath my roof: but no more
on it, the Knave shall pay dear for all.


Sir Anth. Sincerely speaking, Neighbor Chollerick. I think you are a Madman,
and I ought to have the liberty of Speech allowed me in my own house.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father, and in your own Cause too.


Choll. Cause, as the Young man says? why look ye now, the Rogue has given me
cause to turn him loose into the World, and I Will do'^ I warrant ye.


Sir Anth. Ingenuously I Am incensed, I can hold no longer; I say, Neighbor,
hear me, or turn out of my^house; I Am resolved to be master of my own family.


Choll. You say right, I Have done, I Have done.


Sir Anth. Well then, I say, a Justice of the Peace shall take Cognizance of
this affair -- but here comes your House^ keeper.


Enter Decoy. Madam, having taken --

Choll. Why look ye, do you see, we have sent for you to --


Sir Anth. Body of me, the man will never let me speak -- having, Madam, taken
--


Dick. Uds so, say on Sir-father.


Sir Anth. Why sincerely I shall never begin at this rate; having, Madam, taken
into our Consideration the extravagant inclinations of our Children, and those
who respectively depend on us, and maturely considered the sad Consequences
that may attend such courses; and that some who have never shown themselves
affectionate to our Government, signalized themselves yesterday in seducing the
hearts of our Daughters: It is the will and pleasure therefore of your Master,
that by virtue of the authority now given and reposed in you.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father speaks like a Judge.


Sir Anth. For the future prevent all such unlawful courses and methods, that
no Correspondence may be held between them hereafter; for we are firmly
resolved by stratagems and new politics to keep these cunning Gentlemen from
the possession of these Lands to which they aspire.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father, that was a thundering Speech; sure the Rogues will
never have the Impudence to make any more addresses -- my Sisters will never
accept of them.


Choll. Look ye do you see, without further ceremony stay here all night, and
look to the young women; my Neice is already here, and to morrow shall be
married; in the mean time it is fitting we should provide Counsel; but let that
be your task; and mine, to procure License.


Dick. By Ovid here is fine work, we shall all go over head and ears in
Matrimony.


De. Sir, I Will obey your Orders punctually; and to save you the expenses of
Coach-hire, I know of a Lawyer, who will wait upon you when called, and do the
business for a Glass of Wine, without the help of a Fee to sweeten it: I Am
acquainted too with a Nonconformist Parson, who has a wonderful dexterity in
joining hands and hearts.


Choll. That Is good, that is good; be sure you speak to them.


Sir Anth. Well, Neighbor, let us go, every thing shall be in readiness; I Will
have a new Suit too, that I may grace the Nuptials with my gaiety; they shall
go no more to the Walks.


Dick. In statu quo prius you mean Sir-father; for if I live, they shall not all
carry their Maidenheads with them; if they do --


Sir Anth. Body of me, the boy grows wanton -- but it is no matter, a month or
so will tame him; I was young my self, and can remember these things still --
Dick come along Dick.


Choll. Good b'ye, I Will see you again in an hours time.


[Ex^unt. Manet Decoy. De. So this has happened to my wish now the Ladies are
committed to my charge; and since it is mine to provide Counsel, it is in my
power to advance all their Joys: let me dye it is a sweet adventure, and I Am
resolved to build my fortune so strongly (for that will make them liberal) upon
the necessities of the young people, that the frowns of the old can never shake
me; it is a good foundation, ay, and here come materials fit for the Structure.


Enter Melintha, Flora, and Timandra. Oh, Ladies! here have been strange
doings; Sir Anthony and Mr. Chollerick are acquainted with all that passed
yesternight in Lincoln's Inn; the young Philosopher has played the Conjurer, and
infor'd your enemies of all your designs.

Mel No, he turned spy it seems, but the old man will soon forget it.


De. Ay, but Madam, you're condemned, and you too Madam; to morrow's marked out
for Execution-day, and I Am your Jailer by special orders from the higher powers
-- there is no way left to escape.


Flo. And I Am in prison, but not condemned I hope.


Tim. And pray thee, Decoy, will thou not admit of Bail.


De. O dear Madam, by no means, in cases of High Treason there is no such thing
after Judgment given.


Flo. Sure thou have not so much of cruelty in thy Nature; to wink at small
faults, speaks thee tenderhearted; a quality inherent to woman.


De. Self-preservation bars the thoughts of mercy; and if the Prisoners escape,
the Keeper may shift for himself, or stay for certain punishment.


Flo. I Am sorry my Judgment and Experience did not sooner inform me of my Error
-- What do you think of this, Madam? I hope 'twill buy off my Chains, if it do
not purchase Freedom.


[Gives Money. De. Truly, Madam, your generosity staggers my strongest
resolutions.


Flo. Her zeal for my Father's arbitrary Government begins to cool, Sister; ply
her with such another argument as mine, and she will throw off all Obedience, and
become a rebel like our selves, and fly (though not directly) in the face of all
Authority.


Mell. If this can tempt her, She Is of our party.


[Gives Money. Tim. And this shall help to confirm the Convert in her new
tenets, that obedience is an effect of Interest, and it is madness to continue
allegiance when that tie is broke, or better secured with the Enemy.


[Gives Money. De. As I live, fair Ladies, you have overcome me, you have Justice
on your side; it is impossible to raise any objections against such powerful
arguments -- Who Is this?


Enter Willie. Will. Be my Saul this is the aul Jaude thaut mumped me new
Master out o his Siller -- Maudaum, I hea brought ye an Letter frea Sir John
-- me bonny Lasses how do you do, yer Sweethearts aur stauning sighing in the
causy, aun look like sua money clipped sheep; a goad I believe they wull gang
dauft for want o ye.


[Decoy takes the Letter and reads. De. Run Ladies into the other room, I Am but
Deputy-Governess, and it is not safe to meet with your Lovers, unless I were
assured of my Superior's continued absence.


Flo. Well, Madam, remember the weight of our past arguments, and let no new
accident divert your resolution.


[Ex^unt. De. [Reads the letter again] -- Tell the Gentlemen their humble
Servant Decoy waits to receive them with all humility.


Will. Ay, ay, baut ye soud nea hea sent awau the women thaun, for be me saul
they wunnau gaung out o the house till the be as sure o them aus me faither was
o me mither that night Wulle was begotten upon her.


[Exit. De. Now for another Cast of my Art; for that Match-maker knows not her
own trade, who fails at any time to make them pay for their hopes; if we are
not courted with as many Guineas as their Mistresses with Oaths, we manage
amiss, and lose our own fortunes, because we have too much of modesty --
Gentlement, I Am your humble Servant.


Enter Sir John, Captain, Ned, and Willie. Sir John. I hope, Madam, you know
our business.


Will. Goad aun thaut she does, for I tellt her o't.


De. Alas, Sir, I know too much; for my want of power to serve you in this
affair brings my grief.


Sir John. You jest, Madam; sure it is impossible you should be insensible of
our Common Calamity.


De. O Lord, Sir! I Am a sharer in all your Fortunes, and would relieve you from
pain with all my heart; but --


Ned. You Would run no hazard to serve your friends -- Damn her, she must be
bribed, she is like a new Coach-wheel, often greased before she can run smooth.


Sir. Jo. Cannot this persuade?


[All give. Capt. Madam, accept of this small Complement.


N^d. And I humbly offer these few Yellow-boys to procure your assistance.


Will. Wa Sirs, wa Sirs: are ye reed wood tea gea awau yer siller -- wa goad
the Lasses aur na saunted, ye may get them for the half of this trouble.


De. I protest sincerely, Gentlemen, I know not what to say to ye -- but in
spite of danger, you shall once more be happy by my means -- I Will lead the way.


Capt. By our Money he would have said.


[They go off. Will. Wuns cau ye this wooing Alamode! this is an Englis trick
indeed, a maun mun gee siller for an sight o his Sweetheart, aus we do in
Scotlaun tea see au dancing Mere, or au Eape playing on the Bagpipes.


[Goes off. [The flat Scene opens, and discovers Sir John, Captain, Ned,
Willie, Timandra, Melintha, Flora, and Decoy: The Captain and Flora advance,
and Wily after them.] Capt. All danger ought to be despised when Love has any
share in the action; the prize before us should give Courage, and spur us on to
Victory.


Flo. Why you're at your old similies again, Captain, action, prize, and
victory; sure you imagine to your self a formal siege when you attack a Lady; I
hope you don't muster your Company in the Tavern, and ^et the Bottles in
battle-array instead of men.


Will. Be me S^ul he threw ^an o thea men at my head hauf au yeir seen.


Capt. I confess, Madam, a Lady is a strange Enemy; for a Soldier finds it
often more difficult to get access to her Soul, than to throw in provisions to
a Town besieged.


[Here the Ladies and Gentlemen advance. Will. A goad my Master aunt like your
Ladyship wull storm a Fort we any laud in au Lonon aun ye wull gee him a
Commission.


Capt. Sirrah -- ha, who is this, Madam?


[ Chollerick holding the Door. Choll. Thieves! Thieves! Thieves!


Flo. Farewell, Captain; remember, a Town once lost has been regained.


[ Flora goes off, and the other Ladies in haste. Capt. How, Sir! -- draws --


Choll. Murder! Murder! Murder!


Will. O Lord, I Am murdered auready; whaut a deel brought me in tea this
unlucky house aun (...) sua now?


Enter Sir Anthony and Sevant^ with long Staffs, and Dick with his Sword drawn
behind them, and walking backwards. Sir Anth. Body of me, I say, secure the
Gentlemen.


Dick. Uds so, knock 'em down; by Jupiter we shall all be murdered.


Will. Be me saul I Am a dead man; I wull hide me sell beneath this Table.


Sir Jo. Come, let us force a p^ssage to our selves.


Capt. With all my heart.


[They fight, and the Servants give way on each side. Ned. And mine.


[Exeunt. Choll. Ned, Ned, Good boy, thou will not murder thy Uncle -- O Lord!


Sir Anth. I Am dead.


Dick. By Vulcan so am I -- knock 'em down, I say knock 'em down; Sirfather
shall keep ye all from harm.


Choll. Knock 'em down -- why look ye now do you see, they are all gone. Ah that
Rogue my Nephew shall be hanged -- a dog, a --


Dick. Uds so Sir-father, I scowr'd 'em off, Rogues, Pimps, Panders, and
Scoundrels; by Aristotle I Have frighted them; this Sword did execution; but I Will
put it up, because my Uncle that is to be, is here.


Will. Be me Saul I waud I waur in me ain Kintrey again, Englaun soud niver hea
the honor of me presence aun they waud mauke a King of me.


Sir Anth. Oh, oh, I faint, help me forwards; I Will lean upon this Table, and
recover breath.


[As he goes to rest upon it, Dick o'returns it. Choll. Look ye now, do you see;
whow have we got here? another Rogue! the house is full of them, would I were
fairly out on it.


Will. Gaung awau thaun, whau au deel hauds, au grip o'ye -- agoad I believe me
Master has left me here to be hangett.


[Takes hold of Willie. Dick. Stay, stay, let me alone with him; this is Sinon
that was to open the wooden-horse, and let out all the Grecians.


Will. Be me Saul the Englis-men will hea na mercy on me, I fin thaut; baut aun
I could get safe to the door, they soud na ou lay saut I me arse the night
again.


[Offers to run, and Dick stops him. Dick Uds so, not so fast, you shall leave
your head behind ye.


Sir Anth. Body of me, the boy Dick is bloodily disposed.


Will. Be goad sein na better may be, I wull fight for my head furst -- I Will
gaur ye au loap like Dinmonts -- I wull let ye ken whaut it is tea anger a
Scotlaun maun.


Dick. O Lord! O Lord! I Am murdered.


Sir Anth. And so are all of us.


Choll. Oh, oh, oh.


Will. The muckle deel mauke oar ye waud na be at rest till I dous'd yer
doublets for ye; baut now I hea learnt ye mainers we this bred Sword, I Will gang
and seek my new Master.


[ Exit. Singing Old Sir Simon, etc. Dick. Uds so, Sir-father, this was a
damned bloody Dog.


Choll. Look ye now, I see no heads he has left behind him but our three
Calves-heads.


Sir Anth. No matter, it is a mercy he has left those: but where is Madam Decoy,
Body of me? Alderman Chollerick, I say your Housekeeper is naught, and has
betrayed her Trust.


Enter Decoy in a seeming amazement. Choll. Ay, ay, here she is; look ye now,
look ye now, you was brought here to a fine purpose; you was, a very fine
purpose; but it is no matter -- I Will be revenged one day or other.


De. Heaven knows Sir I knew nothing of the matter till just now I met the lewd
fellows in the streets: I was at Mr. Delay the Lawyer, and Mr. Sigher's the
Nonconformist -- God knows I did it purely for the best, and stole out on foot
to save expenses.


[W^eps. Sir Anth. Sincerely speaking, I believe the Woman is innocent.


Dick. By Mercury I believe so too.


Choll. I Have done then, Madam: look ye, look ye to your charge: Farewell, for
I Have not yet dispatched the business of this day.


[Exit. Sir Anth. Come along, Dick; come along.


The fighting Fool gets Scars; but he that is wise
Preserves his Skin, and from known Danger flies:
Honor's an empty Sound, admired by those
Who have no Brains, or no Estate to lose.
While those by Fortune blessed, look-wisely on,
And see this airy Mistress lost or won;
But without Danger to be got by none.
Finis Actus Quarti.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Lucy's Lodgings.
Enter Decoy, Sola. De. WIth difficulty I Have got out of doors, but the old
Lover and the young have relieved me from my post; my three principal Lovers
are uneasy on both sides, and from the Gentlemen I Have received fifty Guineas
this morning to complete their cure; nor have I forgot to squeeze the young
Ladies, even to their very Jewels; I can expect no more than I Have already got
by both parties; for should I now baulk them in this Intrigue, they would never
trust me again: I Have worn them almost threadbare, and it is time to lay them
aside; I Will give therefore the finishing stroke to this plot, hitherto so well
managed, and show my self honest, because I can find no profit by a longer
delay. As for Mr. Freelove's marriage with Lucy, it is easy, their mutual fears
will force them to a speedy obedience, and I Will enjoin an immediate conjunction
between them. Mum, here he comes; I Am glad I have his Bond and hers; it is a
large Fee for a She-Counsel -- Sir, your humble Servant.


Enter Freelove and Willie. Free. I Have punctually obeyed those Orders you sent
me this morning; every thing is in readiness, and I wish the young Lady may --


De. O Lord Sir, doubt it not, I Have dived into her inmost thoughts; but the
business must be speedily dispatched, for her friends begin to pry into it.


Will. Begoad Sir I wull feght we au her freins, and gar 'em gee conseut, wa I
clawed off three Englis-men yesterday.


[ Whispers Lucy. Enter Lucy and Betty. De. Sir, I beg your pardon, the Lady
enters -- Madam, for your own sake embrace this opportunity which now offers it
self; his friends are advertised of his design, and study to break off the
Match -- Now I Have brought ye once more together, I know ye both love, and it
were a sin to part ye, it is hard to please every body, and I Would have you join
for ever, lest you meet no more.


Will. Ay do sua my bairns, agoad I wull dance at yer breidall.


Free. Madam, yesterday you taught me to hope; to day brings new alarms, and an
hours delay may bring me years of pain.


Will. Wuns I say tauke him, tauke him, Madam, he will set yer Watermill au
gaunging.


De. Pray, Madam, consider the Gentleman's violent Love, that he hunts not for
a Fortune; and that he prefers your Esteem to his Interest.


Will. Haud yer chau^ts together in au mischanter to ye, aun let the Lauss
answer for her sell; agoad I waurran, she knes whaut's good for her.


Bet. Do, Madam; pity the Gentleman; I Will swear it is a shame to be so hard
hearted.


Will. Be me Saul thea women hea na mair power cur their tongues than they hea
our their tails, aun thauts no muckle.


Luc. I own I Am powerfully assaulted, and modesty only detains me from saying I
-- Love.


Will. Now be me Saul she says very weill.


Free. Then thus I render thanks for the mighty blessing; my heart scorns its
narrow bounds, and seeks for greater Joys than e're it knew -- let me kiss this
fair hand, and in that (not words) express my transports.


Will. Hout, hout, Sir, kiss her bonny mouth, whaut a deel wull she be the
better of yer kindness aun ye do na mair nor thaut till her.


De. It Is rarely acted, they are at no small pains to che^t one another; and
both of them dissemble with as much pleasure, as a lusty Friar would eat a fat
Capon after a tedious Lent -- Well, Madam, a thousand blessings attend you;
believe me, I could weep for gladness to see you thus far on the way to a
happi^^r state of life -- Complete the Gentleman's Joys, for it is a Sin that
two such loving hearts should be so long divided.


Free. Speak, Madam, speak; he that like me is blessed only by halves in that
uncertain state, finds certain pains; the present pleasure's lost in hopes of
more, and fears of future events rack the Soul.


De. Sure Mad^m your heart yields.


Berty. Come, Madam, lay aside that confounded modesty invented by old decayed
Beauties to torment the young and bar 'em of those pleasures of which their
envious age permitted them not to be sharers -- the Gentleman's addresses are
very honorable.


Will. Ay, ay, Sir, tauke her silence for a grant, come awau tea the K^^k we
her, she wull gaung we good wull I'se waurran her.


Luc. I can be no longer obstinate, I Will yield a blind obedience, and ^ye my
self for ever Freeloves.


Will. Goad aun fair fau her for her kindness aun en sua.


Free. Nay, now my Joys are no more to be expressed.


Will. Nau deel be fain of me gin our lairds Sister whir I waus born in
Scotlaun waud said sua mickle tea au young maun aun she soud never be maired in
her days. Baut a goad for au that she can play in the dark we young meast
Chaplain, au caunting young loun as is in au the kirk again.


De. Truly, Madam, I can hold no longer, excess of Joy brings forth my tears:
pray heavens bless you, you are a lovely couple as ever I put together in my
life.


Will. Whaut au deel ails the auld wife now, kens any body that?


Dec. Well, well, get ye in together, Betty knows where the Parson lives; my
business calls me hence, for this day is Love's Jubilee, and the little Boy is
merry: but come let me first see you into the other Room.


Luc. I Will obey, Madam -- I am made for ever.


[Exeunt with Decoy. Will. Run laus will ye rin aun get the Minister tea mairy
me Master, aun get anither to mairy me.


Bet. Well, well; Willie, I Will think upon it.


[Exit. Will. Do sua me Jo -- now Ise gaung in, aun wait upon me master, whau
kens baut I may get the leg of a Capon tea me wauden dinner, shame fa me gin I
hea-na mickle need o't, for I fin a civil war i me guts* aun my puddings are
gaunging tea eat an aunother.


SCENE II.
Sir Anthony's House.
Enter Sir Anthony, Dick and Chollerick. Sir Anth. So boy, look brisk, body of
me, it is a handsome Lad.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father, I Will make ye a Grandfather in nine Months.


Choll. Look ye, friend, that part is mine, I was born before you, was I not?


Dick. By Jupiter I hope ye would not lie with my Wife.


Choll. That Is right, that is right, I invited some of my Friends to be merry
with us to night.


Sir Anth. And I have invited Mr. Caperer the Dancing master, and Chorus the
Musick-master, the poor Rogues owe me some money, and I Am resolved they shall
dance and sing it out this night; charges upon such occasions are inevitable --
have you invited your Nephew?


Choll. A Rogue, a Villain, I Will see him hang first; invite him! why look ye
now, do you see; --


Sir Anth. I say, Neighbor, abandon your wrath, let not your passion banish
Reason, I am not desirous of the young man's Company.


Choll. That Is true, that is true, I forget my self.


Dick. Uds so, I think you have always a damnable memory.


Enter Madam Decoy. Sir Anth. Call my Daughters and Mr. Chollerick's Niece, are
the Lawyers come? is the Parson ready, and every thing in order?


De. Sir I Have forgot nothing.


Choll. Call them in.


De. Yes, Sir.


[Exit. Dick. Uds so, you might have put on a new suit, Uncle; that is, to be
for a new wise.


Sir Anth. Body of me, that is true, it is an undecent garb for a Bridegroom.


Choll. That Is nothing: look ye, I love my money, and therefore would not
disburse it for trifles; I Will give my Wife a Complement of five hundred
broad-pieces in an imbroidred purse; your vain Coxcombs, who spend all on
Plays, Paints, Persumes, and long Wiggs, have no such gifts to bestow; they
bring a pair of laced breeches to the beds-side, but not one farthing in 'em.


Enter Timand^a, Flora, Melintha and Decoy. De. Ladies, be of good courage,
I Have a plot will save you all, though on the brink of ruin.

EXIT.
Sir Anth. Come, Daughter, let me see no signs of Sorrow in your face, I have
provided for you a wealthy husband -- Dick, bear up to the young Lady.


Choll. Look, do you see, young woman? look kindly upon him, he is a handsome
youth; do it, or expect my immediate displeasure; turn out of doors, run mad for
want, and go to Bedlam at last for shelter, you shall, you -- but I Would almost
forgot my self again, temptation is a dangerous thing, and all men are wise
till they have occasion to show their parts.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father I Will speak to her -- Madam, you and I are like to be
good friends ere to morrow morning; by Jupiter if I had you -- I know where I
would be.


Tim. At the University again it may be, Sir.


Dick. The University! No, by Aristotle I Am for no such Journeys, I Will teach
you Natural Philosophy here in London. -- Uds so, but Marriage is a damned
thing, that allows me but one Scholar; my Sir-father (when he was a young man)
had forty, I warrant him.


Enter Sir John Winmore, Capt. Bellair, as Lawyers; Ned Chollerick like a
Noncon-Parson, and Decoy.


Sir John. We are now fairly in, Madam, and upon you we rely for a fairer Exit.


Capt. I hope the old Gentlemen know us not in our new Shapes.


De. Leave all to my management, and the event shall answer your wishes.


Flo. It Is he, Mars, appears in Masquerade, and shines throughout musty black.


Sir Anth. Gentlemen, you're welcome.


De. Sir, I Have brought two Counselors.


Choll. Very well, very well, I can read Noverint universi in their foreh^ads
at this distance -- are the Papers ready?


Capt. Yes, Sir -- are you ready, Madam?


[to Flora aside. Flo. Before you make a good Council.


Sir Jo. Am I happy, Madam? or doomed to misery? I am a bad Lawyer when my Eyes
must plead my Cause, and I Am obliged without Arguments to refer all to my Judge?


Tim. The adverse-party have authority on their fide, which may be much to
their advantage.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father, it is a Jolly young Parson: shall --


Sir Anth. Presently boy thou shall be a married man.


Dick. By Ovid, Sir-father, I begin to grow proud on it, my head stands just now
as stiff as if the marks of honor already pressed my brow. M^rriage is a
notable trick, that in a minute, of a raw boy makes a grave solid lump of a man.


Ned. Is the young Divine, or the old Merchant, the happy Lover? you see love
has transformed me into a new man; I run the risque of Church-censure too in
pretending to marriages without Orders; but I hope that in this Cloak (the
cover of many infirmities) 'twill be easy to escape the inquisition.


Mel. Yes, if I am Sinner enough to digest a hypocrite, and take up with a me^r
show of S^nctity and Religion.


Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, a Gentleman below-stairs waits for ye.


[Exit. Dick. By Vulcan that is some University-acquaintance or other, I Will
bring him up, and show him how happy I am to be in a few minutes.


[Exit. Sir Anth. Now, Gentlemen, let us see the papers -- Mr. Sigher, pray sit
down a little, for the Law must be still before the Gospel -- what is this? read
the Contents.


Choll. Ay, ay, read the Continents.


Sir Jo. This is, Sir, a Settlement of four hundred per annum upon your eldest
lawful begotten Son Richard Addle, out of that Estate lying in the Country of
Nullibi, in --


Sir Anth. Pray read it, Sir, word by word.


Sir Jo. Faith, Sir, I Am in haste, business calls me speedily hence, and I
humbly beg your excuse, I shall warrant it right -- pox on the Law, I Am wearied
on it already.


Choll. Very good; no matter; and what is this large Scroll?


Sir Jo. The honorable Sir Anthony Addle bestows upon his Daughter eight
thousand Pounds to be paid the first of January next ensuing.


Choll. A long term, the first of January next ensuing! Why look ye do you see,
the Interest of the money at Six per Cent. comes to -- ay, let me see, comes to
-- but no matter, January next, why it is a whole year to'r.


Sir Anth. Body of me, the Man is in a passion before all these Witnesses: I say
Neighbor Chollerick you love not my Daughter.


Flo. No faith, Sir; but your money sets his heart on fire.


Choll. Well, well, I Have done -- and what have we got here?


Capt. This, Sir, contains --


Choll. What Sir? let me see what does it contain.


[takes the parchement. Capt. Now, Madam, quick relief, or we are all undone.


De. Yes, Sir, it is a coming.


[Stamps with her foot. Enter Servant hastily. Ser. Oh, oh, I Am frighted out of
my Senses, your Son, Sir --


Sir Anth. Ay, Body of me, that is true; where is the young Man?


Ser. O Lord, Sir, Arrested, the Bailiffs have got him, it is an Action of Ten
thousand pounds: O, Sir, he is almost dead with fear, and e're now he is either
in the Spunging-house, or the Counter.


Choll. Look ye now, look ye now, do you se^, he has played some Rogue's trick,
and now he is caught.


Sir Jo. This works rarely.


Capt. Thank ye, Madam.


Sir Anth. I say, Neighbor, you are -- but no matter -- a Rogue's trick!


Choll. Well, well, I Have done; no more on it; let us run and Ba^l him.


Sir Anth. By all means, 'twas well moved; sincerely 'twas an unlucky accident.


De. Stop 'em, stop 'em; now is your time to have the Papers subscribed.


Capt. Stay, Gentlemen, stay; first put your Hands and Seals to these Papers;
you know we have much business, and cannot wait your return.


Choll. That Is right, one thing should be done before another: which is mine?


Capt. This, Sir.


Sir Jo. Both these are yours.


Sir Anth. Now all is done, let us run, Neighbor, for my Son's relief: the
delivery of the Papers is forgot; but no matter, we'll do it when we come back.


[Exeunt hastily Sir Anthony and Chollerick. De. Now, Gentlemen, play your game
well; the Stakes lie ready before ye, and here are no old Bullies to sweep the
Table.


Sir Jo. Well, Ladies, you see the Common danger (for such I hope you will own
it) our good Fortune has allowed this Critical minute for us all: which, if
well employed, brings a continued happiness -- we have been good Counselors too.


Ned. Now, Revenge, Love, and Liberty call aloud: sure such powerful music
must affect the heart, and set the soul afloat.


Mel. Come, Gentlemen, Ceremonies are now dangerous, because tedious; I Am
fairly resolved to go with ye.


Tim. And I.


[They run off, Mel. Tim. Sir John and Ned, Decoy following. Capt. You Will stay
behind I suppose, Madam?


Flo. Why faith, Captain, I doubt whether I shall or not.


Capt. If you do, Madam, then I must sleep a Batchellor to night.


Flo. No, hang it, that is a dull comfortless life; I Will rather try the Fool's
Paradise, and for once be married.


Capt. That Is well thought of; the Gentleman in Black, I suppose, has conjured
Sir John already half way into the Circle; let us succeed, and get the second
or third cast of his Office.


[Exeunt hastily. Enter Sir Anth. Choll. and Dick. Sir Anth. Body of me, the
Rogues shall be severely punished; why, they had not a Writ against the
Young Man.


Dick. By Ovid I Am sick, the Rogues have frighted me so, I shall not be able to
show my self a man to night again.


Choll. Villains, Vagabonds, Rakes, Rascals, Sons of -- G^d forgive me, they
had almost spoiled our mirth; Rogues --


Sir Anth. Sincerely it is no matter, all is well again: now to our business --
ha! where are the Lawyers? -- gone -- hoa? who waits there?


Enter Servant. Where are the Law^ers? the Parson? and my Daughters?

Choll. And my Niece; my Niece I ask?


Ser. All gone abroad, Sir.


Sir Anth. Body of me! we are betrayed, cheated, ruined, and undone.


Dick. Pox on your Housekeepers Lawyers, I say.


Choll. It Is rare work, and Ned has a hand in it; that young Dog must have a
finger in the pie; I Will have him hanged; I Will have him hanged, Tyburn is too
good for the Rogue -- O that Vill^^n!


Dick. By Jupiter I Am finely served, I Have lost my Supper, just when my Appetite
had taught me to long for it.


Sir Anth. Run, Sirrah, run; cry, stop the Thieves, the Murderers, the Robbers,
the any-things, body of me, all is lost.


Enter Sir John, Captain Ned, Mel. Flo. and Tim. Ned. No Sir, it is not lost,
that is on a friend bestowed.


Choll. So* Sirrah; I knew the Rogue was one at this mischief; I knew't you dog
you, I Will make you -- let me come at him -- this Ca^e and his Shoulders must
renew their acquaintance.


[Sir Anth. holds him. Sir Anth. Body of me, we have entertained Wolves in
Sheeps-cloathing.


Dick. By Jupiter, two of them were in Fox's Clothing: but uds so, I hope they
are not married, Sir-father.


Mel. Thus low I kneel to beg your Blessing: this Gentleman is your Son, and my
Husband.


Dick. A damned confounded Rogue, is he?


Sir Anth. Body of me, the young Woman has outwitted me: but since she is
married to a Knight's Son, I forgive her; I ever esteemed your Father Sir
Thomas -- Rise, Daughter; prove an obedient Wife, and my Blessing shall never
be wanting.


Ned. This sudden Change speaks the goodness of your Nature; nor shall my duty
(if possible) ever show it self less than your kindness -- this Gentleman too
deserves your pardon and esteem.


Sir Anth. How! body of me! Flo. married!


Flo. Yes faith, Sir, I longed to taste the sweet Sin of Rebellion: and now the
fact is committed, I want a Remission.


Dick. Uds so, Sir father; the Jades are all mad.


Choll. Ned, Sirrah, Rascal, are you really married to this Woman? Durst you
use your Uncle thus? -- 'Twas a needless question, the graceless Villain would
stick at nothing; but I Will be revenged, I will, Sirrah; let them all starve.


Sir Anth. What Is past cannot be recalled; the Girl was never (it seems)
ordained for a Nun, and the method she has pursued persuades me she has Wit: I
wish you, Sir, all that happiness you desire; may you be envied by none, and
esteemed by all.


Capt. This indeed alone could add to my happiness: your friendship and this
young Lady's love exalt me above the reach of F^rtune's malice: should she now
^rown, I Would laugh at her weakness; she can give no more, for this mighty gift
has exhausted all her treasure.


Sir Jo. I Have presumed without your Consent to marry your Niece, my --


Choll. Well, well, Sir, and starve with her when you have done; my Consent was
worth nothing: the blessing of a thousand pounds was a mere trifle; the
Parson's was enough for you: but no matter, let that buy your Dinner; I Will see
you all starve like so many Rats in a ruinous house.


Sir Jo. No, Sir, this secures me from that plague you threaten.


Choll. What Is that, Sirrah? -- I profess I long to swinge this Rogue.


Sir Jo. Ten thousand pounds Alderman Chollerick gave me with his Niece; I
suppose 'twas all her own.


Choll. Oh Dog! oh Villain! oh Wretch! I Am choused! ruined! and -- but it is no
matter! I Will be revenged; I Will have Law; I Will spend all I have in the recovery
of my right, I will -- let me come at him --


Sir Anth. Have patience, Neighbor, body of me, I begin to think that I Am no
better used than I should be.


Capt. Why faith, Sir, I Have made bold with eight thousand pounds instead of
that designed for your Son.


Sir Anth. And body of me, I suppose you have been such another Counselor.


Ned. Yes, faith, Sir, I presume ye know these Letters to be of your own making.


Sir Anth. Sinceely speaking, it is so; I hope however I Have got discrcet
Creditors who will not sue a Commission of Bankrupt against me.


Choll. Look ye Ned; you're a Rogue, a confounded unlucky Villain.


Dick. Uds so, so he is, and used me once very Scurvily; but by Jupiter I dare
not complain, lest he renew his kindness.


Ned. I Am now master of Ten thousand pounds; I remember your old Maxim, Law for
Money; and if it hold, you will add another Ten to it.


Choll. Look ye now, the Rogue has me already on the sore hip -- Ned, Ned, why
Ned, I am thy Uncle, and thy best friend; I Have a great kindness for thee, and
would not willingly put thee to charges: banish, my dear boy Ned, all thoughts
of Law, and live happy with thy present fortune.


Sir Anth. No disputes on a bridal night, the business shall be amicably
composed at another time.


Enter Freelove, and Lucy, Decoy following. Choll. Now, now look ye; whom have
we here? if he is one of Ned's Companions, he is a Rogue, and she a Jilt.


Free. Gentlemen, I wish you much Joy, and you, fair Ladies; I was informed of
your good fortunes, and could be no longer absent; I Am happy too, and blessed as
you are.


Capt. This, Sir, is a Gentleman, and my friend.


Sir Anth. You're very welcome, Sir; Body of me, my Son ^ in-Law's friend is no
less than a Member of my family, and may confidently claim my Service.


Free. Sir, I Am your very humble Servant.


Dick. Uds so, he has got a delicate Wench, would I had married her.


Sir Jo. How long, Freelove, have thou been acquainted with this young Lady?


Free. Not above two days; 'twas by Madam De^c^ys means I had the good fortune
to be beloved, and Marriage soon followed.


Sir Jo. Then, Jack, thou art abused, I know her Circumstances, and can assure
thee she is not Mistress of a hundred pounds.


Free. Kind heaven bless me with the gift of patience, I m ruined, Fortune has
done her worst; and in be^raying others, I Have undone my self.


Sir Jo. Thou too art cheated; but to salve this ^ore, ^^^e give thee a
th^usand pounds, and one hundred yearly during thy (...): forget Sir John (...)
and the follies of thy younger years; be Just to thy husband, and in so doing
thou art kind to thy self and me -- in the mean time, Madam D^c^y has used you
unkindly.


Luc. She has my Bond too for a thousand pounds.


Free. By heaven, and mine too.


Sir Jo. These Bonds, Madam, will not be allowed of by a Judge; and to evite
further trouble, it is fitting you should restore them.


De. O dear Sir, two thousand pounds! I deserve them very well.


Free. The Pillory you mean, Madam.


De. Truly, Sir, I scorn your words; I Am an honest Woman, and will not be so
abused, I do every thing above board, and -- and --


Sir Jo. You did assist me in my Love, and therefore I Am your friend; give up
the Bonds, and I Will give you a Bill of fifty pounds upon my Goldsmith in
Chea^side.


De. Well, Sir, my duty binds me to obedience; and rather than lose your
friendship, I Will do it.


[Gives the Bonds, and they tare off their Names. Enter Willie and Betty. Will.
Come aw^u me Jo, be me Saul we sall be aus merry aus fifty beggars aut au fair;
this letter will gau^ me new Master loup out of his skin for faunness, baut
speak of the meekle deel, aun yer be sure to staurt him -- hea Sir, read th^ut,
aun see whaut it says tea ye yer aul Aunt is aus deed aus au herring, aun hes
left ye au her geer.


B^^. Well, Sir John, I hope you will remember me now I Am married.


Sir Jo. Are you her husband? Sirrah?


Will. A goad am I Sirrah, thea English men hea na breeding, shame fau me gin
they sou'd na gang to Holland to learn it. -- But whaut a vengeance is the
matter we me Master, has the aul wutch geen him the wraung sow be the lug, I
woner?


Free. It is so, good and bad news come together.


Sir Jo. Then Fortune is Just; thou art not, Jack, beholding to thy wife for
all, for now thou have brought thy share -- now Joy shall shine in every face,
and Music shall elevate the Soul to mirth; let the thoughts of business for a
while be suspended, and Love the only end of all our actions.


Sir Anth. Then body of me Mr. Chorus shall give us a Song: Dick call him in
presently.


Dick. Uds so, Sir-father, I Will sing a Song first, I learned it of my
Landlady's daughter at the Swan, who had the Child by young Hobs the Carrier.


Sir Anth. With all my heart boy; Sincerely I Am glad to see thee so merry.


Choll. Rogues, Villains, they will be all hanged


[Speaking to himself aside. Dick. Hem, hem, by Jupiter I have a very good pipe
upon occasion.


[Here Dick sings a Comical Song. Now, Sir-father, how do you like it? by Apollo
I sung it very well.

Will. I wull gee au Scotlaun Dance worth forty o't, baut I waunt a piper.


Capt. The Violin, Sirrah, is better.


Will. Play up thaun Fiddlers, aun be haung't tea ye, aut let me hea au ^erray
bonny Spring.


[Here a Dance by Will.] Now me bonny lauds whaut think o't -- be me Saul I
waunt me Supper; ^ea ye neathing amaung ye tea eet? wa in Scotlau^ we eet aun
drink three days au on e^, tea mauke us able to please the Bride aun au her
Maidens.

Sir Jo. Now let us have another Song.


Sir Anth. And as tha^ ends, let the Dance begin.


[Here a Song, then a Figure-dance. Now, Gentlemen, let us take another Road to
Pleasure, change the Scene of mirth, and in the next Room (larger than this,
and fitted for the purpose) ^oss a Eumper.

Dick. Uds so.


Wine pleasure brings, and Care destroys,
It new creates the Soul for Joys; Ta^ la-ra, ta tal fa-la.
I Have lost my Mistress; but by Jupiter I Am (...) to be merry.

Sir Anth. Body of me, you are in (...) Boy -- Come, Neighbor Chollerick*
^^^get and forgive, as the saying is: Sincerely, who knows but I may live to
get another Daughter for ye?


Choll. No matter, let Ned, and that Jilt be hanged; let the rest of the Rogues
be -- But stay; I will drink with them before I go.


[Is running off in a passion, and returns suddenly. Sir Anth. Then, Gentlemen,
let us go in.


Sir Jo. This day has repaired all our Sufferings past, and we may safely now,
without vanity, believe our selves beloved, if Youth (e're Judgment^ strong)
knew all the Joys, the true content, and peace of mind, which honest Love
rewarded can bestow, they would envy our happiness, and contemn that uncertain
state of life, which instead of pleasure, gives continued pains.


Love and Ambition, something are akin;
But mighty Love is still the nobler Sin;
It wakes the sleeping Soul, and makes it still
Seek greater Goods than purblind Reason will.
We covet nothing, when we all possess;
Our Joys wax greater, and our Fears grow less;
And lasting Pleasures with our Years increase.
[Ex^unt omnes. Finis Coronat Opus.
EPILOGUE:
Spoke by WILL. PINKETHMAN.
YOur Favour's the Reward, I and the Author --
O, stay, no --
The Author and I do jointly seek it;
He finds the Wit, and I -- the face to speak it:
And that we may succeed in our Design,
I come to Court you -- armed with Wit and Wine.
The Fair alone from this Device will shrink;
For as they never Hiss, they never Drink
-- in Public:
Yet these are the terms (the Author's such a Fop)
If you don't Hiss -- I must not Taste a drop.
Then, Friendly Sirs, be to your Servant just,
And Damn the Epilogue to Quench my Thirst.
(...) ^ulness so would mutter,
I should not (...) Bottle after Supper --
If they don't Hiss What not yet, are all against me bent*
Egad, I Will take your Silence for Consent.
-- I dare not venture:
if they Hiss] O, so -- very well --
[Drinks. very well:
If they don't Hiss] Nay! Now once more --
Will. Pinkethman begs you to be Civil;
To have Wine by one, and not drink's, the Devil.
You're all Good-natured if you're Cross to night,
And you will oblige your humble Ser^^t by it;
For though the Wit is Counterfeit, the Wine is right.
[Drinks. But now for the Epilogue -- Egad this is not the
Paper! What shall I do! Let me see if I can
remem^^^ it -- Ha! hum! No; well
I Will speak one of my Own. --
But now I think on it, his is very Pretty;
And I Am afraid I shall not be half so Witty:
So if you will stay till I go find the right,
I Will read it now -- Else call to morrow night.
But hold!
I Have something now of Consequence to say,
Good simple Bays on me bestows his Play;
Therefore, dear Friends, come all on the Third Day.
If not to him, to me your Favor show,
And think on poor Will Pinkethman; for you must know,
Your Long Vacations make him very Low.
And now the Fatal time is Drawing on,
When you will all Forsake this Charming Town,
And to the Country for Diversion run.
The Gamesters, They to Epsom take their way;
And while they are with the City-Dames at play,
The Husband's Bowl their Coin and Cares away.
The Masks (Alas, poor Souls!) they must stay here,
And to the ^olly will in Sholes repair,
To feed on Cold stufft Beef, and drink stale Beer.
The Players; ay, they are left too in the Lurch;
Why, they must even go twice a Day to Church:
For since they are like to live upon the Air,
It Is fit their Fasting should be joined with Prayer.
FINIS.

